Shifting Boundaries: An Experimental Evaluation of a Dating
Violence Prevention Program in Middle Schools
Bruce G. Taylor & Nan D. Stein & Elizabeth A. Mumford &
Daniel Woods
Published online: 19 October 2012
# Society for Prevention Research 2012
Abstract We randomly assigned the Shifting Boundaries
interventions to 30 public middle schools in New York City,
enrolling 117 sixth and seventh grade classes (over 2,500
students) to receive a classroom, a building, a combined, or
neither intervention. The classroom intervention included a
six-session curriculum emphasizing the laws and conse-
quences for perpetrators of dating violence and sexual har-
assment (DV/H), the social construction of gender roles, and
healthy relationships. The building-based intervention
included the use of building-based restraining orders, higher
levels of faculty/security presence in safe/unsafe “hot spots”
mapped by students, and posters to increase DV/H aware-
ness and reporting. Student surveys were implemented at
baseline, immediately after the intervention, and 6-months
post-intervention. As hypothesized, behaviors improved as a
result of the interventions. The building-only and the
combined interventions were effective in reducing sexual
violence victimization involving either peers or dating part-
ners at 6-months post-intervention. This was mirrored by
reductions in sexual violence perpetration by peers in the
building-only intervention. While the preponderance of
results indicates that the interventions were effective, an
anomalous result (increase in sexual harassment victimiza-
tion reports that was contradicted by lower frequency esti-
mates) did emerge. However, after analysis these anomalous
results were deemed to be most likely spurious. The suc-
cess of the building-only intervention alone is important
because it can be implemented with very few extra costs to
schools.
Keywords Teen dating violence . Youth violence
prevention . Middle schools . Experiment
Introduction
Dating violence and sexual harassment (DV/H) (including
“interpersonal” or “gender” violence)1 among adolescents in
school settings is pervasive and associated with a number of
problems (Jouriles et al. 2009; Mulford and Giordano 2008).
DV/H can lead to serious injuries for victims, poorer mental/
physical health, more “high-risk”/deviant behavior, and
increased school avoidance (Gruber and Fineran 2008;
Howard et al. 2007a, b). In their review of the DV/H preven-
tion research, Cornelius and Resseguie (2007) note that most
1 In this report, we use the term dating violence and harassment (DV/
H) to represent physical, emotional, or sexual abuse within a dating
relationship, the definition that CDC uses for teen dating violence
(TDV) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2010). Where
cited studies used the term TDV, we also follow the language of the
original research.
This study (Dating violence prevention programs in public middle
schools: A multi-level experimental evaluation) was funded by the
National Institute of Justice (Grant # 2008-MU-MU-0010), along with
co-funding from the Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools, U.S.
Department of Education. The views expressed are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views or the official position of the
National Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Education or any
other organization.
B. G. Taylor (*): E. A. Mumford
NORC at the University of Chicago,
Bethesda, MD, USA
e-mail: taylor-bruce@norc.org
N. D. Stein
Wellesley College, Center for Research on Women,
Wellesley Centers for Women,
Wellesley, MA, USA
D. Woods
Police Executive Research Forum (PERF),
Washington, DC, USA
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
DOI 10.1007/s11121-012-0293-2

of these evaluations have documented at least a short-term
positive change in knowledge and/or attitudes related to youth
DV/H prevention. However, many of these studies did not use
randomized experiments or other rigorous designs. In the last
few years, new rigorous research has been conducted on the
effectiveness of youth DV/H prevention programs (Foshee
and Reyes 2009; Jaycox et al. 2006; Taylor et al. 2010a; Wolfe
et al. 2009). However, these studies are few and generally
address only eighth and/or ninth grade or older students. Some
research indicates that adolescents may experience DV/H and
sexual harassment as early as sixth grade (Callahan et al.
2003; Eaton et al. 2010; O’Keefe 1997), suggesting that
prevention programs should target students in middle school
(Espelage and Holt 2007; McMaster et al. 2002; Wolitzky-
Taylor et al. 2008). According to one sample of seventh grade
students who indicated that they have begun dating, one-third
reported having committed acts of physical, sexual, or
psychological aggression toward their dating partner (Sears
et al. 2007). Finally, DV/H during adolescence is a significant
risk factor for young adult intimate partner violence (Gómez
2010); as much as half of teen dating violence may persist into
adulthood (Halpern et al. 2009).
There has only been one evaluation (Taylor et al. 2010a)
addressing sixth and/or seventh grade students that that
assessed behavioral measures with an experimental design
(Cornelius and Resseguie 2007; Whitaker et al. 2006). Eval-
uating two components of a DV/H prevention program for
sixth and seventh grade students in middle schools bordering
Cleveland, overall, we found that the intervention improved
knowledge and attitudes related to youth dating violence and
reduced self-reported peer violence victimization and self-
reported perpetration (Taylor et al. 2010a). There was a con-
flicting finding regarding self-reported dating violence perpe-
tration. The intervention seemed to increase self-reported
dating violence perpetration (but not self-reported dating vio-
lence victimization). This iatrogenic finding was examined
closely and was interpreted to be most likely due to reporting
issues as opposed to actual increases in perpetration between
the intervention and control group (Taylor et al. 2010a). Our
team’s research was important because it demonstrated
through an experiment that a condensed five-session class-
room curriculum could be effective for a group as young as
sixth and seventh grade students. The qualitative aspects of
the research were also useful to expanding and honing the
intervention applied in New York City (NYC) as described
below. Although not a replication of this Cleveland study, the
current study builds on this work in assessing modified ver-
sions of the classroom curricula from this earlier study and
adding school building-wide intervention components.
In this paper we provide the results of an evaluation that
used a randomized controlled trial of a DV/H prevention
program for sixth and seventh grade students in NYC. Our
purpose was to provide high-quality scientific evidence
concerning the effectiveness of targeting a young, universal
primary prevention audience with interventions at multiple
levels. The study was designed to yield data that could help
increase the capacity of schools to prevent DV/H. We
hypothesized that the interventions will reduce sexual harass-
ment in all three groups that receive any one of the three
interventions compared to the control group. Further, we
expected the three interventions would reduce the occurrence
of dating and peer violence compared to the control group.
These two overarching hypotheses applied to all the treatment
conditions. Our final hypothesis was that creating a broader
environmental intervention (the combined treatment of the
classroom and building-level interventions) would be more
effective in reducing sexual harassment and violence than the
classroom intervention on its own. We proposed no hypoth-
esis comparing the classroom-only to the building-only inter-
ventions because there is no basis in theory.
Methods
Our study employed a multi-level, experimental, longitudi-
nal design, with data collection taking place from September
2009 to June 2010 in NYC, the largest school district and
one of the most ethnically, linguistically, and racially diverse
populations in the U.S. Our team randomly assigned a
building-based and classroom-based intervention through a
stratification process with 30 public middle schools. With
the exception of three schools (which had three instead of
four classrooms in the study), each school included two
sixth and two seventh grade classrooms in each building,
yielding a total of 117 classrooms (n058 classes in sixth
grade plus 59 classes in seventh grade) and 2,655 students.
An average of 354 students participated in our study from
each of the 30 school buildings. We had good statistical
power (80 %) to find differences even as small as 8 %
between the treatment and control groups; see project final
report at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/
236175.pdf for greater detail (Taylor et al. 2011). We used
a stratified random allocation procedure (Boruch 1997).
Schools were classified by two stratifying criteria (school
size and borough), ensuring that the comparison groups
started out with some identical characteristics and adequate
numbers of schools in each of the study cells. The schools
were assigned to one of the four cells: (1) receive the
building and classroom interventions, (2) receive the build-
ing-only intervention, (3) receive the classroom-only inter-
vention or (4) control group (in which schools/students
experienced their normal class schedule, without receiving
any elements of our classroom-or building-level interven-
tions). Within each of these cells, a random sample of class-
rooms was selected for study participation to complete all
three waves of the survey.
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
65

Description of ‘Shifting Boundaries’ Interventions
The design of our interventions was informed by the theory of
reasoned action (TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein
1967). Based on TRA, attitudes toward and perceived norms
about the desired behavior facilitate the intention to change,
modify, or adopt a particular behavior. The TRA model served
a valuable function of orienting the developer of Shifting Boun-
daries to consider the environmental context that surrounds and
influences intentions and behavior. The addition of the
building-level component was also added based on recommen-
dations from an NIJ/NIH teen dating violence expert meeting
(Dec. 4–5, 2007) to add other components to classroom-based
interventions. Below is a summary of our interventions, includ-
ing classroom-and building-wide activities.
Classroom-Based Intervention The NYC classroom-based
intervention synthesized the lessons from the two components
(a personal interaction component and a Law & Justice Treat-
ment) from our earlier study that the Cleveland area interven-
tionists concurred were the most successfully received by
students. Our team further refined the classroom-and
building-based (see below) interventions with significant input
from the New York City Department of Education (NYC
DOE) central office personnel. The lessons were implemented
by trained school personnel known as SAPIS (Substance
Abuse Prevention and Intervention Specialists), generally over
a period of 6–10 weeks. The six-session curriculum empha-
sized the consequences for perpetrators of DV/H, state and
federal laws related to DV/H, the setting and communicating
of one’s boundaries in interpersonal relationships, and the role
of bystanders as interveners. The key feature of the classroom
curriculum is the framing of activities to help students deter-
mine and set personal boundaries. Educators introduce the
concept of boundaries and teach about the constraints of rele-
vant laws. Using the curriculum, educators prompt students to
consider their interpersonal interactions and use of physical
spaces within the school walls. Activities included exploring
the concepts of laws and boundaries, plotting the shifting
nature of personal space, considering laws as they apply by
gender and activities related to sexual harassment prevention.
The lessons employed both concrete and applied materials, as
well as activities requiring abstract thinking.
Building-Based Intervention Our building-level interventions
include the following features: the introduction of temporary
building-based restraining orders (termed a Respecting Boun-
daries Agreement or RBA), and the placement of posters in
school buildings to increase awareness and reporting of DV/H
to school personnel. In addition, building on research by Astor
et al. (1999, 2001), our building intervention includes a third
component to help schools work with students to identify any
unsafe areas of schools through hotspot mapping. The students
developed maps which were in turn used to plan for a greater
presence of faculty or school security personnel in identified
“hot spots.” These building-based components also aim to
have students develop a greater sense of respect for personal
boundaries, as with the classroom curriculum, but through
different mechanisms, as described above.
To promote greater comparability across our interven-
tions, we applied the same basic “dosage” for the building
intervention as we applied for the classroom lessons. That is,
the building interventions were conducted for the same
number of weeks as the classroom-based intervention (about
6–10 weeks).
Data Collection
School personnel trained by our research team administered
pencil-and-paper surveys. The school staff distributed sur-
veys immediately before schools were assigned to one of the
four study conditions, immediately after the treatment (or
control condition) was completed, and about 6 months after
the intervention (post school assignment in the case of
control schools). The student response rate was 93 % at
the baseline survey, with no statistically significant differ-
ences observed for the treatment and control groups on
participating in the baseline survey. Eight-seven percent of
participating students completed the survey immediately
after the intervention and 82 % completed the 6-month
follow-up survey. There were no statistically significant dif-
ferences for the treatment and control groups on participating
in the first or second follow-up surveys. Following approved
IRB protocols (NYC DOE and Police Executive Research
Forum), in advance of survey administration, parents were
individually informed of the goals of the study and accompa-
nying risks and benefits in a form through which they could
choose to waive their parental consent for their child to par-
ticipate. Parental consent included permission for the students
to complete a baseline and all of the subsequent follow-up
surveys. Students were asked to return parent/guardian decline
forms to the school as soon as possible (parents/guardians
were told that nothing had to be done if they chose to allow
their child to participate in the survey). For students whose
parents chose to waive consent (i.e., provided passive con-
sent), school personnel distributed child assent forms to the
students prior to survey implementation. The surveys took
about 40 min to complete (one classroom period) and were
administered during regular school hours.
Measures
Sexual Harassment Victimization and Perpetration The sur-
veys included prevalence and incidence questions on the
experience of being a victim and/or perpetrator of sexual
harassment. Greater detail and copies of the actual surveys
66
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

used in our study to measure harassment and all of our other
measures can be found in the project Final Report (Taylor et
al. 2011). A response of “yes” any of the following items
was coded “1” and the sum was coded as a dichotomous
variable marking any respondent with a value of one or
greater for sexual harassment prevalence (victimization
and perpetration separately coded). The composite fre-
quency measures (victimization and perpetration separately
coded) for sexual harassment frequency was coded as the
sum total of the following values for each categorical
response (0 coded as 0, 1–3 coded as 2; 4–9 coded as 6.5;
10+ coded as 10) for each sexual harassment item. Sexual
harassment questions included: (a) made sexual comments,
jokes, gestures, or looks; (b) showed, gave, or left sexual
pictures, photographs, messages, or notes about you; (c)
wrote sexual messages or graffiti about you on bathroom
walls, in locker rooms, or other places; (d) spread sexual
rumors about you; said you were gay or a lesbian, as an
insult; spied on you as you dressed or showered at school;
(e) “flashed” or “mooned” you; (f) touched, grabbed, or
pinched you in a sexual way; (g) intentionally brushed up
against you in a sexual way; (h) pulled at your clothing in a
sexual way; (i) pulled your clothing off or down; (j) blocked
your way or cornered you in a sexual way; (k) made you
kiss him or her; and (l) made you do something sexual, other
than kissing. The items for this survey were adapted from
other work (AAUW Educational Foundation 1993, 2001;
Basile et al. 2009; Fineran and Bennett 1999) and were used
in our Cleveland study (Taylor et al. 2010a). All of the
sexual harassment victim and perpetrator measures have
Cronbach’s alpha scores above 0.80. We note that an anon-
ymous reviewer of this manuscript raised concerns of
decreased statistical power for alpha values below 0.80.
Sexual and Physical Violence Victimization and Perpetra-
tion We measured the prevalence and incidence of violence
both in terms of victimization and perpetration, distinguish-
ing the nature of the relationship (specifying whether the
victim/perpetrator was a peer2 or a dating partner3). These
items were designed to assess the impact of DV/H programs
(Foshee et al. 1998; Taylor et al. 2008; Ward 2002). The
surveys included prevalence (yes/no) and incidence (num-
ber of times) questions on the experience of being a victim
and/or perpetrator of sexual violence and physical/non-sex-
ual violence by/of peers and people that you have dated.
Sexual violence prevalence (victimization and perpetration
separately coded) was coded in the same manner as the
sexual harassment coding: A response of “yes” any of the
items was coded “1” and the sum was coded as dichotomous
variable marking any respondent with a value of one or
greater. The composite frequency measures (victimization
and perpetration separately coded) for sexual violence fre-
quency was coded as the sum total of the following values
for each categorical response (0 coded as 0, 1–3 coded as 2;
4–9 coded as 6.5; 10+ coded as 10) for each of the following
two items. Sexual violence items included: (a) pushing,
grabbing, shoving, or kicking in the private parts; and (b)
made you touch their private parts or touched yours when
you did not want them to. A positive response to any one
item in the physical or sexual violence category is coded as
“1” in the dichotomous composite measure. The composite
frequency measures for a given outcome (e.g., sexual vic-
timization) are the sum total of the following values for each
categorical response (0 coded as 0, 1–3 coded as 2; 4–9
coded as 6.5; 10+ coded as 10) for each relevant item (e.g.,
the frequency of recent sexual violence victimization equals
the number of times in the past 6 months the respondent was
pushed, grabbed, shoved, or kicked in the private parts plus
the number of instances of unwanted ‘private parts contact’
reported by the respondent). Most of the violent victimiza-
tion measures had Cronbach’s alpha scores above .80, and
only one measure was below the .70 level (the prevalence of
any peer violence perpetration in Wave 1 at 0.60).
Behavioral Intentions The intention of the students to
engage in or avoid violence is an important control measure
(Jaffe et al. 1992; Wekerle and Wolfe 1999). We measured
behavioral intentions by asking about willingness to inter-
vene in harmful situations, avoid violence, engage in retal-
iatory behavior, and engage in violence. We provided a
variety of scenarios for the students to consider in assessing
their intentions to use or not use violence. From the behav-
ioral intentions survey items (Taylor et al. 2010a; Ward
2002), we developed a single summed scale. All the inten-
tions to reduce or avoid violence measures across Waves 1,
2, and 3 have Cronbach’s alpha scores above 0.75.
DV/H Knowledge We also controlled for knowledge related
to defining DV/H, its prevention, and consequences. Based
on the knowledge index from our earlier work (Taylor et al.
2008), our knowledge measures included “true” or “false”
questions about State rape laws, definitions of abuse and
sexual harassment, resources for help, and sexual harass-
ment myths. The items for this index were developed by the
study team and pilot tested prior to use in NYC. Our knowl-
edge measures across Waves 1, 2, and 3 had acceptable
Cronbach’s alpha scores (Nunnally and Bernstein 1994;
Streiner and Norman 2003) of 0.66, 0.77 and 0.80.
2 Defined for students as, “People about the same age as you. They
may be your classmates, kids in your school, neighborhood/commun-
ity, and are both girls and boys the same age as you. You might or
might not know them or think of them as your friends.”
3 Defined for students as, “People who you are ‘going with,’ ‘dating,’
‘going steady with,’ or have ‘gone out with,’ ‘dated,’ or ‘gone steady
with’ for at least a week. This group also includes anyone who is or
was your boyfriend/girlfriend for at least a week.”
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
67

Other Variables The surveys included demographic and
background descriptors of the students, including age, gen-
der, and ethnicity/racial background. We also included ques-
tions on prior attendance at an educational program about
sexual assault, harassment, or violence, and individuals’
history of dating.
Pre-treatment Study Arm Comparison and Sample
Description
The 30 public middle schools in our study included 58 sixth
grade classrooms and 59 seventh grade classrooms
(n02,655 students). The vast majority of the schools had a
student body of mostly non-whites (86 % of the students in
the 30 schools were non-white). The schools in our study
have low levels of student mobility (out of the 30 schools
only 7 % of the students leave the school each year), and
91 % of the students are in attendance each day. A third of
the students are from families below the poverty level. The
schools in our study are fairly large with on average 891
students in each, and on average 108 suspensions are issued
each year in the 30 schools. The mean ratio of students to
teachers is 14. Regarding academic performance, only 57 %
of the students in the schools meet or exceed the minimum
standards for math proficiency, and only 48 % of the stu-
dents in the schools meet or exceed the minimum standards
for reading proficiency. No statistically significant differ-
ences were observed across the four randomly assigned
conditions based on these aggregate school characteristics.
Next we examined individual-level survey data from the
baseline survey. A pre-treatment comparison of the interven-
tion and control groups based on individual-level survey data
from the baseline survey indicated that all four groups were
similar regarding the following characteristics at baseline:
Age, gender, prior experience with dating violence prevention
programs, number of people dated for more than 1 week,
length of prior dating relationships, any lifetime peer violence
victimization, and any lifetime dating violence victimization.
Despite random assignment, some small but significant pre-
treatment differences in the treatment and control groups did
emerge (Taylor et al. 2011) in the areas of race, dating history,
and prior lifetime history of perpetrating violence and being a
victim of sexual harassment (based on individual-level survey
data). Overall, while we found few differences between the
treatment and control conditions prior to the experiment, most
of these were not very large differences. For the most part, the
four study conditions were similar on the majority of our
measures leaving the only major differences across the groups
their assigned intervention or control condition. Additionally,
random assignment procedures were followed closely. All
schools assigned to treatment received their appropriate treat-
ment. The same held true for the controls. We included the
variables where there were pre-treatment differences into our
later models as covariates to remove any potential biases these
small imbalances might have presented (Armitage 1996).
The sample was fairly evenly split between sixth (n01,266
students) and seventh grade students (1,388 students). Slightly
more of the overall sample was female (53 %). About 34 % of
our sample was Hispanic, and among students not self-
identifying as Hispanic the distribution was 31 % African-
American, 16 % Asian-American, 13 % white and the remain-
der in the “other” racial category). Over a third of the study
sample (40 %) had prior experience with a violence preven-
tion educational program. Nearly half of the sample (48 %)
reported at least one experience of being in a dating relation-
ship that lasted a week or longer. A relatively large number of
sixth and seventh grade students had experienced sexual vio-
lence in dating (20 %) and peer (66 %) relationships at some
point in their life. Further description of the sample at the
individual level is provided in the project’s final report (Taylor
et al. 2011). All differences at the school level are controlled
for in the analyses through individual characteristics and
accounting for clustering by school.
Statistical Analyses
Given the nested nature of our data, variables at the student
level, class level, and building level may be correlated.
Because our substantive interest is in the individual outcomes,
and because of the need to adjust for correlated standard
errors, we do not present simple means for the treatment and
control groups. We included a robust variance estimate to
adjust for within-cluster correlation called the Huber/White/
sandwich estimate of variance (Froot 1989; Huber 1967;
Rogers 1993; White 1980; Williams 2000), the vce (cluster
clustvar) option in Stata 8.0 . For our count data, we used a
negative binomial regression with a robust variance estimate.
We used logistic regression with a robust variance estimate for
our prevalence outcome variables. To address missing data
from partially completed questionnaires, we used multiple
imputations in the analyses. We created five multiply imputed
datasets in SPSS 18.0 (applying the fully conditional specifi-
cation, an iterative Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method) and analyzed the datasets in Stata 8.0, which supports
the analysis of multiple imputed data.
We modeled sexual harassment and sexually violent
behavior outcomes in for Wave B (immediately post-
treatment) and Wave C (about 6-months post-treatment).
For each model we present only the treatment assignment
variable (coded as “Building Only,” “Classroom only,”
“Both/Combined” and the control group as the “reference”
category) (see Table 1). However, where the intervention
conditions were significantly effective at reducing the out-
come (compared to the control), we also tested the relative
effectiveness of the three separate interventions. In practice,
68
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

because the results revealed the classroom-only intervention
not to be effective, the only comparisons discussed are
between the “building only” and the combined conditions.
While not strictly necessary because we are working with
experimental data, we also introduced a set of covariates to
our outcome models. We adjusted for covariates to improve
the precision of the treatment comparisons by reducing error
variance and correcting for any major imbalances in the
distribution of these covariates across the treatment and
control groups that may have occurred due to chance
(Armitage 1996; Gelber and Zelen 1986). We estimated
models of Wave B outcome measures with baseline (Wave
A) covariates. We present estimated models of Wave C
outcome measures with Wave B covariates (we also esti-
mated this same Wave C outcome model with Wave A
covariates and found that the results did not differ).
Table 1 Sexual harassment and sexual violence models
Outcome
Treatment condition
Immediately post intervention
Six months post intervention
Sexual Harassment Victimization: Prevalence
Building only
1.287 (.27)
2.067 (.48)**
Classroom only
0.936 (.18)
1.208 (.21)
Building & classroom
1.031 (.22)
1.180 (.24)
Frequency
Building only
0.912 (.11)
0.695 (.10)**
Classroom only
0.881 (.12)
0.990 (.11)
Building & classroom
0.896 (.11)
0.736 (.10)*
Sexual Harassment Perpetration: Prevalence
Building only
1.047 (.20)
1.161 (.18)
Classroom only
0.995 (.18)
0.918 (.15)
Building & classroom
0.838 (.16)
1.001 (.17)
Frequency
Building only
0.947 (.13)
0.658 (.12)*
Classroom only
0.950 (.14)
0.963 (.13)
Building & classroom
0.859 (.12)
0.744 (.13)
Peer Sexual Violence Victimization: Prevalence
Building only
1.013 (.17)
0.662 (.12)*
Classroom only
0.902 (.15)
0.965 (.16)
Building & classroom
0.680 (.12)*
0.659 (.11)**
Frequency
Building only
0.911 (.13)
0.654 (.13)*
Classroom only
0.823 (.12)
0.929 (.13)
Building & classroom
0.658 (.10)**
0.597 (.10)**
Peer Sexual Violence Perpetration: Prevalence
Building only
1.062 (.20)
0.527 (.11)**
Classroom only
0.856 (.16)
1.115 (.18)
Building & classroom
0.726 (.13)
0.524 (.10)***
Frequency
Building only
1.063 (.15)
0.605 (.12)*
Classroom only
0.877 (.16)
1.027 (.13)
Building & classroom
0.868 (.14)
0.644 (.11)**
Dating Sexual Violence Victimization: Prevalence
Building only
1.007 (.26)
0.498 (.12)**
Classroom only
1.059 (.31)
0.919 (.19)
Building & classroom
0.838 (.19)
0.843 (.18)
Frequency
Building only
0.971 (.22)
0.474 (.13)**
Classroom only
1.044 (.25)
0.856 (.15)
Building & classroom
0.809 (.17)
0.790 (.15)
Dating Sexual Violence Perpetration: Prevalence
Building only
1.045 (.30)
0.503 (.18)
Classroom only
1.199 (.35)
1.038 (.26)
Building & classroom
0.833 (.21)
1.013 (.25)
Frequency
Building only
0.938 (.20)
0.479 (.17)
Classroom only
1.211 (.33)
0.946 (.22)
Building & classroom
0.731 (.17)
0.947 (.22)
Adjusted for student age; gender; ethnicity/racial background; prior attendance at an educational program about sexual assault; student histories of
harassment, violence, and dating; DV/H knowledge scores, and behavioral intentions. Our immediate post-treatment outcome models (Wave B) use
our baseline (Wave A) covariates. Our 6-months post-intervention outcome models (Wave C) use our Wave B covariates (we also estimated this
same Wave C outcome model with Wave A covariates and found that the results did not differ). *p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
69

Results
Sexual Harassment
Experienced Sexual Harassment as a Victim The results
6 months after the interventions were implemented indicated
a treatment effect contrary to expectations. The odds ratio
(OR) of students in the building-only intervention reporting
the prevalence of any sexual harassment victimization was
107 % more than that of the control group (OR02.07,
p0.002). However, the frequency of sexual harassment vic-
timization reported by students in the building-only interven-
tion was 30.5 % lower than the reported frequency of sexual
harassment victimization in the control group (Incidence Rate
Ratio, IRR0.695, p0.014). Likewise, the frequency of sexual
harassment victimization reported by students receiving the
combined classroom and building intervention was 26 %
lower than the reported frequency of sexual harassment vic-
timization in the control group (IRR0.736, p0.026).
Given these findings, we directly compared the combined
and the building-only interventions. The prevalence of sex-
ual harassment victimization reports in schools receiving the
combined treatment (building included) was 43 % lower
(OR0.570, standard error, s.e.0.14, p0.022) than reports
of sexual harassment victimization in schools receiving only
the building treatment. Because the combined treatment was
not significantly different than the control group, these
results mean that while the building intervention appears
to increase the reported prevalence of sexual harassment
victimization, providing the building intervention in con-
junction with the classroom intervention is neutral compared
to no intervention.
Perpetrated Sexual Harassment Six months following the
intervention, the reported prevalence of perpetrating sexual
harassment was no different between the intervention and
control groups. However, students in the building-only
intervention arm reported a 34 % reduction in the frequency
of perpetrating sexual harassment against others compared
to control group reports (IRR0.658, p0.025).
Sexual Violence in Peer Relationships
Victimization by a Peer Immediately post-treatment, the
results indicate a 32 % reduction in the prevalence of sexual
victimization by a peer (OR0.68, p0.025) for students in the
combined intervention arm compared to students in the con-
trol group. Immediately post-treatment, the estimated fre-
quency of sexual victimization by a peer was also
significantly lower (34 %) for students in the combined inter-
vention arm compared to students in the control group
(IRR0.658, p0.005). This finding persists 6-months post-
treatment, at which point we estimate a 34 % reduction in
the prevalence of sexual victimization by a peer (OR0.659,
p0.011) for students in the combined intervention arm com-
pared to students in the control group. This reduction was
mirrored by results reported by students in the building-only
intervention arm (OR0.662, p0.028). Further, the reported
frequency of sexual victimization by a peer indicates the same
positive effects of the building-only and combined classroom
and building interventions. Six months post-treatment, results
indicate a 35 % reduction in the frequency of sexual victim-
ization by peers for students in the building-only treatment
group (IRR0.654, p0.03) and a 40 % reduction in the fre-
quency of sexual victimization by peers for students in the
combined treatment group (IRR0.597, p0.002).
A direct comparison of the combined and the building-
only interventions reveals that combined treatment lead to
33 % lower prevalence of reported victimization by peers
compared to the control group and the “building only”
group (OR0.671, s.e.0.11, p0.02) immediately post-
treatment. This finding is supported by the post-
intervention assessment of peer sexual violence victimiza-
tion frequency, for which the combined intervention again is
significantly more effective (28 %) than the building-only
treatment (IRR0.722, s.e.0.11, p0.028).
Perpetration in a Peer Relationship Six-months post-
intervention, students assigned to the building-only interven-
tion as well as students participating in the combined class-
room and building intervention reported significant lower
prevalence of perpetrating sexual violence on peers. The
reduction was comparable (approximately 47 %) for the two
groups (building-only OR0.527, p0.002; combined interven-
tion OR0.524, p0.001) in comparison to the control group.
The reported frequency declined close to 40 % vis-à-vis the
control group for students experiencing the building-only
intervention (IRR0.605, p0.016) and the “both” intervention
(IRR0.644, p0.009). However, there was no difference
between the building-only intervention and the “both” inter-
vention on this same measure of prevalence of perpetrating
sexual violence on peers (IRR0.939, p0.778).
Sexual Violence in Dating Relationships
Victimization by a Dating Partner Six-months post-
intervention, students in the building-only group reported
50 % reduction in the prevalence of sexual victimization by
a dating partner (OR0.498, p0.007) and a 53 % reduction in
the frequency of such events (IRR0.474, p0.011). More-
over, the building-only group reported a 40 % reduction in
the prevalence of sexual victimization by a dating partner
(OR0.59, s.e.0.14, p0.025) 6 months after the intervention
compared to the “both” group. This is in contrast to the peer
70
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

victimization results, for which the combined treatment was
more effective than the building-only treatment.
Perpetration in a Dating Relationship There was no statisti-
cally significant evidence for declines in perpetrating sexual
violence against a dating partner for any of the interventions
immediately post-treatment or 6 months later.
Discussion
We explored the effectiveness of a DV/H prevention pro-
gram for sixth and seventh grade students in 30 middle
schools. This sample size exceeds other published experi-
ments on youth DV/H (Foshee et al. 2000; Jaycox et al.
2006; Wolfe et al. 2009) allowing for a more powerful
examination of treatment effects. Therefore, even if fairly
small statistical differences between the treatment and
control groups were to emerge we would have a stronger
probability of detecting those differences than earlier
studies. We report on sexual harassment and sexual vio-
lence behavioral measures, although violence outcomes
are sometimes not even measured in teen dating violence
(TDV) prevention studies (Nightingale and Morrissette
1993; Rosen and Bezold 1996), where the focus has often
been on attitude/knowledge changes (Macgowan 1997;
Whitaker et al. 2006).
Regarding sexual harassment, overall, the building inter-
vention was effective in reducing the frequency of both
sexual harassment perpetration and victimization. While
reports of the prevalence of any experience of sexual harass-
ment victimization for students exposed to the building
intervention increased at 6-months post-treatment, the fre-
quency reported by students in the building-only interven-
tion was lower, as were frequency reports from students in
the combined classroom and building intervention. Further,
when delivered in combination with the classroom interven-
tion, the building intervention did not increase the reported
prevalence of sexual harassment.
Regarding sexually violent behavior, the building-only
treatment and the combined intervention were consistently
effective in reducing sexual violence victimization involving
either peers or dating partners at 6-months post-intervention.
This was mirrored by reductions in sexual violence perpetra-
tion by peers for students in the building intervention. While
the focus of the classroom intervention was on dating partner
violence, we believe that the building intervention (with its
broader prevention elements and relocation of school person-
nel based on hotspot mapping of all violent encounters) can be
effective for addressing a variety of forms of sexual violence,
even when combined with the classroom focus on dating
relationships. This phenomenon of diffusion of benefits from
interventions has been documented in other areas of criminal
behavior such as hotspots policing of violent crime areas
where areas near a treated area received similar benefits as
the treated areas (Clarke and Weisburd 1994). Also, this find-
ing of reductions in sexual violence is important given the
general scarcity of positive results in reducing sexual violence
in adults (Lonsway et al. 2009).
Although our earlier application of the classroom interven-
tion in the Cleveland area was effective in reducing peer (but
not dating) violence (Taylor et al. 2010b), in this NYC study
the classroom component by itself was not effective in reduc-
ing either forms of violence. There could be a number of
reasons for this discrepancy in results. It is possible that the
intervention is not effective in different contexts outside the
Midwestern, suburban environment of the Cleveland area
study. The large urban, unique environment of NYC may
interact with the nature of the classroom intervention, reduc-
ing its effectiveness. The personnel delivering the intervention
varied across the Cleveland and NYC sites. Based on school
administration preferences, in some Cleveland schools teach-
ers implemented the interventions; in other schools, a rape
crisis center prevention specialist delivered the lessons. By
contrast in NYC, all of the lessons were implemented by
school personnel called substance abuse prevention special-
ists. Further, this study was not a replication experiment. In
Cleveland, we tested two forms of the classroom intervention:
a ‘law and justice’ curriculum and an interaction-based cur-
riculum. In NYC, we integrated the strongest components of
each curriculum based on qualitative analyses, and it is possi-
ble that this integrated NYC curriculum lost some critical
element present in the distinct Cleveland curricula. These
results raise the question of the need for further experimenta-
tion regarding classroom curricula components, comparing
the ‘law and justice,’ the interaction-based, and the integrated
NYC curricula to a control condition.
We did believe that a building-level intervention would
make an important addition to Shifting Boundaries, and had
hypothesized that the combined approach would be more
effective. Our data provide support for the value of this new
building component both as a stand-alone intervention and
implemented in combination with the classroom interven-
tion. More specifically, our hypothesis that the broader
environmental intervention (combined treatment) would be
more successful in reducing DV/H than classroom alone
was supported, in that the classroom intervention failed to
achieve the program goals on its own. The success of the
combined treatment in comparison to the building-only
condition is mixed. In one case (for our Dating Sexual
Violence Victimization Prevalence measure), building-only
is better than the combined treatment, but in two cases (for
our Peer Sexual Violence Victimization Prevalence and
Frequency measures) the combined treatment is better than
the building-only treatment. Thus, our initial inference that
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
71

the classroom intervention paired with the building inter-
vention could be effective is partially supported.
An argument can be made that the classroom sessions
could be effective, but they seem to need to be done in
combination with the building intervention. It is possible that
the broader focus of the building intervention creates some
important changes in the diverse NYC middle school climate
that allowed for the classroom intervention to have an effect.
Future research will need to measure climate change to assess
this hypothesis. The building-only intervention included more
material that focused on violence prevention more broadly,
while the classroom curriculum focused more particularly on
dating violence. Perhaps adjusting school personnel for hot-
spots of violence can reduce peer violence as well as dating
violence. These findings raise the question of whether we
should be thinking of dating violence in the context of youth
violence more broadly, rather than addressing dating violence
as an isolated problem. This approach has been taken by
others with some success (Wolfe et al. 2009).
There is clear potential for implementing the building
intervention by itself. To date, most of the dating violence
prevention efforts in schools have relied on classroom curric-
ula, but we should not lose sight of the potential for other
points for interventions. For example, online dating relation-
ship simulation games that communicate an anti-violence
message (e.g., see http://jenniferann.org/2010-game-runner-
up-1.htm or www.refresheverything.com/gamechangers),
and which youth can explore independently, could be promis-
ing. The accessibility of an effective building intervention
requiring fewer resources in terms of teacher time, class time,
and materials may be particularly appealing to school districts
operating with constrained resources under duress to meet
challenging academic targets. Given the mixed findings
regarding the relative effectiveness of the building interven-
tion implemented on its own versus in combination with the
classroom curriculum, schools (districts) might want to con-
sider a scaled program, initiating a building intervention and if
resources allow working in the classroom to complement the
building-level approach. A gradual “ramping up” from imple-
menting just the building-only component and gradually
introducing the classroom component may be the most real-
istic and feasible approaches for many middle schools.
Backfire/Iatrogenic Finding
Despite our mostly positive significant findings supporting
the building and combined interventions, the result that that
the building-only intervention increased the reporting of
sexual harassment victimization (prevalence) was contrary
to our expectations. This iatrogenic finding needs to be
considered carefully, as it could have major implications
for the interpretation of the rest of our results. While this
finding may be spurious, we cannot summarily dismiss the
possibility that the building-only intervention increased the
proportion of students who were victims of sexual harass-
ment and that the other desirable results are themselves
spurious. However, we do not believe there is a basis for
this type of interpretation. To begin with, the iatrogenic
finding emerged only for the building-only intervention,
which was also associated with many positive findings.
We did not find any iatrogenic results for our classroom-
only or our both interventions. Next, the iatrogenic finding
only emerges on our sexual harassment prevalence measure
(i.e., did X occur, yes or no), and is countered by desirable
results on our frequency/incidence measures for the same
variable (i.e., how often did X occur).
Furthermore, we need to consider the “other side of the
coin” (i.e., sexual harassment perpetration), for which we
observed a decreased frequency. While not directly compa-
rable due to the different perspective of respondents when
answering questions about victimization and perpetration,
these measures do provide different accounts regarding the
efficacy of the building intervention in addressing sexual
harassment. That is, the intervention is focused on sixth and
seventh grade students, but the victims may be reporting on
violence and harassment from eighth grade students who
were not the target of our intervention. Therefore, the per-
petration measure may be a better gauge of the success of
the intervention since the sixth and seventh grade students
who received our intervention can report on their behavior
against all students, and their lower rates of perpetration
(inclusive of acts they may or may not perpetrate against
non- sixth and seventh grade students) are an indicator of a
successful outcome. We are also encouraged by the fact that
there was nothing in our focus groups with students and
interventionists (Taylor et al. 2011) that would suggest that
the building intervention would have the effect of increasing
sexual harassment victimization. Finally, we might be see-
ing a reporting effect. That is, the intervention may have
sensitized students to recognizing that they are a victim or
perpetrator so they were more likely to report this on the
survey, but those who were truly victims or perpetrators may
have experienced these events or perpetrated these acts less
frequently. Under this interpretation, the treatment helped
students recognize these acts as violence or harassment and
helped decrease their frequency. In sum, we believe that
while iatrogenic results need to be carefully considered, on
balance the one negative does not offer a strong case for an
alternative interpretation of the mostly positive/desirable
results associated with our interventions.
Timing and Follow-Up
Our study was limited to two follow-up points (immediately
following the intervention and about 6 months later), and it
is unclear whether our findings would dissipate over a
72
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

longer follow-up period (Foshee et al. 2004) or hold up
(Wolfe et al. 2009). Additionally, while we are suggesting
that middle schools are an important intervention point for
implementing Shifting Boundaries, more work needs to be
done to assess its potential value (perhaps in a modified
form) in high school settings. A booster version of Shifting
Boundaries might be useful for students that already
received the intervention in middle school, but a “first-time”
version for high school might also have value and may not
be “too late.”
However, given rates of violence reported by middle
school students, our study also suggests that the field may
need to work with even younger groups to invoke a true
primary prevention effort. While there is a field of research
on preventing violence in elementary school ages (Clayton
et al. 2001; Wilson et al. 2003), we are not aware of much
work being done with elementary school students in the area
of the primary prevention of youth dating relationship (or
precursors to dating) violence. Since our intervention is
designed for middle school students, our material would
have to be adapted to be developmentally appropriate for
elementary school students or new interventions would have
to be designed. Knowledge regarding developmental pat-
terns in dating violence is currently limited, but would
inform outcomes studies varying effects at different time
points. While developmental trajectories have been exam-
ined for elementary age children (Aber et al. 2003), to date,
the TDV developmental trajectory literature reflecting more
frequent measurement reveals a small number of studies,
including: one small (n0192), short-term (24-months)
Canadian study of 14–16 year-olds (Wolfe et al. 2003); a
3-year study of 13–19 year-olds (n0973) conducted in rural
North Carolina modeling mean trajectories for each out-
come (Foshee et al. 2009); and a study of 181 high school
students (Nocentini et al. 2010). Such assessments of DV/H
or TDV from a life-course trajectory approach (Elder 1998)
should examine not only elementary school experience and
violence but also whether these early experiences affect
young adulthood relationships.
Limitations
First, we relied on self-report surveys which reflect the
general limitations of self-reports (e.g., recall problems,
telescoping of events, deliberate under-reporting or exagger-
ating of behavior) (Jackson et al. 2000). We recognize the
possibility that there may be an interaction between the
treatment condition and reporting. For example, perpetrators
in one of the treatment groups may under-report violent
behavior due to heightened awareness of the unacceptability
and consequences of their behaviors. Victims in a treatment
condition may also limit reports of their experiences so as
not to be labeled as “a victim.” Despite these concerns,
confidential self-report surveys have become an accepted
modality for collecting youth violence data.
Like others in this area, we measured DV/H by asking
about specific acts against a partner or peer, such as pushing,
kicking, hitting, etc. (or been the victim of these acts). The
measures used did not capture intensity, motivations or
circumstances surrounding violent acts, nor did the meas-
ures distinguish between acts of offense or defense (Wolfe et
al. 2009). Also, because of sensitivity concerns raised by
school personnel regarding explicit measurement of sexual
violence in a middle school population, we were limited to
two main items (“pushed, grabbed, shoved, or kicked you in
your private parts” and “made you touch their private parts
or touched yours when you did not want them to”), similar
to other research (Foshee et al. 1998).
We did not ask participants about their sexual orientation,
so it is not possible to determine if our findings would be the
same for gay and lesbian relationships. We were not able to
measure some important covariates (e.g., violence in the
home or community) which may have potentially influenced
our findings. However, given our use of a randomized
experiment these unmeasured variables should have by de-
sign been balanced across the treatment and control groups.
The broad range of racial/ethnic groups represented in our
study stands in comparison to similar DV/H studies limited to
mainly White youth (Wolfe et al. 2009) and mainly rural
White youth (Foshee et al. 1998). However, our study was
also done in the largest U.S. school district (NYC) and our
results may only be applicable to similar school districts.
We believe more work is needed to better understand the
mechanisms by which the interventions were effective in
improving DV/H behavior. We focus on the efficacy of the
intervention in this paper. Further work is necessary to
examine how the interventions work, and if the components
of the TRA are critical mechanisms. Further, phenomeno-
logical interviews with students would allow researchers to
explore these mechanisms rigorously through highly sys-
tematic qualitative methods for inquiry and analysis (Cres-
well 1998; Patton 1990) and allow the researcher to enter the
field of perception of the program participants to elucidate
what essential program experiences the students felt caused
them to change or not change. In this context, a phenom-
enological interviewing approach is especially warranted
given the dearth of knowledge on what students learn or
fail to learn in treatment; what they respond or relate to most
about treatment; and non-treatment factors that may lead to
change in behaviors.
Conclusions
Our study confirms the importance of working with middle
school students on relationship violence. However, given rates
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
73

of violence reported by middle school students, our study also
suggests that the field may need to work with even younger
groups to invoke a true primary prevention effort. While there
is a field of research on preventing violence in elementary
school ages (Clayton et al. 2001; Wilson et al. 2003), we are
not aware of much work being done with elementary school
students in the area of the primary prevention of youth dating
relationship (or precursors to dating) violence. Since our inter-
vention is designed for middle school students, our material
would have to be adapted to be developmentally appropriate
for elementary school students or new interventions would
have to be designed.
Using an experimental design in NYC middle schools,
we have provided scientific evidence that indicates that our
building intervention and the combination of our building
and classroom interventions can be effective in reducing
some forms of youth violence. Practitioners from domestic
violence and sexual assault centers consume much of their
time and resources in school classrooms focusing on vio-
lence, yet they often work with materials and approaches
that have not been rigorously evaluated or evaluated at all.
Our study helps fill this void of evidence-based guidance
and approaches. These results are encouraging and offer
support to our contention that these multiple levels of les-
sons, activities and pedagogy can be effective with students
in sixth and seventh grades. As a result of this and prior
studies, a body of scientific data is emerging about the
beneficial effects of DV/H interventions targeted to middle
school students. The success of the building intervention
alone is particularly intriguing, in terms of not only its
effectiveness but because it can be implemented with very
few extra costs to schools. Interventions such as our “build-
ing-only” approach are of critical importance to school dis-
tricts during the current economic climate, a time in which
fewer resources are available to address problems such as
DV/H. However, the impact of an intervention delivered
directly to students in classrooms cannot be dismissed.
School districts might consider a scaled approach (growing
a program gradually from the building-level to the class-
room) if resources are limited. We encourage other research-
ers and program developers to expand on this study as they
pursue efforts to interrupt the precursors to youth dating
violence.
References
AAUW Educational Foundation. (1993). Hostile hallways: The AAUW
survey on sexual harassment in America’s schools. Washington,
DC: AAUW Educational Foundation.
AAUW Educational Foundation. (2001). Hostile hallways: Bullying,
teasing, and sexual harassment in school. Washington, DC:
AAUW Educational Foundation.
Aber, J. L., Brown, J. L., & Jones, S. M. (2003). Developmental
trajectories toward violence in middle childhood: Course, demo-
graphic differences, and response to school-based intervention.
Developmental Psychology, 39, 324–348. doi:10.1037/0012-
1649-39.2.324.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (Eds.). (1980). Understanding attitudes and
predicting social behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Armitage, P. (1996). The design and analysis for clinical trials. In S.
Ghosh & C. R. Rao (Eds.), Design and analysis of experiments:
Handbook of statistics (Vol. 13). Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier.
Astor, R. A., Meyer, H. A., & Behre, W. J. (1999). Unowned places
and times: Maps and interviews about violence in high schools.
American Educational Research Journal, 36, 3–42. doi:10.2307/
1163504.
Astor, R. A., Meyer, H. A., & Pitner, R. O. (2001). Elementary and
middle school students’ perceptions of violence-prone school
subcontexts. Elementary School Journal, 101, 511–528.
doi:10.1086/499685.
Basile, K. C., Espelage, D. L., Rivers, I., McMahon, P. M., & Simon,
T. R. (2009). The theoretical and empirical links between bullying
behavior and male sexual violence perpetration. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 14, 336–347.
Boruch, R. (1997). Randomized experiments for planning and evalua-
tion: A practical guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Callahan, M. R., Tolman, R. M., & Saunders, D. G. (2003). Adolescent
dating violence victimization and psychological well-being. Jour-
nal of Adolescent Research, 18, 664–681. doi:10.1177/
0743558403254784.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010). Understanding
teen dating violence - fact sheet. Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/TeenDatingViolence_
2010-a.pdf. Accessed 2 Nov 2011.
Clarke, R., & Weisburd, D. (1994). Diffusion of crime control benefits:
Observations on the reverse of displacement. Crime Prevention
Studies, 2, 165–184.
Clayton, C. J., Ballif-Spanvill, B., & Hunsaker, M. D. (2001). Prevent-
ing violence and teaching peace: A review of promising and
effective antiviolence, conflict-resolution, and peace programs
for elementary school children. Applied & Preventive Psychology,
10, 1–35. doi:10.1016/s0962-1849(05)80030-7.
Cornelius, T. L., & Resseguie, N. (2007). Primary and secondary
prevention programs for dating violence: A review of the liter-
ature. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 12, 364–375.
doi:10.1016/j.avb.2006.09.006.
Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Eaton, D. K., Kann, L., Kinchen, S., Shanklin, S., Ross, J., & Hawkins,
J. (2010). Youth risk behavior surveillance - United States, 2009.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59, 1–142.
Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course and human development. In W.
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology
(pp. 939–991). New York: Wiley.
Espelage, D. L., & Holt, M. K. (2007). Dating violence & sexual
harassment across the bully-victim continuum among middle
and high school students. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 36,
799–811. doi:10.1007/s10964-006-9109-7.
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1999). Gender and power issues of peer
sexual harassment among teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal
Violence, 14, 626–641.
Fishbein, M. (1967). Readings in attitude theory and measurement. In K.
Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.), Health behavior and
health education: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 477–492). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Foshee, V. A., & Reyes, H. L. M. (2009). Primary prevention of
adolescent dating abuse: When to begin, whom to target, and
74
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

how to do it. In J. Lutzker & D. Whitaker (Eds.), Preventing
partner violence (pp. 141–168). Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Arriaga, X. B., Helms, R. W., Koch, G.
G., & Linder, G. F. (1998). An evaluation of Safe Dates, an
adolescent dating violence prevention program. American Jour-
nal of Public Health, 88, 45–50.
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Greene, W. F., Koch, G. G., Linder,
G. F., & MacDougall, J. E. (2000). The Safe Dates program: 1-
year follow-up results. American Journal of Public Health, 90,
1619–1622.
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Ennett, S. T., Linder, F., Benefield, T., &
Suchindran, C. (2004). Assessing the long-term effects of the Safe
Dates program and a booster in preventing and reducing adoles-
cent dating violence victimization and perpetration. American
Journal of Public Health, 94, 619–624.
Foshee, V. A., Benefield, T., Suchindran, C., Ennett, S. T., Bauman, K.
E., & Karriker-Jaffe, K. J. (2009). The development of four types
of adolescent dating abuse and selected demographic correlates.
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 19, 380–400.
Froot, K. A. (1989). Consistent covariance-matrix estimation with
cross-sectional dependence and heteroskedasticity in financial
data. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 24, 333–
355. doi:10.2307/2330815.
Gelber, R. D., & Zelen, M. (1986). Planning and reporting of clinical
trials. In P. Calabresi, P. S. Schein, & S. A. Rosenberg (Eds.),
Medical oncology (pp. 406–425). New York: Macmillian Publish-
ing Company.
Gómez, A. M. (2010). Testing the cycle of violence hypothesis: Child
abuse and adolescent dating violence as predictors of intimate
partner violence in young adulthood. Youth & Society.
doi:10.1177/0044118x09358313.
Gruber, J. E., & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the impact of bullying
and sexual harassment victimization on the mental and physical
health of adolescents. Sex Roles, 59, 1–13.
Halpern, C. T., Spriggs, A. L., Martin, S. L., & Kupper, L. L. (2009).
Patterns of intimate partner violence victimization from adoles-
cence to young adulthood in a nationally representative sample.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 45, 508–516. doi:10.1016/
j.jadohealth.2009.03.011.
Howard, D. E., Wang, M. Q., & Yan, F. (2007a). Prevalence and
psychosocial correlates of forced sexual intercourse among US
high school adolescents. Adolescence, 42, 629–643.
Howard, D. E., Wang, M. Q., & Yan, F. (2007b). Psychosocial factors
associated with reports of physical dating violence among US
adolescent females. Adolescence, 42, 311–324.
Huber, P. J. (1967). The behavior of maximum likelihood estimates
under nonstandard conditions. Paper presented at the Fifth Ber-
keley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
Berkeley, CA.
Jackson, S. M., Cram, F., & Seymour, F. W. (2000). Violence and
sexual coercion in high school students’ dating relationships.
Journal of Family Violence, 15, 23–36.
Jaffe, P. G., Sudermann, M., Reitzel, D., & Killips, S. M. (1992). An
evaluation of a secondary school primary prevention program on
violence in relationships. Violence and Victims, 7, 129–146.
Jaycox, L. H., McCaffrey, D., Eiseman, B., Aronoff, J., Shelley, G. A.,
Collins, R. L., & Marshall, G. N. (2006). Impact of a school-based
dating violence prevention program among Latino teens:
Randomized controlled effectiveness trial. Journal of Adolescent
Health, 39, 694–704.
Jouriles, E. N., Platt, C., & McDonald, R. (2009). Violence in adoles-
cent dating relationships. The Prevention Researcher, 16, 3–7.
Lonsway, K. A., Banyard, V. L., Berkowitz, A. D., Gidycz, C. A.,
Katz, J. T., Koss, M. P., et al. (2009). Rape prevention and risk
reduction: Review of the research literature for practitioners:
National Online Resource Center on Violence Against Women
(http://new.vawnet.org/category/Main_Doc.php?docid01655).
Macgowan, M. J. (1997). An evaluation of a dating violence preven-
tion program for middle school students. Violence and Victims,
12, 223–235.
McMaster, L. E., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. M. (2002). Peer
to peer sexual harassment in early adolescence: A developmental
perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 14, 91–105.
Mulford, C., & Giordano, P. C. (2008). Teen dating violence: A closer
look at adolescent romantic relationships. Washington, DC:
National Institute of Justice.
Nightingale, H., & Morrissette, P. (1993). Dating violence: Attitudes,
myths, and preventive programs. Social Work in Education, 15,
225–232.
Nocentini, A., Menesini, E., & Pastorelli, C. (2010). Physical dating
aggression growth during adolescence. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 38, 353–365. doi:10.1007/s10802-009-
9371-8.
Nunnally, J., & Bernstein, I. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill.
O’Keefe, M. (1997). Predictors of dating violence among high school
students. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 12, 546–568.
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rogers, W. H. (1993). Regression standard errors in clustered samples.
Stata Technical Bulletin, 3, 88–94.
Rosen, K. H., & Bezold, A. (1996). Dating violence prevention: A
didactic support group for young women. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 74, 521–525.
Sears, H. A., Byers, E. S., & Price, E. L. (2007). The co-occurrence of
adolescent boys’ and girls’ use of psychological, physically, and
sexually abusive behaviors in their dating relationships. Journal
of Adolescence, 30, 487–504.
Streiner, D., & Norman, G. (2003). Health measurement scales, prac-
tical guide to their development and use (3rd ed.). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Taylor, B., Stein, N., Mack, A. R., Horwood, T. J., & Burden, F.
(2008). Experimental evaluation of gender violence/harassment
prevention programs in middle schools. Washington, DC:
National Institute of Justice.
Taylor, B., Stein, N., & Burden, F. (2010a). The effects of gender
violence/harrassment prevention programming in middle schools:
A randomized experimental evaluation. Violence and Victims, 25,
202–223.
Taylor, B. G., Stein, N., & Burden, F. (2010b). Exploring gender
differences in dating violence/harassment prevention program-
ming in middle schools: Results from a randomized experiment.
Journal of Experimental Criminology, 6, 419–445. doi:10.1007/
s11292-010-9103-7.
Taylor, B., Stein, N. D., Woods, D., & Mumford, E. (2011).
Shifting Boundaries: Final report on an experimental evalu-
ation of a youth dating violence prevention program in New
York City middle schools. Washington, DC: National Institute
of Justice.
Ward, K. J. (2002). Making the invisible visible: A feminist evaluation
of an adolescent gender violence prevention program (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
Database. (AAT 3050449).
Wekerle, C., & Wolfe, D. A. (1999). Dating violence in mid-
adolescence: Theory, significance, and emerging prevention ini-
tiatives. Clinical Psychology Review, 19, 435–456.
Whitaker, D. J., Morrison, S., Lindquist, C., Hawkins, S. R., O’Neil, J.
A., & Nesius, A. M. (2006). A critical review of interventions for
the primary prevention of perpetration of partner violence.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 11, 151–166. doi:10.1016/
j.avb.2005.07.007.
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76
75

White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance-matrix
estimator and a direct test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica,
48, 817–838. doi:10.2307/1912934.
Williams, R. L. (2000). A note on robust variance estimation for
cluster-correlated data. Biometrics, 56, 645–646. doi:10.1111/
j.0006-341X.2000.00645.x.
Wilson, S. J., Lipsey, M. W., & Derzon, J. H. (2003). The effects of
school-based intervention programs on aggressive behavior: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
71, 136–149. doi:10.1037/0022-006x.71.1.136.
Wolfe, D. A., Wekerle, C., Scott, K., Straatman, A. L., Grasley, C., &
Reitzel-Jaffe, D. (2003). Dating violence prevention with at-risk
youth: A controlled outcome evaluation. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 71, 279–291. doi:10.1037/0022-
006x.71.2.279.
Wolfe, D. A., Crooks, C., Jaffe, P., Chiodo, D., Hughes, R., & Ellis, W.
(2009). A school-based program to prevent adolescent dating
violence a cluster randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 163, 692–699.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Ruggiero, M., Danielson, C. K., Resnick, H. S.,
Hanson, R. F., & Smith, D. W. (2008). Prevalence and correlates of
dating violence in a national sample of adolescents. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 755–
762. doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e318172ef5f.
76
Prev Sci (2013) 14:64–76

