Policy Research Working Paper
7164
Promoting Handwashing and Sanitation
Evidence from a Large-Scale Randomized Trial 
in Rural Tanzania
Bertha Briceño
Aidan Coville
Sebastian Martinez 
Water Global Practice Group
   &
Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
January 2015
WPS7164
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Produced by the Research Support Team
Abstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Policy Research Working Paper 7164
This paper is a product of the Water Global Practice Group and the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research 
Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to 
development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at acoville@worldbank.org.    
The association between hygiene, sanitation, and health is 
well documented, yet thousands of children die each year 
from exposure to contaminated fecal matter. At the same 
time, evidence on the effectiveness of at-scale behavior 
change interventions to improve sanitation and hygiene 
practices is limited.  This paper presents the results of two 
large-scale, government-led handwashing and sanitation 
promotion campaigns in rural Tanzania. For the campaign, 
181 wards were randomly assigned to receive sanitation 
promotion, handwashing promotion, both interventions 
together, or neither. One year after the end of the program, 
sanitation wards increased latrine construction rates from 
38.6 to 51 percent and reduced regular open defecation 
from 23.1 to 11.1 percent. Households in handwashing 
wards show marginal improvements in handwashing behav­
ior related to food preparation, but not at other critical 
junctures. Limited interaction is observed between hand­
washing and sanitation on intermediate outcomes: wards 
that received both handwashing and sanitation promotion 
are less likely to have feces visible around their latrine and 
more likely to have a handwashing station close to their 
latrine facility relative to individual treatment groups. 
Final health effects on child health measured through 
diarrhea, anemia, stunting, and wasting are absent in the 
single-intervention groups. The combined-treatment group 
produces statistically detectable, but biologically insignifi­
cant and inconsistent, health impacts. The results highlight 
the importance of focusing on intermediate outcomes 
of take-up and behavior change as a critical first step in 
large-scale programs before realizing the changes in health 
that sanitation and hygiene interventions aim to deliver.

 
 
Promoting Handwashing and Sanitation: Evidence from a Large-Scale 
Randomized Trial in Rural Tanzania 
 
 
 
Bertha Briceño 
Aidan Coville 
Sebastian Martinez1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Handwashing, sanitation, behavior change, health, Tanzania, field experiment 
JEL codes:  O12, I15, C93 
 
 
1 Briceño: Inter American Development Bank, 1300 New York Avenue, NW, Washington DC 20577, 
berthab@iadb.org; Coville: World Bank, 1818 H St NW, Washington DC 20433, acoville@worldbank.org; 
Martinez: Inter American Development Bank, 1300 New York Avenue, NW, Washington DC 20577, 
smartinez@iadb.org.  
                                                           

 
Acknowledgements 
 
Kaposo Mwambuli, Water and Sanitation Specialist, and Yolande Coombes, Senior Water and 
Sanitation Specialist from WSP are gratefully acknowledged as being part of the evaluation team 
and providing continued support and comments throughout the project during design, 
implementation, and analysis.  
We thank the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and Preventive Health Department in 
Tanzania, especially Dr. Khalid Massa, Elias B.M. Chinamo and Anyitike P. Mwakitalima.  
Professor Paul Gertler has provided guidance and advice throughout the project. Advisors also 
include Sebastian Galiani, John Colford, Benjamin Arnold, Pavani Ram, Lia Fernald, and 
Patricia Kariger.  
The authors are also grateful to the former and current regional team leaders for WSP-Africa, 
Wambui Gichuri and Glenn Pearce-Oroz;  Eduardo Perez, the global task team leader for the 
Scaling Up Rural Sanitation program; and Claire Chase, WSP Economist. We are also grateful to 
Jacqueline Devine, Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, for helpful comments on this paper. 
The WSP-Tanzania country technical assistance team was led by Nathaniel Paynter, followed by 
Jason Cardosi and now C. Ajith Kumar, with continued and extensive support from Kaposo 
Mwambuli and Patrick Mwakilama. Endline data collection was conducted by EDI Africa.  
Nicolas Ajzenman provided skillful research assistance. Alicia Salvatore oversaw the in-country 
design and field activities in the early stages of the project. Martinez’s work on this project 
between 2007 and 2010 was conducted as an economist at the World Bank. Briceño’s work on 
this project between 2010 and 2014 was conducted as a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist at WSP.  
Generous financial support was provided by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 

1. Introduction 
Understanding how to reduce enteric and diarrheal diseases has important implications for child 
morbidity, mortality and long-term growth. Diarrhea is the second largest killer of children under 
five (WHO-UNICEF, 2013), and poor nutrition at an early age can cause growth faltering and 
reduced cognitive development in the longer term (Victora et al., 2008). Exposure to, and 
ingestion of, contaminated fecal matter is understood to be the main pathway through which 
children are exposed to diarrheal diseases and other afflictions that affect nutrient absorption and 
longer-term growth, such as soil-transmitted helminthes and environmental enteropathy 
(Humphrey, 2009). Poor children in developing countries are the ones most at risk of exposure. 
Given their role in reducing fecal-oral pathogen transmission, hygiene and sanitation programs 
are often cited as important development interventions to reduce morbidity and mortality 
worldwide. It is estimated that unsafe water, and inadequate sanitation and hygiene contribute to 
over one million deaths per year, or 1.5% of all deaths (Prüss-Ustün et al, 2014); in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, these deaths are mostly of children under 5 years old. As a result, governments and the 
international community are increasingly investing in the provision of water, sanitation, and 
hygiene (WASH) for the poor. However, the existing evidence on the effectiveness of these 
investments when delivered at scale is limited and of varied quality.2 Small-scale efficacy trials 
show large reductions in diarrhea from handwashing interventions (Ejimot-Nwadiaro et al., 
2008), but there are important concerns about potential measurement bias of self-reported 
measures (Schmidt, 2014). Apart from recent promising work in India (Biran et al., 2014), most 
of the available research suggests that, when taken to scale, sustained behavior change remains 
elusive (Chase & Do, 2012; Galiani et al., 2012). Currently, we do not have efficacy trials of 
sanitation on which to provide a benchmark, and the little evidence on effectiveness trials of 
rural sanitation interventions is far from conclusive.3 There are a number of reasons identified in 
the literature that explain why we may see no, or even negative, impacts on health from 
sanitation interventions. Improved latrine coverage may do little to reduce exposure to other 
important contaminants such as animal feces (Ngure et al., 2013). Due to the externalities 
associated with open defecation, health improvements may not be observed if there is limited 
take-up in the community (Andres et al., 2013). Increasing latrine coverage may even have 
unintended negative consequences, by contaminating groundwater through seepage (Dzwairo et 
al., 2006) or increasing exposure to feces through unhygienic facilities (Greene et al., 2012). The 
latter points towards potentially important complementarities between sanitation and hygiene 
campaigns. While the importance of exposure to contaminated fecal matter on the burden of 
disease is not in dispute, the effectiveness of hygiene and sanitation promotion campaigns to 
2 See Clasen et al. (2010), Fewtrell et al. (2005), Kremer and Zwane (2007), Independent Evaluation Group (2008), Waddington 
et al. (2009), Cairncross et al. (2010), and DFID (2011). 
3 See Cameron et. Al (2013), Patil et al (2014), Clasen et al. (2014) and Hammer & Spears (2013). 
3 
 
                                                           

adequately reduce this transmission mechanism, particularly when implementing large-scale 
programs, is still an open and important empirical question.  
We evaluate the impact of two large-scale, government-implemented programs that promote 
handwashing with soap and improved sanitation in rural Tanzania. The programs are part of a 
multi-country effort to address poor hygiene and sanitation conditions for large rural populations 
in the developing world, implemented through local governments with assistance from the World 
Bank.4 From mid-2009 to early 2011, the two interventions were rolled out in 10 districts5 of 
Tanzania following a factorial experimental design. 181 rural wards included in the study were 
divided into 4 groups to receive the handwashing intervention alone, the sanitation intervention 
alone, both the handwashing and sanitation, or neither intervention (control). We conducted an 
endline survey in 2012, approximately one year after the conclusion of the program. The survey 
includes 3,619 households and 5,768 children under five, with an effective response rate of 
97.8%.  The trial was registered as NCT01465204 at clinicaltrial.gov.6 
Handwashing wards were provided with a package of intensive social marketing interventions, 
including training of community activists, direct consumer contact through road shows, mass 
media campaigns and promotional activities, and technical assistance to build handwashing 
stations with local materials. Sanitation wards received a similar package of marketing efforts 
coupled with a community-led total sanitation triggering event geared towards increasing 
demand for improved sanitation facilities and promoting open defecation free (ODF) 
communities, followed by the creation of a village sanitation committee in charge of ensuring 
sustained behavior change. This was complemented with supply side interventions to train local 
masons in latrine construction and marketing. In both cases, sanitation marketing messages 
concentrated on positive aspirational messages rather than shame tactics. No subsidies were 
used. 
Approximately one year after the end of the program, treatment households are significantly 
more likely to report being exposed to handwashing and sanitation messages of the sort used by 
the program. Households in sanitation wards are more likely to know of a mason who builds 
latrines and be aware of a sanitation committee operating in their village. Private latrine 
construction increased by 12.4 percentage points over the intervention period, a relative increase 
of 33% compared to the control. Increased latrine coverage leads to a 52% decline (23.1% vs 
11.1%) in reported open defecation as the primary means of depositing feces in sanitation wards. 
Handwashing results are less impressive. Households in handwashing wards show marginal 
improvements in handwashing with soap prior to food preparation but not at other critical 
4 Since 2007, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) has provided technical assistance to local and national governments 
implementing large rural sanitation and handwashing promotion programs in India, Indonesia, Peru, Senegal, Tanzania, and 
Vietnam, under the umbrella of two related projects, Global Scaling Up Handwashing and Global Scaling Up Rural Sanitation. 
More information is available at www.wsp.org/scalingupsanitation. 
5 Out of 129 districts in Tanzania at the time of the 2002 census. These districts cover a population of 2,7 million people. 
6 http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01465204 
4 
 
                                                           

junctures such as after defecation. We also find small but significant improvements from 
handwashing promotion along other indicators of cleanliness including the child’s state of 
cleanliness, caregiver’s hands, probability of covering food and cleaning of the household 
latrine. Intermediate outcomes in the combined handwashing and sanitation intervention are 
consistent with impacts found in the single intervention wards. We find no clear evidence of 
meaningful health impacts. On the one hand, using 34,045 child observations from the listing 
data, we find a marginally significant (12.5%) reduction in diarrhea,7 particularly for children 
under three in the combined treatment wards, pointing towards potential complementarities. The 
household survey data of 5,768 children shows a statistically insignificant reduction. 
Counterintuitively, we also find small but significant reductions in hemoglobin levels measuring 
iron-deficiency anemia (1.5%) and weight-for-age in the combination ward, which could be 
driven by gut infections and soil-transmitted helminthes (STHs) reducing the body’s ability to 
absorb nutrients. These anemia and weight results are statistically significant but biologically 
small. We show that this counterintuitive result is unlikely to be driven by selective mortality or 
poor quality latrine construction and the results remain robust to a number of different 
specifications.   
The study design presents some limitations which we mention upfront. First, the 10 districts 
where we conduct the study were selected by government based on political priority rather than 
random selection, affecting the external validity of the study. This said, comparing our control 
group to representative surveys of rural Tanzania, including the 2010 Demographic and Health 
Survey and National Panel Survey, reveals that the two areas are more similar than not along 
basic observable characteristics (refer to Table 1). Since these are predominantly rural 
households, we also find that our sample is poorer on average than the national population. 
Following Filmer and Pritchett (2001), we use principal-components analysis to derive a wealth 
index based on 16 household assets captured both in the study questionnaire and the nationally 
representative 2010-2011 Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS). By plotting the 
wealth distributions of the impact evaluation and LSMS samples, Figure 1 shows that 
approximately 57% of the impact evaluation group falls below the 40th percentile of the national 
wealth distribution – the target group for the World Bank’s goal of increasing shared prosperity.  
The second important concern is that we lack a baseline of pre-intervention characteristics.8 
While we attempt to reconstruct baselines for key variables, these suffer from problems of recall. 
Differential migration and attrition could also be a concern. However, data from the complete 
census listings of selected enumerator areas provides evidence of limited migration and attrition. 
Less than 5% of households moved into the community within the three year intervention period, 
7 The household-level indicator for diarrhea including 5768 households does not find any significant effect on diarrhea, 
although the direction of the sign for the coefficient is consistent.  
8 Although a baseline data collection was intended, unanticipated problems with reliability of data resulted in the cancelation of 
field work in five out of the 10 districts originally planned and the impossibility of using the data to validate the randomized 
design, as it was originally planned. 
5 
 
                                                           

and this does not differ across treatment groups. We mitigate any confounding that migration 
may cause by restricting the sample to households residing in the area since 2009. Finally, 
though this study represents one of the first attempts to experimentally test the impact of 
handwashing and sanitation interventions separately, the study design does not isolate the impact 
of multiple individual components that make up each of the handwashing and sanitation 
intervention packages.  
Our study complements the literature by providing the first experimental evidence of the separate 
and combined effects of sanitation and hygiene campaigns at scale. The work adds to the 
growing body of evidence suggesting that, while handwashing with soap may be an effective 
way to reduce an important fecal-oral transmission mechanism, getting people to actually change 
their behavior is incredibly difficult (Chase & Do, 2012). The work contributes to a more limited 
literature on the causal effects of rural sanitation. Companion studies in Indonesia and India have 
shown that, while it is possible to increase latrine construction through similar promotion 
campaigns,9 these changes fall short of ensuring universal latrine coverage, limiting the potential 
for positive health outcomes (Cameron et al., 2013; Patil et al., 2014).10 More recent work by 
Clasen et al. (2014) finds a similar conclusion even with relatively large improvements in latrine 
coverage (52 percentage point increase). The results highlight the importance of first addressing 
take up and behavior change as a central goal of at-scale WASH interventions before embarking 
on the quest for health impacts (Coville & Orozco, 2014). 
The paper is presented in the following way: Section 2 describes the causal chain linking 
sanitation and handwashing to improved health (presented visually in Figure 2), contextualizes 
the problem in Tanzania, and describes the program interventions and implementation in detail. 
Section 3 describes the study design, Section 4 provides an overview of the data and Section 5 
outlines the econometric specification used to derive the results. Section 6 presents results, 
followed by robustness checks in Section 7. We discuss some possible mechanisms to explain 
the counterintuitive health outcomes in Section 8 and conclude in Section 9.  
2. Handwashing and Sanitation Promotion  
2.1. Transmission Mechanism 
Better sanitation, through safe containment of human feces and reductions in open defecation, is 
expected to decrease the presence of fecal pathogens in the environment, which can otherwise be 
transmitted via soil, surface water, hands or flies. Similarly, handwashing at critical times can 
decrease the risk of infection by reducing the presence of enteric pathogens in the hands/fingers 
9 An important difference in India’s Total Sanitation Campaign is that latrine promotion is accompanied by a subsidy which is 
not the case in Indonesia or Tanzania.  
10 Hammer & Spears (2013) find a large improvement of India’s Total Sanitation Campaign on child stunting, and while the 
analysis is rigorous, the results are somewhat implausible from a biological viewpoint given the small changes in latrine 
construction, which suggests possible data quality concerns. 
6 
 
                                                           

and objects or utensils of frequent use, thus reducing the chances of person-to-person 
transmission and food or water contamination. The variety of transmission channels has been 
summarized in the seminal “F-diagram” reproduced in Figure 3. 
High levels of enteric pathogens manifest in three main ways that adversely affect nutritional 
outcomes, especially for young children: diarrheal diseases, gastrointestinal infections and 
intestinal parasitic infections (soil helminthes and protozoans).11 The pathogens that cause 
diarrheal diseases are transmitted mainly via fecal-oral routes, by ingestion of contaminated 
food, water, or other beverages, by direct or indirect contact with contaminated hands, animal or 
human feces.12 Gastrointestinal infections and environmental enteropathy, are caused by 
ingestion of fecal bacteria in large quantities. Intestinal parasitic infections such as ascariasis, 
trichuriasis and hookworm are transmitted through soil contaminated with feces; giardia is a 
waterborne infection but can also be transmitted through food and person-to-person contact.  
Despite being less visible than diarrheal diseases, subclinical gastrointestinal infections and 
intestinal parasitic infections also affect nutrition in substantial ways. The absorption of nutrients 
is reduced by direct loss through diarrhea, especially by repeated episodes, but also by 
continuous and silent theft of nutrients by parasites (including blood by hookworm), and by 
diversion of energy and proteins to combat infections.13 Environmental enteropathy reduces 
absorptive capacity while increasing permeability of the small intestine (Humphrey, 2009).  The 
result is faltering weight and height for age and increased risk of anemia.14   
It is commonly believed, on the basis of practitioners’ claims and some observational studies, 
that water, sanitation and hygiene investments may result in additional benefits when provided 
together. Arnold et al. (2013) note that, even though some observational studies and theoretical 
modeling of transmission pathways support the use of combined approaches promoted by 
implementing agencies, rigorous evidence justifying this approach is scarce. A meta-analysis by 
Fewtrell et al. (2005) finds that the only evidence on combined interventions do not reduce 
diarrhea more than individual interventions. Our study, being the first large randomized trial 
exploring gains from sanitation promotion and handwashing implemented separately and in 
combination, provides important evidence for understanding the potential complementarities of 
WASH provision for at-scale interventions.15   
11 Other important tropical diseases that can be prevented through adequate water, sanitation and hygiene include trachoma 
and schistosomiasis.  [Mara, 2010] 
12 See Clasen et al. (2010), Prüss et al. (2008) 
13 Chambers ,R (2012) Handout on fecally-transmitted infectious and undernutrition. 
14 Helminth infections are also frequent cause of anemia in pregnant women [Mara, 2010]  
15 In the near future, it is expected that other ongoing trials like the WASH benefits study will contribute to a more 
comprehensive understanding of the interactions among water quality, sanitation, handwashing, and nutrition interventions 
alone and combined designed as an efficacy trial for proof of concept.  See Arnold et. al (2013) for the complete study protocol.  
7 
 
                                                           

This study measures the effects of the sanitation and handwashing interventions on the health of 
children under five years old. These children represent the age group most susceptible to 
diarrheal disease, growth faltering and acute lower respiratory infections, which are major causes 
of childhood morbidity and mortality in developing countries. 
2.2. Context: Rural Tanzania 
Approximately 70% of Tanzania’s population lives in rural areas characterized by subsistence 
livelihoods, poor access to health and education services, and high morbidity and mortality rates. 
The 2010 Demographic and Health Survey estimated that 9.2% of children in rural Tanzania 
died before their fifth birthday, 13.6% experienced diarrhea within a 2 week period, and 57.8% 
could be classified as anemic. Stunting and wasting, as measured by height-for-age and weight-
for-age z-scores, is also commonplace, with 44.5% of children under 5 falling below two 
standard deviations of the reference population mean in height-for-age measures and 4.9% for 
weight-for-age measures. Less than half of the rural population has access to an improved water 
source, and more than half spends over 30 minutes collecting water. The country experienced a 
rapid acceleration of sanitation coverage following a cholera outbreak in the late 1970s, with 
widespread adoption of basic latrines in rural areas. Coverage in rural areas was estimated at 50 
percent by 1980 and the 93/94 HRDS16 survey found that 92.3% of rural Tanzanian households 
had a traditional or improved pit latrine. Over time, these (mostly shared) facilities gradually fell 
into disrepair and, currently, do not meet the JMP standards for “improved” sanitation (World 
Bank, 1996). As such, while most Tanzanian households have access to some form of latrine,  
the majority of these latrines can be more accurately described as ‘fixed-point open defecation’. 
While approximately 80% of households have access to a pit latrine, only 8% have a slab to 
ensure that fecal matter is safely separated from human contact. Open defecation continues to be 
the most common form of toileting among 18% of households and child feces are disposed of in 
an unsafe manner 40% of the time.  
The 92 villages in 46 wards included as our study control sample provide a nuanced snapshot of 
sanitation and hygiene conditions in our study area absent the intervention.17 While 80% of 
households have a pit latrine with slab or VIP latrine, more than 40% of these slabs are in 
disrepair and a third of the facilities are shared with other households. Furthermore, only 17% of 
these latrines have a cover for the squat hole to contain the feces and reduce potential 
transmission by flies, and more than two-thirds of the households with squat hole covers did not 
have them in place when visited. Our data show that, although people are aware of the 
16 Tanzania Human Resources Development Survey, 1993/94 
17 Note that control areas were exposed to mass media campaigns on the radio. 
8 
 
                                                           

importance of washing hands with soap, the presence of soap and handwashing devices,18 
together with actual handwashing behavior, remains low. We observe that 82% of caregivers 
know that handwashing with soap and water is the best method for cleaning hands, while only 
8% of households have any soap visible near the place where hands are washed and only 1.2% 
have a fixed handwashing device. In-depth structured observations reveal that any form of 
handwashing at critical junctures, such as post-toileting or before eating, is low (27%), and 
washing hands with soap is substantially lower (4%). Households have toileting facilities, but 
they are in disrepair and often lack the ability to effectively store fecal matter safely and reduce 
the risk of contamination. Caregivers have basic knowledge of appropriate handwashing 
behavior, but fail to translate this into practice.  
2.3. Rural Sanitation: Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing 
The rural sanitation intervention – Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing (TSSM) – 
combines demand- and supply-side strengthening in an attempt to shift the sanitation equilibrium 
in targeted villages. TSSM uses Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) and sanitation 
marketing to increase demand for improved sanitation, while strengthening the supply of 
sanitation goods and services to local markets, with the aim of making these products more 
affordable and accessible. The objective of the program is to move all household members up the 
sanitation ladder, away from open defecation and towards the use of improved latrines, thereby 
creating ODF communities.  
CLTS is an approach originally championed in South Asia to reduce open defecation by using 
community mobilization activities and behavior change strategies. CLTS recognizes that poor 
sanitation practices pose a fundamental collective action problem and uses a catalytic 
“triggering” event to highlight the problems created by open defecation. A CLTS leader triggers 
a community by bringing community members together and producing a defecation map, 
highlighting all of the areas where defecation occurs. Community members then visit these 
locations on a transect walk. Finally, the facilitator conducts a feces calculation to highlight the 
quantity of fecal matter produced in the community, and generates a mobility chart to show 
households how the fecal matter inevitably contaminates drinking water. In Tanzania, the CLTS 
model deviated from its usual focus on a shame-triggered message that urges behavior change, to 
a more positive one focusing on aspirations and pride (Perez et al., 2012). The project trained 
local CLTS trainers at the district level who, in turn, trained CLTS facilitators in each ward. 
Facilitators then performed CLTS triggering in the communities, after which communities would 
create a CLTS committee consisting of 5 members who would be responsible for starting a 
18 Most handwashing devices in our sample are simple mobile buckets with water and soap.  We differentiate 
between mobile devices such as these and more permanent “fixed” devices which include tippy taps (specifically 
promoted by the intervention), a sink with tap or fixed basin. 
9 
 
                                                           

village latrine register and monitoring progress, while continually motivating households to 
move up the sanitation ladder.  
CLTS activities were accompanied by intensive sanitation marketing and promotion campaigns 
directed towards the head of the household. Marketing approaches included direct consumer 
contact (DCC) which are large, community-based events, and mass media (print and radio). 
Promotional activities at the village level were delivered by village leaders, community health 
workers, as well as the CLTS champions. To maintain focus on aspirations, activities of the 
sanitation marketing campaign fell under the common slogan Choo bora chawesekana (“a good 
latrine is possible”).  
While the mass media radio campaign was broadcasted across the country, 182 villages in 91 
wards were targeted to receive direct sanitation marketing efforts through promotional activities. 
TSSM demand-side strengthening activities consisted of the following: 
1. A mass media campaign including: (i) radio advertisements that feature a short jingle 
about the importance of sanitation, and (ii) a soap opera during a primetime slot on two 
radio channels with 15 minute episodes covering promotional messages for both latrine 
upgrading and handwashing behavior.  
2. Wall murals, posters and flyers with the Choo bora chawesekana slogan providing 
information on pricing, simplicity and the benefits of the “sungura” 19 slab constructed by 
masons trained in the program (see Figure 4 for an illustration).  
3. A roadshow (DCC event) promoting improved sanitation which would include skits, 
competitions, music, dancing, and sungura slab sales promotions. 
4. CLTS triggering and the creation of a sanitation committee. 
Beyond lack of demand, formative research developed to inform the intervention design 
identified limited availability of low-cost, durable sanitation options as being prominent 
challenges to the success of the intervention in rural communities. Furthermore, masons 
exhibited limited business and marketing skills. To overcome these constraints, demand-side 
interventions were accompanied by supply-side strengthening to ensure local provision of 
latrines and sanitation products. The program trained masons, or fundis, in latrine construction 
and marketing skills. The training lasted a week and taught masons how to build sungura cement 
sanitation platforms to be sold for approximately $5 per slab. Masons were also taught more 
general techniques for upgrading latrines together with basic marketing and management skills to 
guide their operations. The aim of the training was to enable masons to capitalize on the demand 
for sanitation products generated by the promotion activities, and to spur future demand.  
19 Sungura means rabbit in Swahili and refers to the appearance of the slab 
10 
 
                                                           

A year into the program, limited availability of materials was creating bottlenecks in the process, 
which led to the decision to introduce a supply chain strengthening component aimed at 
incentivizing local distributors (hardware stores) to make the materials required for cement slabs 
more readily available to masons to use as inputs.    
2.4. Handwashing with Soap 
The handwashing with soap (HWWS) intervention targeted rural mothers with children under 5. 
The program conducted extensive formative research on barriers to handwashing with soap, and 
used the results to inform the design of communication campaigns. Barriers identified include a 
lack of both time and cues (e.g. handwashing stations) that are helpful in reinforcing habits. In 
light of these barriers, HWWS promoted an enabling technology called the “tippy tap20” that 
provides an external cue to handwashing with soap. It comprises a simple handwashing station 
equipped with water and soap (made cheaply using local materials). The campaign specifically 
targeted mothers, who are often seen as the guardians of children’s health and wellbeing, and 
recognized them for their contribution to the family. The campaign was built around an 
overarching communication concept embodied by the slogan Mikono Yenye Fahari (“Hands to 
be proud of”), which was designed to tap into mothers’ aspiration for recognition for the work 
they do for families (Coombes & Paynter, 2010).   
The campaign, which later evolved into Asante Mama (“Thank you mother”), formed the 
backbone of the district-level activities. Activities of the program included mass media 
interventions (radio adverts and soap opera); branded intervention material (posters, hats, 
clothing, etc.); DCC roadshow events (similar to the TSSM interventions); and interpersonal 
contact (IPC) through front-line activators (FLAs), or Msabunashajis,21 who are trained to visit 
households and conduct handwashing promotion events with women on market days, during pre-
natal clinic visits, and at village meetings FLAs would also distribute promotional material 
including flyers and comics on how to construct a tippy tap, and a wall calendar used to remind 
households of the times to watch the soap opera. 
The program identified volunteers from each community and provided them with a 3-day-long 
training structured around pathways for contamination and advocating appropriate hygiene 
practices related to handwashing with soap (including the best methods to follow and critical 
junctures). FLAs were subsequently taught how to effectively engage with the community, relay 
campaign messages to caretakers, and successfully monitor hygienic practices in the village. 
They were trained in tippy tap construction, and were expected to impart this learning to village 
households, with caregivers of young children as their primary target.  
20 For more information on tippy-taps and other enabling technologies, see 
www2.wsp.org/scalinguphandwashing/enablingtechnologies. 
21 Roughly translated as “The Soaper” 
11 
 
                                                           

The HWWS DCC events targeted mothers and stressed the importance of ensuring the 
cleanliness and health of children, which required washing hands with water and soap at critical 
junctures. People were shown how to construct a tippy tap and given a chance to try using one. 
The FLAs reinforced this message in their interaction with caretakers. The HWWS DCC event 
was otherwise implemented in the same manner as the TSSM DCC activities. 
2.5. Program Implementation 
WSP worked in collaboration with Tanzania’s Ministries of Health and Social Welfare to 
develop the TSSM and HWWS campaign materials and trained district government counterparts 
who in turn conducted training of local FLAs, CLTS facilitators and masons and coordinated the 
distribution of marketing materials. DCC events were implemented by private companies 
(separately for the HWWS and TSSM campaigns). The objective was for the Tanzanian 
government to have overall oversight and control of the program implementation for 
sustainability purposes.    
TSSM and HWWS promotional campaigns were phased in between February 2009 and 
December 2010 across 10 rural districts: Mpwapwa, Kondoa, Rufiji, Iringa, Sumbawanga, 
Kiteto, Masasi, Musoma, Karagwe and Igunga. The two interventions were implemented 
separately – in this case the combined intervention implied the overlapping delivery of both 
interventions, rather than a coordinated hybrid of the two. A timeline of activities is presented in 
Figure 5. The mass media campaign ran from February 2009 – December 2010 across the 
country and became a joint TSSM/HWWS intervention; 15 minute radio slots discussed issues 
related to both sanitation and hygiene. Distinct HWWS and TSSM DCC roadshows and other 
marketing materials were initially rolled out from June 2009 – June 2010. However, two separate 
DCC campaigns were conducted for the HWWS intervention, in contrast to only one for the 
TSSM intervention. The first campaign ran from January – June 2010 and the second ran from 
August – October 2010. Mason and FLA training took place early on in the campaigns (June 
2009 – March 2010). Masons were then ready to meet the newly generated demand for sanitation 
following the implementation of CLTS triggering and DCC events in the latter half of 2009 and 
early 2010. Similarly, FLAs were in place to reinforce HWWS messages.    
The mass media radio campaign was broadcasted across the country on two of the major radio 
channels. A total of 80 15 minute soap opera episodes and 1800 radio adverts of 45 seconds each 
were aired, reaching an estimated 10 million people. Since the radio campaign reached all wards, 
irrespective of treatment assignment, it was not directly evaluated and all results in this paper can 
be interpreted as the effect of the TSSM/HWWS interventions at the ward level in the presence 
of a radio campaign.22  
22 In a nested experiment we attempted to unpack the effect of the mass media campaign by conducting a randomized 
encouragement design which provided one third of HWWS households with a calendar or comic mentioning the date and time 
12 
 
                                                           

Table 2 summarizes the reach of the various intervention components based on project 
monitoring data. For TSSM, 407 masons were trained across all treatment villages. A further 282 
CLTS facilitators were trained and conducted CLTS triggering in a total of 79 wards.23 All 
TSSM villages received murals and/or posters, and 81 out of the 90 originally assigned wards 
received the DCC event24 reaching a recorded 180,000 people. 
For the HWWS campaign, 433 FLAs were trained across all of the treatment villages. The DCC 
event missed 5 of the 91 assigned wards, reaching an estimated 220,000 people during the first 
round and 234,000 in the second round.25   
3. Experimental Design  
3.1. Identification Strategy 
Tanzania is administratively separated into 30 regions, 169 districts and 3,643 wards, with the 
average ward holding approximately 12,000 people. To evaluate the impact of sanitation, 
handwashing and combined interventions, we implement a cluster-randomized evaluation with 
random assignment of interventions at the ward level, including a total of 135 intervention and 
46 control wards. Wards were identified as the optimal operational unit of implementation for 
the project, and of sufficient geographic extension to minimize the risk of significant information 
spillovers between populations exposed to the localized messages, community events, and other 
forms of social promotion activities.  
The sample was drawn from 10 districts spread throughout the country selected by the Ministry 
of Water (MoW) and Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) to provide geographic 
diversity at the national level (see map in Figure 6). These districts are not random, and were 
targeted because of operational feasibility for program implementation, taking into account the 
existence of ongoing MoW and MoHSW projects, including the Health Village Campaign 
(HVC) and water and sanitation interventions. Of the 245 wards in these 10 districts, initially 13 
wards were dropped from the sample. Three of these wards were urban, and thus ineligible for 
the program, and the remaining 10 wards were pre-selected as pilot areas for the program and 
excluded from the evaluation. Among the remaining 232 wards the program selected the 190 
largest wards by population size in order to maximize the population under treatment. These 190 
wards were subsequently randomly assigned to one of four groups: (1) Handwashing 
intervention, (2) Sanitation intervention, (3) Handwashing and Sanitation intervention, and (4) 
of the soap opera. We find this had a positive but non-significant increase in recall of the soap opera which was not a large 
enough effect to be able to measure subsequent impacts of the campaign through the encouragement. 
23 While 90 wards were assigned to receive CLTS, 11 were not treated due to logistical challenges of district facilitators training 
and visiting wards, with lack of funds for the district facilitator to travel cited as the reason for non-compliance. 
24 Imperfect compliance resulted from logistical constraints of reaching villages during the roadshow schedule 
25 It is not possible to compute how much overlap there was between the first and second round, but it is expected that these 
numbers mostly reflect repeat exposure since the events were conducted in the same villages in both rounds. 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           

Control (no intervention). After the initial sample selection, the district of Massasi experienced a 
re-districting process through which 9 wards were reassigned to a neighboring district which was 
not part of the program and were dropped from the sample. The reassignment was balanced 
across treatment arms and included 3 wards from the sanitation only group and 2 wards from 
each of the other study arms resulting in a final experimental sample of 181 wards. 
We implemented a block randomization procedure within districts with the objective of 
balancing the population sizes of treatment and control wards within each district. First, wards 
were ordered by population size within districts and blocked into groups of four, starting with the 
four most populous wards, second most populous, and so on. A random number was then 
assigned to each ward, and a group number between 1 and 4 was given to each ward based on the 
ordering of the random number within its respective block. Finally, group numbers were 
randomly assigned to represent one of the three treatment or control groups.26  
3.2. Compliance 
Table 3 presents treatment compliance at the ward level. Of the 181 wards selected for the 
sample, 45 were assigned to handwashing, 44 to sanitation, 46 to the combined intervention and 
the remainder to control. According to administrative records, the implementing agency 
accidentally conducted handwashing promotion in one of the sanitation wards, resulting in actual 
delivery of TSSM only to 43 wards and combined TSSM and HWWS to 47 wards. There were 
no reported deviations from the planned implementation of mason or FLA training, and no 
information was available to assess the actual delivery of village-level media (wall drawings, 
posters, etc.), although, based on information from the field managers,  we expect that a majority 
of the print material dissemination was implemented as scheduled. Within each ward, the two 
largest villages were targeted for program implementation. 
Administrative records of program implementation determined that some wards received only 
partial treatment. 2 of the 45 HWWS wards were not exposed to the DCC event, 7 of the 43 
TSSM wards did not have a CLTS triggering, and 5 of these 7 wards did not receive the DCC 
roadshow event. Of the 47 wards that were assigned to both TSSM and HWWS, 4 wards did not 
receive a CLTS triggering or DCC exposure. 
3.3. Balance 
Table 4 presents balance statistics. Since we do not have a baseline survey, this consists of a 
combination of time-invariant indicators and retrospective responses asked in the endline dating 
to February 2009 – before the intervention had started. Of the 87 variables we are able to present 
for each of the three groups (resulting in 261 comparisons to the control), we find a statistically 
26 The randomized selection procedure can be obtained by the authors on request 
14 
 
                                                           

significant difference in 12 tests for balance at the 5% significance level. The expected number 
of “by-chance” imbalances from a random draw of 261 is 13, which suggests that this is well 
within the expected range. However, some concerns persist. Firstly, half (6) of the imbalances 
are found in the HWWS group, which is more likely to have a cement floor and piped water 
connection. The sanitation only households are more likely to have a pit latrine with slab or 
ventilated pit latrine (VIP) in 2009, and the combination ward households are more likely to 
listen to the radio and have slightly older household members than the control group. The most 
concerning imbalance for the study is the difference in sanitation coverage between TSSM and 
the control group. However, there are good reasons to be skeptical about the validity of these 
imbalances, given that the collected data is retrospective in nature and subject to recall bias. 
Nonetheless, we run all of the results and include all of the imbalanced variables as controls, 
with the tables presented in the online appendix. Overall, the TSSM impact on latrine 
construction and availability reduces, to line up more closely with results found in the combined 
intervention, but signs and significance remain consistent, suggesting that these imbalances are 
not driving any conclusions made in the paper.    
4. Data and Sample  
The sampling procedure, in following program operational guidelines which targeted the two 
largest villages in each treatment ward, selected the two largest villages, based on population 
size, in each of the 181 evaluation wards. For the 362 villages in the sample, the full list of 
census enumeration areas (EAs) was obtained from the Tanzanian National Bureau of Statistics 
(NBS). For each village, the sample included one EA, selected with probability proportional to 
size (PPS). A census listing exercise was then conducted in each EA to collect basic information 
to determine household eligibility for the survey. Survey eligibility criteria were (i) the 
household was present during the period of listing; (ii) had been living in the village since the 
beginning of 2009 or earlier; and (iii) had at least one child under the age of five. Ten eligible 
households were then selected from each EA at random for the sample. 
Field work was conducted between May and December 2012.27 Field teams visited each village 
for three days. The first day was used to conduct the EA census listing exercise.28 The census 
collected data on 72,705 households in the 362 selected EAs. 31% of listed households were 
eligible for the survey, primarily based on the presence of a child under age five in the 
household.  Field supervisors then ran an in-field, automated randomization procedure to select 
10 households at random from each EA to participate in the household survey together with a 
replacement sample of 5 households to be used in the case of potential non-response. If a 
household refused to participate or was not available after two visits, the first household in the 
27 In 2009 a baseline survey was initiated but not completed in 5 of the 10 intervention districts; The endline survey was 
implemented under an independent sampling scheme, following the original sample design. 
28 EA sizes ranged from 51 to 746 households with an average of 221. 
15 
 
                                                           

replacement sample was selected. A total of 105 such replacements were made resulting in 3,619 
completed interviews from 3,724 attempted (97.2% response rate).  
In addition, two of the ten sampled households were selected randomly for structured 
observations which took place on the second day (resulting in a sub-sample of 724 households). 
Structured observations consisted of a three hour visit to the household in the early morning 
(determined by the time the primary caregiver would wake up) where the enumerator would 
observe caregiver handwashing behavior. This was conducted before any household interviews 
were held in the village, with the intention of reducing any potential Hawthorne effects that 
could result from respondents being aware that the intention of the visit was to record 
handwashing behavior. Enumerators would record the various handwashing “critical junctures” 
experienced by the caregiver and target child, which include (i) before preparing, serving or 
eating food and (ii) post-toileting. They would then record whether critical junctures were 
accompanied by handwashing with soap and water. 
Following the structured observations, household surveys were conducted on the second and 
third days of field work. The questionnaire29 included modules on demographics, productive 
activities and assets, water and sanitation status (observed and self-reported), education, hygiene 
practices and knowledge, social capital, self-reported exposure to the program interventions and 
child health. Health results were collected for children between the ages of 6 months and 5 years. 
A description of the priority outcomes is as follows:  
Access to an improved latrine: The variable construction follows the JMP improved sanitation 
definition based on observed latrine type and private ownership. Based on a specific interest of 
the Tanzanian Government, we also consider how access to an improved latrine varies when we 
include shared facilities, or expand the definition of sanitation quality as being fulfilled by only 
one squat hole with a slab that does not expose contents.30 For households with latrines, we also 
ask when the latrine was constructed to determine whether this was done during the intervention 
period. While a small number of households may have flush/pour facilities, including septic 
tanks, we refer to “latrine” construction since 97.5% of households with a toilet facility are 
referring to some form of pit latrine. 
Open defecation: This is a measure of households that report using “no facilities” as the usual 
defecation practice (as per JMP guidelines.) We present a second definition that asks households 
directly whether they practice open defecation always, sometimes, rarely or never. We then 
present these results as a measure of intensity.  
29 Based on the global WSP survey instrument applied for HHWS impact evaluations in Senegal, Peru and Vietnam and TSSSM 
evaluations in India and Indonesia. 
30 see http://www.wssinfo.org/definitions-methods/watsan-categories for the formal JMP definition 
16 
 
                                                           

Caregiver handwashing practices: These were collected based on self-reported information 
and structured observations. Given the potential courtesy bias associated with self-reported 
measures, we consider self-reports as reflecting knowledge rather than practice. For structured 
observations we measure whether the caregiver uses water and soap to wash her own or her 
child’s hands in conjunction with the following exposure events:  
- After fecal contact: (i) after defecating; (ii) after toileting; (iii) after cleaning child post-
toileting 
- Before handling food: (i) before cutting or preparing food; (ii) before eating; (iii) before 
serving food; (iv) before breastfeeding. 
Diarrhea: From the household data we use a caregiver-reported symptom-based measure 
defining 7 day diarrhea prevalence as having 3 or more loose/watery stools in a 24 hour period or 
having a stool with blood or mucus (Baqui et al., 1991). To ensure consistency with the 2010 
DHS, in the listing survey we ask caregivers of 34,045 children (under 5 years) a question on 
whether children have had diarrhea in the past 14 days.  
Anemia: Anemia status (iron deficiency) was collected using a HemoCueTM Hb 201+ 
photometer, which measures blood hemoglobin levels in real time. These biomarkers were 
collected for all children between 6 months and 5 years old in the household. In line with WHO 
guidelines, we consider children to be anemic if their hemoglobin concentration is below 110 
g/L, (WHO, 2011). 
Anthropometry: Child height, weight and head circumference were collected by specially 
trained enumerators with a nursing background, who followed WHO anthropometric data 
collection protocols to assess malnutrition levels. Results are transformed into height-for-age, 
weight-for-age and head circumference-for-age standardized z-scores based on WHO 
international growth standards.  
5. Econometric Specification 
We estimate the intention-to-treat (ITT) estimator as the difference between average outcomes 
across treatment and control groups. The basic specification is:  
 
𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖=  𝛼𝛼+ ∑
𝛽𝛽𝑘𝑘𝑇𝑇𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ ∑
𝑆𝑆𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋
48
𝑙𝑙=1
+ 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
3
𝑘𝑘=1
 
 
(1)  
 
Where, Yij is the outcome of interest for household or individual i in ward j, Tjk is a dummy 
variable equal to 1 in wards assigned to receive treatment k where k = {1,2,3} for HWWS, 
TSSM and the combined intervention respectively. βk is the estimate of the average effect of 
treatment k. Sjl is a dummy variable equal to one if Ward j is included in block l, representing the 
17 
 

block fixed effects for the 4831 stratified ward blocks included to improve precision (Bruhn & 
McKenzie, 2008). For child-level outcomes we include age and month dummies as covariates. 
Standard errors are clustered at the ward level. We then check whether the impacts of the three 
treatment arms are statistically different from each other by presenting F-statistics to test whether 
we can reject the null hypotheses: β1 = β2 ; β1 = β3 and β2 = β3.  The p-values associated with 
these tests are reported in all of the regression tables. 
 
In addition to the basic specification, we estimate the following models: (i) include control 
variables to reduce residual variance and account for any baseline imbalance32 and (ii) estimate 
the local average treatment effect for receiving the program, by instrumenting random 
assignment on actual implementation based on program monitoring data. These additional 
specifications are presented in the online appendix.  
 
6. Results 
For all household- and caregiver-level responses, the tables present the specification that 
includes block fixed effects only. For the child health indicators, the specification presented 
includes block fixed effects together with child age (month dummies) and gender controls. In 
addition we include the full set of models in the online appendix. 
 
6.1. Program Exposure and Outputs 
Table 5 shows impacts on self-reported program exposure to TSSM and HWWS channels, with 
large and significant differences in the probability of being exposed to one or more messages 
among the three treatment groups. Three channels are included for HWWS and TSSM. Both 
interventions include promotional materials (which can include wall drawings, posters and 
comics) and participation in respective DCC events. The third channel of exposure to HWWS 
includes being visited by an msabunashaji/front-line activator, while for TSSM it includes 
attending a CLTS event. 22.4% of households in the control group report being exposed to any 
TSSM messages, while this proportion increases by 14.1 percentage points in the TSSM-only 
group, by 25.1 percentage points in the handwashing-only group, and by 34.5 percentage points 
in the combined group. When measuring the number of events recalled, we find a nearly linear 
relationship with the number of DCC triggering activities in each group (1 in the TSSM group, 2 
for the handwashing, and 3 in the combined group), suggesting that the frequency of program 
activities is strongly related to message exposure and recall.  
31 Not all districts have ward numbers divisible by 4, in which case some blocks contain only 2 or 3 Wards. 
32 We use the variables found to be unbalanced across intervention groups. This includes: (i) whether the household had a pit 
latrine or VIP at baseline; (ii) whether household members listen to the radio; (iii) household asset ownership; and (iv) whether 
the household has access to piped water. 
18 
 
                                                           

While virtually no one in the control group reports exposure to all three channels, 10 percent of 
households in the combined treatment group do. Impacts on exposure to HWWS messages show 
a similar pattern to TSSM. We find increases of 37 and 44 percentage points respectively, off of 
a control mean of 13.5%, for households reporting exposure to one or more channels in the 
HWWS and combined wards, while around 6% of households report exposure to three channels.   
We also ask households if they are aware of the presence of a CLTS committee in the village. 
Table 6 reports an approximately 13 percentage point increase in awareness among households 
in TSSM and combined wards, and a positive and significant 6 percentage point increase in 
handwashing only wards. Compared to control areas, where only 12 percent of households report 
knowing of a CLTS committee, awareness in sanitation areas is almost doubled as a consequence 
of the program.  Similarly, when asked if they are aware of a mason in the community, 
households report an 18 percentage point increase above the 14% awareness level in control 
villages, implying a relative increase of 128%. Reported awareness of a mason in handwashing 
only wards also increases significantly, but by 9 percentage points. Lastly, when asked whether 
the household thinks everyone in the village knows someone who could help build a latrine, 
there is a significant increase of 7 to 8 percentage points in TSSM treatment areas but no impact 
in HWWS-only wards. 
The presence of reported exposure to TSSM messaging in HWWS-only wards and vice versa can 
be expected given imperfect recall a year and a half following the implementation of the 
interventions. This is exacerbated further by the fact that the second HWWS DCC event was 
conducted more recently than the TSSM activities. Furthermore some messaging content in both 
the TSSM and HWWS shared similar features, for example with regards to hygiene behavior. 
That said, as we will see in the results that follow, impacts on final outcomes such as latrine 
construction are much more consistent with the intervention models, suggesting that this 
reporting may reflect imperfect recall rather than real contamination.  
6.2. Impacts on Latrine Construction and Open Defecation 
The primary objective of the sanitation intervention was to increase the coverage of improved 
latrines and reduce open defecation. This could happen through upgrading of existing latrines, or 
building new ones. Since it was believed that basic pit latrine coverage was high in Tanzania, the 
TSSM campaign focused on simple ways to upgrade latrines, for instance, by incorporating the 
concrete sungura slab. However, latrine construction in Tanzania is a fairly frequent activity, 
with 57% of control households reporting the construction of a new latrine in the last 3 years (the 
period since the start of the intervention) and while we find limited evidence of households 
trying to upgrade existing latrines, we find strong evidence of households deciding to build new, 
private facilities. As a baseline falsification test we estimate the impact of the program on the 
probability of latrine construction in the baseline period, prior to the start of the intervention, and 
find no association between the program and pre-intervention latrine construction (Table 7).  
19 
 

The TSSM intervention produces an 8.2 percentage point increase in the probability of building a 
new latrine in the TSSM only wards, and a 7.7 percentage point increase in the combined wards; 
these two effects are not significantly different from one another.  The effect in handwashing 
only wards is not significantly different from the control group.  New latrine construction is 
primarily from private rather than shared latrines. The probability of constructing a new private 
latrine increases between 10 and 12 percentage points above 38% of control households that 
build new private facilities over the intervention period. Consistent with this result, we find that 
the probability of sharing a latrine with another household falls by 9.2 and 7.6 percentage points 
in the TSSM and combined wards respectively. 
As expected, we observe no impact of the HWWS intervention on the probability of constructing 
new private latrines. Unexpectedly, however, there is a significant reduction of about 4 
percentage points in the construction of shared latrines in HWWS and TSSW only wards, and an 
insignificant reduction in combined wards. This may result from household decisions to shift 
from the construction of shared latrines, to the construction of private ones. 
The increase in latrine construction in TSSM wards translates not only into more private latrines 
but also better quality ones. Table 8 shows that the probability of using improved sanitation 
increases in both TSSM and combined treatment wards, irrespective of the definition for 
improved sanitation employed. The use of sungura slabs is still low, but increases significantly 
in the intervention wards from 1.4% in the control areas to 7% and 4.6% in the TSSM and 
combined wards. 
Through behavior change and increased presence of latrines, one of the program’s primary 
sanitation objectives is the reduction of open defecation. Consistent with this objective, we 
observe large and significant reductions in open defecation in both the TSSM and combination 
groups. While 23.1% of households report open defecation as the primary form of feces disposal 
in the control group, this is reduced by 12 percentage points in TSSM only wards and by 7.4 
percentage points in combination wards. As presented in Table 9, the majority of the reduction in 
open defecation is from regular to less frequent open defecation, rather than complete cessation. 
51% of households report at least some open defection in the comparison group and the 
likelihood is not statistically different in the treatment arms. Given the important externalities 
associated with sanitation and defecation practices, it is useful to understand how this translates 
into community-wide practices. Community leaders were asked whether the village had been 
declared open defecation free (ODF). Consistent with the findings on latrine construction and 
household open defecation, we find a significant increase of 12.7 and 8.7 percentage points in 
TSSM and combination villages respectively from 5.4% of control villages claiming to be ODF. 
There is a positive but insignificant increase of 4.6 percentage points in the proportion of ODF 
HWWS villages. Using the fact that we have a sample of 10 households per village, we can also 
estimate village-level open defecation prevalence by aggregating household responses. Figure 7 
presents the cumulative distribution functions for village-level regular open defecation in each 
20 
 

intervention group. Figure 8 shows the same distribution for households practicing at least some 
open defecation. Consistent with the previous findings we observe large improvements in 
village-level regular open defecation across the distribution for TSSM and combination wards, 
but very little (insignificant) differences for village households practicing open defecation some 
of the time. The distributions of these two indicators are also strikingly different. For instance, 
almost all villages have at least some households practicing some open defecation, which 
increases roughly linearly. In contrast, more than half of the sampled villages have nobody 
practicing regular open defecation. A further 25% of villages have between 0% and 20% regular 
open defecation prevalence. The results highlight the fact that the intervention is successful in 
shifting behavior, but this does not result in complete cessation of open defecation which 
remains pervasive.    
We also ask whether the household perceives that people in the community practice open 
defecation and we find that this perception falls in all groups by just over 5 percentage points 
below the mean of 84% in comparison communities. Finally, we observe an increase in the 
probability of correct child feces disposal, as per the JMP definition, in both sanitation treatment 
groups. We are concerned that results from the TSSM group may be driven by possible baseline 
imbalance. Controlling for baseline latrine type, we find positive TSSM results reduce slightly 
and converge to be more closely aligned with combination ward results, with signs and 
significance tests remaining the same with and without controls. These results are found in the 
online appendix.     
6.3. Impacts on Handwashing Knowledge and Behavior 
We now turn to the impacts on handwashing related outcomes. We generate an  index from 0 to 
1, which signifies the proportion of 5 unprompted handwashing junctures of which the caregiver 
is aware– after going to the latrine; after washing baby’s bottom; before preparing food; before 
eating; before feeding/breastfeeding. We find that caregivers in the handwashing and combined 
groups show small but significant improvements in knowledge (Table 10). When inquiring 
whether the caregiver knows that handwashing with soap and water is the best method we 
observe an increase of over 5 percentage points in TSSM and combined wards, and unexpectedly 
no significant impacts in the HWWS only group. However when we turn to self-reported 
handwashing with soap in the last 24 hours we do not see a significant change in any of the 
treatment areas relative to control. Furthermore, while the presence of soap by a handwashing 
station is 8% in the control group, this proportion is unchanged in the handwashing and 
combined wards and actually declines slightly (significant at the 10% level) in TSSM wards. 
Households in the TSSM and combined group report higher expenditures on soap in the last 
month.  
The intervention does not have an impact on the probability of having any form of handwashing 
station, including mobile stations, regardless of whether soap is present (48% of households do), 
21 
 

but does have a relatively large impact on the probability of having a fixed handwashing station 
and a handwashing facility within 6 meters of the latrine in combined intervention wards. While 
only 1.2% of control households have a fixed handwashing station, this proportion increases by 
1.7 and 2.8 percentage points respectively in HWWS and combination groups. Most of this 
change is driven by the presence of “tippy taps”, which we include as fixed handwashing 
stations. While statistically significant, these numbers remain small – a total of 22 tippy taps 
were observed in the entire sample, which questions the sustainability of this intervention.  
Only 3.7% of control households have a handwashing facility within 6 meters of their latrine, 
and this proportion increases by 6.3 percentage points in combination wards (but not the stand 
alone groups). Though in absolute terms the presence of latrines with handwashing facilities in 
combination wards is still relatively small (about 10% of households), this result may reflect an 
interaction of the TSSM and HWWS interventions whereby households exposed to both types of 
messages are more likely to install new latrines with a handwashing station nearby.  
To measure handwashing practice we utilize both direct observation of handwashing at critical 
points in time in the household, as well as self-reported measures. The number of exposure 
events identified through direct observation is very similar across groups and not statistically 
different, with an average of 5.8 exposure events observed per household. Overall, we find no 
differences between treatment and control groups in self-reported or observed handwashing with 
soap after fecal contact (Table 11). Moreover, while 47% of respondents report washing hands 
after fecal contact in the last 24 hours, only 12% of individuals washed hands after fecal contact 
in the direct observation sub-sample. The likelihood of observed handwashing with soap after 
fecal contact actually declines by 5.6 percentage points in TSSM wards, though this is likely 
related to the increased opportunity for observing otherwise unobserved handwashing behavior 
in households with new latrines constructed following the TSSM intervention. That being said, 
there is no significant decrease in observed handwashing in combination wards.   
While there are no significant impacts of the program on handwashing behavior after fecal 
contact, we do find small increases in self-reported and observed handwashing practice before 
preparation of foods. There is a 7.7 percentage point increase in self-reported handwashing 
before food preparation in the HWWS group over the 15% reported in the control group (and no 
significant impacts in the TSSM or combination groups). In the direct observation sample, there 
is a 1.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood of observing handwashing when handling 
food or feeding among members of the HWWS and combination groups, over a mere 1.3% of 
handwashing observed at this junction in the control group.  
Beyond the small positive impacts on handwashing prior to food handling, results from the direct 
observation of handwashing practice are not encouraging. For any exposure event observed by 
the enumerator, 27% were followed by any form of handwashing in the control group with no 
significant differences compared to any treatment group. Only 3.8% of exposure events were 
22 
 

followed by handwashing with soap and water, and again there are no statistically significant 
differences between the control and treatment groups. These results report on the full sample of 
individuals and observed events are largely unchanged when focusing on the behavior of the 
child’s caregiver or the average household behavior (see online appendix).  
6.4. Impact on Other Hygiene Practices 
In addition to handwashing behaviors we measure other indicators related to hygiene practices in 
the household, including the observed cleanliness of children and caregiver’s hands, observed 
animal or human feces around the house and living area, smell of feces around the house, 
presence of garbage, and whether food is covered. Overall, children appear to be cleaner in the 
HWWS and combination wards.  We combine three binary indicators: whether the child has 
dirty hands, fingernails or face, to generate an index from 0 (dirty) to 1 (clean), which increases 
from a base of 0.56 for children in the control group, by 0.077 and 0.069 points respectively in 
the handwashing and combination wards. The results are consistent for each individual indicator   
comprised in the index, amounting to an increase of 5 to 8 percentage points in the likelihood of 
being clean across each of the three dimensions. The caregiver hand cleanliness index also shows 
improvement in handwashing and combination wards. Enumerators rate cleanliness on a scale of 
1 (visible dirt), 2 (unclean appearance), or 3 (clean) for nails, palms and fingerpads of caregivers 
separately. The scores are summed to get a value between 3 and 9. We observe an increase of 
about 0.4 and 0.45 points in the handwashing and combination wards respectively, above a mean 
score of 6.7 in the control group. No changes are observed in TSSM wards.  
 
We observe no changes in the probability of observing human or animal feces around the home 
(9% of households), smell of feces around the house (12% of households) or observed loose 
garbage in the kitchen or house (38% of households). There is a large and significant increase, 
however, in the likelihood that food is completely covered. While food coverage is observed in 
28.3% of control households, this proportion increases significantly in all three treatment groups, 
with magnitudes ranging from 11.1 percentage point increase in the handwashing only group to 
6.8 percentage points in the combined treatment group (impacts are not significantly different 
between groups).  
 
Finally, with regard to sanitation-related behavior we find that households with latrines in the 
TSSM and combined groups are more likely to report having ever cleaned the latrine they use, an 
increase of about 7 percentage points above 80% of households that report this behavior in the 
control group. Furthermore, there is a reduction in the probability of observed feces in the latrine 
or outside of the pit in combination wards. We find a reduction in feces observed in the latrine 
areas outside the pit, from 22% in control households to 17.7% in treatment ones. However, 
there are no significant differences in the reported presence of flies in the latrine area (53.7% of 
households report flies being present all the time).  
23 
 

6.5. Health Outcomes 
The TSSM and HWWS interventions are aimed at provoking handwashing and sanitation related 
behavior change with the ultimate goal of improving the population’s health, particularly health 
outcomes amongst children under 5. These results are presented in Table 13. We analyze the 
program’s impact on the probability of diarrhea in the past 7 and 14 days as a short term measure 
of health from exposure to pathogens; hemoglobin levels/anemia and weight as medium term 
measures of health; and height and head circumference as longer term indicators of the 
cumulative effects of improved health.   
 
For the analysis of diarrhea we use the large-scale household listing survey measuring the 
existence of one or more diarrheal episodes amongst children under 5 in the past 14 days (n= 
34,045), as well as the caregiver report during the in-depth household survey on symptoms of 
diarrhea amongst children under 5 (n=5,768). The diarrhea incidence from the listing data 
includes a much larger sample size and a longer time horizon when compared to the in-depth 
household survey data, thereby providing more power for the measure of impacts on this 
variable. Using the listing data, we estimate a decline in diarrhea of 2.1 percentage points 
(significant at the 10% level) in the combined treatment group, which constitutes a relative 
reduction of 12.5% compared to the control group where 16.8% of children are reported as 
having had diarrhea in the past 14 days. The estimated coefficients in the TSSM and HWWS 
only groups are negative but insignificant. However, when we analyze the household self-
reported outcomes on diarrhea symptoms in the past 7 days we observe no significant differences 
between treatment and control groups. Diarrhea symptoms are reported for 8.6% of children in 
the control group, and while the coefficients on the three treatment groups are negative, they are 
small and statistically insignificant.  
 
Hemoglobin (Hb) levels test for the presence of iron-deficiency anemia, which proxies for the 
child’s nutrient intake and absorption. Nutrient absorption can be affected by intestinal 
pathogens that reduce the absorptive capacity of the child’s intestinal tract. We observe no 
differences in either the level of measured Hb or the probability of anemia for children in the 
TSSM and HWWS only groups. However, in the combined treatment group, children show a 
small but significant decline of 1.65 g/L in hemoglobin (a 1.5% relative decline compared to the 
average of 111.4 g/L in the control group) and a significant increase in the probability of being 
anemic (defined as Hb<110 g/L), 6 percentage points higher than the 41.4% incidence observed 
in the control group. A second indicator that does not change in the singular treatment arms is 
weight-for-age (z-score), an indicator of children’s short term health. The average weight-for-age 
z-score in the combined intervention group declines by 0.075 standard deviations off of an 
average weight-for-age z-score of -1.03. Although biologically insignificant, the unexpected 
direction of the effects of the program on children’s health, as measured through anemia and 
weight, particularly in light of reduced presence of diarrhea in the same population, is a puzzle 
that we explore further in the next section. 
24 
 

 
Finally, our indicators for long run child health are the height-for-age z-score and head 
circumference-for-age z-score. On average we find no effects of the program on the height of 
children in any of the treatment groups relative to control and estimated coefficients are close to 
zero. For head circumference, estimated coefficients are positive but not significant (0.2 standard 
deviations in the handwashing groups). Thus, we conclude that the HWWS and TSSM 
interventions did not have a detectable impact on the long-term health status of beneficiary 
children.  
6.6. Subgroup Analysis: Child Age 
The time in a child’s life during which he or she is exposed to a WASH intervention is likely to 
be an important determinant of the potential effects the intervention may have. For instance, 
stunting is the long-term effect of reduced nutrition at the earliest years of life, where growth 
faltering is most common. Younger children with less developed immune systems may also be 
more susceptible to disease in early life. When we separate our analysis into “younger” (ages 0, 1 
and 2) and “older” (ages 3 and 4) age cohorts, we find little difference in height-for-age 
measures (Table 14). Absolute reductions in diarrhea for the combination wards are largest in the 
youngest age group, where we find a 2.6% reduction off of a control mean of 20.4%, compared 
to an insignificant 1.3% reduction off  of a 10.6% control mean for ages 3 and 4, although the 
relative change is somewhat similar at 12.75% and 12.25% respectively. None of these results 
are statistically significant for either cohort in the TSSM or HWWS wards.  
 
In the same age cohorts we find a larger reduction in hemoglobin levels for the younger group (-
2.35 g/L) and a much smaller and statistically insignificant reduction in the older group (-
0.47g/L) in combination wards. Similarly, weight-for-age reductions are stronger in the younger 
cohort. None of the results are statistically significant for either cohort in TSSM and HWWS 
wards. 
 
It is important to note that this sub-group analysis was not included as part of a formal pre-
analysis plan, and we did not stratify by age cohort in the randomization procedure, although we 
do find baseline balance in child and household characteristics between control and treatment 
wards in these subgroups. The results suggest that most of the health effects are being driven by 
the younger cohort.   
7. Validity Checks  
25 
 

We may be concerned that the counterintuitive health results could be driven by data quality 
issues. Here we explore these concerns in relation to diarrhea (7 and 14 day prevalence), 
hemoglobin level,33 height-for-age, weight-for-age and head circumference z-scores. 
7.1. Courtesy Bias 
While the nature of the intervention made it impossible to blind participants to their treatment 
status, we ensured that interviewers were blinded to the intervention status of each village in an 
attempt to reduce potential courtesy bias. 
Objective biomarker measures help to overcome the potential of courtesy bias, which has been 
documented in previous literature related to WASH interventions (e.g. Schmidt, 2014; DFID, 
2013). To test for potential courtesy bias in self-reported measures, we include a falsification 
question in the child health calendar survey instrument on whether the child has had abrasions, 
scrapes or bruising in the past 7 days, which we would expect to be uncorrelated with the 
handwashing or sanitation interventions. Results are presented in Table 15 and we find a small 
and borderline significant decrease in the combination ward, but no effect in the TSSM or 
HWWS wards suggesting potential but limited concern for reporting bias in the combined group.  
7.2. Nonrandom Covariate Imbalances: Enumerator Bias and Differential Timing 
Biometric measures are able to remove any potential subjective reporting bias, but we may still 
be concerned about non-random measurement bias given the level of skill required to measure 
height, weight, head circumference and anemia levels. We may also be concerned that roll-out of 
the survey (nine months in total) may have resulted in control and treatment households being 
visited at different times in the year. This would be problematic in cases where outcomes are 
seasonal, such as for anemia, which manifests as a symptom of malaria. We run all of the 
regressions for health outcomes (Table 15), and include interviewer and interview month fixed 
effects to account for these potential biases. We find that results remain consistent and 
significant for diarrhea, weight-for-age and hemoglobin level, while remaining small and 
insignificant for height-for-age. In fact, impacts increase slightly in all cases, and the standard 
errors reduce, yielding more precise estimates. Head circumference results vary somewhat across 
specifications, bringing into question the accuracy of this measure. 
7.3. Outliers 
33 Being anemic is based on the cutoff of having less than 110 g/L of hemoglobin in the blood. We find that, although significant, 
the result is highly influenced by the cutoff level chosen, and any cutoff between 73 and 103 g/L would fail to reject a difference 
in means between the control and combination group (Figure 9). In this case, we prefer to conduct robustness on the raw 
hemoglobin levels. 
26 
 
                                                           

Removing observations larger than 3 standard deviations from the mean for anthropometric 
measures discards 41, 33, 61 and 74 observations from the hemoglobin level, weight-for-age, 
height-for-age and head circumference z-scores respectively. Rerunning these regressions with 
this limited set (along with other similar specifications) yields results virtually unchanged from 
the original, except in the case for Hb level, where the impact is reduced and is no longer 
significant (Table 15). This is consistent with Figure 9 which indicates that most of the anemia 
change is coming from a small reduction in Hb levels close to the cutoff of 110 g/L, but there is 
also a left-hand tail in the combination distribution of severely anemic children (which are 
removed as outliers in this specification). Care should be taken when interpreting this result since 
removal of these outliers in the case of Hb levels may exclude important information regarding 
the treatment impact on the distribution of anemia.    
8. Potential Mechanisms 
While the generally accepted theory of change (and the one on which this study was originally 
based) provides clear justification for why we may expect to find positive health outcomes, it is 
less clear what may drive negative health outcomes. Here we consider three possible 
explanations: (i) differential mortality; (ii) contamination of groundwater; and (iii) poor latrine 
quality. 
8.1. Differential Mortality 
Lee et al. (1997) present a framework to describe how we may find negative health effects of 
water and sanitation interventions in high mortality settings. If the intervention reduces mortality, 
this may have the perverse effect of increasing the proportion of sick children, who would have 
otherwise died absent the intervention. If this differential selection is not accounted for, our 
health impacts will be biased downwards. We test for this possibility with the listing data 
available. If differential mortality is affecting health outcomes, we would expect a lower 
mortality rate in the treatment wards. While we do not have appropriate mortality measures, we 
do have data on the number of children under 5 in each of the 50,885 households asked this 
inclusion question during the listing exercise. We find no difference across any of the groups 
(Table 16). Child mortality may induce a fertility response, with mothers being more likely to 
have another child if their child passes away, thus equalizing under 5 ratios across groups. If this 
were the case, however, we would expect to see differences in the age distribution across groups 
(e.g. control households having a higher proportion of 0, 1, or 2 year olds). We run the same 
regression on each age group and find no evidence of different age distributions across groups, 
suggesting that selective mortality is not a concern in our data. 
8.2. Contamination of Groundwater 
Non-experimental research suggests a possible link between pit latrines and contamination of 
groundwater through seepage (Dzwairo et al., 2006). Increasing latrine coverage could then have 
the potential negative effect of increasing exposure to pathogens through drinking water. In this 
27 
 

case, we would expect to find a differential impact of the program depending on whether 
households treat their water before drinking it. Running sub-group analysis on our health 
outcomes based on whether the household treats their water (40% of households do), we find no 
observable differences in health outcomes, suggesting that this transmission mechanism is 
unlikely (Table 17).  
8.3. Poor Latrine Quality 
An important current topic of debate is whether encouraging households to take their first step 
onto the “sanitation” ladder by promoting fixed point defecation could be more harmful than 
helpful, by way of localizing fecal content, bringing it closer to home and providing more 
opportunity for flies to breed and spread disease. The concern is that, if we encourage 
households to build latrines, and these latrines are of a very low quality, we may exacerbate 
contamination opportunities. Our survey instrument has a rich set of measures related to 
observed and reported latrine quality. Running regressions on a wide range of these variables 
suggests that there is no clear difference in latrine quality across groups and, if anything, TSSM 
and combination ward latrines may be slightly better quality than latrines in the control wards, 
with both groups being more likely to have a squat hole cover in place during the enumerator 
observation and the combination group having less visible feces surrounding the latrine (Table 
17).   
9. Discussion 
In summary, the results from this study allow us to identify a few important facts to help reflect 
on potential implications for intervention implementation and future research in this area. 
1. TSSM is able to change behavior but not by enough to significantly influence the 
level of observed fecal matter: We see significant increases in improved latrine 
coverage. However, this does not necessarily translate into a more hygienic 
environment, and it is not clear that this increase in coverage is enough to make a 
difference to the daily fecal exposure that children face. While open defecation 
reduces substantially, the reduction is mostly driven by people limiting regular open 
defecation, while occasional open defecation does not change significantly and 
remains high at 51.3% in the control wards. In the TSSM intervention areas, we find 
fewer than 20% of villages reporting to be ODF. Furthermore, 75% of households 
have animals and 55% allow these animals into their house. New evidence suggests 
that children in contact with animal feces face exposure to high levels of bacteria such 
as E. coli (Ngure et al., 2013), which suggests that a more holistic approach to fecal 
removal may be required to effectively cut the transmission mechanism. 
Unsurprisingly, then, observed feces around the dwelling does not change across 
treatment groups and having a latrine is not correlated with whether feces is observed.   
28 
 

2. At-scale handwashing campaigns produce significantly lower effects on health 
outcomes than efficacy trials. This is likely to result from the limited 
effectiveness of being able to change handwashing behaviors: The HWWS 
intervention presents results consistent with the current literature on large 
effectiveness trials and suggests that significantly changing hygiene behavior through 
promotional activities remains a somewhat challenging task. We do find reasonably 
consistent and positive impacts on a range of hygiene-related indicators, but the 
magnitude is small and diminishes as we go further along the causal chain. It is clear 
that there is a large wedge between knowledge and behavior, with 82% of caregivers 
knowing the importance of washing hands with soap, but only 3.8% of exposure 
events actually being accompanied by this practice. Current large-scale behavior 
change campaigns seem unable to effectively close this gap between knowledge and 
practice. 
3. The tippy taps designed for Tanzania are not sustainable: Since change in 
knowledge is not enough to shift behaviors, the presence of visual cues and 
simplifying the burden of handwashing were promoted through the campaign. This 
was the rationale for promoting the construction and use of tippy taps. However, 
while anecdotal evidence suggests that there was initially high take up, we find that 
only 22 households of a possible 1,829 (1.2%) exposed to the HWWS campaign were 
using them at the time of follow up. 
4. The messages promoted by the campaigns do not translate into predictable 
behavior change: The TSSM intervention promoted the upgrading, rather than 
construction of new latrines, with the sungura slab being produced by masons as an 
add-on to current household facilities. In reality households chose to “upgrade” by 
building their own private latrines rather than sharing with others. HWWS focused on 
washing hands with soap at critical junctures. There seems to be little evidence to 
suggest that this resulted in handwashing behavior change, and yet we do find some 
(weak) evidence on broader measures of hygiene improvements such as latrine 
cleanliness. This may result from two things: (1) message creep – regardless of how 
nuanced the design of the message may be, at scale it becomes more difficult to 
control the delivery of the message (Coombes & Paynter, 2010); and (2) personal 
interpretation – while designers and implementers may have a clear hypothesis of 
how we expect people to react, the same information may be interpreted, and acted 
upon, in different ways.   
5. Combining handwashing and sanitation interventions does not produce clear 
health benefits: No detectable health effects are found in the individual 
interventions. When turning to the combined treatment, diarrhea levels improve 
marginally, but anemia and weight-for-age outcomes worsen. Putting this in 
perspective, the anemia and weight-for-age results, while statistically significant, do 
not seem to be biologically important – they amount to weight reductions of less than 
29 
 

100 grams per child on average, and hemoglobin reductions of 1.6 g/L. However, a 
diarrhea reduction of 2.1 percentage points, when taken at face value, can be 
considered biologically important, although this measure is only marginally 
significant (statistically) and does come with reasonable concerns linked to self-
reporting, making it less reliable than the biometric markers.  
The implications for policy and program implementation require some extrapolation from the 
data and should therefore be considered only as suggestive. If the primary objective of the 
policymaker is to reduce child morbidity and mortality, then intervention intensity needs to be 
considered carefully since there is a tradeoff between going to scale and delivering interventions 
effective enough to generate health impacts through TSSM and HWWS behavior change 
campaigns. Exactly how to increase intensity is beyond the scope of this study. Broadly this 
could focus on doing more of the same interventions more intensively (e.g. multiple follow ups 
within the same villages) or including a broader range of tools (e.g. sanitation subsidies, animal 
fecal containment practices).   
If, on the other hand, the primary objective for policy makers is increased coverage of improved 
practices and materials in their own right (reducing open defecation or increasing handwashing 
with soap), then TSSM seems to be an effective tool to deliver on these objectives, whereas 
changing behavior through HWWS remains a challenge. In summary, the evidence would 
suggest that, whichever objective the policymaker seeks to achieve (increased coverage or health 
improvements), HWWS should be a complementary rather than stand-alone activity.    
10. Conclusion 
Three systematic reviews over the past decade have shown that handwashing with soap 
consistently reduces diarrhea by between 39% and 47% (Fewtrell et al, 2003; Curtis & 
Cairncross, 2005; Ejimot-Nwadiaro et al, 2008). This evidence, however, comes mostly from 
small-scale efficacy trials exploring proof of concept, or matched studies with high levels of 
handwashing compliance. While useful, it is not clear how scalable these interventions are, and 
thus how much national policy can and should draw from this evidence when designing at-scale 
programs where handwashing compliance is more limited. One outlying piece of recent evidence 
using emotional drivers in India has found sustained changes in handwashing practices at scale 
but does not measure resulting health impacts (Biran et al., 2014). Evidence on rural sanitation is 
less comprehensive, and a series of ongoing evaluations will provide evidence on sanitation 
efficacy in the coming years. Moving beyond efficacy trials, this study explores, for the first 
time, what can be achieved at scale through independent and combined sanitation and 
handwashing campaigns and builds on evidence from the global WSP program looking at the 
impacts of government-led, at-scale interventions in Vietnam and Peru (HWWS), and India and 
Indonesia (TSSM). Consistent with the evidence from these evaluations, we find significant 
improvements in intermediate outcomes resulting from the TSSM intervention (latrine 
30 
 

construction and reduction in open defecation) and very limited improvements in intermediate 
outcomes resulting from the HWWS intervention (building handwashing stations and washing 
hands with soap at critical junctures). Also consistent with the programmatic evidence, neither 
intervention on its own is able to measurably improve health outcomes for children under 5. It is 
only in the combined intervention where health impacts are observed; however the inconsistency 
in these outcomes and limited biological significance of the point estimates suggest no clear 
health benefits from the approach.  
The results from this study highlight the importance of focusing on intermediate outcomes of 
take up and behavior change as a critical first step before realizing the changes in health that 
WASH interventions aim to deliver. Finding the balance between intensity, the right incentives, 
holistic coordination and scale becomes an important policy question. The biological reasoning 
behind promoting WASH interventions is theoretically sound, but identifying ways to close the 
gap between objectives, intervention design and delivery, particularly when working at scale, 
should be the priority for researchers, policy makers and implementers alike. 
 
 
 
   
          
 
31 
 

11. References 
 
Andres, L. A., Briceno, B., Chase, C., & Echenique, J. A. (2014). Sanitation and externalities: 
evidence from early childhood health in rural India (No. 6737). The World Bank. 
Arnold BF, Null C, Luby SP, et al. (2013) Cluster-randomized controlled trials of individual and 
combined water, sanitation, hygiene and nutritional interventions in rural Bangladesh and Kenya: 
the WASH Benefits study design and rationale. BMJ Open 2013; 3(8):e003476. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003476 
Baqui AH, Black RE, Yunus M, Hoque AR, Chowdhury HR, et al. (1991) Methodological issues 
in diarrhoeal diseases epidemiology: definition of diarrhoeal episodes. Int J Epidemiol 20: 1057–
1063. 
Bartram J, Cairncross S (2010). Hygiene, sanitation and water: Forgotten foundation of heatlh. 
PLoS Med 7(11): e1000367. Doi:10.371/journal.pmed.1000367 
Biran, A., Schmidt, W. P., Varadharajan, K. S., Rajaraman, D., Kumar, R., Greenland, K., 
Gopalan, B., Aunger, R. & Curtis, V. (2014). Effect of a behaviour-change intervention on 
handwashing with soap in India (SuperAmma): a cluster-randomised trial. The Lancet Global 
Health, 2(3), e145-e154. 
Bruhn, M., & McKenzie, D. (2009). In pursuit of balance: Randomization in practice in 
development field experiments. American economic journal: applied economics, 200-232. 
Cairncross, S., J. Bartram, O. Cumming, and C. Brocklehurst (2010). “Hygiene, sanitation, and 
water: what needs to be done?,” PLoS Med Nov 16;7(11). 
Cameron, L., Shah, M., & Olivia, S. (2013). Impact evaluation of a large-scale rural sanitation 
project in Indonesia. 
Clasen, T., Boisson, S., Routray, P., Torondel, B., Bell, M., Cumming, O., Ensink, J., Freeman, 
M., Jenkins, M., Odagiri, M., Ray, S., Sinha, A., Suar, M. & Schmidt, W.P. (2014). 
Effectiveness of a rural sanitation programme on diarrhoea, soil-transmitted helminth infection, 
and child malnutrition in Odisha, India: a cluster-randomised trial. The Lancet Global 
Health, 2(11), e645-e653. 
Clasen TF, Bostoen K, Schmidt WP, Boisson S, Fung ICH, Jenkins MW, Scott B, Sugden S, 
Cairncross S. (2010) Interventions to improve disposal of human excreta for preventing 
diarrhoea. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 6. Art. No.: CD007180. DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD007180.pub2. 
Clasen T, Schmidt WP, Rabie T, Roberts I and Cairncross S (2007) Interventions to improve 
water quality for preventing diarrhoea: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 334(7597): 
782. 
Coombes, Y and Paynter, N (2010). Scaling Up Handwashing Tanzania: A Handwashing 
Behavior Change Journey. The World Bank Water and Sanitation Program, Washington, D.C. 
Coville, A., & Orozco, V. (2014). Moving from efficacy to effectiveness: using behavioural 
economics to improve the impact of WASH interventions.Waterlines, 33(1), 26-34. 
32 
 

Curtis V and Cairncross S (2003) Effect of washing hands with soap on diarrhea risk in the 
community: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 3(5): 275–81. 
Do, Q. T., & Chase, C. (2012). Handwashing behavior change at scale: evidence from a 
randomized evaluation in Vietnam.  
DFID (2011) “Evidence Paper. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.” DFID Literature Review. 
September 9, 2011. 
DFID (2013) “Evidence Paper. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.” May, 2013. 
Dzwairo, B., Hoko, Z., Love, D., & Guzha, E. (2006). Assessment of the impacts of pit latrines 
on groundwater quality in rural areas: A case study from Marondera district, Zimbabwe. Physics 
and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, 31(15), 779-788. 
Ejemot-Nwadiaro RI, Ehiri JE, Meremikwu MM, Critchley JA. (2008) Hand washing for 
preventing diarrhoea. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 1. Art. No.: 
CD004265. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004265.pub2. 
Fewtrell, L., R. B. Kaufmann, D. Kay, W. Enanoria, L. Haller, and J.M.C. and Colford (2005) 
“Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhea in less developed countries: a 
systematic review and meta analysis.” Lancet Infectious Diseases; Vol. 5. No. 1: 42-52. 
Filmer, D., & Pritchett, L. H. (2001). Estimating wealth effects without expenditure Data—Or 
tears: An application to educational enrollments in states of india*. Demography, 38(1), 115-132. 
Galiani, S., Gertler, P., & Orsola-Vidal, A. (2012). Promoting handwashing behavior in Peru: 
The effect of large-scale mass-media and community level interventions (No. 6257). The World 
Bank. 
Greene, L. E., Freeman, M. C., Akoko, D., Saboori, S., Moe, C., & Rheingans, R. (2012). Impact 
of a school-based hygiene promotion and sanitation intervention on pupil hand contamination in 
Western Kenya: a cluster randomized trial. The American journal of tropical medicine and 
hygiene, 87(3), 385. 
Hammer, J., & Spears, D. (2013). Village sanitation and children's human capital: evidence from 
a randomized experiment by the Maharashtra government. 
Humphrey, J. H. (2009). Child undernutrition, tropical enteropathy, toilets, and handwashing. 
The Lancet, 374(9694), 1032-1035. 
International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (2009). “Running Water, working toilets and safe 
hygiene practices: Essentials services to save lives.” 3ie Enduring Questions Brief No. 10. 
August, 2009. 
Independent Evaluation Group (2008). “What Works in Water Supply and Sanitation? Lessons 
from Impact Evaluations.” IEG Word Bank Fast Track Brief. July 3, 2008 
Independent Evaluation Group (2008). “What Works in Water Supply and Sanitation: Lessons 
from Impact Evaluation.” World Bank, Washington D.C. 
Kremer M. and A. P. Zwane (2007). “What Works in Fighting Diarrheal Diseases in Developing 
Countries? A Critical Review.” World Bank Research Observer; 22(1): 1 - 24. 
33 
 

Lee, L. F., Rosenzweig, M. R., & Pitt, M. M. (1997). The effects of improved nutrition, 
sanitation, and water quality on child health in high-mortality populations. Journal of 
Econometrics, 77(1), 209-235. 
Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Painter J, Altaf A, Billhimer W, Keswick B, Hoekstra RM (2006) 
Combining drinking water treatment and hand washing for diarrhoea prevention, a cluster 
randomised controlled trial. Trop Med Int Health. 2006 Apr; 11(4):479-89. 
Murray et al. (2012). Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 
regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 
2012; 380: 2197–223 
Ngure, F. M., Humphrey, J. H., Mbuya, M. N., Majo, F., Mutasa, K., Govha, M., ... & Stoltzfus, 
R. J. (2013). Formative research on hygiene behaviors and geophagy among infants and young 
children and implications of exposure to fecal bacteria. The American journal of tropical 
medicine and hygiene, 89(4), 709-716. 
Patil, S. R., Arnold, B. F., Salvatore, A. L., Briceno, B., Ganguly, S., Colford Jr, J. M., & 
Gertler, P. J. (2014). The Effect of India's Total Sanitation Campaign on Defecation Behaviors 
and Child Health in Rural Madhya Pradesh: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial. PLoS 
medicine, 11(8), e1001709. 
Perez, E,  Cardosi, J, Coombes, Y, Devine, J, Grossman, A, Kullmann, C, Kumar, CA, 
Mukherjee, N, Prakash, M, Robiarto, A, Setiawan, D, Singh, U, and Wartono D (2012). What 
does it take to scale up rural sanitation, WSP working paper, June 2012.  
Prüss-Ustün, A., Bartram, J., Clasen, T., Colford, J. M., Cumming, O., Curtis, V., Bonjour, S., 
Dangour, A. D., De France, J., Fewtrell, L., Freeman, M. C., Gordon, B., Hunter, P. R., Johnston, 
R. B., Mathers, C., Mäusezahl, D., Medlicott, K., Neira, M., Stocks, M., Wolf, J. and Cairncross, 
S. (2014), Burden of disease from inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene in low- and middle-
income settings: a retrospective analysis of data from 145 countries. Tropical Medicine & 
International Health. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12329 
Rabie, T. and Curtis, V. (2006), Handwashing and risk of respiratory infections: a quantitative 
systematic review. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 11: 258–267. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2006.01568.x 
Schmidt, W. P. (2014). The elusive effect of water and sanitation on the global burden of 
disease. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 19(5), 522-527. 
Victora CG, Adair L, Fall C, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult 
health and human capital. Lancet 2008;371:340–57 
Waddington  H, Snilstveit B, White H and Fewtrell L (2009) Water, sanitation and hygiene 
interventions to combat childhood diarrhoea in developing countries. Synthetic review 1. New 
Delhi: 3ie. 
WHO (2011) Haemoglobin concentrations for the diagnosis of anaemia and assessment of 
severity. Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Information System. Geneva, World Health 
Organization. 
WHO-Unicef  (2013a) Levels and Trends in Child Mortality. Report 2013. World Health 
Organization 
34 
 

WHO-Unicef (2013b). Progress on sanitation and drinking-water - 2013 update. World Health 
Organization 
World Bank (1996) Tanzania: Social Sector Review. Report No. 14039-TA. The World Bank. 
Washington, D.C. 
World Health Organization and UNICEF (2008). “Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation – 
Special Focus on Sanitation.” At 
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmp2008/en/index.html 
35 
 

Table 1: Comparison of IE data to nationally representative surveys 
Variable
Source
Source data
IE data
Demographics
% HH Head that are Female
DHS
23.4%
13.6%
Avg HH size
DHS
5.40
4.90
Housing Characteristics
                       Flooring material
Earth
DHS
80.9%
82.5%
Concrete
DHS
17.5%
14.9%
                       Cooking fuel
Paraffin/Kerosene
DHS
0.5%
0.5%
Charcoal
DHS
8.5%
8.5%
Firewood
DHS
90.1%
91.0%
                        Access
HH has access to improved water source 
DHS
46.2%
33.3%
Assets
Electric Generator
DHS
4.3%
1.4%
Radio
DHS
57.1%
67.7%
TV
DHS
5.3%
2.9%
Mobile Phone
DHS
51.3%
58.9%
Non-Mobile Phone
DHS
0.2%
0.4%
Iron
DHS
19.6%
13.5%
Refrigerator
DHS
1.2%
1.3%
Bike
DHS
50.9%
62.7%
Motorcycle
DHS
4.9%
5.1%
Car or Truck
DHS
1.1%
0.6%
Net School Enrollment Rate
Pre-Primary
National Panel
21.0%
20.4%
Primary
National Panel
79.0%
67.9%
Secondary
National Panel
20.0%
16.2%
Higher
National Panel
1.0%
0.0%
Health
                         Anemia
% of children under 5 with Hemoglobin 
less than 8 grams per deciliter
DHS
5.4%
2.1%
                        Anthropometrics
Height for Age 2SD Below 
DHS
44.5%
47.5%
Weight for Height 2SD Below 
DHS
4.8%
2.5%
Weight for Age 2SD Below 
DHS
16.9%
15.4%
Height for Age 3SD Below 
DHS
17.7%
17.1%
Weight for Height 3SD Below 
DHS
1.3%
0.4%
Weight for Age 3SD Below 
DHS
4.1%
3.2%
Height for Age Mean 
DHS
-1.80
-1.95
Weight for Height Mean 
DHS
0.00
0.02
Weight for Age Mean 
DHS
-1.00
-1.03
Notes: DHS = 2010 Demographic and Health Survey; National Panel = Tanzania 
National Panel Survey (LSMS) 2010 - 2011
36 
 

Table 2: Program outputs 
 
 
Table 3: Program contamination (monitoring data) 
 
 
District
Population  
size
Wards 
sampled
TSSM / 
Combination 
Wards
Masons 
trained
Villages 
with 
trained 
masons
Number of 
CLTS 
facilitators 
trained
Number of 
communities 
triggered
People 
reached 
in TSSM 
DCC
HWWS / 
Combination 
Wards
Frontline 
activators 
trained
People 
reached 
in DCC 
(1)
People 
reached 
in DCC 
(2)
Igunga
399,727
24
12
42
42
32
282
36,500
12
40
35,509
29,093
Karagwe
332,020
24
12
50
49
40
465
21,700
12
46
16,893
39,138
Musoma
178,356
24
12
47
48
40
289
NA
12
50
25,441
37,229
Rufiji
247,993
16
8
49
46
45
185
34,950
8
45
8,783
14,483
Masasi
217,274
15
7
36
34
50
217
28,100
8
42
25,283
13,935
Iringa
254,032
12
6
28
30
18
168
15,580
6
28
14,471
15,071
Sumbawa
305,846
16
8
40
144
24
211
21,350
8
32
29,219
29,077
Kiteto
244,669
8
4
13
30
18
50
5,700
4
53
3,936
10,403
Kondoa
269,704
30
15
76
149
5
183
7,600
15
67
24,418
32,016
Mpwapwa
305,056
12
6
26
58
10
63
9,200
6
30
36,618
13,631
Total
2,754,677
181
90
407
630
282
2,113
180,680
91
433
220,571
234,076
Planned
Lost Wards 
(Masasi)
Final 
Assignment
Contamination
Actually 
treated
Not triggered 
by CLTS
Didn't receive 
TSSM DCC
Didn't receive 
HWWS DCC
Control
48
2
46
-
46
-
-
-
HWWS
47
2
45
-
45
-
-
2
TSSM
47
3
44
-1
43
7
5
-
HWWS + TSSM
48
2
46
+1
47
4
4
3
Notes: no reported problems with (i) mason training or (ii) training of front-line activators (FLAs); no available information for delivery of village-
level media (wall drawings, posters, etc.)
37 
 

Table 4: Baseline Balance 
 
 
Variable
N
Mean
N
Mean
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
Dwelling characteristics
A household member owns the dwelling
3618
0.90
918
0.91
900
0.87
0.11
880
0.89
0.47
920
0.91
0.88
Household uses a clean form of energy for lighting (electricity, 
solar, gas or batteries) 
3619
0.24
919
0.29
900
0.27
0.72
880
0.20
0.09
920
0.22
0.22
Household uses electricity as main energy source for lighting
3619
0.03
919
0.03
900
0.05
0.32
880
0.03
0.95
920
0.03
1.00
Household uses paraffin lamps as main lgihting source
3619
0.74
919
0.70
900
0.72
0.68
880
0.78
0.12
920
0.76
0.23
Main fuel used for cooking is charcoal
3619
0.08
919
0.08
900
0.12
0.34
880
0.05
0.15
920
0.08
0.77
Main fuel used for cooking is firewood
3619
0.91
919
0.91
900
0.87
0.26
880
0.94
0.23
920
0.91
0.94
Floor of main living area is made of cement
3613
0.17
919
0.15
897
0.23
0.04
877
0.15
0.99
920
0.16
0.69
Floor of main living area is made of earth/clay
3613
0.80
919
0.82
897
0.74
0.03
877
0.84
0.54
920
0.81
0.73
Roof of main living area is made of mud/thatch/grass
3619
0.43
919
0.48
900
0.40
0.16
880
0.42
0.28
920
0.40
0.19
Roof of main living area is made of tin/zinc
3619
0.57
919
0.52
900
0.60
0.18
880
0.58
0.31
920
0.59
0.20
Walls of main living area are made of brick/cement
3603
0.71
917
0.67
889
0.75
0.22
879
0.73
0.39
918
0.72
0.49
Walls of main living area are made of mud and poles
3603
0.28
917
0.33
889
0.24
0.21
879
0.27
0.36
918
0.27
0.38
HH Head Characteristics
Male
3614
0.88
919
0.86
898
0.87
0.87
878
0.89
0.25
919
0.88
0.27
Age
3614
40.61
919
39.87
898
41.23
0.10
878
40.19
0.68
919
41.13
0.17
Age Squared
3614
1814.22
919
1750.67
898
1865.33
0.14
878
1768.85
0.80
919
1871.16
0.19
Ever attended school
3612
0.77
919
0.76
897
0.79
0.34
878
0.79
0.25
918
0.76
0.91
Can read and write
3614
0.74
919
0.71
898
0.76
0.13
878
0.75
0.16
919
0.73
0.55
Years of Education (if attended school)
2796
6.48
695
6.47
706
6.57
0.43
697
6.44
0.87
698
6.43
0.79
Muslim
3618
0.31
919
0.29
899
0.29
0.98
880
0.31
0.78
920
0.35
0.44
Christian
3618
0.60
919
0.60
899
0.62
0.79
880
0.62
0.85
920
0.57
0.68
Born in this village
3614
0.67
919
0.68
898
0.68
0.90
878
0.64
0.35
919
0.68
0.93
Number of years living in this village
1191
18.26
295
17.56
284
18.23
0.64
320
18.61
0.40
292
18.64
0.43
Married
3614
0.75
919
0.72
898
0.73
0.77
878
0.76
0.43
919
0.78
0.22
Divorced/widowed/separated
3614
0.11
919
0.12
898
0.12
0.97
878
0.10
0.14
919
0.10
0.22
Lives with partner
3614
0.13
919
0.15
898
0.13
0.76
878
0.14
0.87
919
0.11
0.45
HH Member Demographics
HH size at Baseline
3609
4.94
917
4.89
898
4.94
0.82
877
5.02
0.55
917
4.93
0.86
Age
22159
17.78
5593
17.47
5482
18.03
0.08
5470
17.52
0.85
5614
18.11
0.03
Age Squared
22159
597.34
5593
580.72
5482
615.94
0.14
5470
576.69
0.85
5614
615.86
0.14
Member is Male
22161
0.49
5593
0.50
5482
0.49
0.91
5472
0.50
0.96
5614
0.49
0.62
Age of caregiver
3801
30.65
965
30.39
946
30.60
0.65
925
30.79
0.35
965
30.82
0.32
Age of caregiver Squared
3801
1026.28
965
1018.55
946
1022.03
0.92
925
1030.06
0.74
965
1034.55
0.65
Caregiver is male
3801
0.01
965
0.01
946
0.01
0.09
925
0.02
0.45
965
0.01
0.31
Overall
Control
HWWS
TSSM  
HWWS+TSSM
38 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variable
N
Mean
N
Mean
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
HH Income Sources at Baseline
Most Important income: Employment (Paid Employee)
3619
0.03
919
0.03
900
0.03
0.57
880
0.04
0.15
920
0.02
0.32
Most Important income: Employment (Self-Empoyment with 
employees)
3619
0.06
919
0.06
900
0.06
0.91
880
0.05
0.55
920
0.06
0.85
Most Important income: Not-employed (Remmitances)
3619
0.00
919
0.00
900
0.00
0.55
880
0.00
0.98
920
0.00
0.31
Most Important income: Self Employed Agricultural
3619
0.74
919
0.74
900
0.72
0.68
880
0.75
0.72
920
0.76
0.64
Latrine Type at Baseline
Flush/pour latrine
3618
0.03
919
0.02
900
0.05
0.05
879
0.02
0.82
920
0.04
0.34
No toilet facilities (open defecation)
3618
0.12
919
0.17
900
0.13
0.48
879
0.06
0.01
920
0.09
0.09
Pit latrine with slab or VIP
3618
0.84
919
0.80
900
0.81
0.84
879
0.91
0.01
920
0.86
0.23
Axcces to Water
Main source of drinking water comes from piped water
3619
0.14
919
0.08
900
0.22
0.01
880
0.12
0.23
920
0.14
0.12
Main source of drinking water comes from a well or borehole
3619
0.32
919
0.37
900
0.26
0.06
880
0.31
0.39
920
0.34
0.62
Main source of drinking water comes from surface water
3619
0.40
919
0.42
900
0.38
0.54
880
0.38
0.54
920
0.42
0.98
Is the water source covered
3127
0.22
849
0.27
706
0.25
0.88
777
0.19
0.18
795
0.16
0.08
Number of person trips HH makes to fetch water per day
3477
2.77
886
2.75
838
2.66
0.65
857
2.85
0.59
896
2.81
0.73
Number of times out of the last 10 attempts water has not been 
available
3617
0.30
919
0.25
899
0.33
0.39
880
0.27
0.81
919
0.35
0.28
HH stores water
3619
0.93
919
0.91
900
0.94
0.18
880
0.95
0.12
920
0.93
0.55
HH treats their water
3619
0.40
919
0.37
900
0.39
0.80
880
0.41
0.46
920
0.44
0.22
Assets owned by HH at Baseline
Wealth index at Baseline
3619
0.00
919
0.09
900
0.13
0.13
880
-0.34
0.35
920
0.10
0.60
Household listens to the radio regularly
3619
0.61
919
0.55
900
0.60
0.30
880
0.64
0.07
920
0.64
0.04
Total number of assets
3619
44.18
919
44.44
900
43.95
0.03
880
44.09
0.17
920
44.22
0.35
Another House
3615
0.15
918
0.14
900
0.16
0.36
878
0.17
0.19
919
0.14
0.86
Radio/CD/Cassette Player
3616
0.68
919
0.65
900
0.67
0.55
878
0.71
0.07
919
0.67
0.51
TV
3617
0.03
919
0.03
900
0.04
0.49
878
0.03
0.99
920
0.02
0.46
Bicycle
3617
0.63
919
0.62
900
0.60
0.59
878
0.62
0.87
920
0.67
0.24
Motorcycle
3616
0.05
919
0.04
900
0.07
0.13
878
0.04
0.94
919
0.06
0.25
Overall
Control
HWWS
TSSM  
HWWS+TSSM
39 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Variable
N
Mean
N
Mean
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
N
Mean
p-value
Assets owned by HH at Baseline (cont)
Car 
3617
0.01
919
0.00
900
0.01
0.09
878
0.00
0.73
920
0.01
0.51
Elctric/Gas Stove
3617
0.00
919
0.00
900
0.01
0.70
878
0.00
0.95
920
0.00
0.17
Other Stove
3617
0.25
919
0.20
900
0.30
0.01
878
0.26
0.06
920
0.25
0.13
Refridgerator
3617
0.01
919
0.01
900
0.01
0.31
878
0.01
0.79
920
0.02
0.70
Mattress
3617
0.72
919
0.66
900
0.75
0.05
878
0.72
0.23
920
0.73
0.14
Sewing Machine
3616
0.05
918
0.04
900
0.06
0.14
878
0.05
0.93
920
0.05
0.93
Mosquito Net
3617
0.88
919
0.88
900
0.89
0.74
878
0.86
0.43
920
0.87
0.59
Mobile Phone
3617
0.48
919
0.45
900
0.51
0.08
878
0.47
0.54
920
0.49
0.27
Fixed-line phone
3617
0.00
919
0.00
900
0.00
0.31
878
0.00
0.65
920
0.01
0.18
Iron
3616
0.13
919
0.11
899
0.14
0.22
878
0.15
0.10
920
0.12
0.71
Bed frame
3617
0.70
919
0.67
900
0.73
0.08
878
0.71
0.29
920
0.69
0.59
Jewellery
3616
0.01
919
0.01
899
0.01
0.59
878
0.00
0.16
920
0.01
0.44
Land or Field
3616
0.66
919
0.67
900
0.69
0.61
877
0.67
0.94
920
0.63
0.36
Agricultural Equipment
3617
0.16
919
0.16
900
0.16
0.90
878
0.15
0.91
920
0.17
0.76
Electricity Generator
3617
0.01
919
0.02
900
0.01
0.09
878
0.01
0.06
920
0.01
0.08
Solar Panel
3617
0.01
919
0.02
900
0.01
0.03
878
0.01
0.47
920
0.01
0.37
Sponged Sofa
3617
0.07
919
0.06
900
0.09
0.17
878
0.06
0.87
920
0.06
0.96
Sofa (non-sponged)
3617
0.09
919
0.08
900
0.11
0.40
878
0.08
0.89
920
0.09
0.89
Fan
3617
0.01
919
0.00
900
0.01
0.39
878
0.00
0.74
920
0.01
0.83
Camera
3617
0.00
919
0.00
900
0.00
0.46
878
0.01
0.21
920
0.00
0.70
Number of Animals Owned by HH at Baseline
Total Number of Animals Owned by HH
3619
16.12
919
17.11
900
16.57
0.86
880
15.09
0.42
920
15.68
0.59
Cows
3619
2.38
919
3.32
900
2.45
0.52
880
1.66
0.16
920
2.04
0.29
Bulls
3619
1.22
919
1.90
900
1.01
0.17
880
0.89
0.10
920
1.09
0.20
Donkeys
3619
0.14
919
0.21
900
0.13
0.41
880
0.10
0.20
920
0.12
0.28
Goats
3619
3.31
919
3.28
900
3.94
0.43
880
2.77
0.43
920
3.23
0.94
Sheep
3619
0.68
919
0.85
900
0.59
0.36
880
0.38
0.07
920
0.87
0.96
Pigs
3619
0.30
919
0.30
900
0.26
0.68
880
0.34
0.73
920
0.32
0.85
Chickens
3619
7.39
919
6.77
900
7.43
0.40
880
8.22
0.04
920
7.18
0.53
Ducks
3619
0.46
919
0.27
900
0.53
0.08
880
0.36
0.45
920
0.66
0.03
Geese
3619
0.00
919
0.00
900
0.01
0.31
880
0.01
0.31
920
0.00
-
Rabbits
3619
0.04
919
0.06
900
0.07
0.84
880
0.01
0.15
920
0.01
0.11
Guinea Fowls
3619
0.06
919
0.05
900
0.04
0.70
880
0.10
0.44
920
0.06
0.91
Other Animals
3619
0.14
919
0.10
900
0.10
0.99
880
0.24
0.41
920
0.11
0.93
Notes: p-values are based on a simple t-test comparison between control and relevant treatment group with standard errors clustered at the ward level. P-values < 0.05 are in bold
Overall
Control
HWWS
TSSM  
HWWS+TSSM
40 
 

Table 5: Program exposure 
 
 
 
VARIABLES
High 
(3 channels)
Medium  
(>= 2 channels)
Low 
(>= 1 channel)
Number of 
channels
High 
(3 channels)
Medium  
(>= 2 channels)
Low 
(>= 1 channel)
Number of 
channels
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
HWWS (β1)
0.071***
0.212***
0.373***
0.656***
0.068***
0.193***
0.251***
0.512***
(0.012)
(0.024)
(0.033)
(0.061)
(0.012)
(0.024)
(0.031)
(0.057)
TSSM ( β2)
0.006
0.036*
0.100***
0.142***
0.026**
0.080***
0.141***
0.247***
(0.008)
(0.021)
(0.025)
(0.047)
(0.010)
(0.019)
(0.029)
(0.050)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.061***
0.254***
0.442***
0.758***
0.103***
0.266***
0.345***
0.714***
(0.011)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.055)
(0.014)
(0.024)
(0.027)
(0.057)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.000
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.500
0.180
0.061
0.160
0.030
0.015
0.006
0.004
                         β2 = β3
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Observations
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
R-squared
0.071
0.168
0.238
0.245
0.077
0.141
0.186
0.191
Control Mean
0.001
0.014
0.135
0.150
0.004
0.040
0.224
0.269
HWWS
TSSM
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear 
probability model including block fixed effects.
41 
 

Table 6: TSSM awareness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
HWWS (β1)
0.094***
0.060**
0.027
(0.032)
(0.023)
(0.037)
TSSM ( β2)
0.183***
0.131***
0.081**
(0.036)
(0.026)
(0.035)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.188***
0.130***
0.069*
(0.031)
(0.028)
(0.035)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.020
0.005
0.138
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.004
0.012
0.251
                         β2 = β3
0.871
0.972
0.738
Observations
3,619
3,619
3,619
R-squared
0.133
0.288
0.072
Control Mean
0.143
0.119
0.297
Aware of a 
mason in the 
community
Aware of a CLTS 
committee in the 
village 
Agrees with statement: 
Everybody in this community 
knows somebody that can be paid 
to build or improve a latrine
VARIABLES
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,    
* p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear probability model including block fixed effects.
42 
 

Table 7: Latrine construction and availability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any
private
shared
any
private
shared
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
HWWS (β1)
-0.015
0.026
-0.042**
0.027
0.008
0.019
-0.031
(0.035)
(0.030)
(0.020)
(0.024)
(0.017)
(0.013)
(0.030)
TSSM ( β2)
0.082**
0.124***
-0.042**
0.035
0.036**
-0.001
-0.092***
(0.034)
(0.032)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.018)
(0.011)
(0.027)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.077**
0.100***
-0.022
-0.009
-0.002
-0.007
-0.076***
(0.031)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.018)
(0.010)
(0.026)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.006
0.003
0.972
0.731
0.083
0.158
0.028
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.006
0.013
0.302
0.150
0.592
0.052
0.098
                         β2 = β3
0.892
0.434
0.267
0.067
0.04
0.602
0.465
Observations
3,469
3,469
3,469
3,469
3,469
3,469
2,974
R-squared
0.121
0.108
0.041
0.044
0.039
0.032
0.074
Control Mean
0.571
0.386
0.185
0.181
0.134
0.046
0.332
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients 
estimated using a linear probability model including block fixed effects.
VARIABLES
Household has a […] latrine that was 
constructed within the last 3 years
Household has a […] latrine that was 
constructed more than 3 years ago
Household 
uses a shared 
latrine
43 
 

Table 8: Presence of an improved latrine 
 
 
Reported
Observed
Reported
Observed
Reported
Observed
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
HWWS (β1)
0.038
0.035
0.049
0.046
0.021
0.028
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.034)
(0.034)
(0.029)
(0.030)
TSSM ( β2)
0.124***
0.117***
0.157***
0.151***
0.122***
0.086***
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.029)
(0.028)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.074*
0.077**
0.103***
0.106***
0.076***
0.057**
(0.038)
(0.038)
(0.031)
(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.026)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.023
0.030
0.001
0.003
0.000
0.076
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.337
0.262
0.091
0.058
0.055
0.339
                         β2 = β3
0.176
0.283
0.088
0.161
0.111
0.327
Observations
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
3,619
R-squared
0.230
0.214
0.156
0.152
0.151
0.093
Control Mean
0.761
0.749
0.507
0.497
0.373
0.270
VARIABLES
Definition of improved latrine is based on JMP standard definition. Broad definition considers only the latrine 
type, while the strict definition requires that the slab is suitable for separating humans from excreta (there is 
only one whole in the slab and it is in good repair).
Improved latrine (including 
shared facilities)
Improved latrine (JMP 
definition)
Improved latrine (strict 
definition)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
Coefficients estimated using a linear probability model including block fixed effects.
44 
 

Table 9: Household and community open defecation practices 
 
  
 
Always/regularly
Sometimes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
HWWS (β1)
-0.032
-0.059
-0.057
-0.052*
0.043
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.044)
(0.029)
(0.036)
TSSM ( β2)
-0.120***
-0.098**
-0.062
-0.055*
0.117***
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.029)
(0.034)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
-0.074*
-0.085**
-0.042
-0.066**
0.084**
(0.038)
(0.039)
(0.046)
(0.032)
(0.033)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.020
0.342
0.884
0.925
0.036
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.264
0.506
0.735
0.649
0.332
                         β2 = β3
0.202
0.746
0.632
0.719
0.332
Observations
3,616
3,610
3,610
3,592
3,619
R-squared
0.229
0.135
0.108
0.106
0.186
Control Mean
0.231
0.299
0.513
0.839
0.716
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a 
linear probability model including block fixed effects.
Child feces are 
safely removed
HH is aware of community 
members practicing OD
HH members practice open 
defecation…
VARIABLES
HH members usually 
defecate in 
fields/bushes/rivers
45 
 

Table 10: Caregiver handwashing knowledge and availability of handwashing material 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Knows when to 
wash hands 
(index)
Knows best 
method to 
wash hands
Washed hands 
with soap in 
last 24 hours
HH soap 
expenditure in 
last month (TZS)
HH has a 
handwashing 
device
HH has a 
handwashing 
station with soap
HH has a fixed 
handwashing 
device
Handwashing 
device within 
6m of toilet
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
HWWS (β1)
0.045**
0.021
0.003
144.695
-0.015
-0.013
0.017**
0.012
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.021)
(116.570)
(0.039)
(0.017)
(0.007)
(0.017)
TSSM ( β2)
0.007
0.053**
0.018
269.014**
0.025
-0.030*
-0.001
0.024
(0.017)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(120.058)
(0.040)
(0.018)
(0.006)
(0.018)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.040**
0.057***
0.020
212.111*
-0.004
-0.018
0.028***
0.063***
(0.017)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(122.888)
(0.039)
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.020)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.031
0.089
0.462
0.294
0.285
0.317
0.028
0.509
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.776
0.054
0.440
0.565
0.776
0.734
0.259
0.013
                         β2 = β3
0.049
0.844
0.953
0.650
0.439
0.440
0.001
0.075
Observations
3,614
3,614
3,599
3,453
3,419
3,295
3,419
2,800
R-squared
0.072
0.051
0.059
0.050
0.352
0.149
0.040
0.105
Control Mean
0.302
0.822
0.823
4131.177
0.484
0.080
0.012
0.037
VARIABLES
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear probability 
model including block fixed effects.
46 
 

Table 11: Caregiver handwashing practices and cleanliness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observed
Reported
Observed
Reported
water only
soap and water
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
HWWS (β1)
-0.028
0.042
0.016*
0.077***
0.011
0.006
(0.030)
(0.033)
(0.010)
(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.009)
TSSM ( β2)
-0.056*
0.033
0.009
-0.023
-0.005
-0.010
(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.008)
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.008)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.003
0.025
0.016*
0.022
0.017
0.011
(0.029)
(0.033)
(0.008)
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.008)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.297
0.787
0.490
0.000
0.369
0.062
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.224
0.640
0.976
0.010
0.741
0.614
                         β2 = β3
0.031
0.813
0.456
0.014
0.275
0.014
Observations
961
3,307
2,238
3,307
4,126
4,126
R-squared
0.074
0.106
0.034
0.119
0.035
0.027
Control Mean
0.127
0.474
0.013
0.150
0.273
0.038
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients 
estimated using a linear probability model including block fixed effects.
VARIABLES
HWWS before handling food
HWWS after fecal contact
Any exposure event is accompanied by
47 
 

Table 12: General hygiene 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
HWWS (β1)
0.403**
0.077**
-0.000
-0.001
-0.037
0.111***
0.077***
-0.031
-0.007
(0.187)
(0.030)
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.031)
(0.026)
(0.022)
(0.036)
(0.022)
TSSM ( β2)
0.037
0.025
0.007
0.002
0.035
0.089***
0.015
-0.018
0.014
(0.181)
(0.028)
(0.016)
(0.019)
(0.032)
(0.027)
(0.023)
(0.035)
(0.021)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
0.455**
0.069**
0.008
0.011
-0.037
0.068**
0.072***
0.019
-0.043**
(0.179)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.037)
(0.021)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.020
0.061
0.602
0.826
0.013
0.398
0.005
0.673
0.341
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.740
0.790
0.617
0.504
0.993
0.124
0.831
0.162
0.115
                         β2 = β3
0.008
0.118
0.951
0.618
0.015
0.473
0.017
0.280
0.009
Observations
3,606
5,585
3,583
3,601
3,524
2,780
2,921
2,974
2,896
R-squared
0.091
0.210
0.063
0.061
0.045
0.049
0.094
0.087
0.055
Control Mean
6.765
0.566
0.089
0.124
0.383
0.283
0.800
0.537
0.222
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear probability model including block fixed effects. 
Column (2) also includes child age (month) and gender dummies.
Caregiver hand 
cleanliness index
Child cleanliness 
index
Flies visible 
around latrine
Feces are visible 
outside the latrine
HH has ever 
cleaned latrine
VARIABLES
Feces observed 
in house
Smell of feces 
in dwelling
Garbage is visible 
in dwelling
Food is 
covered
48 
 

Table 13: Under 5 child health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
HWWS (β1)
-0.004
-0.013
0.089
0.007
0.015
0.030
-0.006
0.229
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.754)
(0.023)
(0.043)
(0.057)
(0.048)
(0.141)
TSSM ( β2)
-0.001
-0.010
-0.772
0.024
-0.044
-0.006
-0.061
0.092
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.713)
(0.022)
(0.035)
(0.059)
(0.048)
(0.129)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
-0.011
-0.021*
-1.652**
0.060**
-0.075**
-0.008
-0.097**
0.227
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.772)
(0.023)
(0.038)
(0.057)
(0.045)
(0.154)
 p-values      β1 = β2
0.744
0.813
0.208
0.398
0.137
0.515
0.247
0.263
for F-test      β1 = β3
0.594
0.428
0.023
0.020
0.039
0.476
0.050
0.991
                         β2 = β3
0.399
0.360
0.214
0.091
0.396
0.961
0.445
0.351
Observations
5,768
34,045
5,203
5,203
5,203
5,208
5,202
5,208
R-squared
0.053
0.051
0.194
0.159
0.062
0.084
0.064
0.223
Control Mean
0.086
0.168
111.441
0.414
-1.033
-1.946
0.055
-0.511
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated 
using a linear probability model including block fixed effects, child gender and age (month) dummies. Column (1) reports on the 
symptom-based diarrhea measure capured in the household survey. Column (2) reports on direct diarrhea reports captured in the 
listing survey.
VARIABLES
Anthropometric z-scores
Diarrhea 
in past 7 
days
Diarrhea in past 14 
days (Listing Data)
Anemic 
(Hb < 110 
g/L)
weight-for-
age
height-for-
age
weight-for-
height
head 
circumference
Hemoglobin 
level (g/L)
49 
 

Table 14: Health - age subgroups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
VARIABLES
AGE 0-2
AGE 3-4
AGE 0-2
AGE 3-4
AGE 0-2
AGE 3-4
AGE 0-2
AGE 3-4
AGE 0-2
AGE 3-4
HWWS (β1)
-0.012
-0.014
-0.306
0.951
0.026
-0.010
0.039
0.001
0.281*
0.151
(0.354)
(0.161)
(0.689)
(0.349)
(0.641)
(0.849)
(0.598)
(0.990)
(0.053)
(0.317)
TSSM ( β2)
-0.008
-0.015
-0.199
-1.674
-0.057
-0.043
0.009
-0.059
0.106
0.060
(0.548)
(0.173)
(0.787)
(0.103)
(0.219)
(0.330)
(0.906)
(0.424)
(0.408)
(0.683)
HWWS + TSSM (β3)
-0.026*
-0.013
-2.359***
-0.469
-0.094**
-0.060
0.013
-0.056
0.288*
0.120
(0.078)
(0.239)
(0.005)
(0.646)
(0.047)
(0.245)
(0.854)
(0.430)
(0.073)
(0.446)
Observations
21,337
12,707
3,239
1,964
3,236
1,967
3,241
1,967
3,241
1,967
R-squared
0.043
0.021
0.164
0.149
0.072
0.080
0.109
0.081
0.225
0.229
Control Mean:
0.204
0.106
109.038
115.594
-1.019
-1.058
-2.004
-1.847
-0.467
-0.586
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear 
probability model including block fixed effects, child gender and age (month) dummies.  Columns (1) and (2) use listing data while columns (3) - (10) 
use household survey data. 
Head circumference-for-age
Diarrhea (14 days)
Hemoglobin level (g/L)
Weight-for-age
Height-for-age
50 
 

Table 15: Robustness checks  
 
Specification
Observations R-squared Control Mean
Original
-0.013 (0.250)
-0.010 (0.373)
-0.021*
(0.096)
34,045
0.051
0.168
Interviewer dummies
-0.016 (0.115)
-0.008 (0.421)
-0.023** (0.024)
34,045
0.093
0.168
Month dummies
-0.014 (0.210)
-0.007 (0.498)
-0.019*
(0.086)
34,045
0.094
0.168
Original
0.030 (0.057)
-0.006 (0.059)
-0.008
(0.057)
5,208
0.084
-1.946
Removing outliers
0.031 (0.054)
0.002
(0.053)
-0.004
(0.052)
5,147
0.085
-1.953
Interviewer dummies
0.035 (0.054)
-0.008 (0.054)
-0.020
(0.055)
5,208
0.097
-1.946
Month dummies
0.034 (0.054)
-0.008 (0.053)
-0.021
(0.052)
5,208
0.100
-1.946
Original
0.015 (0.043)
-0.044 (0.035)
-0.075** (0.038)
5,203
0.062
-1.033
Removing outliers
0.024 (0.040)
-0.042 (0.033)
-0.073** (0.036)
5,170
0.063
-1.017
Interviewer dummies
0.031 (0.042)
-0.050 (0.033)
-0.079** (0.037)
5,203
0.068
-1.033
Month dummies
0.040 (0.040)
-0.047 (0.031)
-0.081** (0.035)
5,203
0.071
-1.033
Original
0.229 (0.141)
0.092
(0.129)
0.227
(0.154)
5,208
0.223
-0.511
Removing outliers
0.229* (0.123)
0.086
(0.107)
0.181
(0.131)
5,134
0.187
-0.543
Interviewer dummies
0.100 (0.095)
0.075
(0.095)
0.222**
(0.107)
5,208
0.331
-0.511
Month dummies
0.067 (0.100)
0.041
(0.093)
0.149
(0.106)
5,208
0.343
-0.511
Original
0.089 (0.754)
-0.772 (0.713)
-1.652** (0.772)
5,203
0.194
111.441
Removing outliers
0.199 (0.714)
-0.453 (0.690)
-1.101
(0.733)
5,162
0.196
111.519
Interviewer dummies
-0.181 (0.796)
-0.916 (0.724)
-1.608** (0.760)
5,203
0.200
111.441
Month dummies
-0.656 (0.803)
-1.340* (0.723)
-2.217*** (0.785)
5,203
0.206
111.441
(vi)
0.001 (0.008)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.015*
(0.008)
5,764
0.042
0.044
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear 
probability model including block fixed effects, child gender and age (month) dummies.  Row (i) uses listing data; rows (ii) - (vi) use 
household survey data. For rows (i) - (v) outcomes are subjected to robustness tests. "Original" provides the result presented in the main 
tables. "Removing outliers" excludes observations that are more than three standard deviations away from the mean. "Interviewer dummies" 
includes control dummies for all survey interviewers. "Month dummies" specification includes both interviewer and month-of-interview 
dummies. Row (vi) provides evidence on the falsification test.
Hemoglobin 
level (g/L)
Abrasions / bruising in past 7 days
HWWS
TSSM
HWWS + TSSM
Diarrhea (past 
14 days)
Height-for-
age
Weight-for-
age
Head 
circumference-
for-age
Variables
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
51 
 

Table 16: Mechanism testing: differential mortality rates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
VARIABLES
0 - 1
1 - 2
2 - 3
3 - 4
4 - 5
HWWS
-0.014
-0.022
0.009
-0.003
0.002
-0.001
-0.000
0.002
(0.014)
(0.028)
(0.018)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
TSSM
0.011
0.020
-0.015
-0.004
0.007
0.001
0.006
-0.010*
(0.014)
(0.030)
(0.017)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
HWWS + TSSM
-0.013
-0.034
0.010
-0.005
0.002
-0.001
0.009
-0.004
(0.014)
(0.029)
(0.018)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Observations
50,885
50,885
34,092
34,092
34,092
34,092
34,092
34,092
R-squared
0.068
0.100
0.003
0.002
0.004
0.004
0.002
0.006
Control Mean:
0.444
0.666
1.928
0.205
0.209
0.214
0.196
0.176
Age
Any children 
under 5
Number of 
children under 5
Child age
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated 
using a linear probability model including block fixed effects. All results based on listing data. 
52 
 

Table 17: Mechanism testing: latrine seepage and quality 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
VARIABLES
Slab is 
cleanable
Floor is 
cleanable
Drophole is 
only hole
Solid slab
Flooded by 
water
Strong odor
Feces visible 
outside pit
Flies always 
present
Has a squat 
hole cover in 
place
HWWS
0.026
0.040**
0.026
0.018
0.011
-0.023
-0.008
-0.031
0.005
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.033)
(0.027)
(0.011)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.036)
(0.014)
TSSM
0.032*
0.037**
-0.025
-0.001
0.009
-0.002
0.013
-0.018
0.052***
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.010)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.035)
(0.015)
HWWS + TSSM
0.014
0.022
-0.023
0.014
0.005
-0.012
-0.044**
0.019
0.039***
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.030)
(0.024)
(0.007)
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.037)
(0.014)
Observations
2,896
2,896
2,896
2,883
2,887
2,892
2,892
2,974
2,791
R-squared
0.196
0.224
0.127
0.269
0.053
0.035
0.055
0.087
0.082
Control Mean
0.853
0.863
0.580
0.758
0.013
0.176
0.222
0.537
0.038
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the ward level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients estimated using a linear probability 
model including block fixed effects. Results are conditional on household having a latrine.
53 
 

Figure 1: Wealth distributions for LSMS and IE data  
 
 
Figure 2: Theory of change 
 
 
54 
 

 
Figure 3: The "F-diagram": fecal-oral transmission pathways and interventions to break them 
 
Source: Perez (2012). Adapted from Mara (2010) and originally from Wagner (1958). 
 
 
Figure 4: Marketing materials 
 
 
 
55 
 

 
Figure 5: Intervention timeline 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Map of selected districts 
 
 
 
56 
 

 
 
Figure 7: CDF – village-level open defecation (households practice regular open defecation) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1
Cumulative probability
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Proportion of household members in village mainly defecating in the open
control
TSSM
HWWS
Combination
57 
 

Figure 8: CDF – village-level open defecation (households practice at least some open 
defecation) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Anemia significance by cutoff level
 
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Cumulative probability
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Proportion of household members in village practicing some open defacation
control
TSSM
HWWS
Combination
58 
 

