International Journal of Epidemiology
© International Eptdemiotogical Association 1994
Vol 23, No 5
Printed in Great Britain
Community-based Hygiene
Education to Reduce Diarrhoeal
Disease in Rural Zaire: Impact of the
Intervention on Diarrhoeal Morbidity
PATRICIA A HAGGERTY,* KALENGAIE MULADI," BETTY R KIRKWOOD/ANN ASHWORTH*
AND MANWELA MANUNEBO" ?
Haggerty P A (Centre for Human Nutrition, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 2 Taviton St., London
WC1H OBT, UK), Muladi K, Kirkwood B R, Ashworth A and ManunEbo M. Community-based hygiene education to
reduce diarrhoeal disease in rural Zaire: Impact of the intervention on diarrtioeal morbidity. International Journal of
Epidemiology 1994; 23: 1050-1059.
Background. Diarrhoeal disease is a leading cause of morbidity in young children in rural Zaire. Few diarrhoea preven-
tion programmes have been implemented in Bandundu Province, where available data suggest an annual prevalence
rate of 10%. The urgent need to reduce diarrhoeal morbidity in Zaire, together with the potential effectiveness and
feasibility of hygiene education as a diarrhoea prevention strategy, led to the development of the present research
project.
Methods. A randomized, controlled trial of an education intervention to reduce diarrhoea through improved personal
and domestic hygiene behaviours was conducted in 18 geographically separate village clusters (sites) in rural Zaire. For
12 weeks baseline information on the diarrhoeal morbidity of 2082 children aged 3-35 months was collected at weekly
home visits, and structured observations of hygiene practices related to diarrhoea were made on a subset of 300
families. Intervention messages addressed disposal of animal faeces from the yard, handwashing after defecation and
before meal preparation and eating, and disposal of children's faeces. Three months after the start of the intervention
and exactly 1 year after the baseline studies, a second diarrhoeal morbidity study and a second observational study
were conducted in order to evaluate the intervention.
Results. Children in intervention communities experienced an 11% reduction in the risk of reporting diarrhoea during
the peak diarrhoeal seaon, compared to controls (P < 0.025). The largest differences were seen among children aged
24-35 months, with those from intervention communities reporting significantly fewer episodes, shorter mean dura-
tions and hence fewer days of diarrhoea. There was some evidence that greater reductions in diarrhoea occurred in
sites where the quality of the intervention, a scored measure of volunteer efficacy and community participation, was
highest.
Conclusions. The results of this study suggest that hygiene education may be an effective approach to reduce the in-
cidence and duration of diarrhoeal episodes in rural Zaire. Children aged 2 years appear to benefit the most. A
Hawthorne effect of the education may contribute to diarrhoeal reductions.
Despite remarkable improvements in diarrhoeal mor-
tality due to improved case management and the use of
oral rehydration therapy (ORT), diarrhoea still ac-
counts for about one-third of all deaths among
children under 5 years and for much morbidity. Prac-
tical inexpensive methods to reduce diarrhoeal mor-
bidity and lower mortality are still needed in poor
countries.
Centre for Human Nutrition, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, 2 Taviton Si., London WC1H OBT, UK.
** Centre National de Planification de Nutrition Humaine, BP 2429,
Kinshasa, Zaire.
* Maternal and Child Epidemiology Unit, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, Keppel St., London WC1H 7HT, UK.
Many studies have suggested that the promotion of
good hygiene may be an effective diarrhoea prevention
strategy, yet our understanding of the potential impact
of hygiene education is incomplete. Only a small
number of interventions aimed at specifically improv-
ing personal and domestic hygiene have been planned.
Feachem's estimate1 that effective educational pro-
grammes may reduce diarrhoeal incidence by as much
as 48% was based on just three studies, two of which
focused exclusively on handwashing and were con-
ducted in highly controlled clinic or nursery settings;
such large reductions may not be possible in less con-
trolled environments. Substantial reductions in diar-
rhoeal incidence were reported more recently from
1050
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

IMPACT OF INTERVENTION ON DIARRHOEA IN ZAIRE
1051
community-based randomized trials in Burma2 and
Bangladesh.3 However the findings from these studies
are also difficult to apply generally. In Burma the in-
tervention addressed just one behaviour, i.e. hand-
washing, and therefore no inferences can be drawn
about the effectiveness of hygiene education when
other behaviours are included. In Bangladesh, despite
improvements 
in diarrhoea 
incidence behaviours
targeted by the intervention did not appear to have im-
proved, making interpretation of that trial's results
problematic. The urgent need to reduce diarrhoeal
morbidity, together with the potential effectiveness
and feasibility of hygiene education as a diarrhoea
prevention strategy, led to the development of the
research project described below.
In this report the results of a randomized controlled
trial of a community-based educational intervention
designed to reduce diarrhoeal morbidity in children in
rural Zaire are described. The intervention was based
on four key messages intended to influence personal
and domestic hygiene practices, including: (1) disposal
of animal faeces from the yard by sweeping twice per
day; (2) handwashing before meal preparation and
before eating, (3) handwashing after defecation and
washing both the child's buttocks and hands after the
child had defecated; and (4) proper disposal of
children's faeces.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The study took place in a rural region around Kikwit in
Bandundu Province, Zaire. A baseline survey of the
diarrhoeal morbidity of 2082 children aged 3-35
months 
(from 
c.1875 
families) 
residing 
in 
18
geographically separated sites was conducted between
October and December 1987. Concurrently, 300 ran-
domly sampled sentinel families were visited once for
prolonged, structured observations of child feeding
and hygiene practices postulated to be related to diar-
rhoea. The observational data were used to identify
potential behavioural risks for diarrhoea and to
facilitate the design of key hygiene messages that
were the basis of a community-based educational
intervention.
Following the baseline diarrhoeal and observational
studies, all sites were ranked from lowest to highest ac-
cording to age-adjusted mean days of diarrhoea. Thus
ordered, the first two sites were grouped to form a pair
(pair 1), and each two subsequent sites were similarly
grouped (pairs 2-9), and then one in each pair was
chosen at random to receive the intervention, the other
to serve as a control. Thus nine sites participated in an
educational programme intended to reduce diarrhoeal
morbidity through improved hygiene practices, and
the nine remaining sites served as controls. The in-
tervention was implemented from July to December
1988 by trained community volunteers. Three months
after the start of the intervention, a second diarrhoeal
and second observational study were undertaken, us-
ing the same methods used at baseline 1 year earlier.
Diarrhoeal morbidity and hygiene behaviours related
to the educational messages were then compared bet-
ween the intervention and control communities.
Acquisition of Observational Data
At each site approximately 16% of families with study
children or 300 sentinel families in total, were ran-
domly chosen for an observational study of child
feeding and personal and domestic hygiene practices
related to diarrhoea. A family consisted of people
residing together and sharing the same cooking pot.
For each sentinel family a replacement family was also
randomly chosen, the replacement being included in
the study if the original family moved or declined to
participate.
Ethnographic data were first obtained by trained
field workers (observers) using focus groups and
24-hour activity recalls among women in non-study
villages. These data were used to develop a structured
observation recording form which was extensively
pretested. At each site, for sentinel families, observa-
tions were made of hygiene in the home and the yard,
water use and storage, food preparation and consump-
tion, child defecation and child care patterns. In addi-
tion, timed observations were made of target child ac-
tivity and caretaker practices related to breastfeeding
and feeding the child other liquids/solids. Visits were
announced on the previous day to ensure that women
would be at home, although the purpose of the visit
was not revealed. Each visit began at 0600 h and lasted
up to 7 hours. At the time of the visit observers ex-
plained only that they wished to observe the typical ac-
tivities of young children that could be related to their
health, and asked that family members take no notice
of the observer and conduct their activities as usual.
Observers remained outside the home and refrained
from eating with the family until the observations were
complete.
Each of the observers was assigned to families ran-
domly, and was blind to the diarrhoea] histories of
these families. At the end of each day observers
reviewed each other's observation forms and the team
leader reviewed the forms a second time to ensure that
any errors or omissions were corrected. Following
completion of observations at each site, the forms were
sent to the central office in Kikwit, where the data were
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

1052
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
coded on a separate form before entry into a
microcomputer.
Educational Intervention
Formulation of the intervention. In developing an
educational intervention to improve personal and
domestic hygiene, our goal was to develop three or
four key mesages focused on behaviours that could be
observed and changed within a relatively short time,
using existing community resources at relatively low
cost. We reasoned that messages should promote
behaviours already practised by some in the com-
munity and that could be shown to correlate with
reduced rates of diarrhoea.
Message development was based on comparative
analysis of diarrhoeal rates established from the com-
munity survey, ethnographic data and observed
hygiene practices. In addition, we used empirical
evidence from other studies1'4"* which demonstrate
associations 
between 
certain 
hygiene 
practices
(specifically, handwashing and disposal of faeces) and
reduced rates of diarrhoea. Four messages were
developed, including: (1) disposal of animal faeces
from the yard by sweeping at least twice per day; (2)
handwashing before meal preparation and before
eating; (3) handwashing after defecation and washing
the hands and buttocks of young children following
defecation, and (4) disposal of children's faeces. When
promoting yard sweeping, the removal of sweepings
into a proper garbage pit was emphasized. Disposal of
child faeces emphasized digging, or improving, pit
latrines and the promotion of handwashing en-
couraged the use of soap.
Implementation of educational intervention. The four
key messages formed the basis of a non-formal educa-
tional programme implemented at intervention sites by
female residents, called community volunteers. Two or
three female volunteers, selected from each site by
community leaders were trained intensively for 1 week
by two experienced, 
university-educated 
women
(trainers) working with the project director in Kikwit.
Trainers planned non-formal lessons based on culture-
specific experience, and illustrated the messages using
songs, stories, proverbs, analogical reasoning, and
locally drawn posters. Trainers emphasized the use of
village-wide meetings, home visits and small-group
discussions as strategies to disseminate messages and
monitor message implementation.
Intervention monitoring. Trainers travelled to each of
the sites periodically to monitor the activity of the
volunteers, to document the community participation
process, and to reinforce the volunteers' training. At
these visits they met individually with volunteers and
community leaders, held group meetings, helped
volunteers resolve difficulties, and made unannounced
visits to random families to observe message im-
plementation. For each site they kept a log of
qualitative observations assessing the volunteer's
performance 
and community involvement 
using
indicators, including: the number of community
members recruited to assist the volunteers; the fre-
quency of meetings and group discussions; the
frequency of home visits; the frequency of problems
encountered and actions implemented to resolve them;
perceived changes in village hygiene practices; and
perceptions of villagers' knowledge and awareness of
messages. Intervention and monitoring continued for 6
months.
Activities in control sites. In order to control for the
potential Hawthorne effect of the intervention on
hygiene practices, i.e. the possibility that behaviour
might change due to the care and attention given to in-
tervention communities, we felt it was necessary to
develop a service or educational programme for con-
trol sites, and that any such 'placebo intervention'
needed to be implemented with the same intensity and
quality of resources as for the intervention sites. We
considered several placebo interventions unrelated to
diarrhoea, but rejected them because they risked
undermining our credibility, because villagers would
find it incongruous for us to collect weekly diarrhoea
data if we were concurrently promoting an interven-
tion to reduce, for example, malaria. Therefore a 'con-
trol intervention' was developed, based on two key
messages intended to prevent dehydration during a
diarrhoeal episode: (i) continue to breastfeed the child
during a diarrhoea] episode, and (ii) give rice water to
the child during diarrhoea. These messages were
selected for control sites on the premise that they
would be unlikely to influence diarrhoea incidence,
although they could possibly reduce the duration of
episodes. Community volunteers from control sites
were selected and trained in the same way as interven-
tion site volunteers, although their training was
separate. Posters, songs, proverbs and slogans were
developed 
for the control volunteers' 
training.
Monitoring of activities at the control sites was con-
ducted in an identical manner to that at the interven-
tion sites.
Evaluation of the Intervention
Beginning 3 months after the start of the intervention,
exactly 1 year after the baseline studies, a second diar-
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

IMPACT OF INTERVENTION ON DIARRHOEA IN ZAIRE
1053
rhoeal morbidity study and a second observational
study of hygiene practices were conducted, in order to
evaluate the impact of the intervention on diarrhoeal
morbidity, hygiene practices and child growth. Ap-
proximately one-third of the total study sample at
baseline had entered their fourth year of life and were
therefore too old at follow-up, hence these children
were replaced by an equal number of new infants. A
new subsample of 293 sentinel families was randomly
selected for the follow-up observational study.
Data collection methods during the follow-up study
were the same as those used during baseline, with a few
exceptions. The observation recording form was re-
vised to record mainly behaviours addressed by the in-
tervention and was, therefore, more focused. For the
community survey, interviewers were placed at sites
where they could speak the same dialect of the local
language as the residents. At baseline this factor had
not been considered.
and mean duration of diarrhoeal episodes were studied
according to the child's age, sex and study gToup,
using either standard normal deviate (SND) tests or
analyses of variance. The number of episodes and of
days of diarrhoea were adjusted for incomplete follow-
up, and a logarithmic transformation was used to
study the number of days with diarrhoea. Both the
number of days with diarrhoea and the mean duration
of episodes were adjusted for reporting discrepancy:
these methods are described in an earlier report.8 Chi-
squared tests or x2 tests for trends were employed,
where appropriate, to compare distributions of the
diarrhoea variables grouped into two or more
categories.9'10
We present results of analyses concerning all
reported episodes of diarrhoea. Additional analyses of
severe episodes with blood, or fever, or both, and per-
sistent episodes, will be described in a separate report.
Data Analysis
To evaluate the impact of the intervention on diar-
rhoeal morbidity, data analysis was conducted
separately for sites and for children. For the site-level
analyses, the age-adjusted mean number of episodes at
each site (i.e. the site incidence rate) was calculated and
adjusted for age, and statistical tests were based on the
variation between sites.7 Both pre- to post-intervention
changes in diarrhoea between intervention and control
sites and post-intervention differences in diarrhoea
were studied. Analyses also took into account the
baseline levels of morbidity and the quality of the in-
tervention at each site. Non-parametric tests were used
throughout these analyses.
For the child-level analyses, during the pre- and
post-intervention periods the number of episodes of
diarrhoea, the total number of days with diarrhoea,
RESULTS
Of the 1954 children enrolled in the follow-up study,
1764 (90.3%) had ^9 complete weeks of diarrhoeal
morbidity data. The remaining 190 were excluded
from the analyses. In four children with ^9 weeks of
data, information on age was not reliable and they
were therefore excluded from analyses involving this
variable.
Comparability of Study Groups at Baseline
Table 1 shows that matching and randomization of
sites largely equalized diarrhoeal rates between the two
study groups, although there was still considerable in-
equality in incidence rates within pairs, particularly in
pairs 6-9. Despite randomization, overall the control
gToup had episodes of slightly longer duration than the
intervention group (P < 0.02).
TABLE 1 Baseline darrhoeal rates in matched pairs of sites in Bandundu, Zaire, during 12 weeks of study, October-December 1987
Pair
Geometric mean days
Intervention 
Control
No. of episodes
Intervention 
Control
Duration of episodes
Intervention 
Conirol
0.82
0.87
1.80
2.10
2.52
3.34
10.51
14.71
18.78
0.58
0.92
1.97
2.21
2.26
6.15
8.60
13.24
18.97
0.49
0.46
0.96
1.41
1.31
1.19
3.29
3.17
4.59
0.38
0.56
1.15
1.35
1.27
2.71
2.64
2.38
3.39
3.80
3.50
5.32
3.72
3.44
6.84
3.92
5.45
4.71
3.23
4.00
3.58
3.14
3.97
3.33
4.86
7.94
6.96
AU
4.15
4.44
1.93
1.82
4.70
5.15
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

1054
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
Mean no. episodes
6-11
12-17 
18-23
Age (months)
24-29
30-38
Control m w n
FIGURE 1 Baseline diarrhoea rates during 12 weeks October-December 1987
Mean number of episodes
12-17 
18-23 
24-29
Child age (months)
30-35
•* 
bmrmwa pr»4nt 
-+- 
CcnM pr*-tn
-• - MrwndpoUnl 
—*•- ConMpoM-tr*
FIGURE 2 Afw/i number of episodes of diarrhoea pre- and post-intervention,
according to child age and study group
In both study groups, an average of about two
episodes of diarrhoea per child were reported and
episodes declined with age from infancy to 35 months
(Figure 1). The mean reported duration of episodes
was approximately 5 days in both groups.
Pre- to Post-intervention Reductions in Diarrhoeal
Rates in Intervention and Control Children
During the post-intervention period, diarrhoeal mor-
bidity was greatly reduced relative to the previous year
among all children in both study groups. Diarrhoeal
incidence rates declined by approximately 50% in each
group (Figure 2), and the reductions were highly
significant within each age category in both groups
(SND tests, P < 0.0001 in every case). The mean dura-
tions of episodes declined from the pre- to post-
intervention periods in both study gToups also, but
mainly among children aged ^24 months.
Pre- to Post-intervention Changes in Diarrhoeal
Incidence at Intervention and Control Sites
To differentiate the impact of the intervention from
the overall observed reduction of diarrhoea, the
changes in site incidence rates from the pre- to post-
intervention periods in both intervention and control
sites were compared. In six out of nine sites in each
study group incidence rates declined (Figure 3). At the
three control sites where post-intervention incidence
rates were actually worse (pair numbers 1, 2 and 4), the
increases were larger than at the three intervention sites
where incidence rates worsened (pair numbers 2,3 and
5). The overall difference in the percentage reduction
of diarrhoea between the nine intervention and nine
control sites was tested using the Wilcoxon signed rank
test, taking the pairing of sites into account. This test
was not significant (P = 0.51). When the same test was
applied to compare differences between intervention
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

100%
IMPACT OF INTERVENTION ON DIARRHOEA IN ZAIRE
Percentage redaction in diarrhoea
1055
-150%
Intervention sites
Cootrol sites
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Randomization pair number
FIGURE 3 Percentage reduction in diarrhoea according to baseline matched
pairing of sites0
1 Sites ordered and grouped into pairs for randomization, using baseline mean
no. days of diarrhoea (Table I)
Psrctntag* redaction In diarrhoea
50%
- 5 0 % -
-100%-
-150%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Activity rank
FIGURE 4 
Percentage reduction in diarrhoea by site activity rank
and control site incidence rates stratified by child
age, there were, once again, no significant differences
between the study groups.
Lastly, percentage reductions were compared taking
into account the quality of the volunteers' activities
and community participation. Figure 4, which gives in-
tervention activities ranked from best (1) to worst (9),
shows that the percentage reductions were greater at
intervention compared to control sites. However, the
Wilcoxon signed rank test indicated that the dif-
ferences in percentage reductions between sites with
equal activity ranks were not significant (P = 0.44).
There were, furthermore, no differences between in-
tervention and control sites when site incidence rates
were stratified by child age.
Correlates of Pre- to Post-intervention Reduction in
Diarrhoea
Whilst there were no apparent differences between the
study groups in the pre- to post-intervention percen-
tage reductions in diarrhoea, either according to ran-
domization pair number or to intervention activity
rank, Figures 3 and 4 indicate that diarrhoeal reduc-
tions may have been associated with pair number and
with activity rank. In Figure 3, percentage reductions
appear to increase with increasing pair number (i.e,
with increasing baseline incidence rates). Similarly, an
association between the percentage reduction in diar-
rhoea and intervention quality is suggested by Figure
4. When the closeness of this association for all sites
considered together, and for site incidence rates
stratified by child age, were tested using Kendall's rank
correlation coefficient (W), no significant correlation
emerged.
Comparison of Post-intervention Diarrhoeal Rates
between Intervention and Control Children
One year after baseline, overall, children in interven-
tion sites had a reported mean of 0.85 episodes of diar-
rhoea, while children in control sites had 0.90 episodes
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

1056
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
(NS). Diarrhoeal incidence declined with age in both
groups (Figure 2) and was lower in the third year of life
among intervention compared with control children,
however this was not statistically significant (P =
0.09).
There was no discernible evidence of a trend towards
fewer episodes of diarrhoea in intervention compared
to control children after the intervention (Table 2).
Nevertheless, proportionately fewer children in in-
tervention sites were reported to have diarrhoea than
at control sites. The relative risk of a child reporting
diarrhoea at any time during the post-intervention
surveillance period at intervention sites was 0.89 of
that of controls (95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.84-0.98), representing an 11 °7o reduction in reporting
risk (P < 0.025).
TABLE 2 Distributions of children between study groups according
to number of episodes of diarrhoea, post-intervention
Episodes
No.
0
1
2
3 +
0
1 +
Intervenlion
children
No.
450
192
98
80
450
370
(54.9)
(23.4)
(11.9)
(9.8)
(54.9)
(45.1)
Control
children
No.
464
266
129
85
464
480
(%)
(49.1)
(28.2)
(13.7)
(9.0)
(49.2)
(50.8)
P
0.23*
< 0.02"
* Significance of x2 test for trend (I df), 0-3+ episodes, x2
** Significance of x2 test, 0 versus 1 + episodes, x2 = 5-53.
1.52.
The intervention appeared to reduce the total time
children had diarrhoea. Children with diarrhoea from
intervention sites showed a significant trend towards
shorter durations of episodes than those with diar-
rhoea from control sites (Table 3, P = 0.04). This
trend was most evident in the proportions of children
with durations >3 days. The reduction in the total
time with diarrhoea was, not surprisingly, reflected in
fewer days of diarrhoea among intervention compared
to control children (x2 trend, P < 0.025).
The trend toward fewer total days of diarrhoea
among intervention children, was apparent for all age
categories except infants aged 3-5 months, and in-
tervention children had, overall, a geometric mean of
1.4 days of diarrhoea, compared to 1.7 days for the
control group (P = 0.04). The mean duration of
episodes for all ages combined was similar in both
study groups, about 4.2 days per episode, however in-
tervention children aged 24-29 months had somewhat
TABLE 3 Distributions of children between study groups according
to mean duration of episodes, post-intervention
Mean duration
of episodes
(days)
l-<2
2-<3
3-<4
4-<6
6 +
Children No.
Intervention
children
No.
58
99
82
76
55
370
(15.7)
(26.8)
(22.2)
(20.5)
(14.9)
Control
children
No.
62
100
120
121
77
480
(%)
(12.9)
(20.8)
(25.0)
(25.2)
(16.0)
P
0.04*
* Significance of x2 test for trend (1 df), X2 = 4.20.
shorter episodes than control children of the same age
(P = 0.08).
Comparison of Post-intervention Diarrhoeal Rates at
Intervention and Control Sites
The impact of the intervention was evaluated further
by analysing age-adjusted site incidence rates, since
sites were the unit of randomization in this study
(Table 4). For each randomization pair the Wilcoxon
signed rank test was used to assess the significance of
differences between sites with equal randomization
pair numbers. This test was insignificant, as were
similar tests considering site incidence rates stratified
by child age.
To explore whether the impact of the intervention
differed according to the quality of volunteers' ac-
tivities and community participation, the site incidence
rates were compared according to intervention 'activi-
ty ranks'. Post-intervention differences in incidence
rates between sites of equal activity rank were studied,
again using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. This test
was not significant (P = 0.77), and further analyses
(i.e. differential analyses by child age) were not
pursued.
DISCUSSION
Because the intervention was addressed to com-
munities, and not to individual households, the evalua-
tion focused on the differences in diarrhoeal rates bet-
ween the intervention and control sites. These analyses
revealed few significant differences between the two
study groups, either in the comparisons of post-
intervention site incidence rates or the comparisons of
pre- to post-intervention percentage reduction in in-
cidence rates. These results do not signify that the in-
tervention had no effect. The most likely explanation
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

IMPACT OF INTERVENTION ON DIARRHOEA IN ZAIRE
TABLE 4 Post-intervention diarrhoeal incidence rates at intervention and control sites according to randomization pair number*
1057
Pair
Intervention
sites
Control
sites
Incidence rate ratio
Adjusted 
Crude
Intervention-control
difference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
All
0.44
0.59
1.11
0.25
1.34
0.70
1.57
0.15
1.31
0.85
0.74
1.33
0.58
2.13
0.50
0.77
1.50
0.71
0.22
0.90
0.57
0.44
1.91
0.12
2.68
0.91
1.05
0.21
5.95
0.94
(0.68)
(0.62)
(1.43)
(0.23)
(1.80)
(100)
(0.79)
(0.30)
(2.93)
(0.89)
P = 0.03C
-0.30
-0.74
0.53
-1.88
0.84
-0.07
0.07
-0.56
1.09
-0.05
P = 0.81d
* Site incidence rates adjusted for child age. Randomization pair number based on ordering of sites matched according to baseline diarrhoeal rates.
Incidence Rate Ratio. Adjusted column represents ratio of age-adjusted site incidence rates within pairs. Crude column represents ratio of relative
risk within pair stratum (unadjusted for age).
c Significance of stratified Mantel-Haenszel summary estimate of incidence rate ratio (0.89). Mantel-Haenszel summary estimate and associated tesi
based on crude relative risks within each stratum, thereby controlling for effect of site. Estimate not controlled for age.
d Significance of Wilcoxon signed rank test.
for the lack of statistical significance at site level is that
comparisons were dependent on the variation among
nine pairs of sites. In all probability, any differences
between the study groups due to the intervention
would need to have been quite large to be detected by
the site-level analyses; these tests had little power to
discern the moderate differences which the child-level
analyses suggest are due to the intervention. In fact,
when the Wilcoxon test was used to assess the dif-
ferences between pre- and post-intervention site in-
cidence rates, separately for intervention and control
sites, the differences among the intervention sites ap-
proached significance (P = 0.08), whereas among the
controls they did not (P = 0.21), suggesting that the
aggregate decline in the intervention sites was larger.
Moreover, when child-level analyses were con-
ducted, a Mantel-Haenszel summary estimate of the
relative risk of diarrhoea in matched pairs of interven-
tion and control sites (IRR = 0.89, P = 0.03), revealed
that children at intervention sites experienced an 11 %
lower risk of diarrhoea than those in control sites with
similar baseline rates. Children from intervention com-
munities also had shorter durations of episodes and,
hence, fewer total days of diarrhoea than children
from control communities with comparable baseline
rates. The largest differences were observed among
children aged 24-35 months. In a similarly focused
study of a hygiene educational intervention in
Bangladesh3 the impact was greatest in the 12-35
month age group. This suggests that personal and
domestic hygiene practices may be more important
aetiological factors for diarrhoea in these older
children, than for infants. Children >12 months are
breastfed less frequently, play farther away from the
home and may be cared for by siblings only slightly
older than themselves. Greater mobility and less direct
maternal supervision would undoubtedly increase their
risk of exposure to environmental contamination
relative to younger children. In contrast, among in-
fants, factors other than personal and domestic
hygiene behaviours may be of relatively greater impor-
tance in determining diarrhoeal rates, e.g. the use of
colostrum, the age of introduction of weaning foods,
the use of non-human milk.
The fact that the intervention appeared to reduce the
length of diarrhoeal episodes, particularly in the older
children, raises the possibility that there may have
been a differential effect of the intervention on spe-
cific pathogenic organisms known to be asso-
ciated with longer episodes, e.g. shigella,14 and that
such organisms may be more amenable to hygiene
education.
Analyses of the correlations of percentage reduc-
tions in diarrhoea with randomization pair number
and with intervention activity rank were performed to
determine whether the intervention had differential
effects. It appeared that larger reductions occurred at
sites with high baseline incidence rates for both in-
tervention and control groups, however these dif-
ferences were not borne out by statistical analysis. If
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

1058
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
the intervention did have a stronger impact on sites
with the worst initial rates, it is possible that in these
sites proportionately more bad behaviours were prac-
tised, and therefore the opportunities for correcting
these behaviours were more numerous.
Similar results emerged from the study of the cor-
relations between percentage reduction and interven-
tion activity rank: although the correlation was not
significant, the appearance of a possible correlation in
the three intervention and three control sites having
the highest scores suggested that greater reductions oc-
curred in sites where community volunteers and/or
residents were more enterprising. Differences in
behavioural changes and in growth rates according to
activity ranks (analyses not presented here) reinforce
this view.
Whilst the comparison of the differences in diar-
rhoeal reductions between intervention and control
sites provides a measure of the intervention's impact,
the fact that incidence rates decreased markedly in
both groups relative to baseline deserves attention. The
most likely explanations for the large declines in both
groups are either: (i) annual fluctuations in diarrhoeal
rates; or (ii) a Hawthorne effect occurred, i.e. an effect
due not to message content per se, but to the con-
tinuous presence of community volunteers and inter-
viewers; or (iii) communities wanted to show that they
had carried out interventions which they knew were
aimed at diarrhoea and purposely underreported.
Large annual fluctuations in diarrhoeal rates have
been documented in this area of Zaire previously (Ver-
non A A, 1990 and WHO, 1986, personal communica-
tion). Health facility data from the Diarrhoeal
Diseases Control Programme in Bandundu indicate
that from 1985 to 1989 annual hospital admissions for
diarrhoea among children ^ 5 years of age fluctuated
widely, with the highest percentage (11%) reported in
1987, and the lowest (4%) in 1988. This suggests that
the large declines observed in the present study reflect,
at least in part, the general regional decline between
1987 and 1988. As regards the Hawthorne effect, the
presence of the research team may have stimulated
villagers' general awareness of diarrhoea and its causes
(as well as other illnesses and their causes). In control
areas, furthermore, volunteers (as free agents) may
have promoted other health and diarrhoea messages
based on their own previous knowledge, in addition to
the control messages. It is unlikely that message
leakage from intervention to control sites could ac-
count for these reductions, since all sites were
geographically well separated and field monitors, be-
ing on the alert for message leakage,reported only one
instance which was of minor importance.
Difficulties Encountered
The sustained involvement and activity of community
volunteers was pivotal to the success of the inter-
vention, since the volunteers were the principal com-
munity resource used. Several of the volunteers were,
however, inadequately selected by their communities
or poorly motivated. Although project leaders visited
each site twice prior to the training period to explain
the goals of community volunter selection to village
leaders, this was insufficient. As might be expected,
those volunteers who performed poorly during train-
ing or exhibited poor motivation were less effective in
their communities. A related, severe problem was the
inability of trainers to visit volunteers frequently to
provide technical, managerial and moral support, due
to poor roads, insufficient and expensive transport,
inadequate vehicle repair, and poor supplies of fuel.
For similar reasons, it was impossible to regroup
volunteers in Kikwit at any point during the inter-
vention for refresher training and an exchange of
volunteer experiences.
A further difficulty was that the time frame planned
for the study was too short in a number of ways. Be-
tween message development and implementation of
the intervention there were only 2 months, allowing
little time for re-selection of inappropriate volunteers.
Also, although the educational posters were pretested,
there was insufficient time to pilot message dissemina-
tion in the field using the methods promoted during
training. Perhaps most pertinently, the time frame of
the intervention was in all probability inadequate to
achieve the full potential of behaviour change at the
community 
level. 
Adoption 
of 
the 
prescribed
behaviours in even the most active sites was only
gradual.
Implications of the Findings
On balance, the results of this study suggest that the
observed reductions in diarrhoeal rates were at-
tributable to the intervention. The results presented
here should, however, be considered in tandem with
the evaluations of the project's impacts on behaviour
and nutritional status: these analyses (forthcoming)
reinforce the conclusion that the changes in diarrhoeal
rates were due to the intervention. Improvements in
hygiene behaviours and child growth followed similar
patterns to the diarrhoeal reductions with respect to
baseline measurements and intervention quality.
Moreover, analyses of the growth data, like the diar-
rhoeal data analyses, suggested the intervention had a
stronger impact on children in the third year of life.
There have been few community studies from which
to predict the reductions that might be expected from
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

IMPACT OF INTERVENTION ON DIARRHOEA IN ZAIRE
1059
personal and domestic hygiene interventions, and it is
likely that greater reductions could occur. To assess
the potential benefit of personal and domestic hygiene
education fairly, similar approaches should be studied
in settings where operational constraints do not pose a
major obstacle to community volunteer monitoring
and support, where greater emphasis is placed on
volunteer selection and training in message dissemina-
tion methods, and where sufficient time is allowed to
elapse before the final evaluation, in order to max-
imize behavioural change. The comparative effect of
focusing a similar approach (with these improvements)
on children 24-35 months of age, would also merit
further study.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This investigation received financial support from the
Diarrhoeal Diseases Control Programme of the World
Health Organization. We also wish to express our
gratitude to the entire field team for their diligent
work, and to the families for their co-operation. Dur-
ing the data analysis phase, M ManunEbo and B
Kirkwood 
received 
financial 
support 
from 
the
Overseas Development Administration.
REFERENCES
1 Feachem R G. Interventions for the control of diarrhoeal diseases
among young children: promotion of personal and domestic
hygiene. Bull 
World Health 
Organ 
1984; 62: 467-76.
2 Han AM, HlaingT. Prevention of diarrhoea and dysentery by hand
washing. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1989; S3: 128-31.
3 Stanton B F, Clemens J D. An educational intervention for
altering water-sanitation behaviors to reduce childhood diar-
rhea in urban Bangladesh. 2. A randomized trial to assess the
impact of the intervention on hygienic behaviors and rates of
diarrhea. Am J Epidemiol 1987; 125: 292-301.
4 Khan M U. Interruption of shigellosis by hand 
washing.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1982; 76: 164-68.
5 Clemens J D, Stanton B F. An educational intervention for altering
water-sanitation behaviours to reduce childhood diarrhea in
urban Bangladesh. 1. Application of the case-control method
for development of an intervention. Am J Epidemiol 1987;
125:284-91.
6 Esrey S A, Feachem R G, Hughes J M. Interventions for the con-
trol of diarrhoeal diseases among young children: improving
water supplies and excreta disposal facilities. Bull World
Health Organ 1985; 63: 757-72.
7 Kirkwood B R, Morrow R H. Community-based intervention
trials. J Biosoc Set 1989; 10 (Soppl.): 79-86.
8 Haggerty P, ManunEbo M N, Ashworth A, Muladi K, Kirkwood B.
Methodological approaches in a baseline study of diarrhoeal
morbidity in weaning-age children in rural Zaire. Int J
Epidemiol 1994; 23: 1WO-49.
9 Kirkwood B R. Essentials of Medical Statistics. London: Blackwell
Scientific Publications, 1988.
10 Breslow N E, Day N E, (eds). Statistical Methods in Cancer
Research, I. The Analysis of Case-control Studies. Lyon: In-
ternational Agency for Research on Cancer, 1980.
1' SPSS/PC + V2.0 Base Manual for the IBM PC/XT/A T and PS/2.
Chicago: SPSS Inc., 1988.
12 Miettinen O. Estimability and estimation in case-referent studies.
Am J Epidemiol 1976; 103: 226-235.
13 MorgenstemH, Kleninbaum DG, KupperL L. Measures of disease
incidence used in epidemiologic research. Int J Epidemiol
1980; 9:97-104.
14 Black R E, Brown K H, Becker S, Abdul Alim A R M , Huq I.
Longitudinal studies of infectious diseases and physical
growth of children in rural Bangladesh. II. Incidence of diar-
rhoea and association with known pathogens. Am J Epidemiol
1982; 115: 315-24.
(Revised version received January 1994)
 at University of Michigan on July 19, 2015
http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

