Virginia Commonwealth University 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
VCU Scholars Compass 
VCU Scholars Compass 
Theses and Dissertations 
Graduate School 
2016 
TESTING A LOW-INTENSITY AND ACCESSIBLE COGNITIVE 
TESTING A LOW-INTENSITY AND ACCESSIBLE COGNITIVE 
BEHAVIORAL THERAPY FOR INSOMNIA (CBT-I) INTERVENTION 
BEHAVIORAL THERAPY FOR INSOMNIA (CBT-I) INTERVENTION 
IN INDIVIDUALS NEWLY DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER 
IN INDIVIDUALS NEWLY DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER 
Amma Agyemang 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarscompass.vcu.edu/etd 
 Part of the Psychological Phenomena and Processes Commons 
 
© The Author 
Downloaded from 
Downloaded from 
https://scholarscompass.vcu.edu/etd/4452 
This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the Graduate School at VCU Scholars Compass. It 
has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and Dissertations by an authorized administrator of VCU Scholars 
Compass. For more information, please contact libcompass@vcu.edu. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTING A LOW-INTENSITY AND ACCESSIBLE COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL 
THERAPY FOR INSOMNIA (CBT-I) INTERVENTION IN INDIVIDUALS NEWLY 
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER 
 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Doctor of 
Philosophy at Virginia Commonwealth University 
 
 
by 
 
AMMA A. AGYEMANG 
M.S., Virginia Commonwealth University, 2012 
M.P.H., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2009 
B.A., The College of William and Mary, 2007 
 
 
 
 
Director: Bruce D. Rybarczyk, Ph.D. 
Professor of Psychology 
Department of Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Commonwealth University  
Richmond, Virginia 
May 2016 
 
 

ii 
Acknowledgement 
 
 
 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor and mentor, Dr. Bruce Rybarczyk.  I have 
learned a great deal from him these past six years and I am so grateful for his guidance through 
this entire process.  I would also like to thank Dr. Laura Siminoff, who provided invaluable 
lessons in research and in being a productive scientist.  I would like to thank my entire 
dissertation committee for their helpful feedback in designing and implementing this project.  
This study would not have been possible without the patients who gave their precious time 
during a particularly stressful time in their lives.  On a personal note, I would like to thank my 
entire family, including all four of my parents.  Last, but certainly not the least, I would like to 
thank my husband, Danny, for his wonderful support throughout my training and in completing 
this project.  Thank you all! 
 

3
Table of Contents 
 
Page 
 
Acknowledgment………………………………………………………………………………….ii 
 
List of Figures……………………………………………………………………………………..4 
 
List of Tables……………………………………………………………………………………...5 
 
Abstract……………………………………………………………………………………………6 
 
Introduction……...………………………………………………………………………………...8 
 
Review of the literature………….……………………………………………………….11 
 
Statement of problem……………..……………………………………………………...33 
 
Statement of the hypotheses……………………….……………………………………..34 
 
Methods……...……………………………………………………………………………….......35 
 
Study design.………………………………………………………………..…………....35 
 
Participants.………………………………………..……………..…………....................36 
 
Procedure……………………………………………..………………………………….41 
 
Measures……………..…………………………………………………………………..47 
 
 
Data analysis………………………………………..……………………………….…...49 
 
Results…………………………………………………………………………..………………..51 
 
Hypothesis 1………………………………………………………………………..……51 
 
Hypothesis 2……………………………………………………………………………..59 
 
Hypothesis 3……………………………………………………………………………..64 
 
Discussion……………………………………………………………………………..…………67 
 
Limitations…………………………………………………………………...…………..85 
 
Strengths………………………………………………………………………………....87 
 
Implications………………………………..…………………………………………….88 
 
List of References………………………………………………………………………………..90 
 
Appendix……………………………………………………………………..……………........103 

4
List of Figures 
 
Page 
 
Figure 1. Recruitment and Retention of Study Participants …………………………………….50 
Figure 2. Acceptance of SHUTi among Participants………………………………………….....55 
Figure 3. Change in ISI from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups………...59 
Figure 4. Change in WASO from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups……59 
Figure 5. Change in TST form Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups……….60  
Figure 6. Change in SOL from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups…........60 
Figure 7. Change in SE from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups………...61 
Figure 8. Change in PHQ-9 from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups….....63 
Figure 9. Change in GAD-7 from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups……64 
Figure 10. Change in FACT-G from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and TAU Groups....65 

5
List of Tables 
 
 
Table 1. Sociodemographic Characteristics of Sample at Baseline ……………………………36 
Table 2. Cancer- and Insomnia-Related Characteristics at Baseline ……………...……………39 
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of the Outcome Variables at Baseline ………………………….41 
Table 4. Reasons for Deciding Not to Participate in Study……………………………………...51 
Table 5. Reasons for Not Completing SHUTi………………………………………………….. 51 
Table 6. Means (SD) and Effect Sizes of Sleep-Related Variables.. ……………………………61 
Table 7. Means (SD) and Effect Sizes of Depression, Anxiety, and Health-Related QOL...........64 
 
 

6
 
Abstract 
 
 
 
TESTING A LOW-INTENSITY AND ACCESSIBLE COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL 
THERAPY FOR INSOMNIA (CBT-I) INTERVENTION IN INDIVIDUALS NEWLY 
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER 
 
By Amma A. Agyemang, M.S., M.P.H.  
 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy at Virginia Commonwealth University  
 
Virginia Commonwealth University, 2015  
 
Major Director: Bruce Rybarczyk  
Professor of Psychology  
Department of Psychology 
 
Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or nonrestorative sleep 
that lasts for at least one month and is accompanied by significant impairment in daytime 
functioning including fatigue, irritability, and/or difficulty concentrating.  It is one of the most 
common complaints reported by individuals with cancer, especially around the time of cancer 
diagnosis and treatment.  Yet it is often unrecognized and untreated, leading to adverse health 
consequences and increased healthcare costs.  Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-
I) has been recommended as the gold standard for treating insomnia among individuals with 
cancer.  Multiple studies have tested and proven the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT-I among 
individuals with cancer.  However, only one study has investigated the efficacy of CBT-I in 
individuals newly diagnosed with cancer who are undergoing cancer treatment.  Moreover, 
previous studies have been limited by their focus on largely homogenous samples of White, 
well-educated women with breast cancer.  The dissemination of CBT-I among individuals with 
cancer is greatly limited by the lack of available providers and resources needed to implement 
the standard face-to-face treatment.  One strategy to address this shortage has been to abbreviate 

7
standard CBT-I into low-intensity modalities that require fewer resources and can be self-
administered on the Internet.  The current study sought to examine the feasibility and 
acceptability, as well as the efficacy of one such program, an online low-intensity CBT-I 
intervention, Sleeping Healthy Using the Internet (SHUTi), supplemented with clinician support, 
in a sample of individuals newly diagnosed with heterogeneous malignancies who were 
undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation.  Results yielded support for the feasibility and 
acceptability of addressing individuals’ insomnia with a low-intensity CBT-I intervention while 
they are undergoing cancer treatment.  With regard to sleep, there were significant treatment 
effects observed on a global measure of insomnia severity and on subjective sleep consolidation.  
There were also significant treatment effects for depressive symptoms.  Findings are discussed in 
the context of study limitations and for the purpose of expanding the literature on disseminating 
CBT-I early in the cancer care trajectory. 
 
 
 
 

8
Testing a Low-Intensity and Accessible Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-I) 
Intervention in Individuals Newly Diagnosed with Cancer  
 
Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or nonrestorative sleep 
that lasts for at least one month and is accompanied by significant impairment in daytime 
functioning including fatigue, irritability, and/or difficulty concentrating (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2000).  Insomnia is one of the most common complaints reported by individuals 
with cancer.  Yet it is often unrecognized and untreated (Graci, 2005; J. Savard & Morin, 2001), 
leading to adverse health consequences and increased healthcare costs (Leger & Bayon, 2010; J. 
Savard & Morin, 2001; Wade, 2011).  Insomnia prevalence ranges from 19% to 30% (Davidson, 
MacLean, Brundage, & Schulze, 2002; J. Savard & Morin, 2001), with the highest rates reported 
in breast cancer (38%) and lung cancer (37%) (Davidson et al., 2002).  These rates are 
considerably higher than the prevalence in the general population, which is estimated at 10-15% 
(Roth, 2001).  Individuals who have cancer and insomnia experience greater depression and 
mood disturbances (Bardwell et al., 2008; Donovan & Jacobsen, 2007; J. Savard, S. Simard, S. 
Hervouet, et al., 2005; Van Onselen et al., 2010), fatigue (Anderson et al., 2003; Beck, Dudley, 
& Barsevick, 2005; Davidson et al., 2002; Donovan & Jacobsen, 2007; Sarna, 1993), decreased 
quality of life (Davidson et al., 2002; Redeker, Lev, & Ruggiero, 2000; Vargas et al., 2010), and 
likely, increased mortality (J. Savard & Morin, 2001; Theobald, 2004).  Thus, examining 
insomnia in the context of cancer is critical to improving outcomes for individuals with cancer, 
as is evidenced by the wealth of literature examining the co-occurrence of cancer and insomnia 
(K. K. Cheng & Lee, 2011; Espie et al., 2008; Fiorentino & Ancoli-Israel, 2006; Graci, 2005; 
O'Donnell, 2004; J. Savard, Simard, Blanchet, Ivers, & Morin, 2001).   
The accumulated evidence has illuminated important aspects of the nature of insomnia in 
cancer.  For example, insomnia tends to persist in individuals with cancer, such that as many as 

9
75-95% of insomnia cases progress into chronic insomnia (Davidson et al., 2002; J. Savard et al., 
2001), lasting for six months or more.  Pain (Grond, Zech, Diefenbach, & Bischoff, 1994), 
fatigue (Balachandran, Faiz, Bashoura, & Manzullo, 2013; Roscoe et al., 2007), and mood 
symptoms (Van Onselen et al., 2010) have been identified as significant predictors of cancer-
related insomnia. Individuals  with clinically significant pain (Sharma et al., 2012) or fatigue 
(Davidson et al., 2002) are nearly three times more likely than others to experience sleep 
disturbances, whereas those with significant anxiety and depression are nearly five times more 
likely to report sleep problems (Sharma et al., 2012).  Indeed, cancer-related insomnia rarely 
occurs in isolation; more often it presents as part of a symptom constellation consisting of pain, 
fatigue, and mood symptoms (Beck et al., 2005; Chen & Tseng, 2006; Donovan & Jacobsen, 
2007; Hoffman, Given, von Eye, Gift, & Given, 2007; Sharma et al., 2012).  One study found 
that as much as 18% of a sample of elderly individuals  experienced concurrent insomnia, pain, 
and fatigue within weeks of their cancer diagnoses (Kozachik & Bandeen-Roche, 2008).  The 
evidence further suggests that insomnia underlies important mechanisms in cancer symptom 
burden—it mediates the relationships between pain and fatigue (Beck et al., 2005), between 
depression and fatigue, and between depression and pain (Stepanski et al., 2009).   
When it comes to the timing of insomnia treatment in cancer, the period immediately 
after cancer diagnosis and prior to treatment is increasingly being recognized as a critical period. 
While for many individuals with cancer, insomnia lingers through cancer survivorship and even 
years after cancer treatment (Gooneratne et al., 2007), studies indicate that for most individuals  
symptoms peak before and during early treatment (Buick et al., 2000; Phillips, Jim, Donovan, 
Pinder-Schenck, & Jacobsen, 2012; Thomas, Bower, Hoyt, & Sepah, 2010; Van Onselen et al., 
2012).   Longitudinal studies have found that insomnia is most prevalent (28%) within the first 

10
two months after diagnosis, when surgery is completed and adjuvant treatment is initiated (J. 
Savard, Ivers, Villa, Caplette-Gingras, & Morin, 2011; J. Savard, Villa, Ivers, Simard, & Morin, 
2009).  Furthermore, individuals with insomnia at the beginning of treatment tend to experience 
a chronic course, while those with symptoms that do not reach the threshold for an insomnia 
diagnosis (i.e., sleep disturbances without daytime impairment) are much more likely to recover 
(J. Savard, Ivers, et al., 2011).  Also, the disruption in circadian rhythms that precipitates sleep 
disturbances has been found to occur within the first week of a treatment cycle (J. Savard, Liu, et 
al., 2009).  Taken together, these findings suggest that intervening to improve sleep at the outset 
of cancer treatment among those individuals with a comorbid insomnia diagnosis has the 
potential to make the greatest impact in terms of benefiting individuals’ coping during treatment.  
Despite the clinical significance of insomnia early in the cancer treatment trajectory, 
fewer studies have focused on understanding insomnia prior to radiation or chemotherapy 
treatment (Ancoli-Israel et al., 2006; Beck et al., 2010; Berger, Farr, Kuhn, Fischer, & Agrawal, 
2007; Garrett et al., 2011; Miaskowski et al., 2011; Phillips et al., 2012; Van Onselen et al., 
2010; Vargas et al., 2010).   Much more attention has been given to insomnia and sleep 
disturbances during and after chemotherapy and/or radiation (Bardwell et al., 2008; Berger, 
1997; Berger & Farr, 1999; Berger & Higginbotham, 2000; Carpenter et al., 2004; Costantini, 
Ale-Ali, & Helsten, 2011; Davidson et al., 2002; Kuo, Chiu, Liao, & Hwang, 2006; Moore, 
Berger, & Dizona, 2011; Payne, Piper, Rabinowitz, & Zimmerman, 2006; Rissling, Liu, 
Natarajan, He, & Ancoli-Israel, 2011; J. Savard, Liu, et al., 2009; J. Savard et al., 2001).  
Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) is considered gold standard treatment for 
comorbid insomnia and its treatment effects are more durable than pharmacological treatments 
{Morin, 1999 #123;National Institutes of Health, 2005 #76}.  However, there is only one 

11
published study of CBT-I in individuals  prior to chemotherapy initiation (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, 
Lynch, et al., 2009).  Findings from this study showed that, although a CBT-I plan implemented 
before chemotherapy and reinforced during and after chemotherapy resulted in some benefits for 
sleep immediately and one year after, it did not confer significant improvements on critical 
subjective and objective sleep measures.  One study limitation that likely contributed to these 
findings is that most participants (60%) reported fairly good or very good sleep at baseline, 
leaving little room for improvement.  These findings underscore the importance of testing the 
efficacy of CBT-I among individuals  who are experiencing significant sleep disturbances and 
daytime impairment (i.e., meet criteria for insomnia). 
 
Intervening on individuals’ sleep soon after cancer diagnosis and prior to treatment 
initiation is not without its challenges.  Due to the large number of individuals  presenting with 
insomnia during a time when engagement in intensive treatment is difficult, the best approach 
would likely include a stepped care model that includes low intensity/highly accessible 
treatments (self-help and abbreviated) as a first step (Mack & Rybarczyk, 2011).  Self-help and 
abbreviated treatments have been highly tested in other insomnia groups (Edinger & Sampson, 
2003; Rybarczyk, Mack, Harris, & Stepanski, 2011; Wagley, Rybarczyk, Nay, Danish, & Lund, 
2012), but to our knowledge, only two self-help treatments have been tested in individuals with 
cancer (Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard, Villa, Simard, Ivers, & Morin, 2011) and neither study 
was conducted with newly diagnosed patients.   Previous studies suggest that self-help 
approaches are 50-75% as effective as therapist delivered unabridged approaches.  The proposed 
study will extend previous research (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Lynch, et al., 2009; Ritterband et al., 
2012) by examining the feasibility and efficacy of a low-intensity and accessible self-
administered CBT-I intervention with clinician support in individuals with cancer.  Participants 

12
will be individuals newly diagnosed with non-advanced (i.e., curable) cancers who have yet to 
initiate their first course of chemotherapy or radiation therapy. They must report experiencing at 
least three episodes of sleep disturbance per week that is associated with daytime effects such as 
fatigue, irritability, or difficulty concentrating and has persisted for at least one month.  This 
study will seek to address the following two complementary aims: 1) To assess the feasibility 
and acceptability of a low-intensity and accessible CBT-I intervention among individuals newly 
diagnosed with cancer; and 2) To determine the efficacy of the intervention in improving sleep 
and other quality of life outcomes during cancer treatment.  In accomplishing these aims, the 
proposed study emphasizes increasing implementation and dissemination of CBT-I among 
individuals with cancer as suggested in the Reach Effectiveness Adoption Implementation 
Maintenance (RE-AIM) model (Glasgow, Vogt, & Boles, 1999), by decreasing barriers related to 
time and cost (Glasgow & Emmons, 2007) while seeking to increase feasibility and acceptability 
(Klesges, Estabrooks, Dzewaltowski, Bull, & Glasgow, 2005). 
Review of the Literature 
Insomnia in Cancer 
Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or nonrestorative sleep, 
that lasts for at least one month (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).  To meet diagnostic 
criteria, the sleep disturbance or associated daytime fatigue must cause clinically significant 
distress or impairment.  Insomnia that occurs in the context of another medical condition like 
cancer is termed Secondary Insomnia or more appropriately, Comorbid Insomnia (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000; National Institutes of Health, 2005).  Comorbid insomnia is 
functionally equivalent to primary insomnia (Rybarczyk, Lund, Mack, & Stepanski, 2009) and 
warrants no less clinical attention.  Indeed addressing comorbid insomnia in cancer, which 

13
affects as many as one-third of all individuals with cancer (Davidson et al., 2002; J. Savard & 
Morin, 2001), is especially important because it is more likely to be undertreated due to the 
notion among patients and providers that the condition is a less significant (compared to cancer) 
and/or is a temporary disturbance for which few effective treatments exist (Fleming & Davidson, 
2012).  A first step to addressing cancer-related insomnia is to understand its etiology.   
 
Etiological theory of comorbid insomnia in cancer.  Much like primary insomnia, 
insomnia among individuals with cancer is explained through a diathesis-stress model.  This 
model posits that a disorder like insomnia results when an environmental stressor triggers an 
underlying vulnerability (Morin & Espie, 2003; Spielman, Caruso, & Glovinsky, 1987). 
According to Spielman’s 3-P model, insomnia develops when a predisposition or vulnerability to 
sleep disturbance (e.g., genetic and personality traits) is triggered by precipitating factors (e.g., 
life stressors, schedule changes), and is maintained when perpetuating factors (e.g., poor sleep 
hygiene, maladaptive beliefs about sleep) become entrenched (Spielman et al., 1987).  Research 
has identified predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors that while not unique to 
individuals with cancer, are especially relevant to the development and persistence of insomnia 
in this population. Of note, much of the evidence has focused only on precipitating factors.  
Predisposing factors.  Three of the most relevant predisposing factors for insomnia 
among individuals with cancer are psychiatric disorders, older age, and female gender.  The co-
occurrence of psychiatric disorders like anxiety and depressive disorders with cancer is one 
important factor that explains individuals ’ heightened predisposition to insomnia.  Since 
insomnia or poor sleep is often part of the constellation of anxiety and depressive symptoms, it is 
believed that the increased prevalence of these psychiatric disorders in individuals with cancer, 
approximated at 49-53%, also increases risk for insomnia (Fleming & Davidson, 2012; J. Savard 

14
& Morin, 2001).  Regarding age, cancer incidence is highest among older individuals (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013), making the advanced age of most individuals with 
cancer another important predisposing factor (Fleming & Davidson, 2012; J. Savard & Morin, 
2001).  Finally, being female is a likely relevant predisposing factor for individuals with cancer 
(J. Savard, Villa, et al., 2009) given that insomnia is most prevalent in breast cancer (Fleming & 
Davidson, 2012).  Also, anxiety and depressive disorders are more common in females (Leach, 
Christensen, Mackinnon, Windsor, & Butterworth, 2008), thus further increasing the burden of 
insomnia for females diagnosed with cancer. 
Precipitating factors.  Unlike predisposing factors, the factors that precipitate and 
perpetuate insomnia are much more amenable to intervention. For individuals with cancer, the 
most salient precipitating factor is the experience of being diagnosed with and treated for cancer.  
Although insomnia may pre-date cancer diagnosis for some individuals , it is also likely that for 
many, the stress and worry that accompany the emergence of cancer-related symptoms, the 
process of diagnosis, of surgery and active treatment is enough to trigger the onset of insomnia 
(Fleming & Davidson, 2012).  Many individuals  may respond with fear and distress to their 
unusual symptoms prior to diagnosis, which may disrupt their sleep; the extent of the disruption 
is likely related to the speed with which they seek medical attention and how quickly a diagnosis 
is made once such attention is sought (Fleming & Davidson, 2012).   
Findings that insomnia symptoms peak soon after cancer diagnosis and immediately prior 
to treatment (Van Onselen et al., 2012) provide clear support for the notion that cancer diagnosis 
and treatment precipitate insomnia.  Individuals  are likely to experience much fear and anxiety 
during this period that may disrupt their sleep through various pathways.  First, treatment may 
aggravate existing pre-treatment symptoms related to the distress of diagnosis (J. Savard, Liu, et 

15
al., 2009).  Second, surgery, often an initial step of treatment for patients, has been found to more 
than double the risk for insomnia in cancer (J. Savard, Villa, et al., 2009).  This is partly 
attributable to the period of hospitalization associated with surgery as it is associated with 
concomitant environmental (e.g., noise, medication-dosing schedules), behavioral (e.g., daytime 
napping, modified bedtime routine), and psychological risk factors (e.g., isolation, fear) (Sheely, 
1996).  Individuals  are also likely to experience distress as a result of undergoing an invasive 
procedure, which may result in loss in function or an altered appearance (Jacobsen, Roth, & 
Holland, 1998).  Lastly, active treatment (i.e., chemotherapy, radiation therapy) is associated 
with significant physiological changes that can trigger insomnia.  For instance, chemotherapy is 
thought to disrupt sleep by impairing patients’ rest-activity circadian rhythms as early as after the 
first administration (J. Savard, Liu, et al., 2009), leading to decreased differentiation between 
daytime and night time activity (Fernandes, Stone, Andrews, Morgan, & Sharma, 2006; Levin et 
al., 2005; Parker et al., 2008; Pati et al., 2007), and daily dysfunction (Ancoli-Israel et al., 2006; 
Beck et al., 2010).  Other biological agents in cancer therapies that contribute to insomnia are 
corticosteroids and biological response modifiers.  Corticosteroids, like dexamethasone, used to 
treat cancer pain and other treatment related side effects, increase cortisol levels, thereby 
inducing insomnia (Kirkbride et al., 2000).  Similarly, interferon and tumor necrosis factor, 
which are used to treat malignant melanoma, can also disrupt patients’ sleep/wake cycles (J. 
Savard & Morin, 2001).  Besides these biological effects, chemotherapy and radiation treatment 
have significant side effects that include pain, fatigue, and emotional distress, which are also 
implicated in insomnia.  The sheer prevalence of these side effects means that few individuals 
with cancer are unaffected; when taken together with the considerable distress they cause, an 
examination of how these specific side effects impact insomnia is warranted.   

16
An estimated 25% of newly diagnosed patients, 33% of those in treatment, and 75% of 
those with advanced cancer experience pain (Swarm et al., 2013).  Cancer-related pain impairs 
patients’ functioning while diminishing their quality of life, and when it is not adequately 
controlled early in cancer care, can shorten patients’ survival (Swarm et al., 2013).  As might be 
expected, cancer pain is one of the most feared symptoms by patients (Swarm et al., 2013).  
Insomnia from cancer-related pain can result from the pain in and of itself, or the medications 
used to treat the pain (Theobald, 2004).  Experimental and clinical studies show that pain 
precipitates insomnia by causing micro arousals, thereby lightening sleep and lessening the 
restorative benefits of sleep.  Individuals with persistent pain may also experience more 
nocturnal awakenings due to physiological changes related to pain.  Pain can also induce 
insomnia by disrupting mood (Smith & Haythornthwaite, 2004).   
Approximately 80% of individuals  undergoing chemo- and/or radio-therapy report 
cancer-related fatigue (Hofman, Ryan, Figueroa-Moseley, Jean-Pierre, & Morrow, 2007).  It is 
defined as a subjective, persistent, and distressing state of tiredness related to cancer or its 
treatment that interferes with usual functioning and is often unrelieved by rest (Berger et al., 
2010).  Patients on average consider cancer-related fatigue to be the most distressing symptom of 
cancer and its treatment (Berger et al., 2010).  Research suggests that cancer-related fatigue is 
reciprocally associated with insomnia (Roscoe et al., 2007).  Specifically, although fatigue can 
result from the physiological effects of cancer or cancer treatment (e.g., anemia) (Anderson et 
al., 2003), insomnia also increases daytime fatigue.  It is also possible for decreased daytime 
activity and restless sleep to exacerbate fatigue, perhaps due to daytime napping and diminished 
circadian functioning as a result of inactivity (Berger & Higginbotham, 2000).  Subjective and 

17
objective measures of sleep confirm this complex relationship between insomnia and cancer-
related fatigue.   
Lastly, an estimated 50% of individuals with cancer have anxiety and/or depressive 
disorders that contribute to and co-vary with sleep disturbances (Phillips et al., 2012; J. Savard & 
Morin, 2001; Van Onselen et al., 2012; Woodward, 2011).  For example, cancer surgeries that 
result in changes in patients’ physical appearance or loss of function may produce greater 
emotional distress and thus increase risk for insomnia (J. Savard & Morin, 2001).  In some cases, 
sleep disturbances can elevate patients’ risk for depression (Fiorentino & Ancoli-Israel, 2014).  
Even though emotional distress and insomnia can be related and treating insomnia may improve 
emotional adjustment, it is important to note that for many patients, depression and anxiety may 
also require attention separate from insomnia treatment (Fiorentino & Ancoli-Israel, 2014). 
Perpetuating factors.  Chief among the behaviors that maintain insomnia once 
precipitated is poor sleep hygiene {Fiorentino, 2006 #17}.  Insomnia persists when patients 
respond to its onset with maladaptive sleep behaviors that increase arousal and sleep effort, 
thereby inhibiting relaxation and sleep.  For example, patients may spend more time in bed due 
to fatigue when not sleepy, perhaps engaging in activities that interfere with sleep, which 
weakens the association between their beds and sleep.  Similarly, patients may weaken the 
association between sleep and/or relaxation and their bedroom when they repeatedly pair 
heightened arousal with their bedrooms by going to their bedrooms when in pain or distress 
(Fleming & Davidson, 2012).  Also possible, patients may nap during the day in efforts to regain 
lost nighttime sleep, or may keep irregular sleep-wake schedules due to the side effects of 
treatment.  While these behaviors are patients’ attempts to cope with a stressful time period in 
their lives and may even be in keeping with treatment recommendations (Woodward, 2011), 

18
insomnia becomes chronic when these behaviors become habits and persist after acute stressors, 
such as treatment, end.   
Individuals may also develop faulty beliefs and attitudes about sleep that can perpetuate 
insomnia (J. Savard & Morin, 2001; Woodward, 2011).  While not unique to individuals with 
cancer, one of the most common maladaptive beliefs about sleep that can perpetuate insomnia 
includes unrealistic expectations about sleep requirements (e.g., I need 8 hours of sleep each 
night).  Others are erroneous causal attributions (e.g., If I don’t sleep well, my cancer will come 
back); misattribution or exaggeration of the perceived consequences of insomnia (e.g., I’m 
always tired because I can’t get a good night’s sleep); and perceived diminished control or 
predictability of sleep (e.g., I feel like when and how I sleep is completely out of my control).  
These beliefs undermine sleep because they increase anxiety and other negative emotional 
responses, thereby increasing arousal at bedtime, which overrides the body’s entrained sleep 
response.   
Importance of treating insomnia early in cancer care trajectory.  The importance of 
treating insomnia among individuals with cancer, especially early in the cancer care trajectory 
cannot be overstated.  Left untreated, the consequences of insomnia for individuals can be 
severe.  Individuals with concurrent cancer and insomnia experience greater symptom burden 
and poorer overall survival (Degner & Sloan, 1995).  One study found that insomnia symptoms, 
which peaked within the first eight weeks after diagnosis, significantly increased the risk for 
death within the first year after cancer diagnosis (Kozachik & Bandeen-Roche, 2008). 
According to the current state of the evidence, CBT-I is the treatment of choice for 
cancer-related insomnia.  However, the efficacy and feasibility of CBT-I during this critical 
period of cancer treatment, namely the time surrounding cancer surgery and the initiation of 

19
active treatment, remains unclear (J. Savard & Savard, 2013).  Thus, an important avenue for 
research, and the purpose of the current pilot study, is to investigate whether CBT-I can be 
implemented as effectively during this time period as observed in other studies, and to examine 
whether it will be acceptable to individuals with cancer. 
Treatment for Comorbid Insomnia in Cancer 
The need for effective insomnia treatment in cancer has led to a proliferation of studies.  
First, it must be acknowledged that successful treatment of insomnia in cancer must include 
management of cancer-related symptoms such as pain and treatment side effects through 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological modalities.  As discussed above, these symptoms 
contribute to and exacerbate insomnia.  However, solely addressing these symptoms is 
insufficient, as the behaviors and thought patterns that perpetuate insomnia outlast these 
symptoms (J. Savard & Morin, 2001).  Moreover, as the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
(2005) State of the Science conference statement asserts, comorbid insomnia is a separate 
diagnosis that merits individualized attention.  Thus, this review of the evidence on treating 
comorbid insomnia in cancer will focus on insomnia-specific treatment. 
Pharmacological treatment.  As in the general population (Morin & Jarrin, 2013), 
hypnotic medications are often prescribed to individuals with cancer who report insomnia.  
Recent estimates put hypnotic medication use in this population at 23%, with more than one-
third of individuals initiating use at one point or another after their cancer diagnosis (Casault, 
Savard, Ivers, Savard, & Simard, 2012).  Although hypnotic medications have been shown to be 
effective in the short-term in the general population (National Institutes of Health, 2005), they 
have yet to be studied in cancer populations (National Cancer Institute, 2013).  Additionally, 
sleep experts recommend limiting use to two to four weeks (National Institutes of Health, 2005); 

20
however, patients with cancer were found to be using these medications for an average of five 
years (Casault et al., 2012).  Not only is evidence for such long-term use lacking (National 
Cancer Institute, 2013; J. Savard & Savard, 2013), but long-term use can also have adverse 
health consequences, including tolerance, dependence, residual daytime drowsiness, impaired 
cognitive functioning, and increased risks for falls and motor vehicle accidents (Glass, Lanctot, 
Herrmann, Sproule, & Busto, 2005; J. Savard & Morin, 2001).  Among individuals with cancer 
specifically, hypnotic medication use is associated with diminished quality of life and increased 
symptom burden (Paltiel et al., 2004).  Moreover, sustained hypnotic medication use can actually 
precipitate insomnia by interfering with rapid eye movement sleep (National Cancer Institute, 
2013), as well as perpetuate insomnia because individuals tend to overestimate their efficacy 
(Holbrook, Crowther, Lotter, Cheng, & King, 2000).  Individuals may also adopt beliefs that 
only these medications can treat their insomnia, or that their sleep problems are permanent, due 
to their dependence on these medications or the unpleasant withdrawal symptoms they 
experience when they attempt to discontinue use.  For these reasons, non-pharmacological 
treatment, specifically CBT-I, is recommended as first-line treatment for insomnia in individuals 
with cancer (National Cancer Institute, 2013). 
Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Insomnia.  CBT-I is a multiple-component 
behavioral treatment that aims to decrease the maladaptive behaviors and thought patterns that 
perpetuate insomnia (Morin, 2004).  It is comprised of stimulus control, sleep restriction, sleep 
hygiene, and cognitive restructuring, as well as an optional relaxation training component used 
by some clinicians (Smith, Huang, & Manber, 2005).   
Stimulus control operates on the notion that after numerous unsuccessful attempts to fall 
asleep, individuals with insomnia condition arousal by repeatedly pairing wakefulness with 

21
bedtime and the sleep setting (Bootzin, 1973).  Thus, the stimulus control component of CBT-I 
aims to repair the association between sleep and sleep stimuli (i.e.,, bedtime, bed, bedroom), as 
well as to restore synchronized circadian rhythms through five specific guidelines: 1) Go to bed 
only when sleepy; 2) Use the bedroom only for sleep or sex; 3) Get out of bed whenever unable 
to sleep after 15 minutes and only return to bed when sleepy; 4) Wake up at the same time each 
morning; and 5) Do not nap during the day (Bootzin, Epstein, & Wood, 1991; Morin, 2004).   
Sleep restriction is guided by the principle that insomnia is maintained by the excess 
amount of time individuals with insomnia spend in bed not sleeping.  Thus, limiting the amount 
of time spent in bed creates a temporary state of sleep deprivation or sleep pressure that is 
sufficient enough to overpower individuals’ conditioned arousal (Morin, 2004) .  The goal of 
sleep restriction is to help individuals fall asleep faster, increase sleep continuity and improve 
sleep quality and ultimately, to enhance the efficiency of individuals’ sleep.  To determine an 
individual’s sleep restriction regimen, a “sleep window” (i.e.,, bed- and wake-times) is 
established based on the average total sleep time estimated from sleep diaries (Morin, 2004).  
Adjustments are made to the “sleep window” over the course of treatment depending on the 
patient’s progress and changes in sleep efficiency (Morin, 2004).  For example, an individual’s 
averaged total sleep time per night is five hours, and she must be up for work at 6 AM.  
Therefore, she would be instructed to go to bed no earlier than 1 AM. 
Sleep hygiene is the education component of CBT-I that entails teaching individuals 
about the external factors that promote and hinder sleep (Morin, 2004).  For instance, individuals 
are educated about how environmental factors such as light and/or noise in the bedroom can 
disrupt sleep.  They are counseled to avoid behaviors such as nighttime caffeine, alcohol, or 

22
nicotine use.  Alternatively, they are encouraged to engage in behaviors more conducive to sleep, 
including consuming a light snack before bed, and exercising daily.   
Cognitive restructuring targets those beliefs, expectations and thought patterns that 
interfere with sleep by driving maladaptive behaviors (Morin, 2004).  For instance, individuals 
may have misconceptions about the causes of insomnia (e.g., “My sleep is poor because I’m 
getting old”), have distorted perceptions that amplify the consequences of insomnia (e.g., “If I 
don’t get a full night’s sleep, I’ll be sick”), hold unrealistic expectations about sleep (e.g., “I have 
to get at least eight hours of sleep at night”), and/or may have dysfunctional beliefs about sleep-
promoting practices (e.g., “I should just stay in bed and try harder to sleep”) (J. Savard & Savard, 
2013; Woodward, 2011).  These beliefs maintain insomnia by heightening individuals’ 
performance anxiety and by instilling a sense of learned helplessness around sleep, thereby 
increasing sleep effort and decreasing the likelihood of sleep (Morin, 2004).  In addition to 
directly addressing these beliefs by challenging them, cognitive restructuring entails teaching 
individuals to: 1) never try to sleep; 2) not catastrophize after a poor night’s sleep; and 3) have 
realistic expectations about sleep (Morin, 2004).  
Relaxation training can work in concert with the other components of CBT-I to reduce 
individuals’ physiologic and cognitive arousal, especially at night, thereby promoting sleep 
(Morin, 2004).  There are a number of techniques for relaxation training, including progressive 
muscle relaxation, an exercise through which individuals are taught to tense and release different 
muscle groups to relax their bodies.  Another option is guided imagery, in which through mental 
representations, individuals are guided to a peaceful scene where they are able to perceive the 
experience with their senses (Post-White, 2002).   

23
Efficacy of CBT-I.  The efficacy of CBT-I is well established, with studies yielding large 
effect sizes.  On average, studies produce a 50-60% reduction in symptoms on key subjective 
and objective insomnia outcomes (J. D. Edinger, W. Wohlgemuth, R. Radtke, G. Marsh, & R. 
Quillian, 2001a; Espie, Inglis, Tessier, & Harvey, 2001; Morin, Colecchi, et al., 1999; Morin, 
Culbert, & Schwartz, 1994; Morin, Hauri, et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2002) among 70-80% of 
treated individuals (Woodward, 2011).  Treatment gains can last for as long as two years (Morin, 
Colecchi, et al., 1999).  Specifically, individuals typically report decreases in sleep onset latency 
(SOL), the period between laying down to sleep and sleep onset, and wake after sleep onset 
(WASO), the amount of time spent awake after sleep onset, to non-clinical levels after treatment 
(Edinger et al., 2001a; J. D. Edinger, W. K. Wohlgemuth, R. A. Radtke, G. R. Marsh, & R. E. 
Quillian, 2001b; Irwin, Cole, & Nicassio, 2006; Morin, Colecchi, et al., 1999; Morin, Kowatch, 
Barry, & Walton, 1993).  Improvements in total sleep time (TST) have also been noted, with 
individuals reporting average increases of up to 45 minutes (Morin, Colecchi, et al., 1999; Morin 
et al., 1993).  CBT-I also corresponds with improvements in quality of sleep or sleep 
consolidation, as measured by sleep efficiency (Edinger, Hoelscher, Marsh, Lipper, & Ionescu-
Pioggia, 1992; Mimeault & Morin, 1999).   Finally, individuals who undergo CBT-I report 
clinically significant improvements in their self-efficacy to address sleep problems and in their 
sleep satisfaction, as well as a decrease in their dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs about sleep 
(Edinger et al., 2001a; Edinger et al., 2001b; Morin, Blais, & Savard, 2002; Morin, Colecchi, et 
al., 1999).  
When compared to pharmacotherapy, CBT-I is a more efficacious and durable treatment 
and it has the additional benefit of avoiding the side effects of pharmacological treatments.  For 
instance, a meta-analysis showed that CBT-I recipients reported significantly greater 

24
improvements in SOL than those treated with pharmacotherapy, 43% vs. 30% (Smith et al., 
2002).  The superior potency of CBT-I over pharmacotherapy is further supported by evidence 
that CBT-I alone is equally as, or more efficacious than combining pharmacotherapy with CBT-I 
(Jacobs, Pace-Schott, Stickgold, & Otto, 2004).  Compared to those receiving pharmacotherapy, 
individuals treated with CBT-I are more likely to achieve normal sleep patterns after treatment, 
to be satisfied with their sleep, and to perceive their treatment as more effective, (Jacobs et al., 
2004).   
Effectiveness of CBT-I.  Although requisite, establishing treatment efficacy is 
insufficient evidence for the feasibility or generalizability of CBT-I to real world settings.  This 
is especially important given that in real world settings, individuals with insomnia also present 
with comorbid psychiatric and medical conditions (Morin, Stone, McDonald, & Jones, 1994).  
Compared to efficacy studies, the literature on the clinical effectiveness of CBT-I is less 
developed.  Early evidence of the effectiveness of CBT-I came from case series studies of 
treatment-seeking patients from sleep clinics (Dashevsky & Kramer, 1998; Morin, Stone, et al., 
1994; M Perlis et al., 2000; M  Perlis, Sharpe, Smith, Greenblatt, & Giles, 2001), and also from 
primary care clinics (Espie, Inglis, Tessier, et al., 2001; Espie, Inglis, & Harvey, 2001; Espie, 
MacMahon, & Kelly, 2007).  Nevertheless, the evidence is unequivocal that the efficacy of CBT-
I is generalizable to more heterogeneous patient populations, including those with comorbid 
medical and psychiatric conditions (Smith et al., 2005).  In particular, CBT-I was associated with 
26-65% improvement in SOL, 48-50% improvement in WASO, 13-28% improvement in TST, 
and 14-33% improvement in SE (Okajima, Komada, & Inoue, 2011).  Moreover CBT-I 
recipients reported decreases in hypnotic medication use (Espie, Inglis, Tessier, et al., 2001; 
Morgan, Dixon, Mathers, Thompson, & Tomeny, 2003; Morin et al., 2004; Morin, Colecchi, 

25
Ling, & Sood, 1995) and on multiple quality of life indicators (Dixon, Morgan, Mathers, 
Thompson, & Tomeny, 2006; Morgan et al., 2003). 
CBT-I Format.  Despite its proven efficacy and effectiveness, CBT-I remains underused 
as a result of low availability and accessibility due to a lack of resources including limited 
availability of trained clinicians (Edinger & Means, 2005).  This has prompted research into 
understanding the optimal dosing for treatment effect as well as the efficacy and effectiveness of 
abbreviated CBT-I, and into less resource-intensive treatment modalities.  This line of research 
also extends the evidence on the effectiveness of CBT-I, as it tends to use more heterogeneous 
samples, with a goal of increasing dissemination of CBT-I. 
Low-intensity CBT-I.  Edinger et al. (2007) provided the basis for this line of 
scholarship, by demonstrating that contrary to expectations, one- and four-session CBT-I 
treatment outperformed the two- and eight-session treatments.  Other studies have demonstrated 
that abbreviated CBT-I, constituting two to three sessions (face-to-face and over the telephone), 
is effective in significantly improving sleep among primary care patients (Buysse et al., 2011; 
Edinger & Sampson, 2003), psychiatric outpatients (Wagley et al., 2012), and among older 
adults with medical and psychiatric comorbidities (Germain et al., 2006).  Overall, low-intensity 
CBT-I, including self-administered interventions, have been shown to be 50-75% as clinically 
effective as face-to-face unabridged treatments (Rybarczyk, Lopez, Schelble, & Stepanski, 2005; 
Rybarczyk et al., 2011). 
Self-administered CBT-I.  In addition to abbreviating sessions, research suggests that 
dissemination of CBT-I can be greatly expanded through self-administered modalities like 
Internet-based computerized programs.  In fact, a recent meta-analysis found six different 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of computerized CBT-I, comprising 433 study participants 

26
(S. K. Cheng & Dizon, 2012).  Findings showed up to moderate effect sized improvements in the 
following outcomes: number of awakenings, WASO, TST, SOL, time in bed (TIB), SE, and 
sleep quality.  There were also large improvements in subjective insomnia symptoms and 
consequences.  Moreover, adherence among participants in computerized CBT-I was 78%, 
higher than the rates reported in face-to-face CBT-I (S. K. Cheng & Dizon, 2012).  
Self-administered CBT-I with clinician support.  Although comparable to standard CBT-
I, self-administered CBT-I results in smaller treatment effects (J. Savard, Ivers, Savard, & Morin, 
2013; van Straten & Cuijpers, 2009) that are clinically significant (Currie, Clark, Hodgins, & 
El‐Guebaly, 2004).  Augmenting self-administered interventions with clinician support is one 
strategy to address this limitation.  Adding clinician support to self-administered CBT-I increases 
the intensity of the treatment, but it remains on the continuum of a low-intensity treatment.  
Several studies support that supplementing self-help CBT-I with clinician support enhances 
treatment effects (Ho, Chung, Yeung, Ng, & Cheng, 2014; Jernelöv et al., 2012; Kaldo et al., 
2015).  Most recently Kaldo and colleagues (2015) found that when compared to an active 
control treatment that entailed sleep hygiene, relaxation, mindfulness and general stress 
management, guided CBT-I resulted in clinically meaningful improvements in insomnia 
symptoms that was sustained 12 months post treatment. 
Taken together, the evidence clearly supports abbreviated and computerized CBT-I as 
viable strategies for disseminating this efficacious and effective treatment.  First, these treatment 
modalities help meet the varying needs of individuals with insomnia, as not all may require the 
full, intensive, treatment protocols.  Secondly, they address the time- and resource-demands that 
make face-to-face CBT-I unfeasible in certain clinical settings or among certain patient-
populations.  Individuals with cancer who are about to initiate active cancer treatment fall into 

27
this latter category.  Given that cancer treatment is such a taxing time, individuals may find low-
intensity CBT-I more acceptable.  This line of research inquiry is supported by a small, but 
promising body of literature on the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT-I among individuals with 
cancer.   
CBT-I in cancer.  To date, there have been 15 published studies on the efficacy of CBT-
I among individuals diagnosed with cancer (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Lynch, et al., 2009; Davidson, 
Waisberg, Brundage, & MacLean, 2001; Epstein & Dirksen, 2007; Espie et al., 2008; Fiorentino 
& Ancoli-Israel, 2006; Garland et al., 2014; Matthews, Schmiege, Cook, Berger, & Aloia, 2012; 
Quesnel, Savard, Simard, Ivers, & Morin, 2003; Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard, Simard, Ivers, 
& Morin, 2005; J. Savard, Villa, et al., 2011; Simeit, Deck, & Conta-Marx, 2004).  The strongest 
support for CBT-I among individuals with cancer is provided by RCTs.  Nine of the published 
studies have been RCTs, with individual (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Lynch, et al., 2009; Fiorentino & 
Ancoli-Israel, 2006; Matthews et al., 2012; J. Savard et al., 2013), group (Epstein & Dirksen, 
2007; Espie et al., 2008; Garland et al., 2014; J. Savard, S. Simard, H. Ivers, et al., 2005), or 
computerized designs (Ritterband et al., 2012).  Treatments have typically entailed four to eight 
15- to 120-minute in-person sessions.  These studies have proven the efficacy of CBT-I at 
improving sleep among individuals with cancer on key sleep parameters including SOL, WASO, 
and SE, and self-rated insomnia, as well as at conferring benefits in psychological well-being and 
quality of life.  When tested, these therapeutic gains can be maintained for up to 12 months after 
treatment.   
These studies are not without their limitations.  First, the samples in these RCTs have 
been especially homogenous, as all or the majority of participants have been diagnosed with 
breast cancer.  Second, all, but one of these studies, have been conducted among individuals who 

28
are months or years post-diagnosis and -treatment.  For example, in the first RCT published, 
Savard and colleagues (2005) randomized 57 breast cancer survivors who were on average 31 
months post treatment, to an eight-session group CBT-I protocol or to a wait-list control.  The 
CBT-I protocol was standard, including stimulus control, sleep restriction, sleep hygiene, and 
cognitive restructuring.  Findings showed that compared to the control group, CBT-I recipients 
showed significantly greater improvement on subjective and some objective measures of sleep, 
with treatment gains maintained and even enhanced for some participants at the twelve-month 
follow-up.  Additionally, CBT-I was associated with significant decreases in depression and 
anxiety, and increase in global quality of life.  More recently, Fiorentino et al. (2009) reported 
similar results in a crossover design study of breast cancer survivors five to 24 months post 
treatment.  After completing the six-session individual standard CBT-I protocol plus progressive 
muscle relaxation, 71% of participants experienced a remission in their sleep disturbances.  
There were significant improvements on subjective (i.e.,, WASO, SE) and objective (i.e.,, 
actigraph-measured WASO, sleep percentage) sleep measures.   
Berger et al. (2009) completed the only RCT to date in individuals with cancer who were 
also undergoing chemotherapy.  In the study, 219 individuals with breast cancer were randomly 
assigned to CBT-I or a healthy eating control treatment condition.  Prior to chemotherapy, 
individuals in the CBT-I condition developed an Individualized Sleep Promotion Plan with a 
nurse, covering modified stimulus control and sleep restriction, sleep hygiene, and relaxation.  
The sleep plan was revised prior to each subsequent cycle of treatment, with reinforcements 
scheduled seven days after each revision.  Post-CBT-I, individuals reported significantly fewer 
awakenings and higher sleep efficiency, as well as fewer actigraph-measured awakenings.  
Findings from this study support the feasibility and efficacy of implementing CBT-I prior to and 

29
during active cancer treatment.  Nevertheless, this examination of the benefits of CBT-I during 
this critical point of the cancer treatment trajectory was likely limited by the exclusion of 
individuals with chronic insomnia, leaving a largely non-clinical insomnia sample, a majority of 
whom self-identified as “fairly good” or “very good” sleepers.   
Low-intensity CBT-I in cancer.  Given its demonstrated efficacy, researchers in recent 
years have sought to increase the dissemination of CBT-I among individuals with cancer through 
self-help versions of CBT-I.  Pioneering this kind of work, Savard et al. (2011) examined the 
feasibility of a self-help CBT-I intervention composed of a 60-minute video and a 20-page 
booklet on sleep hygiene, stimulus control, sleep restriction, and cognitive restructuring.  In the 
single-group study design, participants were recruited during radiotherapy and were given the 
intervention materials after completing a two-week sleep diary.  Participants were instructed to 
read a segment of their intervention booklet and to watch a segment of the video each week, for 
six weeks.  There were significant, large effect-sized improvements in perceived sleep quality, 
SOL, WASO, and SE, moderate effect-sized improvements in depression and quality of life, as 
well as small effect-sized decrease in use of sleep medications, with many of these treatment 
gains generally maintained at the three-month follow-up.  Moreover, these findings are 
especially promising in light of results that the self-reported adherence was 100%, while the 
attrition rate (18%) is comparable to that reported in a clinician-led intervention trial (16-18%) 
(Espie et al., 2008).  However, the true efficacy of this self-help CBT-I has yet to be tested, as 
there was no control group to rule out the effects of time and/or treatment expectancies.  
In the second self-help CBT-I study, Ritterband and colleagues (2012) evaluated the 
efficacy of Sleep Healthy Using The Internet (SHUTi), an individually-tailored, interactive 
Internet-based CBT-I treatment protocol, among cancer survivors who were on average, 48 

30
months post-treatment.  Of note, unlike previous studies, only individuals who self-reported that 
their cancer diagnosis or treatment precipitated or exacerbated their sleep problems were eligible 
to participate.  The SHUTi program consists of six 45 to 60-minute cores covering stimulus 
control, sleep restriction, sleep hygiene, and cognitive restructuring.  Participants are provided 
with individualized tailoring and feedback throughout the program based on sleep diary data that 
they enter.  Additionally, automated emails are sent to participants to inform them of next steps 
and to encourage adherence.  Post-intervention, the authors found that compared to the waitlist 
control group, SHUTi completers reported statistically significant and clinically meaningful 
improvements in multiple sleep outcomes.  In particular, SHUTi produced 19% improvement in 
SE, 59% improvement in SOL, and large effect-sized improvement in self-rated sleep quality.  
Lastly, treatment effects for fatigue, ranging from moderate to large, was observed in the SHUTi 
group.  Similar to the other self-help CBT-I study reviewed (J. Savard, Villa, et al., 2011), 
adherence was high, with 86% of participants completing the SHUTi program, which is 
comparable to adherence reported in a clinician-led intervention (Berger et al., 2003).       
Both of these studies of self-help CBT-I had limitations that were similar to previous 
RCTs.  In both studies participants were individuals with breast cancer who were months or 
years post-treatment.  In fact, in one study, active cancer treatment was considered an exclusion 
criterion (J. Savard, S. Simard, H. Ivers, et al., 2005).  As in other CBT-I studies among 
individuals with cancer, the study samples have lacked racial and ethnic diversity, as the majority 
have been well-educated Caucasian women.  Despite these shortcomings, these studies have 
provided very favorable results about the efficacy and feasibility of implementing low-intensity 
CBT-I interventions among individuals with cancer.  In addition to producing treatment effects 
on key insomnia outcomes comparable to those in face-to-face interventions, findings suggest 

31
that these interventions can also produce clinically meaningful benefits on other psychosocial 
outcomes including fatigue and quality of life.  These studies add to the growing knowledge base 
on effective strategies for translating and disseminating CBT-I among individuals with cancer.   
Self-administered CBT-I with clinician support in cancer.  There has been only one study 
that has tested the efficacy of a self-administered CBT-I supplemented with clinician support in 
individuals diagnosed with cancer.  Building on previous work, Savard and colleagues (2013) 
compared the efficacy of a low-intensity CBT-I intervention, a video-based intervention with six 
booklets, supplemented with clinician support to a standard, face-to-face intervention in women 
who had undergone treatment for breast cancer.  The authors found that the low-intensity 
intervention resulted in clinically significant improvements on several sleep parameters.  These 
treatment effects were smaller than those found for the face-to-face intervention (J. Savard et al., 
2013).  Moreover, even though clinician support was offered, 9% of participants in the low-
intensity treatment condition accessed this support.   
Among the strongest arguments for these low-intensity CBT-I programs for patients, 
especially those already burdened with cancer, are their flexibility and convenience, which may 
enhance their acceptance and adherence.  Preliminary data seem to support this, as the reported 
adherence rates have been higher than those reported in a face-to-face group CBT-I study.  One 
research question that remains unanswered is the feasibility and efficacy of these low-intensity 
CBT-I interventions during the early stages of active cancer treatments, when patients are most 
likely to experience insomnia.   
Considerations.  In pursuit of the study aims, there were a number of considerations 
related to cancer and to Internet usage.  The literature clearly supports treating individuals with 
cancer who also have comorbid insomnia with CBT-I, but there were a number of considerations 

32
unique to the experiences of this population.  The first has to do with the fatigue (Smith et al., 
2005) and pain (National Cancer Institute, 2013) associated with cancer and its treatment.  As 
described earlier, pain and fatigue can precipitate insomnia, as well as contribute to maladaptive 
thinking patterns and behaviors that perpetuate sleep disturbances.  Thus, any CBT-I regimen for 
individuals with cancer, particularly if implemented during active cancer treatment, must address 
how these side effects impact sleep.  For some patients, these cancer treatment side effects may 
require separate pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic management.  For example, tricyclic 
antidepressants can be especially beneficial for treating sleep disturbances in patients with 
neuropathic pain and depression (National Cancer Institute, 2013).  Additionally, non-
pharmacologic strategies can be embedded in CBT-I treatment components.  For instance, 
stimulus control and sleep hygiene can correct some individuals’ tendency to respond to cancer-
related pain and fatigue by spending additional time in bed by setting activity/exercise goals, and 
timing naps appropriately to limit their interference with nighttime sleep (National Cancer 
Institute, 2013; Smith et al., 2005).  To reinforce those instructions, cognitive restructuring can 
also be used to adjust patients’ misattributions of fatigue with sleep loss, while helping 
individuals distinguish between fatigue (i.e., decreased energy, such as a sense of heaviness in 
limbs, which may require rest but not necessarily sleep) and sleepiness (i.e., requiring effort to 
stay awake) (Smith et al., 2005).   Also, relaxation techniques can be implemented in conjunction 
with pain management and to reduce conditioned arousal at bedtime. 
 Other considerations were related to cancer-specific psychological distress and age.  
Given the high co-occurrence of psychological distress, including depression and anxiety, with 
cancer and insomnia, these symptoms must also be appropriately managed in order to achieve 
the full benefit of CBT-I.  Psychiatric symptoms were assessed to determine whether they 

33
required separate psychotherapy or pharmacologic intervention (Smith et al., 2005).  Lastly, 
older individuals with cancer and comorbid insomnia may have required important modifications 
to CBT-I protocols (National Cancer Institute, 2013).  For instance, sleep hygiene and cognitive 
restructuring could be tailored to address the changes in sleep cycles that occur as part of the 
natural aging process.  Thus, older patients were engaged in cognitive restructuring to develop 
more realistic expectations of their sleep.   
Lastly, since that the current study examined the feasibility and efficacy of an online 
program, considerations regarding Internet access must be discussed.  To accurately capture 
patients’ CBT-I treatment preferences rather than their Internet access, prospective participants 
needed regular access to the Internet.  Based on current evidence on Internet access, the potential 
for this requirement to have biased study findings was limited.  An estimated 85% of American 
adults use the Internet (Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2011), with 72% of users having 
searched for health-related information (Fox & Duggan, 2013).  Moreover, differences in access 
by socioeconomic status (SES) have decreased significantly (U.S. Government of Commerce, 
2000) and access is similar across different racial and ethnic minority groups—86% of non-
Hispanic Whites compared to 85% of non-Hispanic Blacks and 76% of Hispanic adults reported 
using the Internet in 2013 (Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2011).  Given the increased 
rates of cancer among older adults, it is also important to note that Internet access is increasing in 
this segment of the population, with 83% of adults aged 50-64, and 56% of adults aged 65 and 
older using the Internet (Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2011; Zickuhr & Madden, 
2012).   These statistics further supported the importance of examining the acceptability and 
efficacy of an online CBT-I intervention, given that access to face-to-face CBT-I is limited. 
Statement of the Problem 

34
 
CBT-I is an evidence-based, efficacious and effective treatment for cancer-related 
insomnia.  The treatment improves sleep, psychological and physical symptoms, with treatment 
gains that last for up to 12 months.  With the utility of CBT-I in cancer firmly established, 
research efforts have recently turned to accelerating the translation and dissemination of CBT-I 
to a greater number of patients through low-intensity treatment modalities.  To date, only two 
studies of a web-based and a video plus treatment booklet self-help interventions have been 
tested.  One study added clinician support to the self-administered treatment.  Overall, these 
studies have yielded very promising findings, demonstrating that CBT-I, even in its low-intensity 
forms, can have clinically meaningful and lasting effects on sleep, depression, quality of life, and 
fatigue.  Moreover, participants appear to respond well to these treatments, with adherence rates 
higher than those reported in face-to-face studies, and comparable attrition rates.  However, these 
findings are limited by the homogenous, non-representative nature of the study samples, when it 
comes to demographic characteristics and malignancy type.  Second, despite evidence supporting 
the importance of treating CBT-I in the early phases of cancer treatment, only one CBT-I study 
and none of the low-intensity CBT-I studies, has been conducted during active cancer treatment.   
 
This study aimed to address these gaps in the literature while extending previous research 
on accelerating the translation and dissemination of CBT-I among individuals with cancer 
through low-intensity treatment modalities. This study examined the feasibility, acceptability, 
and efficacy of a low-intensity and accessible CBT-I intervention delivered online, SHUTi, with 
therapist support provided as needed.  Participants were individuals newly diagnosed with non-
advanced (i.e.,, curable) cancers who were about to initiate their first course of chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy, and were experiencing at least three episodes of sleep disturbance per week 

35
that was associated with daytime effects such as fatigue, irritability, or difficulty concentrating 
and had persisted for at least one month.  The following complementary aims were examined:  
Specific Aim 1: To assess the feasibility and acceptability of an online CBT-I 
intervention, Sleeping Healthy Using the Internet (SHUTi), in individuals newly 
diagnosed with cancer. 
Specific Aim 2: To determine the efficacy of SHUTi at improving sleep and other 
quality of life outcomes during cancer treatment.  
Statement of Hypotheses 
 
Based on past evidence and the aims of the current study, the following hypotheses were 
proposed: 
1. SHUTi will be a feasible and acceptable treatment for insomnia among patients newly 
diagnosed with cancer who are undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation. 
2. Compared to the treatment as usual (TAU) group, participants in the SHUTi group 
will report significantly better sleep after treatment, as indicated by lower Insomnia 
Severity Index (ISI) score, higher SE, decreased SOL, higher TST, and shorter 
WASO. 
3. Compared to the TAU group, participants in the SHUTi group will report 
significantly better health-related quality of life and lower psychological distress (i.e., 
depression and anxiety) after treatment. 
Methods 
Study Design 
The current study examined the feasibility and efficacy of a low-intensity and accessible 
CBT-I intervention delivered online, SHUTi, among patients newly diagnosed with cancer who 

36
were treatment naïve and undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation at an academic medical 
center.  Participants were randomized to either the SHUTi condition or TAU group. All 
participants had a face-to-face meeting with the doctoral student at enrollment, when baseline 
self-report questionnaires were completed (see Measures section for further detail).  As a pre-
treatment assessment, all participants also completed a 1-week sleep diary.  Participants 
randomized to SHUTi were enrolled in the program and provided with their login information at 
the end of the pre-assessment period.  SHUTi participants were informed that they had the option 
of accessing the doctoral student’s assistance to complete the program at any time during the 
study period. Specifically, she would be available to meet them at their weekly appointments to 
provide a tablet for them to complete the program cores either with her or independently during 
their appointments. Individuals randomized to TAU were contacted by telephone biweekly or in 
person if the doctoral student saw them during an appointment while she was meeting with 
another study participant. These phone calls and in-person visits mimicked the level of contact in 
the treatment condition to encourage participant engagement.  However, during these contacts, 
no advice regarding sleep was given and if participants asked for help, they were encouraged to 
discuss their concerns with their oncologists.  Individuals in the TAU group were also given the 
option of receiving SHUTi if interested at the end of the study period.  However, none of the 
patients in the TAU condition chose to complete SHUTi.  At the end of the study period, all 
participants completed a 1-week diary and the same standardized questionnaires completed at 
baseline. Participants in the SHUTi condition also completed a questionnaire about the 
acceptability of the program. 
Participants 

37
 
Twenty-eight adults (i.e., 18 years and older) diagnosed with non-advanced (i.e., curable) 
cancer who were about to initiate chemotherapy and/or radiation treatment for the first time 
participated in this study.  None of the participants had widely disseminated (i.e., metastatic) 
disease at the time of recruitment.  These individuals were eligible if they reported experiencing 
at least three episodes of sleep disturbance per week that was associated with daytime effects 
such as fatigue, irritability, or difficulty concentrating and had persisted for at least one month.  
Participants were recruited from the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) Massey 
Cancer Center.  The VCU Massey Cancer Center is an NCI-designated cancer center that 
provides comprehensive cancer care through multidisciplinary teams.  These teams convene at 
weekly tumor board meetings to discuss patients and to design treatment plans.  There are tumor 
board meetings for specific cancer sites: head and neck, ear, nose and throat; breast; chest; 
gastrointestinal; gynecological; and prostate and other urologic.  In addition to these 
multidisciplinary teams, there is also a Fellows clinic, in which hematological/oncology medical 
fellows see patients, who are primarily indigent or uninsured, with various malignances.  Prior to 
their initial treatment appointments with their oncologist, potential participants were identified 
through case presentations at these tumor board meetings and at the Fellow’s clinic, chart review, 
and oncologist referral. 
Inclusion criteria were as follows: a) newly diagnosed non-advanced (i.e., curable) 
cancer; b) scheduled or planned to begin chemotherapy or radiotherapy; c) chemotherapy- or 
radiotherapy-naïve; c) meet diagnostic criteria for chronic insomnia (i.e., lasting for at least one 
month); d) interested in contributing to the understanding of insomnia in cancer; and e) have the 
permission of their oncologists to participate.  Chronic insomnia has been defined in previous 
research (Edinger et al., 2004; Rybarczyk, Stepanski, et al., 2005) as the presence of (1) three or 

38
more episodes of insomnia (i.e.,, ≥ 30-minute SOL, ≥ 60-minute WASO, or ≤ 6.5 hour-TST per 
night) of per week and (2) daytime effects of insomnia, such as irritability, difficulty 
concentrating, or fatigue for at least one month.  Exclusion criteria were: a) untreated alcohol or 
substance abuse or dependence, bipolar, or psychotic disorder; b) medical conditions such as 
seizure disorder, restless leg disorder, or Parkinson’s disease; and c) untreated sleep disorders 
such as sleep apnea.  Other CBT-I efficacy and effectiveness trials have used these exclusion 
criteria (Smith et al., 2005) because sleep restriction may be riskier in bipolar or seizure disorder 
as it may precipitate a manic episode or lower the seizure threshold.  Similarly, Parkinson’s 
disease may cause sleep disturbances (Rybarczyk, Stepanski, et al., 2005). 
The sociodemographic characteristics for the analytic sample (N=28) and for participants in the 
SHUTi (n=14) and TAU (n=14) conditions are presented in Table 1.  F-tests (for continuous 
variables) and chi-square analyses (for categorical variables) were used to verify the success of 
randomization by examining whether there were any significant differences by condition at 
baseline.  No significant differences were found between the SHUTi group and the TAU group 
with regard to gender, age, race, marital status, education, employment, income, and insurance 
status (all p values > .05).  
 
 
Table 1. Sociodemographic characteristics of sample at baseline 

39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline insomnia- and cancer-related characteristics for the total sample and by group 
are presented in Table 2.  F-tests and chi-square analyses found no significant differences 
Characteristic 
Overall (N=28) CBT-I (n=14) 
TAU (n=14) 
Gender, n (%) 
Females 
22 (78.6) 
11 (78.6) 
11 (78.6) 
Males 
6 (21.4) 
3 (21.4) 
3 (21.4) 
Age, M (SD) 
47 (10.8) 
43 (10.2) 
50 (10.4) 
Range 
23-63 
37-49 
44-56 
Race, n (%) 
White 
18 (64.3) 
9 (64.3) 
9(64.3) 
Black 
9 (32.1) 
4 (28.6) 
5 (35.7) 
Asian 
1 (3.6) 
1 (7.1) 
0 
Marital status, n (%) 
Married 
13 (46.4) 
6 (42.9) 
7 (50.0) 
Single 
7 (25.0) 
5 (35.7) 
2 (14.3) 
Divorced/Separated/Widowed 8 (28.6) 
3 (21.4) 
5 (35.7) 
Education, n (%) 
Some High School 
1 (3.6) 
0 
1 (7.1) 
High School 
6 (21.4) 
3 (21.4) 
3 (21.4) 
Some College 
12 (42.9) 
5 (35.7) 
7 (50.0) 
College 
5 (17.9) 
3 (21.4) 
2 (14.3) 
Graduate School 
4 (14.3) 
3 (21.4) 
1 (7.1) 
Employment, n (%) 
Full time 
10 (35.7) 
5 (35.7) 
5 (35.7) 
Part time 
9 (32.1) 
5 (35.7) 
4 (28.6) 
Unemployed 
5 (17.9) 
2 (14.3) 
3 (21.4) 
Disability 
4 (14.3) 
2 (14.3) 
2 (14.3) 
Income, n (%) 
<$10, 000 
8 (28.6) 
4 (28.6) 
4 (28.6) 
$10-29, 999 
7 (25.0) 
3 (21.4) 
4 (28.6) 
$30-49, 999 
2 (7.1) 
2 (14.3) 
0 
$50-74, 999 
2 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
$75-99, 999 
2 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
$100, 000 
7 (25.0) 
3 (21.4) 
4 (28.6) 
Insurance, n (%) 
Indigent/uninsured 
5 (17.9) 
3 (21.4) 
2 (14.3) 
Medicaid/VCC 
5 (17.9) 
1 (7.1) 
4 (28.6) 
Medicare 
1 (3.6) 
0 
1 (7.1) 
Private 
17 (60.7) 
10 (71.4) 
7 (50.0) 

40
between the SHUTi group and the TAU group with regard to these characteristics including 
cancer site, stage, time since cancer diagnosis, and type of cancer treatment (all p values > .05).  
Baseline descriptive statistics of the outcome variables (ISI, SOL, WASO, SE, FACT-G 
and its component scores, PHQ-9 and GAD-7) for the sample and by group at baseline are 
presented in Table 3.  F-tests and chi-square analyses were performed to examine whether there 
were any significant differences in outcomes of interest by group. Since these tests are sensitive 
to violations of normality, variables found to be high on skewness and/or kurtosis were adjusted.  
Adjustments were performed by converting data points with z-scores greater than 1.96 (p < .05) 
to the next closest value that was under the cut-off value from the sample for that variable. This 
method maintains the shape of the sample distribution without distorting the data (Tabachnick & 
Fidel, 2007) and was determined to be the most appropriate way of addressing outliers given the 
small sample size (Taylor, Rybarczyk, Nay, & Leszczyszyn, 2015). Results showed that the two 
groups were equivalent with regard to all outcome variables (all p values > .05). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41
Table 2. Cancer- and insomnia-related characteristics at baseline 
Characteristic 
Overall (N=28) 
CBT-I (n=14) 
TAU (n=14) 
Cancer site, n (%) 
Breast 
10 (35.7) 
3 (21.4) 
7 (50.0) 
Gastrointestinal 
7 (25.0) 
5 (35.7) 
2 (14.3) 
Head & neck  
6 (21.4) 
4 (28.6) 
2 (14.3) 
Gynecological 
4 (14.3) 
1 (7.1) 
3 (21.4) 
Other 
1 (3.6) 
1 (7.1) 
0 
Stage at diagnosis, n (%) 
I 
6 (21.4) 
4 (28.6) 
2 (14.3) 
II 
6 (21.4) 
1 (7.1) 
5 (35.7) 
III 
9 (32.1) 
6 (42.9) 
3 (21.4) 
IV 
5 (17.9) 
2 (14.3) 
3 (21.4) 
Other 
2 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
1 (7.1) 
Months since diagnosis, M (SD) 
2 (1.8) 
1.5 (0.85) 
2.4 (2.3) 
Surgery 
18 (64.3) 
8 (57.1) 
10 (71.4) 
Type of treatment, n (%) 
Chemotherapy 
14 (50.0) 
8 (57.1) 
6 (42.9) 
Radiation 
3 (10.7) 
0 (0) 
3 (21.4) 
Chemo-radiation 
11 (39.3) 
6 (42.9) 
5 (35.7) 
Duration of insomnia, n (%) 
≤ 5 months 
14 (51.9) 
10 (71.4) 
4 (31.8) 
6-12 months 
3 (11.1) 
1 (7.1) 
2 (15.4) 
1-5 years 
1 (3.7) 
1 (7.1) 
0 
≥ 6 years 
10 (33.3) 
2 (4.3) 
7 (53.8) 
Onset of insomnia, n (%) 
Before cancer diagnosis 
21 (75.0) 
9 (64.3) 
12 (85.7) 
After cancer diagnosis 
7 (25.0) 
5 (35.7) 
2 (14.3) 
Cancer caused insomnia, n (%) 
11 (39.3) 
8 (57.1) 
3 (21.4) 
Cancer affected sleep, n (%) 
24 (85.7) 
13 (92.9) 
11 (78.6) 
Told oncologist about sleep 
problems, n (%) 
11 (39.3) 
8 (57.1) 
3 (21.4) 
Use of sleep aid, n (%) 
15 (55.6) 
8 (57.1) 
7 (53.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42
Table 3. Descriptive statistics of the outcome variables at baseline 
 
Characteristic 
Overall 
(N=28) 
CBT-I 
(n=14) 
TAU 
(n=14) 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), M (SD) 
13.6 (6.2) 
13.7 (4.7) 
13.4 (7.6) 
Sleep Onset Latency in minutes (SOL), M (SD) 63.9 
(58.9) 
50.3 (33.5) 
77.5 (75.5) 
Wake Time After Sleep Onset in minutes 
(WASO), M (SD) 
44.8 
(35.1) 
51.8 (40) 
37.8 (29.2) 
Sleep Efficiency % (SE), M (SD) 
69.6 
(17.3) 
72.8 (15.8) 
66.4 (18.9) 
Total Sleep Time in minutes, M (SD) 
372.2 
(130.6) 
419.8 
(143.9) 
324.6 (99) 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-
General (FACT-G), M (SD) 
72.2 
(16.1) 
67.4 (15.6) 
77.5 (15.6) 
Physical Well-being Score 
19.2 (5.9) 
17.8 (6.3) 
20.6 (5.1) 
Emotional Well-being Score 
15.8 (4.4) 
15.3 (4.1) 
24 (3.5) 
Social/Family Well-being Score 
22.6 (6.2) 
21.3 (7.8) 
24 (3.5) 
Functional Well-being Score 
14.7 (6.9) 
12.9 (6.2) 
16.4 (7.3) 
Patient Health Questionaire-9 (PHQ-9), M 
(SD) 
10.2 (4.4) 
10.6 (4) 
9.8 (5.3) 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7), M 
(SD) 
8.8 (5.1) 
8.5 (3.9) 
9 (6.3) 
 
 
Procedure  
The study protocol was approved by Massey Cancer Center’s Protocol Review and 
Monitoring Committee (PRMC), MCC-14-1076, and the VCU Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), HM20002827.   
Recruitment.  Study participants were recruited between December 2014 and August 
2015.  Before recruitment for the study could begin, the doctoral student presented the study and 
eligibility criteria to the multidisciplinary teams at tumor board meetings and at the 
hematology/oncology Fellows’ pre-clinic conferences.  The doctoral student then attended these 
weekly tumor board meetings to identify potential study participants from the list of new patients 
that were discussed at each meeting. Other potential participants were identified at the 

43
hematology/oncology Fellows’ pre-clinic conferences, where patients who would be seen in the 
clinic that same day were discussed.  Potential participants’ ability to participate in the study was 
verified with their oncologists at the tumor board meetings and at the pre-clinic conferences.  In 
addition to these active recruitment strategies, there was passive recruitment through fliers that 
were placed in areas of prominence at Massey. 
The doctoral student approached patients during a pre-treatment appointment using a 
standardized verbal introduction to describe the study while also informing patients that their 
oncologists had given prior approval for their participation.  This introduction took place either 
before or after patients had met with their oncologists.  While these visits were usually one of the 
first times individuals were meeting with their oncologists, individuals were only approached 
after they had discussed their treatment plans with their oncologist.  Interested individuals were 
formally assessed for other eligibility criteria, particularly, that they met diagnostic criteria for 
insomnia.  Participants that met eligibility criteria and expressed interest in participating in the 
study were then consented into the study.  The doctoral student reviewed consent forms with 
eligible individuals to ensure that they understood the study procedure and their rights as 
participants.  After which, participants were asked to give written informed consent.  After 
consent, enrolled participants were administered baseline assessments.  In a few cases, potential 
participants were identified after they had already had a pre-treatment visit and did not have any 
upcoming appointments scheduled before their first treatment appointment.  In those cases, 
individuals were approached about the study over the telephone and eligible individuals were 
also consented over the telephone, though written consent was obtained at the first meeting with 
the doctoral student.  Baseline questionnaires were also completed over the telephone and these 
individuals were emailed their baseline sleep diaries so that they would have them completed 

44
before they met up with the doctoral student at their first treatment appointment. Once consented, 
each patient was enrolled into either the SHUTi or TAU arm by random assignment.   
Randomization.  The randomization process was as follows.  Prior to beginning the 
study, a random number generator (www.randomization.com) was used to produce a random 
permutation of integers from 1 to 30.  This list was then matched with a systematic listing of 30 
total treatment and control condition assignments (e.g., T, C, T, C, etc.)  For example, if the 
random number generator produces 1, 23, 15, and 27, these numbers will determine the first four 
group assignments, so that first patient will be assigned to the treatment condition (T), the 23rd to 
the control condition (C), 15th to the treatment condition (T), and the 27th to the control condition 
(C).  Thus at enrollment, the patient’s assignment to the treatment or control condition was 
already determined. 
At least one week after study enrollment, the doctoral student met with each study 
participant, whether in the SHUTi or TAU condition to collect baseline sleep diary data.  This 
visit took place either before or at the first chemotherapy or radiation treatment appointment.  At 
this meeting, individuals in the SHUTi condition were enrolled in the program and given their 
login information.  Whenever possible, an introductory module that teaches users about the 
program and its features was also completed at this visit, to facilitate participants starting on the 
actual treatment portion of the program as immediately as possible.  At this time, individuals 
were also asked about their preference for completing the treatment either independently or with 
the doctoral student’s assistance.  For participants who chose to work with the doctoral student, 
arrangements were made to meet at subsequent treatment appointments.  For participants who 
chose to complete the program independently, the doctoral student monitored their progress with 
completing SHUTi Cores online and individuals were contacted either over the telephone or in 

45
person if they failed to log onto the program for more than 1-2 weeks.  Additionally, the option 
of completing the program at their treatment appointments with or without the doctoral student’s 
assistance was presented again.  In contrast, individuals in the TAU condition were told that they 
would be contacted biweekly, either on the telephone or in person, until the end of the study 
period once they completed the baseline sleep diary.   
At the end of the study period, all participants completed the same questionnaires that 
they completed at baseline.  Participants in the SHUTi condition also completed a questionnaire 
on the acceptability of the program.  Questionnaires were completed either in person or over the 
telephone depending on the participants’ availability.  Participants were also asked to complete a 
1-week sleep diary, which was either collected at a subsequent appointment or emailed to the 
doctoral student.   
Compensation.  To incentivize participation, individuals enrolled in the study were 
given two $10 Visa gift cards.  At enrollment, participants were informed verbally and through 
the written study consent form that they would be provided a small compensation for their 
participation.  Participants who completed baseline questionnaires and returned a completed 
baseline 1-week sleep diary were given the first $10 gift card.  Participants received the second 
$10 gift card after they completed post-treatment period questionnaires and returned a completed 
post-treatment 1-week sleep diary.   
SHUTi.  An overview of the SHUTi intervention is presented in Figure 3. The online 
program is made-up of six, weekly treatment Cores modeled after weekly face-to-face CBT-I 
sessions (Thorndike et al., 2008).  Each Core began by providing a rationale for learning the 
material, explained the main content of the Core, and assigned homework with suggestions for 
improving sleep over the coming week.  Each Core ended with a summary review of the main 

46
points in the Core.  The main content for each Core addressed myths about sleep, discussed in-
depth information and vignettes, and used quizzes to evaluate users’ learning in an interactive 
manner.  As well as being interactive, SHUTi allowed for personalization.  For instance, 
modifications were made to sleep recommendations based on participants’ sleep diary data and 
individually set treatment goals.   
 
The first Core of SHUTi is the Overview, which provided a review and rationale of 
insomnia and its treatment, including the impact of insomnia, its risk factors, and the 
effectiveness of CBT-I.  Second is the Sleep Behavior Core, which introduced and implemented 
sleep restriction as well as stimulus control.  The next Core is Sleep Behavior Core 2 and built on 
the previous Core by addressing concerns about sleep restriction while expanding on stimulus 
control instructions.  The fourth Core is the Sleep Education Core, which focused on teaching 
sleep hygiene, particularly the lifestyle and environmental factors that influence sleep.  The fifth 
Core is the Sleep Thoughts Core, aptly named for its focus on cognitive restructuring.   
Last is the Problem Prevention Core, which sought to synthesize information from the previous 
five cores to solidify users’ knowledge and to prevent future problems by preparing users to cope 
with eventual increase in insomnia symptoms. 
 
Each Core took approximately 45 to 60 minutes to complete.  Cores were presented one 
at a time; the next Core became available to users a week after they completed one Core.  
However, users were able to revisit previous Cores as often as possible.  Similar to an in-person 
CBT-I intervention, users were not required to keep sleep diaries after the baseline 1-week diary 
that was used to establish an initial sleep window.  However, they were able to continue 
completing sleep diaries if they choose to, and the program used a built-in algorithm to make 

47
necessary adjustments to users’ sleep diaries if they continued to enter sleep diary data during the 
treatment. 
Measures 
 
All study measures were self-reported due to the unfeasibility and cost concerns of 
objective measures like polysomnography and actigraphy.  The use of only self-report measures 
is not uncommon in insomnia studies like this (Smith et al., 2005).  All study measures are 
included in the Appendix. 
 
Study eligibility questionnaire.  Individuals who expressed interest in the study after 
being approached by the doctoral student were administered a brief questionnaire to assess their 
eligibility.  To be eligible, individuals had to have been diagnosed with non-advanced cancer and 
scheduled to undergo curative chemotherapy and/or radiation (i.e., not palliative).  They also had 
to be chemotherapy and radiation naïve.  This was verified via chart review.  Regarding sleep, 
individuals had to report experiencing difficulty initiating (i.e., inability to fall asleep within 30 
minutes) or maintaining sleep (i.e., awakening during the night for a total of 60 minutes), early 
morning awakenings (i.e., achieving less than 6.5 hours of sleep) at least three days a week.  
These sleep difficulties had to be associated with daytime consequences such as fatigue, 
irritability, or difficulty concentrating.  All of these symptoms had to have persisted for at least 
one month.  Thus, individuals had to answer “Yes” to all questions on the questionnaire to be 
eligible for participation.  They also had to answer “No” to the exclusion criteria.  Specifically, 
individuals were ineligible to participate if they reported untreated sleep apnea, seizure disorder, 
substance/alcohol use disorder, psychotic disorder, restless leg syndrome, or Parkinson’s disease.    
Participant information/Demographic questionnaire.  The doctoral student 
administered a paper and pencil questionnaire to assess the history and current nature of 

48
individuals’ insomnia and cancer.  In particular, the questionnaire asked about the time of cancer 
diagnosis and when treatment would/had begun.  Participants were also asked about the duration 
of their sleep disturbance.  The questionnaire also asked individuals about their perception of the 
relationship between their sleep difficulties and their cancer diagnosis.  In particular, they were 
asked whether they believed their sleep difficulties pre-dated or developed subsequent to their 
cancer diagnosis.  They were also asked whether they had talked to their oncologist about their 
sleep difficulties, and if they were taking a sleep aid.  The questionnaire also collected 
participants’ demographic information including age, education, income, and employment status. 
 
Sleep diary.  Standardized sleep diaries from SHUTi were used to measure and track key 
sleep quality indicators (Thorndike et al., 2008).  Sleep diaries consisted of twelve questions 
including questions about the length of naps, use of sleep aids, bedtime, minutes to fall asleep, 
number and duration of nighttime awakenings, wake time, time of getting out of bed.  
Individuals were also asked about alcohol use and its timing.  Lastly, participants were able to 
write in any comments about their sleep they found pertinent.  Data from the sleep diaries were 
used to calculate SOL, WASO, TST, and SE. 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI).  The ISI is an empirically valid seven-item global 
measure of perceived sleep difficulties (Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin, 2001) that has been also 
been validated in individuals with cancer (M. Savard, Savard, Simard, & Ivers, 2005).  
Respondents were asked to rate the perceived severity of their current sleep problems, 
satisfaction with their sleep, perceived sleep-related impairment, how noticeable they believe 
that impairment is to others, and the amount of distress associated with the sleep disturbance.  
All ratings were reported on a 0 to 5 scale, for a 0-28 total score, with higher scores indicating 
greater insomnia severity.  The ISI has been evaluated as a reliable and validated measure of 

49
insomnia that is sensitive to treatment response in clinical populations, including individuals 
with cancer (Bastien et al., 2001; M. Savard et al., 2005).   
 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9).  The PHQ-9 is a self-report version of the 
depression module from the PRIME-MD, a diagnostic measure for common psychiatric 
disorders (Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001).  It is a 9-item instrument used to measure 
depressive symptoms and functional impairment that is used to diagnose Major Depressive 
Disorder and to track treatment progress.  Items correspond to DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000).  The PHQ-9 has been found to be a valid and reliable 
measure and has diagnostic validity comparable to the original clinician administered instrument 
(Kroenke et al., 2001) and has been widely used to screen for depression among cancer 
individuals (Strong et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2011). 
 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7).  The GAD-7 is a brief, 7-item self-report 
screening measure of generalized anxiety symptoms (Spitzer, Kroenke, Williams, & Lowe, 
2006).  The measure was developed from the DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).  The measure has been empirically 
validated (Lowe et al., 2008) and has been found to be an appropriate measure of anxiety 
symptoms among individuals with cancer (L. F. Brown, Kroenke, Theobald, Wu, & Tu, 2010; 
Kroenke et al., 2009). 
 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-General scale (FACT-G).  The FACT-G 
is a valid and reliable measure for evaluating general quality of life among individuals with 
cancer undergoing cancer treatment (Cella et al., 1993).  Items assess individuals’ symptoms and 
ability to perform activities in the following domains: Physical well-being, social/family well-
being, emotional well-being, and functional well-being.  The instrument has been used as an 

50
outcome measure in numerous intervention studies among individuals with cancer (Rogers et al., 
2009; Segal et al., 2009; Velikova et al., 2004). 
 
Treatment acceptability questionnaire.  To evaluate the acceptability of SHUTi among 
participants, a 12-item questionnaire was adapted from questionnaires used by Thorndike and 
colleagues (2008) for the initial evaluation of the utility and impact of SHUTi.  Participants were 
asked to rate their perception of the suitability, ease of use, and effectiveness of SHUTi on a 5-
point Likert scale where 1 corresponded “Not at All” and 5 corresponded with “Very.”  Sample 
questions were, “How effective do you think this program will be as a long term cure?” and 
“How acceptable do you think the program would be for patients like you?”  Participants were 
also asked to provide comments about their experiences with SHUTi.  
Data Analysis 
Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics - Version 23 and 
G*Power – Version 3.1.9.2.  Only the twenty-eight participants that completed all baseline 
measures were included in the analyses.  Additionally, a “last observation carried forward" 
method was used to address instances of missing data.  For two participants who completed the 
TAU period but failed to complete the post-treatment questionnaires and sleep diaries, their 
baseline data was used in place of post-treatment data.  This is a conservative approach to 
addressing missing data due to attrition when analyzing treatment effects.  The method limits 
attrition bias while strengthening any conclusions that can be made about the intervention 
(Kazdin, 2003).  To verify results, a sensitivity analysis was also performed wherein the analyses 
were repeated with missing data and results were similar to results when the “last observation 
carried forward” was used. 

51
To standardize effects for ease of interpretation, Cohen's d was reported as a measure of 
effect size.  As a general rule, the cutoff is d = 0.20 for a small effect size, d = 0.50 for a medium 
effect size, and d = 0.80 for a large effect size (Cohen, 1988).  Cohen’s d was calculated using 
G*Power – Version 3.1.9.2. (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007).  
 
Outline of Analyses by Hypotheses 
Hypothesis 1. To test the first hypothesis that online CBT-I (i.e., SHUTi) would be a 
feasible and acceptable treatment for insomnia in individuals newly diagnosed with cancer who 
are undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation, a number of indicators were examined.  These 
indicators were: (1) Recruitment; (2) completion rate; (3) time to complete study and reasons for 
delays; (4) use and impact of doctoral student support; (5) SHUTi acceptability among 
participants; and (6) participants’ comments about their experiences using SHUTi. 
Hypothesis 2.  To test the second hypothesis that compared to the group, participants in 
the SHUTi group would report significantly better sleep after treatment, repeated measures 
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was used.  The independent variable (IV) was 
condition (SHUTi vs. TAU) and the repeated factor was time (baseline and post-treatment).  The 
dependent variables (DVs) were the five indices of sleep quality—total score on the ISI, and the 
four sleep parameters calculated from sleep diary data, SOL, TST, WASO and SE.  Follow-up 
repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were also conducted to assess condition by 
time interactions for individual sleep variables.  
Hypothesis 3.  To test the third hypothesis that compared to the TAU group, participants 
in the SHUTi group would report significantly better health-related quality of life and lower 
psychological distress after treatment, repeated measures MANOVA was used.  The IV was 
condition (SHUTi vs. TAU) and the repeated factor was time (baseline and post-treatment).  The 

52
DVs were total scores on the PHQ-9, GAD-7, and on the FACT-G and its individual 
components. Follow-up repeated measures ANOVAs were also conducted to assess condition by 
time interactions for individual outcome variables.  
Results 
Hypothesis 1: Study Acceptability and Feasibility  
 
Recruitment.  The recruitment and retention of study participants is illustrated in Figure 
1.  Study recruitment took place from December 2014 to August 2015.  A total of 53 individuals 
were approached or responded to recruitment fliers posted for the study.  Out of these 
individuals, 83% were screened for study eligibility.  The reasons why patients refused to be 
screened for the study are presented in Table 4.  Among the total number of patients who were 
screened, 68% were found to meet inclusion criteria.  Most of the excluded patients (57%) were 
not experiencing sleep problems and if they were, they were not distressed by the symptoms and 
thus did not meet diagnostic criteria for insomnia.  Only 14% of the excluded patients were 
excluded due to not having Internet or an email account.  Although there was a study tablet 
available that patients could have used, they further explained that they were not comfortable 
using the Internet.  Once screened and found to be eligible, 100% of these patients agreed to 
participate in the study and were consented.       
 
 
 
 
 
 

53
Figure 1. Recruitment and Retention of Study Participants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
49 patients from VCU Massey Cancer Center (VCU MCC) newly 
diagnosed with cancer and about to begin chemotherapy and/or 
radiation identified at tumor board meetings and Fellows’ clinic 
were approached and introduced to the study by the graduate 
student after obtaining permission from their oncologists. 
 
4 patients contacted the graduate student about participation in the 
study after seeing fliers posted around VCU MCC. 
• 7 patients were 
uninterested. 
• 2 patients 
declined due to 
distress. 
• 1 patient 
deemed 
inappropriate 
by oncologist.  
44 patients were screened for enrollment in the study. 
13 patients were 
found to be 
ineligible    
• 7 patients were 
good 
sleepers/not 
distressed by 
sleep problems. 
• 4 had already 
completed/starte
d treatment. 
• 2 patients did not 
have 
Internet/email  
31 patients who met inclusion criteria were enrolled and randomized 
to CBT-I or TAU. 
16 Randomized to 
CBT-I 
15 Randomized to 
TAU 
1 participant did 
not complete 
baseline measures 
and did not 
respond to 
attempts to 
contact.  
14 participants 
completed baseline 
measures 
1 participant 
did not return 
baseline sleep 
diary and did 
not respond to 
attempts to 
contact. 
 
1 participant 
asked to drop 
out of the study 
due to feeling 
overwhelmed. 
16 participants 
completed baseline 
measures 
14 completed pre-
treatment sleep diary 
14 completed pre-
treatment sleep diary 
14 participants were enrolled in 
SHUTi 
• 11 patients completed all 6 cores 
• 3 patients completed ≤30% of cores   
14 participants 
completed TAU period 
14 participants completed post-
treatment measures including 
post-treatment sleep diary 
12 participants completed post-
treatment measures including 
post-treatment sleep diary 
1 participant 
died. 
 
1 participant 
did not 
respond to 
attempts to 
contact. 

54
Table 4. Reasons for Deciding not to Participate in Study (n=10) 
Reason  
Number of Patients 
Not interested in study 
7 
Feeling stressed about upcoming cancer treatment 
2 
Oncologist deemed patient to be inappropriate 
1 
 
Completion rate.  Overall, 84% of the total number of participants that were randomized 
completed the study and all post-treatment questionnaires.  This corresponds to a 13% attrition 
rate for the SHUTi group (n=3) and a 20% (n=3) attrition rate for the TAU group.  In the SHUTi 
group, one participant completed the baseline questionnaires but failed to complete the baseline 
sleep diary and was subsequently lost to follow-up.  Even though this patient was enrolled in 
SHUTi, only the training module was completed.  Another participant randomized to SHUTi 
asked to drop out of the study before being enrolled in the program.  Among the participants who 
were enrolled in SHUTi, 79% (n=11) completed all the six Cores.  The rest of the participants 
completed at least 30% or two of the Cores.  Reasons participants gave for not completing the 
program are enumerated in Table 5.  In the TAU group, one patient never completed the baseline 
questionnaires or the sleep diary and was lost to follow-up.  Among the participants who 
completed the TAU period, one participant died and thus post-treatment data was not collected.  
Another participant was lost to follow-up.   
 
Table 5. Reasons for not Completing SHUTi (n=3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason  
Number of Patients 
Program does not work well on cell phone 
1 
Sleep improved after initial increase in symptoms at diagnosis 
and beginning of treatment 
1 
Experienced treatment complications and found it difficult to 
continue program 
1 

55
Time to complete study and delays.  The study period was initially planned to last nine 
to ten weeks for each participant.  There would be a one-week pre-treatment period when 
patients would complete their baseline sleep diaries.  The treatment period would last 
approximately six to seven weeks and then the post-treatment sleep diaries would be completed 
during week 9 or week 10.  Instead, the study period lasted approximately four months on 
average and lasted as long as six months for some patients.  However, the study period was 
equivalent between the SHUTi and TAU groups.  Data collection was completed in December 
2015.  
 
There were a number of reasons for these delays.  First, some participants experienced 
delays with beginning treatment.  Approximately 13% of the study participants experienced 
treatment delays that lasted from one to several weeks.  Immediately prior to beginning 
treatment, two participants’ most recent scans showed disease progression and their disease had 
to be upstaged.  Thus, adjustments had to be made to these participants’ treatment plans.  In 
another patient, treatment was delayed to allow for additional time for healing from neo-adjuvant 
surgery.  In the last participant, treatment was delayed due to the participant becoming sick and 
requiring time for recovery.   
 
Once treatment was initiated, there were additional delays due to side effects, infections, 
and participants’ competing demands.  Once participants began chemotherapy and/or radiation 
treatment, 37% of participants experienced some form of delay during the study period.  For two 
of the participants, the onset of the side effects was within the first two treatments, and required 
hospitalization and for one of the participants, the hospitalization was for several weeks.  In one 
participant, the severity of side effects was such that chemotherapy was discontinued 
prematurely; though the patient went on to receive radiation.  This participant required additional 

56
time to recover before resuming SHUTi.  Another participant experienced further disruption in 
sleep due to high dosages of pain medications and decided to resume SHUTi after completing 
the part of the treatment regimen when pain medications were needed, so that a more regular 
sleep schedule could be maintained.  One participant continued to work during treatment, 
making completing SHUTi less of a priority and contributing to delays with completing the 
program.  Another participant, who was undergoing oral chemotherapy, was unresponsive to 
attempts to contact for approximately 1 month.  Thus, the doctoral student was only able to reach 
the participant during a medical appointment.   
Finally, collecting post-treatment was delayed by additional instances of hospitalizations 
and disease progression.  One participant was hospitalized due to treatment-related complications 
and disease progression.  For another participant, scans showed disease progression, which 
necessitated multiple appointments with different providers before it was eventually determined 
that palliative treatment and hospice care would be most appropriate.  Another participant had a 
young child and other work responsibilities that contributed to some delay with completing post-
treatment measures and the post-treatment sleep diary.  
Doctoral student support and impact for SHUTi.  Approximately 91% of the SHUTi 
participants who completed all six Cores did so with the assistance of the doctoral student.  
Among these participants, 60% initially accepted the doctoral student’s assistance.  She met with 
them during at least six treatment or other medical appointments and provided a tablet for them 
to complete the Cores.  The level of assistance varied by participant.  Some participants required 
as little assistance as setting up the Core and answering questions, whereas for one participant, 
the doctoral student completed each Core with the participant.  The remaining 40% of the 
participants initially opted to complete the Cores independently.  However, they experienced 

57
significant delay with completing the program.  Three of the participants experienced delay due 
to disease-related complications and the other patient experienced an increase in distress such 
that attempts to contact were unsuccessful and the doctoral student had to wait for a medical 
appointment for face-to-face contact.  Thus these participants were only able to complete the 
program with the doctoral student calling them weekly and working with them to complete the 
Cores over the telephone.  
Thus, with regard to doctoral student support, participants who completed SHUTi can be 
classified into four different categories: (1) No support (9%); (2) Initially accepted moderate 
support (45%); (3) Initially accepted full support (9%); and (4) Initially refused but accepted full 
support due to unexpected delays (36%).  These groups of participants differed in 
sociodemographic characteristics and in the time required for SHUTi completion.  Participants 
who initially accepted the doctoral student’s (moderate or full) support completed the program 
within ten weeks, while participants who initially chose to work independently took 
approximately four months to complete the program.  As far as sociodemographic differences, 
approximately 67% of the participants who initially opted to complete the program with the 
doctoral student’s assistance were African American.  In other words, all African American 
participants in the SHUTi group initially opted to complete the program with the doctoral 
student’s assistance.  Participants who initially worked with the doctoral student also were more 
likely to be unemployed (33%) or on disability (33%).  In comparison, participants who initially 
opted to work independently were more likely to have part-time (67%) or full-time (33%) 
employment. 
SHUTi acceptability.  Participants’ ratings for the acceptability and utility of SHUTi are 
presented in Figure 2.  Overall, SHUTi participants rated the program as being moderately 

58
4.14 
3.86 
4.79 
3.57 
3.46 
3.93 
3.64 
3.00 
3.07 
2.86 
3.29 
3.21 
3.59 
1.00 
2.00 
3.00 
4.00 
5.00 
How easy was the web program to use? 
How convenient was the web program to use? 
How easy was the information to understand? 
How much did you like the web program? 
How consistent was the program with information 
from your doctors? 
How acceptable was the web program for you? 
How acceptable do you think the program would 
be for patients like you? 
How suitable did  you find the program for 
helping you get to sleep? 
How suitable did you find the program for helping 
you stay asleep? 
How suitable did you find the program for helping 
you with waking up too early? 
How effective do you think this pgoram will be as 
a long-term cure? 
How able were you to follow through with the 
program's recommendations? 
Overall 
acceptable, with an average acceptability rating of 3.6 (1-5 scale).  The highest rated items had to 
do with the program’s ease of use (4.1) and comprehensibility (4.8).  Participants rated the 
program acceptability for themselves and for others like them in the moderate range, 3.9 and 3.6 
respectively.  In contrast, the item that was given the lowest rating (2.9) was the item that asked 
about the program’s suitability for helping with early morning awakenings.  Similarly, items 
regarding the program’s utility for addressing difficulty initiating (3.0) and maintaining sleep  
(3.1) received lower ratings. On average, participants reported moderate adherence to the 
program’s recommendations (3.2).      
 
Figure 2. Acceptance of SHUTi among Participants (n=14) 
 

59
 
SHUTi participants’ comments.  Participants randomized to SHUTi provided 
comments on their experiences with the program.  Among the favorable comments, one 
participant cited the sleep hygiene component as being particularly helpful, “The part I found 
most helpful about the program was the setup for my bedroom to make my room more 
comfortable and relaxing for good sleep.”  Another participant reported that completing the sleep 
diaries had been beneficial for correcting misperceptions about the amount of sleep, “I found it 
most helpful to realize how much I was actually sleeping because it was more than I thought.”  
Two participants mentioned that the doctoral student had been a positive aspect of the program, 
with one reporting, “I don’t know how acceptable or effective the program would have been 
without the counselor.” 
Participants also offered comments unique to the context of individuals with new cancer 
diagnoses navigating active treatment.  One participant spoke about the fit of the program for 
patients, “I think it’s a great program for people with insomnia.  I don’t think it was very helpful 
for people with illness.”  Another participant expressed concerns about the timing of the 
program, “I think within a month of diagnosis, it’s natural to not be sleeping, it’s a matter of 
time.  I think it would be better if we were asked questions about sleep rather than a program.  
The program made it more a problem; it was more stress than needed.  It would have been better 
once things had settled, after a treatment plan was set.”  Lastly, one participant spoke about the 
difficulty of completing the program while experiencing treatment side effects, “The program 
wasn’t convenient to use because I wasn’t feeling good. I didn’t like that I had to access a 
computer because it wasn’t great on my phone.  I would have liked it better on paper or in 
person.  I’m lazy, I like medications.” 

60
The remainder of participants’ comments pertained to difficulties related to SHUTi-
specific features.  Three participants mentioned that it was difficult to try to complete the 
program on their cell phones, which made it inconvenient.  One participated stated, “I didn’t find 
completing the diaries intuitive, there was no default after completing a diary, so I had to change 
it every time I logged in.  And it didn’t work well on my cell phone.”   
Hypothesis 2: Change in Sleep Variables by Group. 
 
A repeated measures MANOVA was performed to examine the second hypothesis that 
SHUTi would improve participants’ sleep at post-treatment when compared to the TAU 
condition.  Due to the assumptions underlying repeated measures MANOVA (Mayers, 2013), the 
data was first checked for any violations, including normality and multicollinearity.  Initially, 
several variables were highly skewed and/or kurtotic (values outside the range of -1.5 to 1.5).  
Transforming several outliers addressed this violation.  To identify outliers, standardized z-
scores for baseline and post-treatment values of the outcome variables were calculated.  This 
method entailed identifying values that corresponded to z-scores greater than 1.96 (p < 0.05) and 
converting them to the next closest value below the cut-off value (i.e., the value that corresponds 
to the highest non-significant z-score) for that variable.  This method is appropriate for 
addressing outliers in small samples because it does not distort the data in order to maintain the 
sample distribution (Tabachnick & Fidel, 2007) and the method has been used previously in 
similar studies (Taylor et al., 2015).  In all, ten total data points were converted.  Baseline data 
points that were converted were ISI (Z = 2.14); SOL (Z = 3.02, Z = 2.43); TST (Z = 2.08); and 
WASO (Z = 3.23).  Post-treatment data points that were converted were SOL (Z = 4.76); TST (Z 
= 2.26); and WASO (Z = 3.51, Z = 2.29, Z = 2.03). 

61
Next, multicollinearity among the outcome variables was examined by running bivariate 
Pearson correlations.  Results showed that SE was highly correlated (r > ± 0.7, p < 0.05) with 
several other variables and Box’s M Test of Equality could not be calculated due to this 
violation.  Thus, SE was removed from the MANOVA and examined independently.  When 
Box’s M Test of Equality was calculated again without SE in the model, the assumption was 
found to be satisfied.  To test the assumption of equality of error variances, Levene’s Test of 
Equality of Error Variances values for the variables were examined.  Results showed that with 
the exception of SOL, all values were nonsignificant (p > 0.05).  However, because the sample 
sizes are equivalent between groups, the effects of this violation are mitigated.  Nevertheless, 
Pillai's Trace will be the test statistic reported because it is robust to violations of the assumption 
of homogeneity of variance/covariance matrices when there are two equivalent groups (Field, 
2009). 
 
 Results of the MANOVA model using TST, ISI, WASO, and SOL as dependent 
variables showed a significant time by group interaction, Pillai’s Trace = 0.337, F(4, 23) = 2.92, 
p < 0.05.  Follow-up repeated measures ANOVAs found a significant time by group interaction 
for ISI, Pillai’s Trace = 0.262, F(1, 26) = 9.25, p < .05; and for WASO, Pillai’s Trace = 0.195, F 
(1, 26) = 6.31, p < .05.  See Figures 3 and 4.  There were no significant time by group 
interactions for TST (p = 0.323) or SOL (p = 0.908). See Figures 5 and 6.   
Before running the repeated measures ANOVA for SE, the assumption of sphericity or 
homogeneity of the variances between groups was verified by calculating Mulchy’s Test of 
Sphericity.  Results showed that all Epsilons were equal to 1, indicating that the assumption was 
met.  When SE was examined independently in a repeated measures ANOVA, there was a trend 

62
toward a significant time by group interaction, Pillai’s Trace = 0.118, F(1, 26) = 3.47, p = 0.074. 
See Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 3. Change in Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) Scores from Baseline to Post-Treatment in 
SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted)  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Change in Wake Time After Sleep Onset (WASO) in Minutes from Baseline to Post-
Treatment in SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted)  
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) Score 
TAU 
SHUTi 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Wake Time After Sleep Onset (WASO) 
in Minutes 
TAU 
SHUTi 

63
Figure 5. Change in Total Sleep Time (TST) in Minutes from Baseline to Post-Treatment in 
SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted)  
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Change in Sleep Onset Latency (SOL) in Minutes from Baseline to Post-Treatment in 
SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted)  
 
 
 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Total Sleep Time (TST) in Minutes 
TAU 
SHUTi 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Sleep Onset Latency (SOL) in Minutes 
TAU 
SHUTi 

64
Figure 7. Change in Sleep Efficiency (SE), % from Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and 
Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted)  
 
 
With regard to effect sizes calculated with Cohen’s d, there was a medium effect size 
observed for ISI (Cohen’s d = 0.60) and for WASO (Cohen’s d = 0.49).  There were small effect 
sizes observed for SE (Cohen’s d = 0.37), and TST (Cohen’s d = 0.20).  See Table 6. 
 
Table 6. Means (Standard Deviation) and Effect Sizes of Sleep-Related Variables in CBT-I and 
TAU Groups at Baseline and Post-Treatment 
 
Baseline M (SD) 
Post-Treatment  
M (SD) 
Effect 
Size 
(d) 
CBT-I     TAU 
CBT-I      TAU 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)* 
14.0 
(4.80) 
13.4 
(7.63) 
6.3 (5.0) 
12.8 
(4.7) 
0.60 
Sleep Onset Latency (SOL) 
50.3 
(33.5) 
77.5 
(75.5) 
36.0 
(31.03) 
65.1 
(67.8) 
0.03 
Wake Time After Sleep Onset 
(WASO)* 
51.8 
(39.9) 
37.8 
(29.2) 
23.3 
(28.4) 
40.4 
(4.0) 
0.49 
Total Sleep Time (TST) 
419.8 
(143.9) 
324.6 
(99.0) 
482.4 
(123.0) 
342.7 
(102.1) 
0.20 
Sleep Efficiency (SE) 
72.8 
(15.8) 
66.4 
(18.9) 
85.1 
(12.1) 
66.8 
(21.9) 
0.37 
*p<0.05 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Sleep Efficiency (SE), % 
TAU 
SHUTi 

65
Hypothesis 3: Change in Depression, Anxiety, and Health-related Quality of Life. 
 
A repeated measures MANOVA was performed to examine the third hypothesis that 
SHUTi would decrease participants’ depression and anxiety while increasing their health-related 
quality of life at post-treatment when compared to the TAU condition.  Due to the assumptions 
underlying repeated measures MANOVA (Mayers, 2013), the data was first checked for any 
violations, including normality and multicollinearity.  Initially, several variables were highly 
skewed and/or kurtotic (values outside the range of -1.5 to 1.5).  Transforming outliers addressed 
this violation.  To identify outliers, standardized z-scores for baseline and post-treatment values 
of the outcome variables were calculated.  This method entailed identifying values that 
corresponded to z-scores greater than 1.96 (p < 0.05) and converting them to the next closest 
value below the cut-off value (i.e., the value that corresponds to the highest non-significant z-
score) for that variable.  This method is appropriate for addressing outliers in small samples 
because it does not distort the data in order to maintain the sample distribution (Tabachnick & 
Fidel, 2007) and the method has been used previously in similar studies (Taylor et al., 2015).  In 
all, five total data points were converted.  Baseline data points that were converted were PHQ-9 
(Z = 2.33) and GAD-7 (Z = 2.40).  Post-treatment data points that were converted were PHQ-9 
(Z = 2.52) and GAD-7 (Z = 2.33, Z = 2.14). 
 
Next, multicollinearity among the outcome variables was examined by running bivariate 
Pearson correlations.  Results showed that FACT-G was highly correlated (r > -0.7, p < 0.05) 
with PHQ-9 and GAD-7 scores.  Thus, FACT-G was removed from the MANOVA and 
examined independently.  To test the assumption, the correlation between the dependent 
variables is equal between the groups, Box’s M Test of Equality was examined.  Results from the 
test were not significant (p > 0.05), indicating that the assumption is satisfied.  To test the 

66
assumption of equality of error variances between the groups, Levene’s Test of Equality of Error 
Variances values for the variables were examined.  Results showed that none of the values were 
significant (p > 0.05).  Thus this assumption was also satisfied.  Nevertheless, Pillai's Trace will 
be the test statistic reported due to its robustness and for uniformity across analyses. 
 
Depression and anxiety.  Results of the MANOVA model using PHQ-9 and GAD-7 as 
dependent variables did not show a significant time by group interaction.  However, there was a 
trend toward significance, Pillai’s Trace = 0.180, F(2, 25) = 2.74, p = 0.084.  Follow-up repeated 
measures ANOVAs found a significant time by group interaction for PHQ-9, Pillai’s Trace = 
0.159, F(1, 26) = 4.93, p < 0.05.  There was no significant time by group interaction for GAD-7 
(p = 0.587).  See Figures 8 and 9.  With regard to effect size, there was a small effect size 
observed for PHQ-9 (Cohen’s d = 0.43).  See Table 7. 
 
Figure 8. Change in Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) from Baseline to Post-Treatment in 
SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted) 
 
 
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 
 (PHQ-9) Score 
TAU 
SHUTi 

67
Figure 9. Change in Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) Scores from Baseline to Post-
Treatment in SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers Adjusted) 
 
 
 
Table 7. Means (Standard Deviation) and Effect Sizes of Depression, Anxiety, and Health-
Related Quality of Life in CBT-I and TAU Groups at Baseline and Post-Treatment 
 
Baseline M (SD) 
 
CBT-I      TAU 
Post-Treatment 
M (SD) 
CBT-I     TAU 
Effect 
Size 
(d) 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9*  
10.9 (4.1) 
9.8 (5.3) 
6.9 (4.5) 
9.1 (5.0) 
0.43 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 
 (GAD-7) 
8.7 (4.0) 
9.0 (6.3) 
6.5 (5.3) 
5.9 (5.2) 
0.11 
Functional Assessment of Cancer 
Therapy-General (FACT-G)  
67.5 
(16.1) 
77.5 
(15.6) 
76.4 
(20.0) 
78.7 
(17.7) 
0.23 
Physical Well-being  
17.8 (6.3) 
20.6 
(5.1) 
18.5 
(6.5) 
18.9 
(5.6) 
0.18 
Emotional Well-being  
15.3 (4.1) 
15.3 
(4.1) 
19.1 
(4.7) 
17.5 
(5.1) 
0.31 
Social/Family Well-being  
21.3 (7.8) 
23.9 
(3.5) 
22.3 
(7.4) 
25.5 
(10.2) 
0.03 
Functional Well-being  
16.5 (7.3) 
12.9 
(6.2) 
16.8 
(7.9) 
15.8 
(7.2) 
0.22 
*p<0.05 
 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 
(GAD-7) Score 
TAU 
SHUTi 

68
Health-related quality of life.  Results from Mulchy’s Test of Sphericity showed that 
assumption of sphericity was satisfied in the model examining FACT-G individually.  When 
FACT-G was examined independently in a repeated measures ANOVA, there was no significant 
time by group interaction, (p = 0.244). See Figure 7.  This corresponded to a small effect size 
(Cohen’s d = 0.21).  
 
Figure 10. Change in Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-General (FACT-G) Scores from 
Baseline to Post-Treatment in SHUTi and Treatment as Usual (TAU) Groups (N=28; Outliers 
Adjusted) 
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
The current study sought to address two complementary aims.  The first aim was to 
examine the feasibility and acceptability of implementing a low-intensity online CBT-I 
intervention, SHUTi, to address insomnia among individuals who had been newly diagnosed 
with cancer and were undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation.  Secondly, the study aimed to 
evaluate the efficacy of SHUTi in improving sleep outcomes and secondarily, in decreasing 
60 
62 
64 
66 
68 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
80 
Baseline 
Post-Treatment 
Functional Assessment of Cancer 
Therapy-General (FACT-G) Score 
TAU 
SHUTi 

69
psychiatric distress while increasing health-related quality of life.  In pursuing these aims, the 
study adds to previous scholarship that has proven CBT-I to be an efficacious, effective, and 
durable treatment that can improve sleep and psychological well-being among cancer survivors.  
The current study is also in line with an emergent, yet promising body of work that shows that 
low-intensity versions of CBT-I such as self-directed treatment modalities, can achieve results 
comparable to standard treatments without the high resource demands (Ritterband et al., 2012; J. 
Savard et al., 2013).  For instance, Savard and colleagues (2014) tested the efficacy of a low-
intensity plus (optional) clinician support video-based CBT-I intervention and a face-to-face 
CBT-I intervention in a sample of 242 breast cancer survivors.  They found that the low-intensity 
treatment resulted in small to large treatment effects on subjective sleep parameters that were 
comparable, though not equivalent to the treatment effects observed in the standard treatment.  
The remission rate in the low-intensity group (44.3%) was smaller than in the standard treatment 
group (71.3%) but still statistically significantly greater than in the control group (25.7%) (J. 
Savard et al., 2013).  Yet, these studies have been plagued by limitations that threaten their 
generalizability.  Published studies have focused on samples that are primarily White, female, 
and well educated (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von Essen, et al., 2009; Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard 
et al., 2013).  Disease sites in these studies have also been homogenous, with breast cancer being 
overrepresented.  Furthermore, previous studies have left the important question about the 
possibility of addressing insomnia during the early and critical period immediately after cancer 
diagnosis and during active treatment, largely unexamined.  A literature search found only one 
study that has tested CBT-I in women newly diagnosed with breast cancer who were undergoing 
chemotherapy (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von Essen, et al., 2009). 

70
 
Based on the current state of the evidence, it was hypothesized that implementing 
SHUTi, a low-intensity online CBT-I intervention, to treat insomnia among individuals who 
were newly diagnosed with cancer and undergoing chemotherapy and/or radiation would be 
feasible and would be found acceptable by participants.  It was further hypothesized that SHUTi 
would improve sleep as well as decrease anxiety and depression while enhancing health-related 
quality of life.  In all, these hypotheses were partially upheld.  First, there was some support for 
the feasibility and acceptability of addressing insomnia among survivors early in the cancer 
trajectory.  Second, there was preliminary evidence that a low-intensity intervention delivered 
online with clinician support can improve sleep and decrease psychological distress. 
Feasibility and Acceptability of SHUTi   
 
Recruitment.  A major success of the current study and a key piece of evidence in 
support of feasibility is the successful recruitment of a diverse group of participants as they were 
navigating a highly stressful part of their disease management.  Overall, 70% of the patients who 
were screened for the study were found to be eligible and of these patients, 100% initially agreed 
to participate in the study and were enrolled.  Among these participants, 91% (n=28) of the 
participants completed all baseline assessments, constituting the final study sample that was 
included in all analyses. 
 
The participation rate in the current study is higher than rates previously observed in 
similar studies.  The only other published study that implemented CBT-I among individuals 
newly diagnosed with cancer as they were undergoing chemotherapy reported a 70% enrollment 
rate (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von Essen, et al., 2009) .  Similarly, another intervention study 
targeting fatigue in newly diagnosed patients undergoing chemotherapy reported a 71% 
enrollment rate (Ream, Richardson, & Alexander-Dann, 2006).  The high rate of participation 

71
observed in the present study is particularly noteworthy given concerns about overwhelming and 
overburdening patients so early in their cancer diagnosis and treatment trajectory.  In fact, this 
was often a concern encountered by the doctoral student when discussing the study with certain 
members of treatment teams.  However, the rates of participation found in the current study as 
well as in the aforementioned intervention studies implemented during active cancer treatment 
have been higher than the rates (47-58%) found in other CBT-I studies that have addressed 
insomnia post-cancer treatment (Epstein & Dirksen, 2007; Fiorentino et al., 2009; Ritterband et 
al., 2012; J. Savard, S. Simard, H. Ivers, et al., 2005).   
There are a number of features specific to the study design that likely contributed to the 
participation rate.  Patients may be more willing to participate in interventions that target side 
effects and other psychological correlates of cancer during treatment because this phase is 
especially stressful and thus they may have greater need for these services.  There is support for 
this hypothesis from a systematic review of studies on the unmet supportive care needs of people 
with cancer that found that levels of unmet needs were highest during treatment.  Yet patients 
often fail to report their sleep difficulties to their oncologists (Engstrom, Strohl, Rose, 
Lewandowski, & Stefanek, 1999).  In the current study 60% of participants had not talked to 
their oncologist about their insomnia. But that does not mean that patients are not seeking 
services and/or help from other sources, whether that is from family members (Engstrom et al., 
1999) or from complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) modalities.  Insomnia has been 
identified as one of the most reasons that cancer survivors use CAM treatments (Mao, Palmer, 
Healy, Desai, & Amsterdam, 2011).  One study found that the greater the unmet need, the more 
likely a cancer survivor was to use a CAM treatment (Mao et al., 2008).  More specifically, 
studies have reported that as many as 87 to 91% of individuals were using one or more 

72
complementary treatments (i.e., in addition to conventional treatment) during active treatment  
(Yates et al., 2005).  The addition of a CAM intervention was usually self-initiated rather than 
being recommended by an oncologist. This suggests that newly diagnosed patients are especially 
interested in adjunctive treatments during chemotherapy or radiation. 
Nevertheless, recruiting newly diagnosed patients who have yet to begin treatment is 
particularly challenging (Balogun et al., 2011).  It is likely that there were qualities about the 
current study that helped overcome some of these challenges.  For one, the study employed a 
low-intensity treatment modality, addressing newly diagnosed patients’ concerns about the 
accessibility and convenience of non-pharmacological interventions for insomnia (Davidson, 
Feldman-Stewart, Brennenstuhl, & Ram, 2007).  It is noted that the two other studies of low-
intensity CBT-I among individuals with cancer reported participation rates ranging from 50-55% 
(Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard, Villa, et al., 2011).  Thus it is likely that it was the timing of 
the current study during treatment when need is high, as well as its low-intensity modality that 
helped boost the participation rate.  The current study was also flexible.  Participants were 
informed that the doctoral student could meet with them during their medical appointments, 
rather than requiring additional meetings.  Participants who experienced delays in their treatment 
were also able to resume participation after their delays.  Cancer survivors have cited flexibility 
as being key to participation in insomnia interventions (Davidson et al., 2007).   
Sample diversity.  In addition to being feasible in terms of the availability and 
willingness of the study population, the racial and ethnic diversity of the current study supports 
the feasibility of studying the efficacy of low-intensity CBT-I among minority cancer survivors.  
Racial and ethnic minorities made up approximately one-third of the current study sample (30% 
African American).  This proportion is greater than has been included in past studies of CBT-I in 

73
cancer, where racial and ethnic minorities, when included, have made up 4 to 18% of the studied 
samples (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von Essen, et al., 2009; Epstein & Dirksen, 2007; Fiorentino et al., 
2009; Ritterband et al., 2012).  The importance and challenge of recruiting minority participants 
to intervention studies is well established (Areán, Alvidrez, Nery, Estes, & Linkins, 2003; D. R. 
Brown, Fouad, Basen-Engquist, & Tortolero-Luna, 2000; Swanson & Ward, 1995; Yancey, 
Ortega, & Kumanyika, 2006).  One factor that likely contributed to the success of recruiting 
African Americans in the current study is the race of the doctoral student.  The doctoral student 
is Black and having her as the face of the study likely facilitated the participation of African 
American patients that were approached.  There is evidence that suggests that race concordance 
between participants and interviewers corresponds to higher participant cooperation rates, 
especially among Black participants (Moorman, Newman, Millikan, Tse, & Sandler, 1999).   
However, race concordance is not sufficient for successful minority recruitment (Areán et 
al., 2003).  It is likely that the other features of the study, namely the availability of a tablet, the 
flexibility, and convenience of the study also contributed to the sample diversity.  As previously 
stated, all African American participants in the SHUTi condition chose to meet with the doctoral 
student and use the tablet to complete cores during their appointments.  The availability of the 
study tablet likely mitigated any barriers that may have been related to Internet access.  In fact, 
one African American participant explained that the Internet access in her home became 
unreliable during the study period.  Additionally, the flexibility and convenience of the study 
(i.e., no additional meetings) as previously described, likely contributed to a higher participation 
rate.  In sum, providing participants with a tablet for use during their appointments and allowing 
them flexibility likely contributed to an overall higher rate of participation in the current study, 

74
however, these factors (i.e., economic barriers, treatment schedule) have been shown to be more 
likely to influence minority participation in cancer studies (Giuliano et al., 2000).   
Doctoral student support.  When it comes to the study feasibility, the support of the 
doctoral student cannot be overstated.  As one participant described, “I don’t know how 
acceptable or effective the program would have been without the counselor.”  Of note, this is not 
the first study to employ clinician support as an adjunct to a self-help CBT-I intervention in 
individuals with cancer (J. Savard et al., 2013).  However, in the previous study, very few of the 
participants accessed clinician support.  Thus this is one of the first self-help CBT-I studies in 
individuals with cancer to report on how participants used clinician support.  One of the most 
telling findings from the current student is that among SHUTi completers, when compared to 
participants who initially chose to complete SHUTi on their own (n=5), participants who initially 
accepted the doctoral student’s support (n=6) completed the program faster (10 weeks vs. 16 
weeks).  Moreover, a significant minority of participants randomized to SHUTi (27%; n=4) 
likely only completed SHUTi after much delay because of having the doctoral student’s support 
to assist in completing each core.  This finding suggests that having the doctoral student’s 
support had a considerable impact on the completion rate as well as the time to complete.  
Meeting with patients at their weekly or biweekly medical appointments made it much less likely 
that patients would forget to complete a core, thereby cutting down on delays.  It may also have 
served to maintain participants’ commitment to the program as meeting with the doctoral student 
was a frequent reminder that the study was ongoing. 
Also worth discussing is how participants who initially accepted the doctoral support 
differed from the rest of the SHUTi group.  These participants were more likely to be African 
American and to be from a lower socioeconomic class.  Recruitment and retention of African 

75
Americans and individuals from lower socioeconomic status is critical to ensuring the 
generalizability of observed treatment effects.  Past studies have found that participation and 
retention rates tend to be lower among Black participants and those from lower socioeconomic 
classes (Murthy, Krumholz, & Gross, 2004).  Yet the current study shows that when provided 
with the option of additional support, these participants may be more likely to access this support 
and with this additional support, they can demonstrate similar if not better participation and 
retention rates than other participants.  Having the support of the doctoral student, who is Black, 
may have been especially effective at facilitating minority participation because it enhanced the 
qualities of research studies most likely to encourage participation among black and poor 
research participants—convenience of program location and timing, as well as the enthusiasm 
and trustworthiness of study staff (Gross, Julion, & Fogg, 2001). 
Acceptability.  An important indicator of a study’s feasibility is its reception among its 
intended target population.  Findings from the current study suggest that in general, participants 
found SHUTi to be an acceptable intervention for addressing their sleep difficulties.  Put another 
way, 79% found the program to be mostly or very acceptable for themselves and 64% believed 
that it would be mostly or very acceptable for others like them.  These findings suggest that 
despite some participants concerns about having a sleep intervention while they were in the early 
stages of cancer treatment, most participants had a positive response and felt the program would 
be helpful to others like themselves. 
Other findings regarding the program’s utility and effectiveness can be compared to 
findings from the only other study to examine the acceptability of SHUTi in a sample of 
individuals with insomnia (Thorndike et al., 2008).  In the previous study, 100% of participants 
reported that SHUTi was mostly or very easy and convenient to use.  Nearly all participants 

76
(95%) indicated that the program was mostly or very understandable.  The current study found 
somewhat similar results.  Most participants (79%) found SHUTi easy and convenient to use.  
All participants indicated that the program was mostly or very easy to understand.  On other 
hand, there were some discrepancies between the past and current findings.  Whereas Thorndike 
and colleagues (2008) reported that 90% of their sample found SHUTi to be consistent with what 
they heard from their doctors, only 46% of participants in the current study found the program to 
be consistent. Similarly, 81% of the sample from the previous study rated the program as being 
mostly or very effective as a long-term cure, while 62% stated that they were mostly or very able 
to follow through with treatment recommendations.  In contrast, only 36% of participants in the 
current study felt the program would be effective and only 36% reported being adherent.  The 
discrepancy in how consistent SHUTi is with providers’ recommendations may be partly 
explained by the inconsistency between oncologists’ encouragement that patients rest during 
treatment and instructions from stimulus control to only go to bed when sleepy.  Such 
inconsistencies may also help explain why so few patients felt they were able to adhere to the 
program’s recommendation.  One participant’s comment that it did not seem like SHUTi was 
especially relevant for individuals who are medically compromised, lends further support to this 
argument.  Participants may have been less adherent because they felt less capable of doing so 
because of physical limitations.  Lastly participants may have been less confident in SHUTi as an 
effective long-term cure also because they were sick while undergoing the program.  Most 
participants (86%) reported that their cancer diagnosis had adversely affected their sleep, thus 
they may have felt that only the successful treatment of their disease would effectively address 
their sleep problems.  It is important to note that even though less than one-half of participants 
reported being adherent to the program and only a little over one-third indicated that the program 

77
would be an effective long-term cure, SHUTi was proven to be efficacious at improving sleep 
and psychological distress among participants. 
 
SHUTi Treatment Effects on Self-Reported Sleep 
 
The baseline sleep parameters in the current study were somewhat comparable to those 
reported in a recent meta-analysis of 8 randomized controlled trials of CBT-I efficacy in cancer 
survivors (Johnson et al., 2016).  The mean SE for participants randomized to SHUTi in the 
current study was 72.8% compared to 74.9% in previous studies.  The mean WASO in the 
current study was 51.8 minutes compared to 61.5 minutes and the mean SOL in the current study 
was 50.3 minutes compared to 41.3 minutes in previous studies.   
It is noteworthy that there was a small difference in mean ISI scores, 14.0 in the current 
study compared to 17.1 in previous studies.  Given the similarities in other sleep parameters, this 
difference suggests that even though participants in the current study were reporting sleep 
parameters consistent with insomnia, they were not as distressed about these symptoms as has 
been observed in previous studies.  This difference may be due to the fact that whereas most of 
the participants in previous studies have been months and years past their cancer diagnosis and 
treatment (Epstein & Dirksen, 2007; Ritterband et al., 2012), participants in the current study 
were on average within the first two months of their cancer diagnosis.  One theoretical 
framework that has been advanced to understand how the co-occurrence of psychiatric and 
physical conditions influences the treatment of psychiatric symptoms is the “crowd-out effect” 
(Lê Cook, McGuire, Alegría, & Normand, 2011).  This framework postulates that when patients 
experience both physical and psychiatric conditions concurrently, they may be more likely to 
focus on the physical condition as being more critical.  This tendency to prioritize physical 
conditions over psychiatric symptoms may be even more pronounced in this sample given the 

78
proximity of the cancer diagnosis.  It is important to note that even though participants in the 
current study reported less insomnia-related distress than has been found in previous studies, 
their level of distress is nevertheless above the cut-off score (10) determined to differentiate 
between non-clinical and clinically significant sleep difficulties (Morin, Belleville, Bélanger, & 
Ivers, 2011). 
Findings from the current study showed that when compared to participants who received 
TAU, participants who completed at least 30% of SHUTi (79% had 100% completion rate) 
showed significant improvement on a global measure of insomnia and on several specific sleep 
parameters.  On the ISI, considered by many to be the most reliable single measure of sleep 
(Smith & Wegener, 2003) , there was a 55% decrease in the mean ISI score from 14.0 to 6.3 in 
the SHUTi group, compared to a 5% decrease from 13.4 to 12.8 in the TAU group.  Research 
suggests that an ISI reduction of > 7 indicates moderate improvement while a reduction of > 8 
indicates marked improvement (Morin et al., 2011).   There was complete remission in the 
SHUTi group, as the mean ISI score was reduced from the clinical range to the non-clinical 
range while the mean for the TAU group remained in the clinical range.  With regard to WASO, 
there was a similar 55% decrease in the SHUTi group (51.8 to 23.3 minutes) compared to a 7% 
increase in the TAU group.  There was a marginally significant treatment effect found for SE.  
There was a 12-percentage point increase in the SHUTi group compared to a 0.4-percentage 
increase in the TAU group.  The mean SE for the SHUTi group achieved the normal range cut-
off of 85%.   
Although there were larger improvements in SOL and TST in the SHUTi group than in 
the TAU group, there were no significant time by group interactions.  There was a 28% decrease 
in the mean SOL in the SHUTi group (50.3 to 36 minutes) compared to a 16% decrease in the 

79
TAU group (77.5 to 65.1 minutes).  Nevertheless, the mean SOL for both the SHUTi and the 
TAU groups were above the generally accepted clinical cut-off of 30 minutes.  The lack of a 
significant time by group interaction for SOL suggests that the improvement in SE is due to the 
decrease in WASO rather than the decrease in SOL.  The mean TST for the SHUTi group 
increased by 63 minutes compared to an 18-point increase in the TAU group.  Thus the lack of 
significant findings for these variables may have been due to limited power due to the small 
sample size even though this sample size is consistent with previous power analysis calculations 
(Ritterband et al., 2012).   
To contextualize the current findings in the literature, there are a number of different 
comparisons.  First, these findings can be compared to the broader literature on the effects of 
CBT-I among cancer survivors as reported in a recent meta-analysis (Johnson et al., 2016).  
However, this comparison is limited by the fact that all of these studies have been with cancer 
survivors rather than with individuals with new diagnoses who are undergoing treatment.  To 
address this shortcoming, the present findings can be compared to the only other published study 
of CBT-I on patients with new diagnoses undergoing chemotherapy (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von 
Essen, et al., 2009). While this is not a perfect comparison, the study’s use of a hybrid face-to-
face and self-help model is similar to the current study’s use of clinician support as an adjunct to 
online treatment.  Third, the current findings can also be compared to a previous test of SHUTi 
in a group of cancer survivors (Ritterband et al., 2012). 
Although overall similar, the effect sizes from the current study are smaller than have 
been reported in the larger literature on CBT-I in cancer (Johnson et al., 2016) and more 
comparable to findings reported in the previous trial of SHUT (Ritterband et al., 2012).  For 
example, there were large effect sizes reported for ISI (1.74), WASO (0.98), and SE (0.99) in the 

80
meta-analysis compared to moderate effect sizes for ISI (0.60) and WASO (0.49) and a small 
effect size for SE in the current study.  In the previous SHUTi trial, the effect size for ISI was 
large (1.85) while the effect size for SE (0.72) was medium to large and was small for WASO 
(0.22).  This is not unexpected, as all but one of the studies included in the meta-analysis are of 
standard, face-to-face CBT-I while SHUTi is a low-intensity version.  The smaller effect sizes 
observed in the current study for ISI and SE when compared to the previous SHUTi trial may be 
partially explained by the fact that the current sample was more medically compromised.  Post-
treatment data for the current study was collected on average, 4 months after cancer diagnosis.  A 
longitudinal study of the course of insomnia in cancer showed that among individuals with 
insomnia syndrome at diagnosis, there is a 92% persistence rate at 6 months after diagnosis 
compared to only a 38% 18 months after diagnosis (J. Savard, Ivers, et al., 2011).  Previous 
intervention trials have also found variations in treatment effects by time since diagnosis and 
treatment status at time of intervention.  Specifically, one study found that whereas an exercise 
intervention significantly improved sleep quality among participants who had indolent cancer, 
there were no treatment effects in participants with active disease (Courneya et al., 2012).  While 
not focused on sleep-related outcomes, a meta-analysis of exercise interventions among 
predominantly breast cancer samples found that there were larger treatment effects on patient-
reported outcomes during the post-oncology treatment phase than during treatment (Schmitz et 
al., 2005; Speck, Courneya, Mâsse, Duval, & Schmitz, 2010).  Thus the current study provides 
support for the efficacy of CBT-I during the early stages of cancer diagnosis and treatment, while 
also demonstrating that given the acuity of distress (Carlson et al., 2004; Hanson Frost et al., 
2000) during this period, treatment effects may be blunted.  

81
Notably, the one exception was WASO, where the current study found a medium effect 
size whereas the previous SHUTi trial found a small effect size (Ritterband et al., 2012).  In fact, 
there was no significant group by time effect in the previous trial.  In the current study, this was 
the only sleep parameter wherein there was a slight worsening in the TAU group at post-
treatment.  The current findings also differ from results described in the only other study of 
CBT-I during active treatment (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von Essen, et al., 2009).  In the previous 
study, the authors failed to find a significant group by time effect as found in the current study.  
However, they did find that only participants in the treatment group and not in the control group 
experienced a significant decrease in WASO. The current findings indicate that WASO may be a 
particularly relevant indicator of poor sleep during the early stages of cancer diagnosis and 
treatment.  This assertion is supported by similar findings that without intervention, WASO 
increased during chemotherapy and only decreased after chemotherapy.  Thus CBT-I is more 
likely to have an effect on WASO during this phase of the cancer trajectory.  It is generally 
argued that differences in how insomnia symptoms are manifested (difficulties in initiating vs. 
maintaining sleep) are negligible due to the instability of these symptom differences (Hohagen et 
al., 1994) and consequently these differences are not given much consideration when it comes to 
designing interventions for treatment trials.  Yet studies have consistently showed that there are 
variations in how CBT-I affects different sleep parameters.  Past research indicates that while 
stimulus control and sleep restriction are the most effective components of CBT-I (Kyle et al., 
2015; Morgenthaler et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2002), cognitive restructuring (i.e., changing 
unhelpful thoughts about sleep) and cognitive control (i.e., addressing thoughts, worries early in 
the evening) are especially helpful for consolidating sleep (Edinger et al., 2001b).  There is also 
evidence that cognitive arousal is associated with more nighttime awakenings and greater sleep 

82
fragmentation (Rasskazova, Zavalko, Tkhostov, & Dorohov, 2014).  Thus the significance of 
WASO during cancer treatment and the larger effect of SHUTi on WASO in the current study in 
comparison to the previous SHUTi trial implicates the particular relevance of thoughts in this 
sample.  There is evidence that supports the notion that cancer-related worry thoughts are 
especially salient soon after diagnosis and during treatment (Antoni et al., 2009). 
In contrast, there were no significant treatment effects for SOL and TST.  The findings 
regarding TST are in line with findings from the previous SHUTi trial (Ritterband et al., 2012).  
They are also similar to previous trials that have failed to find treatment effects to TST despite 
improvements in other sleep parameters (Espie et al., 2008; J. Savard et al., 2013).  A possible 
explanation is that CBT-I initially aims to improve sleep efficiency by narrowing participants 
sleep window to consolidate sleep.  Expanding the sleep window, which is more likely to have 
an impact on TST occurs later in treatment.  Thus the current intervention may not have allowed 
a long enough study period to detect changes in TST (Espie et al., 2008).  Unlike TST, SOL has 
typically been shown to be responsive to CBT-I (Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard et al., 2013).  
The null results in the current study along with the fact SOL was the only sleep parameter that 
remained in the clinical range in both the SHUTi and TAU group, may have to do with the 
prevalence of cancer-related physical symptoms.  Physical symptoms including pain, which are a 
major precipitating factor for insomnia in cancer (Theobald, 2004), have been shown to 
specifically contribute to difficulty initiating sleep (Mercadante, Girelli, & Casuccio, 2004).  
Given that pain and other physical symptoms are more prevalent during treatment than after 
treatment (Van den Beuken-van Everdingen et al., 2007), it may explain why this sleep 
parameter was refractory to treatment in the current study.  Furthermore, there is evidence that 
only face-to-face behavioral treatments for insomnia, as opposed to those delivered over the 

83
Internet or over the telephone, improve sleep in patients with cancer or non-cancer pain (Tang et 
al., 2015). 
SHUTi Treatment Effects on Depression and Anxiety Symptoms  
 
Findings showed that SHUTi was associated with a significant and medium sized 
improvement in depressive symptoms.  At baseline, participants in the SHUTi and TAU groups 
reported moderate depressive symptoms.  Post-treatment, the SHUTi group exhibited a 4-point 
decrease in PHQ-9 scores, signifying a decrease in depressive symptoms from the moderate to 
mild range.  In contrast, PHQ-9 scores in the TAU group were largely unchanged (-0.7 
decrease), the mean score for the group is at the upper limit of the mild range and close to the 
recommended cut-off score (10) suggested for clinical attention (Morin et al., 2011).  Post-
treatment, only two participants in the SHUTi group (14.3%) reported a score that was above the 
clinical cut-off, compared to 4 or 28.6% in the TAU group.  Previous trials of CBT-I in cancer 
have reported mixed findings with regard to treatment effects for depression.  Some studies have 
failed to find a treatment effect (Matthews et al., 2012; Ritterband et al., 2012).  Among the 
studies that have found a treatment effect for depression, the effect size has been in the medium 
range (Espie et al., 2007; J. Savard et al., 2013), while the effect size in low-intensity modalities 
have been more similar to the current results and have been in the small range (J. Savard et al., 
2013).  Ritterband et al (2012) found that while SHUTi did not have a significant effect on 
depressive symptoms, there was a medium treatment effect size.   
 
There was no treatment effect for anxiety.  There was a significant time effect that was 
similar across the two groups, such that there was a 2-point decrease in the mean GAD-7 score 
for the SHUTi group compared to a 3-point decrease in the TAU group.  At post-treatment, both 
groups were reporting mild anxiety symptoms.  This type of discrepancy in the treatment effects 

84
of CBT-I on psychological symptoms is uncommon in the literature.  For the most part, studies 
have found that the presence or absence of treatment effects has been similar for depression and 
anxiety.  For example, Espie and colleagues (2007) found that group CBT-I was associated with 
a medium sized treatment effect for depression and anxiety, while Ritterband et al. (2014) found 
that SHUTi did not significantly improve depressive or anxiety symptoms.  There is only one 
other study that found that whereas face-to-face CBT-I had a significant effect on depression and 
anxiety, video-based CBT-I significantly improved depression but not anxiety (J. Savard et al., 
2013).  An argument could be made that this difference is related to the intensity of the 
intervention, such that standard CBT-I may be more effective in addressing anxiety than 
depression.  However, the fact that several standard CBT-I trials have failed to find treatment 
effects for anxiety and findings from the previous SHUTi trial also showed that there was no 
significant treatment effect on anxiety suggests that there may be another explanation.  Instead, it 
seems more plausible that there may be a difference in the nature of depression versus anxiety 
that makes the former more responsive to CBT-I.  In the current study, anxiety scores decreased 
for all participants, while depression only decreased in the SHUTi group.  This idea is 
substantiated by findings from a recent meta-analysis of non-pharmacological sleep treatments in 
chronic pain that while treatment conferred benefits for depression post-treatment and at follow-
up, there was no treatment benefit for anxiety (Tang et al., 2015).  Similarly, another meta-
analysis found a significant medium effect size for CBT-I on depression while the effect for 
anxiety outcomes was small and non-significant, suggesting that CBT-I is more effective for 
depression than for anxiety (Belleville, Cousineau, Levrier, & St-Pierre-Delorme, 2011; 
Sánchez-Ortuño & Edinger, 2012).  Given the timing of the current study and its proximity to 
participants’ diagnosis and treatment, patients’ anxiety was likely more related to cancer, and 

85
thus more responsive to the natural course of decreasing worry as patients adjust to their 
diagnoses and treatment.   
SHUTi Treatment Effects on Health-related Quality of Life 
 
At baseline, the mean FACT-G total score was 72.2.  This score is lower than has been 
reported in normative data for a heterogeneous oncology sample (80.9) (Brucker, Yost, Cashy, 
Webster, & Cella, 2005) and in a previous study of CBT-I in cancer (80.1) (Espie et al., 2008), 
indicating worse health-related quality of life for the current sample.  There were substantial 
differences between the mean component scores for the current study and normative data 
reported for individuals with cancer, such that for emotional and functioning well-being, the 
differences were clinically meaningful.  These differences are consistent with the current sample 
being sicker.    
There was no treatment effect observed for overall health-related quality of life or its 
components.  There was no significant time effect, unlike in the case of sleep-related outcomes 
and psychological symptoms, suggesting that FACT-G total scores did not change from baseline 
to post-treatment.  There was a 5-point increase in the mean total score for the entire sample, 
while there was a 9-point increase in the SHUTi group compared to a 1-point increase in the 
TAU group.  It is likely that this difference may not have reached statistical significance due to 
the small sample size, especially since the increase in the SHUTi group was clinically 
meaningful.  However, it is also possible that there is no treatment effect.  A previous study of 
face-to-face CBT-I found medium to large effects for health-related quality of life.  On the other 
hand, the previous SHUTi trial failed to find treatment effects for quality of life, but a video-
based self-directed trial found a small positive effect.  The current sample was sicker than has 
been studied previously and on the whole, reported worsening physical well-being at post-

86
treatment.  It is possible that improvements in certain components of the FACT-G (i.e., 
emotional well-being) were canceled out by worsening physical well-being.  Despite a slight and 
clinically non-significant increase in the mean physical well-being score for the SHUTi group 
(+0.7), the mean scores for both groups were substantially lower than the mean reported for a 
normative sample, 18.5 in SHUTi and 18.9 in TAU compared to 22.7 and for a sample with 
cancer, 21.3.  The mean total FACT-G scores also remained lower than reported in normative 
data.  Thus even at post-treatment, the sample continued to feel burdened by their disease, which 
makes sense since many were still engaged in active treatment.   
Limitations 
 
The current findings must be interpreted in the context of several limitations.  First, the 
sample size was small and may have limited the ability to detect some treatment effects.  This 
was particularly relevant when it came to outcomes like the TST and health-related quality of life 
wherein the mean scores for the SHUTi group differed considerably from the TAU group, yet 
there was no significant time by group interaction found.  The current sample size was based on 
power calculations reported in previous studies.  Moreover, the sample size in the current study 
is comparable to sample sizes that have been used in similar studies in the past (Fiorentino et al., 
2009; Ritterband et al., 2012).  However, the consistent time effects observed across most of the 
outcomes in the current study is consistent with past evidence that during this early phase of the 
cancer trajectory, there are substantial changes in patients’ sleep and psychological well-being 
(Bárez, Blasco, Fernández-Castro, & Viladrich, 2009; J. Savard, Ivers, et al., 2011; Schroevers, 
Ranchor, & Sanderman, 2006).  Thus, a larger sample size may be required to detect time by 
group interactions.  However, this also makes the observed treatment effects that much more 
credible. 

87
 
Another limitation of the current study is the use of only self-reported sleep parameters.  
The observed effects on sleep may have been even more convincing if they had been further 
substantiated by treatment effects on objective sleep measures.  The inclusion of subjective and 
objective sleep measures is especially important given past mixed findings about differences in 
CBT-I effects by type of sleep measure (Lund, Rybarczyk, Perrin, Leszczyszyn, & Stepanski, 
2013).  However, this was a small pilot study and adding objective sleep measures was not 
feasible.  Additionally, there are other studies in this area that have only used self-reported sleep 
measures (Matthews et al., 2014; Ritterband et al., 2012).     
 
A third study limitation is the lack of a follow-up data to assess the durability of 
treatment effects.  Studies that have evaluated study outcomes at follow-up have found that there 
are important changes in outcomes that contribute important information about treatment effects.  
Whereas some studies have found that some treatment effects diminish over time (Taylor et al., 
2015), others have found that for some outcomes, the treatment effects are actually enhanced at 
follow-up (Espie et al., 2008; J. Savard, S. Simard, H. Ivers, et al., 2005).  Thus follow-up data in 
the current study may have helped shed light on whether treatment effects would emerge or 
increase at follow-up when participants are likely done with their cancer treatment and thus may 
be more able to adhere to SHUTi recommendations.  Yet this is not the first study in this area to 
exclude follow-up data (Epstein & Dirksen, 2007; Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard et al., 2013). 
 
On a related note, the poor health status of some of the study participants likely 
contributed to the study delays and may have dampened some treatment effects.  The study 
aimed to evaluate SHUTi during active cancer treatment, so it was expected that participants 
would be sick.  However, 18% of the current sample had stage IV malignancies.  These patients 
were not diagnosed with widely metastatic disease and thus were planned to undergo curative 

88
treatment, making them eligible for the current study.  This is not the first study of its kind to 
include participants with stage IV disease (Ritterband et al., 2012).  But given that this study was 
during treatment, it is likely that stage IV disease was more impactful.  The inclusion of these 
patients contributes further to the generalizability of the current findings. 
 
A final limitation is that the doctoral student was responsible for randomization, data 
collection and implementing the intervention.  Thus, blinding the experimenter was impossible, 
which may have contributed to demand effects (Orne, 1962).  However, this threat to validity is 
mitigated by the fact that the intervention was a standardized program delivered online.  Even 
though the doctoral student provided some support to all but one of the participants in the 
treatment condition, the core intervention was standardized. 
Strengths  
 
This study has several strengths.  A major strength of the current study is the diversity of 
the sample, which enhances the external validity of findings.  In recruiting a study sample that is 
diverse in race, socioeconomic status and type of malignancy, the current study addresses a 
significant gap in the literature.  Previous samples have been primarily White, well-educated 
women with breast cancer.  For example, this is one of the first studies to include patients with 
head and neck cancer.  The current study suggests that online CBT-I can also be effective in 
other types of cancers as well as among Black individuals and those from lower socioeconomic 
strata.  
 
Another strength of the present study is the inclusion of clinician support.  There is 
previous support that low-intensity CBT-I interventions can be enhanced with the addition of 
clinician support (Ho et al., 2014; Jernelöv et al., 2012).  However, previous trials that have 
included clinician support have found that participants have not taken advantage of this option (J. 

89
Savard, Villa, et al., 2011).  Evaluating clinician support was more feasible in the current study 
because the doctoral student was able to monitor participants’ progress through SHUTi and there 
were multiple opportunities to offer support during participants’ medical appointments.  In the 
current study Black participants and those from lower socioeconomic status appeared to be more 
likely to initially accept the doctoral student’s support.  While it was not possible to test these 
hypotheses, it does suggest research questions for future inquiry.  Also, flexibly offering 
clinician support rather than using randomization or having participants select an option at the 
beginning of treatment, more closely approximates how treatment would naturally unfold in a 
non-research clinical context. 
Implications 
Findings from the current study have implications for scholarship and clinical practice.  
Related to one of its primary aims, the first implication from the current study is about 
feasibility.  Overall, the current findings support the feasibility of implementing a low-intensity 
CBT-I intervention to improve sleep among individuals newly diagnosed with cancer and 
undergoing active treatment.  Future research should consider the following caveats.  First, given 
that participants tend to be sicker during treatment, future studies should build in additional time 
to account for illness-related delays.  There should also be flexibility to allow participants to 
continue the study if there are delays and building research activities around medical 
appointments substantially decreases the burden on participants, thus encouraging participation.  
On a related note, having a study tablet that allows participants to complete study activities 
during their medical appointments also facilitates participation.  This also serves to increase 
participation by minority and low-income individuals.  To that end, the current study adds to 
accumulated evidence that when minority and low income individuals are recruited and the 

90
barriers to their participation minimized, they are just as likely if not more likely than other 
groups to participate in research studies (Wendler et al., 2005).   
The treatment effects on self-reported sleep parameters and psychological functioning 
have significance for addressing insomnia during cancer treatment.  Namely, low-intensity CBT-
I can have a meaningful impact on sleep and depression even during this particularly stressful 
phase of the cancer care trajectory.  Wake time after sleep onset may be especially responsive to 
treatment during this time, perhaps because intrusive thoughts are at a peak during this period.  
Yet, anxiety is less responsive to CBT-I likely because patients’ anxiety is more closely tied to 
their disease.  Health-related quality of life may be similarly unaffected by low-intensity CB-I.  
These findings suggest that during cancer treatment, other outcomes may be more suitable for 
capturing the secondary effects of CBT-I.  One possibility is fatigue.  Fatigue has been examined 
as a secondary outcome in multiple CBT-I trials among individuals with cancer (Espie et al., 
2008; Ritterband et al., 2012; J. Savard, S. Simard, H. Ivers, et al., 2005).  Fatigue was also 
included in the previous evaluation of CBT-I during cancer treatment (Berger, Kuhn, Farr, Von 
Essen, et al., 2009).  The current findings also highlight the importance of assessing multiple 
sleep parameters and not relying solely on global measures of insomnia.  During the period 
immediately after diagnosis when they are about to embark on treatment, patients may 
underreport the distress related to their sleep difficulties because they may be more inclined to 
attend to their physical illness.  

91
References 
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders: DSM-IV-TR: American Psychiatric Pub. 
Ancoli-Israel, S., Liu, L., Marler, M. R., Parker, B. A., Jones, V., Sadler, G. R., . . . Fiorentino, 
L. (2006). Fatigue, sleep, and circadian rhythms prior to chemotherapy for breast cancer. 
Supportive Care in Cancer, 14(3), 201-209.  
Anderson, K. O., Getto, C. J., Mendoza, T. R., Palmer, S. N., Wang, X. S., Reyes-Gibby, C. C., 
& Cleeland, C. S. (2003). Fatigue and sleep disturbance in patients with cancer, patients 
with clinical depression, and community-dwelling adults. Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management, 25(4), 307-318.  
Antoni, M. H., Lechner, S., Diaz, A., Vargas, S., Holley, H., Phillips, K., . . . Blomberg, B. 
(2009). Cognitive behavioral stress management effects on psychosocial and 
physiological adaptation in women undergoing treatment for breast cancer. Brain, 
Behavior, and Immunity, 23(5), 580-591.  
Areán, P. A., Alvidrez, J., Nery, R., Estes, C., & Linkins, K. (2003). Recruitment and retention 
of older minorities in mental health services research. The Gerontologist, 43(1), 36-44.  
Balachandran, D., Faiz, S., Bashoura, L., & Manzullo, E. (2013). Cancer-related fatigue and 
sleep disorders. Sleep Medicine Clinics.  
Balogun, N., Gentry-Maharaj, A., Wozniak, E. L., Lim, A., Ryan, A., Ramus, S. J., . . . Gessler, 
S. F. (2011). Recruitment of newly diagnosed ovarian cancer patients proved challenging 
in a multicentre biobanking study. Journal of clinical epidemiology, 64(5), 525-530.  
Bardwell, W. A., Profant, J., Casden, D. R., Dimsdale, J. E., Ancoli-Israel, S., Natarajan, L., . . . 
Pierce, J. P. (2008). The relative importance of specific risk factors for insomnia in 
women treated for early-stage breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 17(1), 9-18.  
Bárez, M., Blasco, T., Fernández-Castro, J., & Viladrich, C. (2009). Perceived control and 
psychological distress in women with breast cancer: a longitudinal study. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 32(2), 187-196.  
Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index 
as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2(4), 297-307.  
Beck, S. L., Berger, A. M., Barsevick, A. M., Wong, B., Stewart, K. A., & Dudley, W. N. 
(2010). Sleep quality after initial chemotherapy for breast cancer. Supportive Care in 
Cancer, 18(6), 679-689.  
Beck, S. L., Dudley, W. N., & Barsevick, A. (2005). Pain, sleep disturbance, and fatigue in 
patients with cancer: Using a mediation model to test a symptom cluster. Paper presented 
at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Belleville, G., Cousineau, H., Levrier, K., & St-Pierre-Delorme, M.-È. (2011). Meta-analytic 
review of the impact of cognitive-behavior therapy for insomnia on concomitant anxiety. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 31(4), 638-652.  
Berger, A. M. (1997). Patterns of fatigue and activity and rest during adjuvant breast cancer 
chemotherapy. Paper presented at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Berger, A. M., Abernethy, A. P., Atkinson, A., Barsevick, A. M., Breitbart, W. S., Cella, D., . . . 
Escalante, C. P. (2010). Cancer-related fatigue. Journal of the National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network, 8(8), 904-931.  
Berger, A. M., & Farr, L. (1999). The influence of daytime inactivity and nighttime restlessness 
on cancer-related fatigue. Paper presented at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 

92
Berger, A. M., Farr, L. A., Kuhn, B. R., Fischer, P., & Agrawal, S. (2007). Values of sleep/wake, 
activity/rest, circadian rhythms, and fatigue prior to adjuvant breast cancer chemotherapy. 
Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 33(4), 398-409.  
Berger, A. M., & Higginbotham, P. (2000). Correlates of fatigue during and following adjuvant 
breast cancer chemotherapy: a pilot study. Paper presented at the Oncology Nursing 
Forum. 
Berger, A. M., Kuhn, B. R., Farr, L. A., Lynch, J. C., Agrawal, S., Chamberlain, J., & Von 
Essen, S. G. (2009). Behavioral therapy intervention trial to improve sleep quality and 
cancer-related fatigue. Psycho-Oncology, 18(6), 634-646.  
Berger, A. M., Kuhn, B. R., Farr, L. A., Von Essen, S. G., Chamberlain, J., Lynch, J. C., & 
Agrawal, S. (2009). One-year outcomes of a behavioral therapy intervention trial on sleep 
quality and cancer-related fatigue. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 27(35), 6033-6040.  
Berger, A. M., VonEssen, S., Kuhn, B. R., Piper, B. F., Farr, L., Agrawal, S., . . . Higginbotham, 
P. (2003). Adherence, sleep, and fatigue outcomes after adjuvant breast cancer 
chemotherapy: Results of a feasibility intervention study. Oncology Nursing Forum, 30, 
513-522.  
Bootzin, R. R. (1973). Stimulus control treatment for insomnia. Paper presented at the APA 80th 
Annual Convention, Honolulu, HI, September 2-8, 1972. 
Bootzin, R. R., Epstein, D., & Wood, J. M. (1991). Stimulus control instructions Case Studies in 
Insomnia (pp. 19-28): Springer. 
Brown, D. R., Fouad, M. N., Basen-Engquist, K., & Tortolero-Luna, G. (2000). Recruitment and 
retention of minority women in cancer screening, prevention, and treatment trials. Annals 
of epidemiology, 10(8), S13-S21.  
Brown, L. F., Kroenke, K., Theobald, D. E., Wu, J., & Tu, W. (2010). The association of 
depression and anxiety with health-related quality of life in cancer patients with 
depression and/or pain. Psycho-Oncology, 19(7), 734-741.  
Brucker, P. S., Yost, K., Cashy, J., Webster, K., & Cella, D. (2005). General population and 
cancer patient norms for the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-General (FACT-
G). Evaluation & the Health Professions, 28(2), 192-211.  
Buick, D. L., Petrie, K. J., Booth, R., Probert, J., Benjamin, C., & Harvey, V. (2000). Emotional 
and functional impact of radiotherapy and chemotherapy on patients with primary breast 
cancer. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 18(1), 39-62.  
Buysse, D. J., Germain, A., Moul, D. E., Franzen, P. L., Brar, L. K., Fletcher, M. E., . . . 
Reynolds, C. F. (2011). Efficacy of brief behavioral treatment for chronic insomnia in 
older adults. Archives of internal medicine, 171(10), 887-895.  
Carlson, L., Angen, M., Cullum, J., Goodey, E., Koopmans, J., Lamont, L., . . . Robinson, J. 
(2004). High levels of untreated distress and fatigue in cancer patients. British Journal of 
Cancer, 90(12), 2297-2304.  
Carpenter, J. S., Elam, J. L., Ridner, S. H., Carney, P. H., Cherry, G. J., & Cucullu, H. L. (2004). 
Sleep, fatigue, and depressive symptoms in breast cancer survivors and matched healthy 
women experiencing hot flashes. Paper presented at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Casault, L., Savard, J., Ivers, H., Savard, M., & Simard, S. (2012). Utilization of hypnotic 
medication in the context of cancer: Predictors and frequency of use. Supportive Care in 
Cancer, 20(6), 1203-1210.  

93
Cella, D. F., Tulsky, D. S., Gray, G., Sarafian, B., Linn, E., Bonomi, A., . . . Brannon, J. (1993). 
The Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy scale: Development and validation of the 
general measure. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 11(3), 570-579.  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). National Program of Cancer Registries: 
1999-2010 Incidence, WONDER On-line Database  Retrieved November 11, 2013, from 
http://wonder.cdc.gov/cancernpcr.html 
Chen, M., & Tseng, H. (2006). Symptom clusters in cancer patients. Supportive Care in Cancer, 
14(8), 825-830.  
Cheng, K. K., & Lee, D. T. (2011). Effects of pain, fatigue, insomnia, and mood disturbance on 
functional status and quality of life of elderly patients with cancer. Critical Reviews in 
Oncology/Hematology, 78(2), 127-137.  
Cheng, S. K., & Dizon, J. (2012). Computerised cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 81(4), 206-
216.  
Costantini, C., Ale-Ali, A., & Helsten, T. (2011). Sleep aid prescribing practices during 
neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Journal of Palliative Medicine, 
14(5), 563-566.  
Courneya, K. S., Sellar, C. M., Trinh, L., Forbes, C. C., Stevinson, C., McNeely, M. L., . . . 
Reiman, T. (2012). A randomized trial of aerobic exercise and sleep quality in lymphoma 
patients receiving chemotherapy or no treatments. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & 
Prevention, 21(6), 887-894.  
Currie, S. R., Clark, S., Hodgins, D. C., & El‐Guebaly, N. (2004). Randomized controlled trial 
of brief cognitive–behavioural interventions for insomnia in recovering alcoholics. 
Addiction, 99(9), 1121-1132.  
Dashevsky, B. A., & Kramer, M. (1998). Behavioral treatment of chronic insomnia in 
psychiatrically ill patients. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.  
Davidson, J. R., Feldman-Stewart, D., Brennenstuhl, S., & Ram, S. (2007). How to provide 
insomnia interventions to people with cancer: insights from patients. Psycho-Oncology, 
16(11), 1028-1038.  
Davidson, J. R., MacLean, A. W., Brundage, M. D., & Schulze, K. (2002). Sleep disturbance in 
cancer patients. Social Science & Medicine, 54(9), 1309-1321.  
Davidson, J. R., Waisberg, J. L., Brundage, M. D., & MacLean, A. W. (2001). 
Nonpharmacologic group treatment of insomnia: A preliminary study with cancer 
survivors. Psycho‚ÄêOncology, 10(5), 389-397.  
Degner, L. F., & Sloan, J. A. (1995). Symptom distress in newly diagnosed ambulatory cancer 
patients and as a predictor of survival in lung cancer. Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management, 10(6), 423-431.  
Dixon, S., Morgan, K., Mathers, N., Thompson, J., & Tomeny, M. (2006). Impact of cognitive 
behavior therapy on health-related quality of life among adult hypnotic users with chronic 
insomnia. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 4(2), 71-84.  
Donovan, K. A., & Jacobsen, P. B. (2007). Fatigue, depression, and insomnia: evidence for a 
symptom cluster in cancer. Paper presented at the Seminars in Oncology Nursing. 
Edinger, J. D., Bonnet, M. H., Bootzin, R. R., Doghramji, K., Dorsey, C. M., Espie, C. A., . . . 
Stepanski, E. J. (2004). Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: Report of 
an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Sleep, 27(8), 1567-1596.  

94
Edinger, J. D., Hoelscher, T. J., Marsh, G. R., Lipper, S., & Ionescu-Pioggia, M. (1992). A 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep-maintenance insomnia in older adults. Psychology 
and Aging, 7(2), 282.  
Edinger, J. D., & Means, M. K. (2005). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for primary insomnia. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 25(5), 539-558.  
Edinger, J. D., & Sampson, W. S. (2003). A primary care "friendly" cognitive behavioral 
insomnia therapy. Sleep, 26(2), 177-184.  
Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W., Radtke, R., Marsh, G., & Quillian, R. (2001a). Cognitive 
behavioral therapy for treatment of chronic primary insomnia: A randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association.  
Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G. R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001b). 
Does cognitive-behavioral insomnia therapy alter dysfunctional beliefs about sleep? 
Sleep: Journal of Sleep and Sleep Disorders Research.  
Engstrom, C. A., Strohl, R. A., Rose, L., Lewandowski, L., & Stefanek, M. E. (1999). Sleep 
alterations in cancer patients. Cancer Nursing, 22(2), 143-148.  
Epstein, D. R., & Dirksen, S. R. (2007). Randomized trial of a cognitive-behavioral intervention 
for insomnia in breast cancer survivors. Paper presented at the Oncology nursing forum. 
Espie, C. A., Fleming, L., Cassidy, J., Samuel, L., Taylor, L. M., White, C. A., . . . Paul, J. 
(2008). Randomized controlled clinical effectiveness trial of cognitive behavior therapy 
compared with treatment as usual for persistent insomnia in patients with cancer. Journal 
of Clinical Oncology, 26(28), 4651-4658.  
Espie, C. A., Inglis, S., Tessier, S., & Harvey, L. (2001). The clinical effectiveness of cognitive 
behaviour therapy for chronic insomnia: Implementation and evaluation of a sleep clinic 
in general medical practice. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39(1), 45-60.  
Espie, C. A., Inglis, S. J., & Harvey, L. (2001). Predicting clinically significant response to 
cognitive behavior therapy for chronic insomnia in general medical practice: Analyses of 
outcome data at 12 months posttreatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 69(1), 58-66.  
Espie, C. A., MacMahon, K., & Kelly, H. (2007). Randomized clinical effectiveness trial of 
nurse-administered small-group cognitive behavior therapy for persistent insomnia in 
general practice. Sleep, 30(5), 574-584.  
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical 
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior 
Research Methods, 39, 175-191.  
Fernandes, R., Stone, P., Andrews, P., Morgan, R., & Sharma, S. (2006). Comparison between 
fatigue, sleep disturbance, and circadian rhythm in cancer inpatients and healthy 
volunteers: evaluation of diagnostic criteria for cancer-related fatigue. Journal of Pain 
and Symptom Management, 32(3), 245-254.  
Field, A. (2009). Discovering statistics using SPSS: Sage publications. 
Fiorentino, L., & Ancoli-Israel, S. (2006). Insomnia and its treatment in women with breast 
cancer. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 10(6), 419-429.  
Fiorentino, L., & Ancoli-Israel, S. (2014). Sleep disturbances in cancer survivors. In S. Redline 
& N. A. Berger (Eds.), Impact of Sleep and Sleep Disturbances on Obesity and Cancer. 
New York: Springer. 

95
Fiorentino, L., McQuaid, J. R., Liu, L., Natarajan, L., He, F., Cornejo, M., . . . Ancoli-Israel, S. 
(2009). Individual cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in breast cancer survivors: 
A randomized controlled crossover pilot study. Nature and Science of Sleep, 2010, 1.  
Fleming, L., & Davidson, J. R. (2012). Sleep and medical disorders. In C. M. Morin & C. A. 
Espie (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Sleep and Sleep Disorders. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Fox, S., & Duggan, M. (2013). Health online 2013  Retrieved March 30, , 2014, from 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx 
Garland, S. N., Carlson, L. E., Stephens, A. J., Antle, M. C., Samuels, C., & Campbell, T. S. 
(2014). Mindfulness-based stress reduction compared with cognitive behavioral therapy 
for the treatment of insomnia comorbid with cancer: a randomized, partially blinded, 
noninferiority trial. Journal of Clinical Oncology, JCO. 2012.2047. 7265.  
Garrett, K., Dhruva, A., Koetters, T., West, C., Paul, S. M., Dunn, L. B., . . . Lee, K. (2011). 
Differences in sleep disturbance and fatigue between patients with breast and prostate 
cancer at the initiation of radiation therapy. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 
42(2), 239-250.  
Germain, A., Moul, D., Franzen, P., Miewald, J., Reynolds 3rd, C., Monk, T., & Buysse, D. 
(2006). Effects of a brief behavioral treatment for late-life insomnia: Preliminary 
findings. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 2(4), 403-406.  
Giuliano, A. R., Mokuau, N., Hughes, C., Tortolero-Luna, G., Risendal, B., Ho, R. C., . . . 
Mccaskill-Stevens, W. J. (2000). Participation of minorities in cancer research: the 
influence of structural, cultural, and linguistic factors. Annals of epidemiology, 10(8), 
S22-S34.  
Glasgow, R. E., & Emmons, K. M. (2007). How can we increase translation of research into 
practice? Types of evidence needed. Annual Review of Public Health, 28, 413-433.  
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. (1999). Evaluating the public health impact of 
health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM framework. American Journal of Public 
Health, 89(9), 1322-1327.  
Glass, J., Lanctot, K. L., Herrmann, N., Sproule, B. A., & Busto, U. E. (2005). Sedative 
hypnotics in older people with insomnia: Meta-analysis of risks and benefits. BMJ, 
331(7526), 1169.  
Gooneratne, N. S., Dean, G. E., Rogers, A. E., Nkwuo, J. E., Coyne, J. C., & Kaiser, L. R. 
(2007). Sleep and quality of life in long-term lung cancer survivors. Lung Cancer, 58(3), 
403-410.  
Graci, G. (2005). Pathogenesis and management of cancer-related insomnia. The Journal of 
Supportive Oncology, 3(5), 349-359.  
Grond, S., Zech, D., Diefenbach, C., & Bischoff, A. (1994). Prevalence and pattern of symptoms 
in patients with cancer pain: a prospective evaluation of 1635 cancer patients referred to a 
pain clinic. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 9(6), 372-382.  
Gross, D., Julion, W., & Fogg, L. (2001). What Motivates Participation and Dropout Among 
Low‐Income Urban Families of Color in a Prevention Intervention?*. Family Relations, 
50(3), 246-254.  
Hanson Frost, M., Suman, V. J., Rummans, T. A., Dose, A. M., Taylor, M., Novotny, P., . . . 
Evans, R. E. (2000). Physical, psychological and social well‐being of women with 
breast cancer: the influence of disease phase. Psycho‐Oncology, 9(3), 221-231.  

96
Ho, F. Y.-Y., Chung, K.-F., Yeung, W.-F., Ng, T. H.-Y., & Cheng, S. K.-W. (2014). Weekly 
brief phone support in self-help cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia disorder: 
Relevance to adherence and efficacy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 63, 147-156.  
Hoffman, A. J., Given, B. A., von Eye, A., Gift, A. G., & Given, C. W. (2007). Relationships 
among pain, fatigue, insomnia, and gender in persons with lung cancer. Paper presented 
at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Hofman, M., Ryan, J. L., Figueroa-Moseley, C. D., Jean-Pierre, P., & Morrow, G. R. (2007). 
Cancer-related fatigue: The scale of the problem. The Oncologist, 12(Supplement 1), 4-
10.  
Hohagen, F., Kappler, C., Schramm, E., Riemann, D., Weyerer, S., & Berger, M. (1994). Sleep 
onset insomnia, sleep maintaining insomnia and insomnia with early morning awakening-
-temporal stability of subtypes in a longitudinal study on general practice attenders. 
SLEEP-NEW YORK-, 17, 551-551.  
Holbrook, A. M., Crowther, R. e., Lotter, A., Cheng, C., & King, D. (2000). Meta-analysis of 
benzodiazepine use in the treatment of insomnia. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
162(2), 225-233.  
Irwin, M. R., Cole, J. C., & Nicassio, P. M. (2006). Comparative meta-analysis of behavioral 
interventions for insomnia and their efficacy in middle-aged adults and in older adults 
55+ years of age. Health Psychology, 25(1), 3.  
Jacobs, G. D., Pace-Schott, E. F., Stickgold, R., & Otto, M. W. (2004). Cognitive behavior 
therapy and pharmacotherapy for insomnia: A randomized controlled trial and direct 
comparison. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164(17), 1888.  
Jacobsen, P. B., Roth, A. J., & Holland, J. C. (1998). Surgery. In J. C. Holland (Ed.), Psycho-
Oncology (pp. 257-268). New York: Oxford University PRess. 
Jernelöv, S., Lekander, M., Blom, K., Rydh, S., Ljótsson, B., Axelsson, J., & Kaldo, V. (2012). 
Efficacy of a behavioral self-help treatment with or without therapist guidance for co-
morbid and primary insomnia-a randomized controlled trial. BMC psychiatry, 12(1), 1.  
Johnson, J. A., Rash, J. A., Campbell, T. S., Savard, J., Gehrman, P. R., Perlis, M., . . . Garland, 
S. N. (2016). A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of 
cognitive behavior therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) in cancer survivors. Sleep medicine 
reviews, 27, 20-28.  
Kaldo, V., Jernelöv, S., Blom, K., Ljótsson, B., Brodin, M., Jörgensen, M., . . . Lindefors, N. 
(2015). Guided internet cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia compared to a control 
treatment–a randomized trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 71, 90-100.  
Kazdin, A. (2003). Research Design in Clinical Psychology. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Kirkbride, P., Bezjak, A., Pater, J., Zee, B., Palmer, M., Wong, R., . . . Sun, A. (2000). 
Dexamethasone for the prophylaxis of radiation-induced emesis: a National Cancer 
Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group phase III study. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
18(9), 1960-1966.  
Klesges, L. M., Estabrooks, P. A., Dzewaltowski, D. A., Bull, S. S., & Glasgow, R. E. (2005). 
Beginning with the application in mind: Designing and planning health behavior change 
interventions to enhance dissemination. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 29(2), 66-75.  
Kozachik, S. L., & Bandeen-Roche, K. (2008). Predictors of patterns of pain, fatigue and 
insomnia during the first year following a cancer diagnosis in the elderly. Cancer 
nursing, 31(5), 334.  

97
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The Phq-9. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 16(9), 606-613.  
Kroenke, K., Theobald, D., Norton, K., Sanders, R., Schlundt, S., McCalley, S., . . . Carpenter, J. 
S. (2009). The Indiana Cancer Pain and Depression (INCPAD) trial: Design of a telecare 
management intervention for cancer-related symptoms and baseline characteristics of 
study participants. General Hospital Psychiatry, 31(3), 240-253.  
Kuo, H.-H., Chiu, M.-J., Liao, W.-C., & Hwang, S.-L. (2006). Quality of sleep and related 
factors during chemotherapy in patients with stage I/II breast cancer. Journal of the 
Formosan Medical Association, 105(1), 64-69.  
Kyle, S. D., Aquino, M. R. J., Miller, C. B., Henry, A. L., Crawford, M. R., Espie, C. A., & 
Spielman, A. J. (2015). Towards standardisation and improved understanding of sleep 
restriction therapy for insomnia disorder: A systematic examination of CBT-I trial 
content. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 23, 83-88.  
Lê Cook, B., McGuire, T. G., Alegría, M., & Normand, S. L. (2011). Crowd‐out and Exposure 
Effects of Physical Comorbidities on Mental Health Care Use: Implications for Racial–
Ethnic Disparities in Access. Health services research, 46(4), 1259-1280.  
Leach, L. S., Christensen, H., Mackinnon, A. J., Windsor, T. D., & Butterworth, P. (2008). 
Gender differences in depression and anxiety across the adult lifespan: the role of 
psychosocial mediators. Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 43(12), 983-
998.  
Leger, D., & Bayon, V. (2010). Societal costs of insomnia. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 14(6), 379-
389.  
Levin, R. D., Daehler, M., Grutsch, J., Quiton, J., Lis, C., Peterson, C., . . . Huff-Adams, S. 
(2005). Circadian function in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. British 
Journal of Cancer, 93(11), 1202-1208.  
Lowe, B., Decker, O., Muller, S., Bruhler, E., Schellberg, D., Herzog, W., & Herzberg, P. Y. 
(2008). Validation and standardization of the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Screener 
(GAD-7) in the general population. Medical Care, 46(3), 266-274.  
Lund, H., Rybarczyk, B., Perrin, P., Leszczyszyn, D., & Stepanski, E. (2013). The discrepancy 
between subjective and objective measures of sleep in older adults receiving CBT for 
comorbid insomnia. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69(10), 1108-1120.  
Mack, L. J., & Rybarczyk, B. D. (2011). Behavioral treatment of insomnia: A proposal for a 
stepped-care approach to promote public health. Nature and Science of Sleep, 3, 87.  
Mao, J. J., Palmer, C. S., Healy, K. E., Desai, K., & Amsterdam, J. (2011). Complementary and 
alternative medicine use among cancer survivors: A population-based study. Journal of 
Cancer Survivorship, 5(1), 8-17.  
Mao, J. J., Palmer, S. C., Straton, J. B., Cronholm, P. F., Keddem, S., Knott, K., . . . Barg, F. K. 
(2008). Cancer survivors with unmet needs were more likely to use complementary and 
alternative medicine. Journal of Cancer Survivorship, 2(2), 116-124.  
Matthews, E. E., Berger, A. M., Schmiege, S. J., Cook, P. F., McCarthy, M. S., Moore, C. M., & 
Aloia, M. S. (2014). Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia outcomes in women after 
primary breast cancer treatment: a randomized, controlled trial. Paper presented at the 
Oncology nursing forum. 
Matthews, E. E., Schmiege, S. J., Cook, P. F., Berger, A. M., & Aloia, M. S. (2012). Adherence 
to cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTI) among women following primary 
breast cancer treatment: a pilot study. Behavioral sleep medicine, 10(3), 217-229.  

98
Mayers, A. (2013). Introduction to statistics and SPSS in psychology: Pearson. 
Mercadante, S., Girelli, D., & Casuccio, A. (2004). Sleep disorders in advanced cancer patients: 
prevalence and factors associated. Supportive Care in Cancer, 12(5), 355-359.  
Miaskowski, C., Lee, K., Dunn, L., Dodd, M., Aouizerat, B. E., West, C., . . . Swift, P. (2011). 
Sleep-Wake Circadian Activity Rhythm Parameters and Fatigue in Oncology Patients 
Prior to the Initiation of Radiation Therapy. Cancer nursing, 34(4), 255.  
Mimeault, V., & Morin, C. M. (1999). Self-help treatment for insomnia: Bibliotherapy with and 
without professional guidance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67(4), 
511.  
Moore, T. A., Berger, A. M., & Dizona, P. (2011). Sleep aid use during and following breast 
cancer adjuvant chemotherapy. Psycho-Oncology, 20(3), 321-325.  
Moorman, P., Newman, B., Millikan, R., Tse, C.-K., & Sandler, D. (1999). Participation rates in 
a case-control study: The impact of age, race, and race of interviewer. Annals of 
epidemiology, 9(3), 188-195.  
Morgan, K., Dixon, S., Mathers, N., Thompson, J., & Tomeny, M. (2003). Psychological 
treatment for insomnia in the management of long-term hypnotic drug use: A pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of General Practice, 53(497), 923–928.  
Morgenthaler, T., Kramer, M., Alessi, C., Friedman, L., Boehlecke, B., Brown, T., . . . Owens, J. 
(2006). Practice parameters for the psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: 
an update. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report. SLEEP, 29(11), 1415.  
Morin, C. M. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the treatment of insomnia. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 65(Suppl 16), 33-40.  
Morin, C. M., Bastien, C., Guay, B., Radouco-Thomas, M., Leblanc, J., & Vallieres, A. (2004). 
Randomized clinical trial of supervised tapering and cognitive behavior therapy to 
facilitate benzodiazepine discontinuation in older adults with chronic insomnia. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 161(2), 332-342.  
Morin, C. M., Belleville, G., Bélanger, L., & Ivers, H. (2011). The Insomnia Severity Index: 
Psychometric indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep, 
34(5), 601-608.  
Morin, C. M., Blais, F., & Savard, J. (2002). Are changes in beliefs and attitudes about sleep 
related to sleep improvements in the treatment of insomnia? Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 40(7), 741-752.  
Morin, C. M., Colecchi, C., Stone, J., Sood, R., & Brink, D. (1999). Behavioral and 
pharmacological therapies for late-life insomnia: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA: 
Journal of the American Medical Association.  
Morin, C. M., Colecchi, C. A., Ling, W. D., & Sood, R. K. (1995). Cognitive behavior therapy to 
facilitate benzodiazepine discontinuation among hypnotic-dependent patients with 
insomnia. Behavior Therapy, 26(4), 733-745.  
Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, S. M. (1994). Nonpharmacological interventions for 
insomnia: A meta-analysis of treatment efficacy. The American Journal of Psychiatry.  
Morin, C. M., & Espie, C. A. (2003). Insomnia: A clinician's guide to assessment and treatment: 
Springer. 
Morin, C. M., Hauri, P. J., Espie, C. A., Spielman, A. J., Buysse, D. J., & Bootzin, R. R. (1999). 
Nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine review. Sleep, 22(8), 1134-1156.  

99
Morin, C. M., & Jarrin, D. C. (2013). Epidemiology of insomnia: Prevalence, course, risk 
factors, and public health burden. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 8(3), 281-297.  
Morin, C. M., Kowatch, R. A., Barry, T., & Walton, E. (1993). Cognitive-behavior therapy for 
late-life insomnia. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 61(1), 137.  
Morin, C. M., Stone, J., McDonald, K., & Jones, S. (1994). Psychological management of 
insomnia: A clinical replication series with 100 patients. Behavior Therapy.  
Murthy, V. H., Krumholz, H. M., & Gross, C. P. (2004). Participation in cancer clinical trials: 
race-, sex-, and age-based disparities. Jama, 291(22), 2720-2726.  
National Cancer Institute. (2013, December 4, 2013). PDQ Sleep Disorders  Retrieved February 
23, 2014, from 
http://cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/supportivecare/sleepdisorders/HealthProfessional 
National Institutes of Health. (2005). National Institutes of Health State of the Science 
Conference statement on Manifestations and Management of Chronic Insomnia in 
Adults, June 13-15, 2005. Sleep, 28(9), 1049-1057.  
O'Donnell, J. F. (2004). Insomnia in cancer patients. Clinical Cornerstone, 6(1), S6-S14.  
Okajima, I., Komada, Y., & Inoue, Y. (2011). A meta-analysis on the treatment effectiveness of 
cognitive behavioral therapy for primary insomnia. Sleep and Biological Rhythms, 9(1), 
24-34.  
Orne, M. T. (1962). On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: With particular 
reference to demand characteristics and their implications. American Psychologist, 
17(11), 776.  
Paltiel, O., Marzec-Boguslawska, A., Soskolne, V., Massalha, S., Avitzour, M., Pfeffer, R., . . . 
Peretz, T. (2004). Use of tranquilizers and sleeping pills among cancer patients is 
associated with a poorer quality of life. Quality of Life Research, 13(10), 1699-1706.  
Parker, K. P., Bliwise, D. L., Ribeiro, M., Jain, S. R., Vena, C. I., Kohles-Baker, M. K., . . . 
Harris, W. B. (2008). Sleep/wake patterns of individuals with advanced cancer measured 
by ambulatory polysomnography. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 26(15), 2464-2472.  
Pati, A. K., Parganiha, A., Kar, A., Soni, R., Roy, S., & Choudhary, V. (2007). Alterations of the 
characteristics of the circadian rest-activity rhythm of cancer in-patients. Chronobiology 
international, 24(6), 1179-1197.  
Payne, J. K., Piper, B. F., Rabinowitz, I., & Zimmerman, M. B. (2006). Biomarkers, fatigue, 
sleep, and depressive symptoms in women with breast cancer: A pilot study. Paper 
presented at the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Perlis, M., Aloia, M., Millikan, A., Boehmler, J., Smith, M., Greenblatt, D., & Giles, D. (2000). 
Behavioral treatment of insomnia: A clinical case series study. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine, 23(2), 149-161.  
Perlis, M., Sharpe, M., Smith, M. T., Greenblatt, D., & Giles, D. (2001). Behavioral treatment of 
insomnia: Treatment outcome and the relevance of medical and psychiatric morbidity. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 24(3), 281-296.  
Pew Internet and American Life Project. (2011). Demographics of internet users  Retrieved 
March 29, , 2014, from http://pewinternet.org/Static-Pages/Trend-Data-(Adults)/Whos-
Online.aspx 
Phillips, K. M., Jim, H. S., Donovan, K. A., Pinder-Schenck, M. C., & Jacobsen, P. B. (2012). 
Characteristics and correlates of sleep disturbances in cancer patients. Supportive Care in 
Cancer, 20(2), 357-365.  

100
Post-White, J. (2002). Clinical indication for use of imagery in oncology practice. In D. M. 
Edwards (Ed.), Voice Massage, Scripts for Guided Imagery (pp. 319). Pittsburgh, PA: 
Oncology Nursing Society. 
Quesnel, C., Savard, J., Simard, S., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M. (2003). Efficacy of cognitive-
behavioral therapy for insomnia in women treated for nonmetastic breast cancer. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71(1), 189.  
Rasskazova, E., Zavalko, I., Tkhostov, A., & Dorohov, V. (2014). High intention to fall asleep 
causes sleep fragmentation. Journal of sleep research, 23(3), 297-303.  
Ream, E., Richardson, A., & Alexander-Dann, C. (2006). Supportive intervention for fatigue in 
patients undergoing chemotherapy: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management, 31(2), 148-161.  
Redeker, N. S., Lev, E. L., & Ruggiero, J. (2000). Insomnia, fatigue, anxiety, depression, and 
quality of life of cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Research and Theory for 
Nursing Practice, 14(4), 275-290.  
Rissling, M. B., Liu, L., Natarajan, L., He, F., & Ancoli-Israel, S. (2011). Relationship of 
menopausal status and climacteric symptoms to sleep in women undergoing 
chemotherapy. Supportive Care in Cancer, 19(8), 1107-1115.  
Ritterband, L. M., Bailey, E. T., Thorndike, F. P., Lord, H. R., Farrell-Carnahan, L., & Baum, L. 
D. (2012). Initial evaluation of an Internet intervention to improve the sleep of cancer 
survivors with insomnia. Psycho-Oncology, 21(7), 695-705.  
Rogers, L. Q., Hopkins-Price, P., Vicari, S., Markwell, S., Pamenter, R., Courneya, K. S., . . . 
Jones, L. (2009). Physical activity and health outcomes three months after completing a 
physical activity behavior change intervention: Persistent and delayed effects. Cancer 
Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, 18(5), 1410-1418.  
Roscoe, J. A., Kaufman, M. E., Matteson-Rusby, S. E., Palesh, O. G., Ryan, J. L., Kohli, S., . . . 
Morrow, G. R. (2007). Cancer-related fatigue and sleep disorders. The Oncologist, 
12(Supplement 1), 35-42.  
Roth, T. (2001). New developments for treating sleep disorders. The Journal of clinical 
psychiatry, 62, 3.  
Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Schelble, K., & Stepanski, E. (2005). Home-based video CBT for 
comorbid geriatric insomnia: a pilot study using secondary data analyses. Behavioral 
sleep medicine, 3(3), 158-175.  
Rybarczyk, B., Lund, H. G., Mack, L., & Stepanski, E. (2009). Comorbid insomnia. Sleep 
Medicine Clinics, 4(4), 571-582.  
Rybarczyk, B., Mack, L., Harris, J. H., & Stepanski, E. (2011). Testing two types of self-help 
CBT-I for insomnia in older adults with arthritis or coronary artery disease. 
Rehabilitation Psychology, 56(4), 257.  
Rybarczyk, B., Stepanski, E., Fogg, L., Lopez, M., Barry, P., & Davis, A. (2005). A placebo-
controlled test of cognitive-behavioral therapy for comorbid insomnia in older adults. 
Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 73(6), 1164.  
Sánchez-Ortuño, M. M., & Edinger, J. D. (2012). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for the 
management of insomnia comorbid with mental disorders. Current psychiatry reports, 
14(5), 519-528.  
Sarna, L. (1993). Correlates of symptom distress in women with lung cancer. Cancer Practice, 
1(1), 21.  

101
Savard, J., Ivers, H., Savard, M.-H., & Morin, C. M. (2013). Is a video-based cognitive 
behavioral therapy for insomnia as efficacious as a professionally administered treatment 
in breast cancer? Results of a randomized controlled trial. Sleep, 37(8), 1305-1314.  
Savard, J., Ivers, H., Villa, J., Caplette-Gingras, A., & Morin, C. M. (2011). Natural course of 
insomnia comorbid with cancer: An 18-month longitudinal study. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, 29(26), 3580-3586.  
Savard, J., Liu, L., Natarajan, L., Rissling, M. B., Neikrug, A. B., He, F., . . . Sadler, G. R. 
(2009). Breast cancer patients have progressively impaired sleep-wake activity rhythms 
during chemotherapy. Sleep, 32(9), 1155.  
Savard, J., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Insomnia in the context of cancer: A review of a neglected 
problem. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 19(3), 895-908.  
Savard, J., & Savard, M. (2013). Insomnia and cancer: Prevalence, nature, and 
nonpharmacologic treatment. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 8(3), 373-387.  
Savard, J., Simard, S., Blanchet, J., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Prevalence, clinical 
characteristics, and risk factors for insomnia in the context of breast cancer. Sleep, 24(5), 
583.  
Savard, J., Simard, S., Hervouet, S., Ivers, H., Lacombe, L., & Fradet, Y. (2005). Insomnia in 
men treated with radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 14(2), 147-
156.  
Savard, J., Simard, S., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M. (2005). Randomized study on the efficacy of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia secondary to breast cancer, part I: Sleep and 
psychological effects. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 23(25), 6083-6096.  
Savard, J., Villa, J., Ivers, H., Simard, S., & Morin, C. M. (2009). Prevalence, natural course, and 
risk factors of insomnia comorbid with cancer over a 2-month period. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, 27(31), 5233-5239.  
Savard, J., Villa, J., Simard, S. b., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M. (2011). Feasibility of a self-help 
treatment for insomnia comorbid with cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 20(9), 1013-1019.  
Savard, M., Savard, J., Simard, S. b., & Ivers, H. (2005). Empirical validation of the Insomnia 
Severity Index in cancer patients. Psycho-Oncology, 14(6), 429-441.  
Schmitz, K. H., Holtzman, J., Courneya, K. S., Mâsse, L. C., Duval, S., & Kane, R. (2005). 
Controlled physical activity trials in cancer survivors: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, 14(7), 1588-1595.  
Schroevers, M., Ranchor, A. V., & Sanderman, R. (2006). Adjustment to cancer in the 8 years 
following diagnosis: A longitudinal study comparing cancer survivors with healthy 
individuals. Social Science & Medicine, 63(3), 598-610.  
Segal, R. J., Reid, R. D., Courneya, K. S., Sigal, R. J., Kenny, G. P., Prud'Homme, D. G., . . . 
D'Angelo, M. E. S. (2009). Randomized controlled trial of resistance or aerobic exercise 
in men receiving radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
27(3), 344-351.  
Sharma, N., Hansen, C. H., O'Connor, M., Thekkumpurath, P., Walker, J., Kleiboer, A., . . . 
Sharpe, M. (2012). Sleep problems in cancer patients: Prevalence and association with 
distress and pain. Psycho-Oncology, 21(9), 1003-1009.  
Sheely, L. C. (1996). Sleep disturbances in hospitalized patients with cancer. Paper presented at 
the Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Simeit, R., Deck, R., & Conta-Marx, B. (2004). Sleep management training for cancer patients 
with insomnia. Supportive Care in Cancer, 12(3), 176-183.  

102
Smith, M. T., & Haythornthwaite, J. A. (2004). How do sleep disturbance and chronic pain inter-
relate? Insights from the longitudinal and cognitive-behavioral clinical trials literature. 
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 8(2), 119-132.  
Smith, M. T., Huang, M. I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive behavior therapy for chronic 
insomnia occurring within the context of medical and psychiatric disorders. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 25(5), 559-592.  
Smith, M. T., Perlis, M. L., Park, A., Smith, M. S., Pennington, J., Giles, D. E., & Buysse, D. J. 
(2002). Comparative meta-analysis of pharmacotherapy and behavior therapy for 
persistent insomnia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(1), 5-11.  
Smith, M. T., & Wegener, S. T. (2003). Measures of sleep: The Insomnia Severity Index, 
Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) sleep scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Diary (PSD), and 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Arthritis Care & Research, 49(S5), S184-S196.  
Speck, R. M., Courneya, K. S., Mâsse, L. C., Duval, S., & Schmitz, K. H. (2010). An update of 
controlled physical activity trials in cancer survivors: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of Cancer Survivorship, 4(2), 87-100.  
Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A behavioral perspective on insomnia 
treatment. Psychiatric Clinics of North America.  
Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B., & Lowe, B. (2006). A brief measure for assessing 
generalized anxiety disorder: The GAD-7. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166(10), 1092-
1097.  
Stepanski, E. J., Walker, M. S., Schwartzberg, L. S., Blakely, L. J., Ong, J. C., & Houts, A. C. 
(2009). The relation of trouble sleeping, depressed mood, pain, and fatigue in patients 
with cancer. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 5(2), 132.  
Strong, V., Waters, R., Hibberd, C., Murray, G., Wall, L., Walker, J., . . . Sharpe, M. (2008). 
Management of depression for people with cancer (SMaRT oncology 1): A randomised 
trial. The Lancet, 372(9632), 40-48.  
Swanson, G. M., & Ward, A. J. (1995). Recruiting minorities into clinical trials toward a 
participant-friendly system. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 87(23), 1747-1759.  
Swarm, R. A., Abernethy, A. P., Anghelescu, D. L., Benedetti, C., Buga, S., Cleeland, C., . . . 
Janjan, N. A. (2013). Adult cancer pain. Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network, 11(8), 992-1022.  
Tabachnick, B., & Fidel, L. (2007). Using Multivariate Statistics (6th ed.). Boston: 
Pearson/Allyn & Bacon. 
Tang, N. K., Lereya, S. T., Boulton, H., Miller, M. A., Wolke, D., & Cappuccio, F. (2015). 
Nonpharmacological treatments of insomnia for long-term painful conditions: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of patient-reported outcomes in randomized 
controlled trials. SLEEP 38(1), 1751-1764. doi: 10.5665/sleep.5158. 
Taylor, H. L., Rybarczyk, B. D., Nay, W., & Leszczyszyn, D. (2015). Effectiveness of a CBT 
Intervention for Persistent Insomnia and Hypnotic Dependency in an Outpatient 
Psychiatry Clinic. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 71(7), 666-683.  
Theobald, D. E. (2004). Cancer pain, fatigue, distress, and insomnia in cancer patients. Clinical 
Cornerstone, 6(1), S15-S21.  
Thomas, K. S., Bower, J., Hoyt, M. A., & Sepah, S. (2010). Disrupted sleep in breast and 
prostate cancer patients undergoing radiation therapy: The role of coping processes. 
Psycho-Oncology, 19(7), 767-776.  

103
Thorndike, F. P., Saylor, D. K., Bailey, E. T., Gonder-Frederick, L., Morin, C. M., & Ritterband, 
L. M. (2008). Development and perceived utility and impact of an internet intervention 
for insomnia. E-journal of applied psychology: clinical and social issues, 4(2), 32.  
U.S. Government of Commerce. (2000). A nation online: How Americans are expanding their 
use of hte Internet. Washington, D.C. 
Van den Beuken-van Everdingen, M., De Rijke, J., Kessels, A., Schouten, H., Van Kleef, M., & 
Patijn, J. (2007). Prevalence of pain in patients with cancer: a systematic review of the 
past 40 years. Annals of Oncology, 18(9), 1437-1449.  
Van Onselen, C., Dunn, L. B., Lee, K., Dodd, M., Koetters, T., West, C., . . . Swift, P. (2010). 
Relationship between mood disturbance and sleep quality in oncology outpatients at the 
initiation of radiation therapy. European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 14(5), 373-379.  
Van Onselen, C., Paul, S. M., Lee, K., Dunn, L., Aouizerat, B. E., West, C., . . . Miaskowski, C. 
(2012). Trajectories of sleep disturbance and daytime sleepiness in women before and 
after surgery for breast cancer. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 45(2), 245-
260.  
van Straten, A., & Cuijpers, P. (2009). Self-help therapy for insomnia: a meta-analysis. Sleep 
medicine reviews, 13(1), 61-71.  
Vargas, S., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Antoni, M. H., Lechner, S. C., Holley, H. A., & Carver, C. S. 
(2010). Sleep dysfunction and psychosocial adaptation among women undergoing 
treatment for non-metastatic breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 19(6), 669-673.  
Velikova, G., Booth, L., Smith, A. B., Brown, P. M., Lynch, P., Brown, J. M., & Selby, P. J. 
(2004). Measuring quality of life in routine oncology practice improves communication 
and patient well-being: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
22(4), 714-724.  
Wade, A. G. (2011). The societal costs of insomnia. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 7, 
1.  
Wagley, J., Rybarczyk, B., Nay, W. T., Danish, S., & Lund, H. G. (2012). Effectiveness of 
abbreviated CBT for insomnia in psychiatric outpatients: Sleep and depression outcomes. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology.  
Walker, J., Hansen, C. H., Butcher, I., Sharma, N., Wall, L., Murray, G., & Sharpe, M. (2011). 
Thoughts of death and suicide reported by cancer patients who endorsed the "suicidal 
thoughts" item of the PHQ-9 during routine screening for depression. Psychosomatics, 
52(5), 424-427.  
Wendler, D., Kington, R., Madans, J., Van Wye, G., Christ-Schmidt, H., Pratt, L. A., . . . 
Emanuel, E. (2005). Are racial and ethnic minorities less willing to participate in health 
research? PLoS Med, 3(2), e19.  
Woodward, S. C. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in patients with cancer. 
Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 15(4), E42-E52.  
Yancey, A. K., Ortega, A. N., & Kumanyika, S. K. (2006). Effective recruitment and retention of 
minority research participants. Annual Review of Public Health, 27, 1-28.  
Yates, J. S., Mustian, K. M., Morrow, G. R., Gillies, L. J., Padmanaban, D., Atkins, J. N., . . . 
Colman, L. K. (2005). Prevalence of complementary and alternative medicine use in 
cancer patients during treatment. Supportive Care in Cancer, 13(10), 806-811.  
Zickuhr, K., & Madden, M. (2012). Older adults and Internet use  Retrieved March, 30, 2014, 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Older-adults-and-internet-use.aspx. 
 

104
Appendix 
1. Study eligibility questionnaire 
2. Clinical Interview 
3. Sleep diary 
4. Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) 
5. Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) 
6. Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) 
7. Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-General scale (FACT-G) 
8. Treatment preference questionnaire 
 

105
Study Eligibility Questionnaire 
1. Have you been diagnosed with non-metastatic cancer? 
 
2. Will you undergo chemotherapy or radiation treatment? 
 
3. Is this the first time you will undergo chemotherapy or radiation treatment? 
 
4. Do you experience at least three episodes of disturbed sleep per week AND daytime 
consequences such as fatigue, irritability, or difficulty concentrating that has lasted for at 
least one month? 
 
a. An episode of insomnia is defined as: 
i. An inability to fall asleep within 30 minutes 
AND/OR 
ii. Awakening during the night (after falling asleep) for a total of 60 minutes 
or more 
AND/OR 
iii. Achieving less than 6.5 hours of sleep per night 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106
Participant information/Demographic questionnaire 
 
1. When were you diagnosed with cancer? 
 
2. When do you begin treatment? 
 
3. For how long have you experienced the following symptoms? _____years  _____months 
a) At least three episodes of disturbed sleep per week  
 
 
 
  
AND 
b) Daytime consequences such as fatigue, irritability, or difficulty concentrating? 
 
4. When did you first notice you were having problems with your sleep? 
___Before cancer diagnosis 
 
___After cancer diagnosis 
 
 
 
5. Have you ever told your oncologist about these sleep problems? 
___Yes 
___No 
 
6. Do you believe that your cancer diagnosis and/or treatment caused your sleep 
problems?  
___Yes 
___No 
 
7. Do you believe that your cancer diagnosis and/or treatment has affected your sleep?  
___Yes 
___No 
 
8. Are you taking any sleep aids, either prescribed or over the counter? 
___Yes 
___No 
 
9. Please tell me your age: _____ 
 
10. Gender: ____Male 
____Female 
 
11. Marital status: ____Married 
____Single 
____Divorced/Separated/Widowed 
 
12. Race/ethnicity: ___Hispanic/Latino 
____not Hispanic/Latino 
_____African American/Black 
 
____Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
_____American Indian/Alaskan  
____White 
_____Asian 
 
 
 
____Two or more races 
 
13. Education: 
___Some high school 
 
 
____College 
___High school 
 
 
 
____Graduate school 
___Some college 
 
14. Please indicate your household income 
___< $10,000 
___$10-29,999 

107
___$30-49,999 
___$50-74,999 
___$75-99,999 
___$100,000+ 
 
15. What is your employment status? 
___Full-time 
___Part-time 
___Retired 
___Disabled 
___Other  
 
 

 
 
 
SHUTi 
Sleep Healthy Using The Internet 
©2003 - 2011 University of Virginia Behavioral Health & Technology 
 
 
- 1 - 
 
In order to better understand your sleep problem and monitor your progress 
while using SHUTi, it is important to collect some information on your sleep 
pattern. 
General Instructions 
 
• What is a Sleep Diary? A sleep diary is designed to gather 
information about your daily sleep pattern. 
 
• How often and when do I fill out the sleep diary? It is necessary 
for you to complete your sleep diary every day. If possible, the 
sleep diary should be completed within one hour of getting out of 
bed in the morning. 
 
• What should I do if I miss a day on this paper version of the 
diary? If you forget to fill in the diary or are unable to finish it, 
leave the diary blank for that day. If you complete this paper diary 
but do not enter it into SHUTi that day, you can enter up to 3 days 
worth of diaries at one time (today, yesterday, and the day before). 
 
• What if something unusual affects my sleep or how I feel in the 
daytime? If your sleep or daytime functioning is affected by some 
unusual event (such as an illness, or an emergency) you may make 
brief notes on your diary. 
 
• What do the words “bed” and “day” mean on the diary? This 
diary can be used for people who are awake or asleep at unusual 
times. In the sleep diary, the word “day” is the time when you 
choose or are required to be awake. The term “bed” means the 
place where you usually sleep. 
 
• Will answering these questions about my sleep keep me awake? 
This is not usually a problem. You should not worry about giving 
exact times, and you should not watch the clock. Just give your best 
estimate. 

 
 
 
SHUTi 
Sleep Healthy Using The Internet 
©2003 - 2011 University of Virginia Behavioral Health & Technology 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
Sleep Diary Instructions 
Use the guide below to clarify what is being asked for each item of the Sleep Diary. 
 
Question 1: 
What time did you get into bed? 
Write the time that you got into bed. This may not be the time you began “trying” to 
fall asleep. 
 
Question 2: 
What time did you try to go to sleep? 
Record the time that you began “trying” to fall asleep.  This is the time you go to bed 
with the intention of falling asleep. It should not include time in bed when you did 
not intend to fall asleep (that is included in Question  1). If you go to bed at 10:15 
PM, but do not turn the lights off with the intention of going to sleep until 11:30 
PM, you should enter 10:15 PM in Question 1 and 11:30 PM for this question. If 
you go to bed at 10:15 PM with the intention of going to sleep right away, but then 
do not fall asleep until 11:30 PM, you should write down 10:15 PM for both 
questions. The next question will capture how long it took to fall  asleep. 
 
Question 3: 
How long did it take you to fall asleep? 
Beginning at the time you wrote in question 2, how long did it take you to fall asleep. 
Enter your answer in hours and minutes. Provide your best estimate of how long it 
took you to fall asleep once you got into bed and turned off the lights with the 
intention of going to sleep. If you go to bed at 10:15 PM with the intention of going to 
sleep, but then do not fall asleep until 11:30 PM, you should write down 1 hour 15 
minutes (75 minutes total) in this space. 
 
Question 4: 
How many times did you wake up, not counting your final awakening? How 
many times did you wake up between the time you first fell asleep and your final 
awakening? This is the number of times you remember waking up during the 
night. 

 
 
 
SHUTi 
Sleep Healthy Using The Internet 
©2003 - 2011 University of Virginia Behavioral Health & Technology 
 
 
- 3 - 
 
Question 5: 
In total, how long did these awakenings last? 
What was the total time you were awake between the time you first fell asleep and 
your final awakening. Enter your answer in hours and minutes. For example, if you 
woke 3 times for 20 minutes, 35 minutes, and 15 minutes, add them all up 
(20+35+15= 70 min or 1 hr and 10 min). Estimate to the best of your knowledge how 
many minutes you spent awake for all awakenings combined. This should not 
include your very last awakening in the morning, as this will be logged in the next 
question (Question 6). 
 
Question 6: 
What time was your final awakening? 
Record the last time you woke up in the morning. This is the very last time you 
woke up in the morning. If you woke up at 4:00 AM and never went back to sleep, 
this is the time to write.  However, if you woke up at 4:00 AM, but went back to 
sleep for a brief period of time (for example, from 6:00 AM to 6:35 AM; this 
information would then be included in Questions 4 and 5), then your last 
awakening would be 6:35  AM. 
 
Question 7: 
What time did you get out of bed for the day? 
What time did you get out of bed with no further attempt at sleeping? This may be 
different from your final awakening time (e.g., you may have woken up at 6:35 AM 
but did not get out of bed to start your day until 8:20 AM). 
 
Question 8: 
How would you rate the quality of your sleep? 
“Sleep Quality” is your sense of whether your sleep was good or poor. Please use the 
following 5-point scale to indicate how you felt when you got up in the morning: 
(1=Very Poor, 2=Poor, 3=Fair, 4=Good, 5=Very Good) 

 
 
 
SHUTi 
Sleep Healthy Using The Internet 
©2003 - 2011 University of Virginia Behavioral Health & Technology 
 
 
- 4 - 
 
Question 9: 
In total, how long did you nap or doze? 
Estimate the total amount of time you spent napping or dozing, in hours and 
minutes. For instance, if you napped twice, once for 30 minutes and once for 60 
minutes, and dozed for 10 minutes, you would answer 1 hour 40 min. 
This should include all naps even if they were not intentional. For instance, if you 
dozed off in front of the TV for 30 minutes, this should be included.  If you did not 
nap or doze, select 0 (zero). 
 
Question 10a: 
How many drinks containing alcohol did you have? 
Enter the number of alcoholic drinks you had where 1 drink is defined as one 12 oz 
beer (can), 5 oz wine, or 1.5 oz liquor (one shot). 
 
Question 10b: 
What time was your last drink? 
If you had an alcoholic drink yesterday, enter the time of day in hours and minutes of 
your last drink. If you did not have a drink, write “N/A” (not applicable). 
 
Question 11: 
Did you take any over-the-counter or prescription medication(s) to help 
you sleep? If so, list medication(s), dose, and time taken: 
List the medication name, how much and when you took EACH different medication 
you took tonight to help you sleep. Include medication available over the counter, 
prescription medications, and herbals (example: "Zolpidem 10 mg 10 pm").  If every 
night is the same, write “same” after the first day. 
 
Comments: 
If you have anything that you would like to say that is relevant to your sleep feel free 
to write it here.

