ORIGINAL PAPER
Reminders make people adhere better to a self-help
sleep intervention
Corine Horsch1 & Sandor Spruit2 & Jaap Lancee3 & Rogier van Eijk2 &
Robbert Jan Beun2 & Mark Neerincx1 & Willem-Paul Brinkman1
Received: 14 January 2016 /Accepted: 7 December 2016 /Published online: 23 December 2016
# The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The experiment presented in this paper investi-
gated the effects of different kinds of reminders on adher-
ence to automated parts of a cognitive behavioural therapy
for insomnia (CBT-I) delivered via a mobile device.
Previous studies report that computerized health interven-
tions can be effective. However, treatment adherence is
still an issue. Reminders are a simple technique that could
improve adherence. A minimal intervention prototype in
the realm of sleep treatment was developed to test the
effects of reminders on adherence. Two prominent ways
to determine the reminder-time are: a) ask users when they
want to be reminded, and b) let an algorithm decide when
to remind users. The prototype consisted of a sleep diary,
a relaxation exercise and reminders. A within subject de-
sign was used in which the effect of reminders and two
underlying principles were tested by 45 participants that
all received the following three different conditions (in
random order): a) event-based reminders b) time-based
reminders c) no reminders. Both types of reminders im-
proved adherence compared to no reminders. No differ-
ences were found between the two types of reminders.
Opportunity and self-empowerment could partly mediate
adherence to filling out the sleep diary, but not to the
number of relaxation exercises conducted. Although the
study focussed on CBT-I, we expect that designers of
other computerized health interventions benefit from the
tested opportunity and self-empowerment principles for re-
minders to improve adherence, as well.
Keywords Adherence . Reminders . Sleep . Self-help .
Compliance . Insomnia
1 Introduction
Everyone forgets to do something now and then. The
consequences of forgetting to do something depend on
what was forgotten. Some of these memory failures can
be fatal. Fogetting to buy milk is less problematic than
forgetting to take a sleeping baby out of a soon to be
hot car, or medical errors during surgery. The intention
to do something in the future is formed in prospective
memory [1]. Everyone suffers from prospective memory
failures. In fact, Kliegel and Martin [2] state that 50–
80% of everyday life forgetting is due to these prospec-
tive memory failures. Another study in the health do-
main found that most of the preventable mistakes were
prospective memory failures [3]. Not only medical pro-
fessionals suffer from prospective memory failures, also
patients suffer from it. For example, people forget to
take their pills. Forgetfulness, or prospective memory
failure, is one of the main reasons [4–6].
Several models attempt to explain how prospective
memory works e.g., the preparatory attentional and
memory theory, the reflexive-associative theory, and
the multi-process model [1]. The latter two theories in-
clude cues. The idea is that an intended action is asso-
ciated with a cue. When that cue occurs the intended
action is remembered automatically. Reminders provided
for example by a smartphone can serve as these cues
* Corine Horsch
c.h.g.horsch@tudelft.nl
1
Delft University of Technolgoy, Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD,
Delft, The Netherlands
2
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
3
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
DOI 10.1007/s12553-016-0167-x

and might play an important role in performing targeted
behaviour.
Reminders have been used in various domains in different
forms for a long time. Ranging from tying a string around your
finger, self-written notes, to reminders set on PDAs, watches,
and smartphones. Fogg describes three types of triggers in his
behavioural model [7]. He distinguishes sparks, facilitators,
and signals. A spark is a cue that enhances motivation.
There are three core motivators that sparks can use: plea-
sure-pain, hope-fear, and social acceptance-rejection. A facil-
itator is a cue that makes it easier to exhibit a certain type of
behaviour (enhances ability). A signal is a simple reminder
used in cases where both motivation and ability are high.
Another distinction in reminders can be made based on the
trigger method utilized. Various trigger methods are time-
based, event-based, and location-based. An example of a
time-based action is taking cookies out of the oven in
20 min, an example of an event-based action is bringing up
an issue during the next meeting, and a location-based action
is throwing a letter in a mailbox when passing by. Prospective
memory also makes use of these type of triggers, and research
has shown that people perform better at event-based intentions
than at time-based intentions [8]. Especially if target behav-
iour has to be performed at a specific time, people could ben-
efit from a reminder system.
Furthermore, interruptibility has been studied extensively
(e.g. [9–11]). Traditionally, task complexity, task duration, and
the moment of interruption has been identified as determining
factors for the appropriateness of an interruption [12].
Recently, mobile interruptibility studies shifted the focus to
the moment of interruption. Mobile studies have shown that
smartphone notifications can have inappropriate timing [13,
14]. In mobile interruptibility studies context is often men-
tioned as the determining factor for the appropriateness of an
interruption. Context, however, is a comprehensive concept
that is used differently in studies. For example, Ho and
Intille [11] measure physical activity and appropriateness of
interruptions, whereas Pielot and colleagues [15] use phone
usage data to infer interruptibility. Independent of the defini-
tion of context that is used, all studies acknowledge the im-
portance of appropriate timing.
There is substantial evidence that computerized health in-
terventions can be effective [16–18]. However, adherence re-
mains a challenge. Compared to more traditional treatments,
computerized interventions can be experienced as less bind-
ing, therefore it is easy to drop-out [19]. Since, the efficacy of
treatment is partly determined by adherence [20–23] it is cru-
cial to optimize adherence [24]. One of the reasons why peo-
ple do not adhere to health interventions is forgetfulness [22,
25]. Reminders are a simple technique that could help solving
this particular problem of forgetfulness [25]. For example,
earlier studies in the health domain have shown that mobile
text reminders increase show-up rates for gastrointestinal
endoscopy [26], for breast cancer screening [27], and sun-
screen use [28]. Another example, regarding an app with no-
tifications, showed an increase from 12% to 63% in logging
food intake on a mobile phone when reminders were given
compared to the absence of reminders [29]. Moreover, a sys-
tematic review about reminders in cell phone interventions
found a difference in 20 of the 25 studies between the inter-
vention and control group [30]. This indicates that reminders
improve adherence and the outcome of interventions.
Previous research suggests that reminders can be effective,
to our knowledge, however, barely any empirical work has
been done regarding the underlying principles that explain
why these reminders work. This paper discusses and tests
two prominent reminder approaches: time-based reminders
and reminders inspired by the interruptibility literature. The
time-based reminders are self-set reminders in which the user
can choose the time. The other reminders are automatic event-
based reminders, inspired by the Capability-Opportunity-
Motivation Behaviour (COM-B) model [31]. Here the system
detects opportune moments and send a reminder.
A domain that can benefit from effective reminders is mo-
bile insomnia treatment. People who suffer from insomnia
have difficulties initiating or maintaining sleep [32]. Having
insomnia leads to personal suffering, like a reduced quality of
life, and societal costs, like reduced productivity [33]. Studies
estimate that about 10% of the adults suffer from insomnia
[34]. Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-I) is
the treatment of choice for this disorder and fairly standard-
ized in protocols [35]. CBT-I consists of several exercises that
requires behaviour changes, however, adherence to CBT-I re-
mains a problem [22, 36]. For instance, a daily sleep diary that
helps people to become aware of their sleep behaviour and
monitor progress is easily missed. Reminding people to do
their exercises could be beneficial and provides opportunity
to test the effect and underlying principles of reminders.
2 Reminder design and hypotheses
Earlier work has shown that reminders probably work, but it
might depend on the domain, the patient demographics, psy-
chosocial and behavioural characteristics, etc. [37, 38]
Therefore, the first step is investigating if reminders in an
sleep intervention domain, delivered via a smartphone are
effective. So, hypothesis 1 is:
H1: Reminders increase adherence compared to no
reminders. When people are reminded to do something
they will do it more often, compared to situations in
which they are not reminded to do it. There was no hy-
pothesis regarding an adherence difference between the
two types of reminder.
174
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

Figure 1 depicts this and the following hypotheses regard-
ing the effect of reminders and their underlying mechanisms.
2.1 Self-set reminder
Having users set the reminder times themselves (instead
of automatically set reminders) might be an adequate
mechanism, because users know best when they have
time to perform an activity. Several psychological prin-
ciples support and explain why self-set reminders in-
crease adherence. Firstly, the self-determination theory
[39] states that supporting autonomy, competence, and
relatedness increases people’s motivation and perfor-
mance. By giving users the control to set the reminder
times, their autonomy is supported and thereby their
motivation and performance increases. Secondly, the
consistency principle [40] states that humans want to
be consistent in their attitudes, beliefs, perceptions, and
behaviours and they will change any of these when
inconsistency is discovered. This suggests that, when
people set the reminder times themselves, they are more
likely to follow-up on those reminders, because they
want to be consistent. Thirdly, predictability could be
seen as a basic human motive. From an evolutionary
viewpoint, higher predictability of (dangerous) events
gives a better chance of survival. Campbell and Tesser
[41] construct the predictability motive from the human
desire for certainty, the need for an understandable
world, and the need to be able to predict the environ-
ment. In line with this predictability motive, reminders
will be perceived more positive when arriving at pre-
dictable times, and adherence will benefit from this pos-
itive attitude.
In conclusion, self-set reminders could help to improve
adherence because of three underlying principles. First, users
would probably feel more in control and therefore respond
more positive to the reminders. Second, people might feel
committed to their self-set reminders, which would also elicit
more positive responses. Third, the reminders are more pre-
dictable when the users set the times themselves, and this
should also improve the response to reminders. In summary,
these self-set reminders should increase the sense of self-em-
powerment, and therefore increase treatment adherence.
H2: If self-set reminders are given, self-empowerment
mediates adherence. When people receive reminders at
times they set themselves, they feel more empowered. In
which self-empowerment includes, perceived control,
commitment and predictability. So, it was hypothesised
that self-set reminders increase perceived self-empower-
ment, and that perceived self-empowerment was associ-
ated with their adherence. Therefore, self-empowerment
could partly explain adherence, when self-set reminders
were given.
2.2 COM-B reminder
Reminders can also be triggered automatically. The
Capability-Opportunity-Motivation-Behaviour (COM-B)
model states that the possibility that people exhibit a behav-
iour depends on the capability of a person, the opportunity,
and their motivation to exhibit that behaviour [31].
Opportunity in this context means the circumstances that al-
low someone to exhibit the targeted behaviour. For example,
taking the stairs, instead of the elevator, is only possible when
there are stairs (opportunity). Besides, it is easier to climb
stairs when they are located in front of the entrance (opportune
location), or when colleagues take the stairs (social opportu-
nity). The model suggests that if people are capable and mo-
tivated to exhibit the targeted behaviour, a reminder at an
opportune moment, improves the change a person will exhibit
this behaviour. This reminder design is in line with earlier
work regarding interruptibility.
H3: If COM-B reminders are given, opportunity medi-
ates adherence. It was hypothesized that when people
receive these automatic reminders, it was an opportune
moment to perform the targeted behaviour. Therefore, it
was expected that opportuneness was associated with
people’s adherence, thereby partly explaining an increase
in adherence for COM-B reminders.
Fig. 1 The three hypothesized
relationship between the type of
reminder, the explaining concepts
and adherence
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
175

3 Method
3.1 Experimental design
This field experiment had a within-subjects design with 45
participants who were exposed to three conditions during a
total time of three weeks. In one condition participants re-
ceived no reminders to perform targeted behaviour, in the
other condition participants set the reminders themselves,
and the last condition consisted of automatic COM-B re-
minders. The order of the three conditions was counter-
balanced across the participants. The study was approved by
Human Research Ethics Committee of Delft University of
Technology.
3.2 The intervention system
An app for people suffering from insomnia was developed to
test the two types of reminders. Since most people always
carry their phones with them, smartphones were suitable for
reminders. The app contained a sleep diary, a relaxation exer-
cise, sleep overview graphs, and reminders. The two different
activities were chosen to measure adherence because they
have different properties. For example, it was probably easier
for people to spend 1 min, which is the approximated time for
filling in the diary, than 7 min, which is the length of the
relaxation exercise.
Navigation in the app was done using the main menu
(Fig. 2a), containing all the elements of the app. In the intro-
duction screen (Fig. 2b) a short explanation of the relaxation
exercise and the sleep diary was given, as well as information
about the reminders. Furthermore, the app contained a pro-
gressive muscle relaxation exercise (Fig. 2c). The instructions
were both visual on the screen in text and simultaneously
audible. Moreover, the app contained a sleep diary consisting
of four screens each with one question on it, respectively: (1)
what time did you go to sleep?, (2) what time did you get up?,
(3) indicate when you were awake, (4) which score would you
give your sleep? (Fig. 2d and e). Via a different menu-item
users could correct mistakes in their sleep diaries. An over-
view of users’ tracked sleep was shown in a graphical over-
view (Fig. 2f). The last menu-item was settings. Here, people
could change the times of the reminders in the self-set condi-
tion. Participants chose the time for three daily reminders: one
reminder for filling out their sleep diary, and two others for
doing the relaxation exercise.
For the automated reminders, we assumed that if people
download an app, they were able and motivated to use the
app. Leaving one requirement to exhibit a behaviour to fulfil,
namely opportunity. The opportunities to exhibit the targeted
behaviour were automatically detected by the smartphone
based on the smartphone usage. The sleep diary needs to be
filled out as closely as possible to waking up. So, users
received a reminder for filling in the diary the first time they
turned on their phone in the morning. Reminders for the re-
laxation exercises were generated when people: a) were at the
same physical place for more than one hour, since it was
regarded appropriate to take a break when sitting still for some
time; b) ended a phone call, and thus were already distracted
from another (important) task; or c) used another app,1 and
thus were already using their phone. Reminders were of
course not generated when users already filled in their diary
or did the relaxation exercise, or were occupied with that ac-
tivity. Moreover, the time between two reminders was at least
30 min.
3.3 Procedure
Participants were recruited via social media, online advertise-
ments, the website www.ikgalekkerslapen.nl, and in
university lectures. After giving online consent and
completing the first questionnaire, participants were enabled
to download the app. The Sleepcare app ran on Android OS
versions from 2.3 and higher. Participants used their own
smartphone with Internet connection for this experiment. A
short introduction text about the app was shown the first time
participants opened the app (Fig. 2b). The participants were
instructed to fill out the sleep diary every day, and do the
relaxation exercise twice a day. However, they were free to
use the app in whatever way they wanted. After every week,
participants got an e-mail with a link to that week’s question-
naire and to inform them about the change of condition (with-
in-subjects). Within two weeks after finishing the whole ex-
periment participants were contacted for a semi-structured
telephone interview.
People who gave informed consent, but did not download
the app, received an e-mail with the question why they did not
proceed with the experiment or app. Also participants from
whom only a few days of data was received, got a similar e-
mail to gain insight in reasons for non-adherence.
3.4 Measurements
Primary outcome and mediation measures During the ex-
periment, adherence was measured by logging how often the
diary was filled out (0–7 days), and how often the relaxation
exercise was performed. These were the primary outcome
measures. The mediation measures were the level of perceived
self-empowerment and the suitability of the timing of the re-
minders (opportunity). Both mediation measures were mea-
sured using a questionnaire specially designed for this study
consisting of 7-point Likert scale statements (Appendix 4).
1 Only the top-10 apps in the Netherlands triggered a reminder: Whatsapp,
Facebook, Candy Crush, Nu.nl, Twitter, NOS, Wordfeud, Minecraft, Wheres
My Water, Ruzzle, Browser.
176
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

Both concepts were measured in the two reminder conditions
to examine if these concepts were able to explain adherence
rates. Furthermore, motivation and ability were measured to
check the assumptions of the COM-B model. The COM-B
model states that the possibility that people exhibit a behav-
iour depends on the opportunity, the person’s motivation to
exhibit that behaviour, and the capability of a person to exhibit
that behaviour [31]. Opportunity was measured as one of the
mediators and was expected to vary across the study.
Motivation and capability, on the other hand, were expected
to be constant during the experiment, so they would not influ-
ence adherence. In order to check this assumption motivation
was measured using the Situational Motivation Scale (SIMS)
[42], consisting of Intrinsic Motivation (IM), Identified
a.Mainmenu
b. Introducon screen
c. Relaxaon exercise
d. Sleep diary queson
e. Diary graphical question
f. Sleep diary overview
Fig. 2 Screenshots of the Sleepcare app translated from Dutch
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
177

Regulation (IR), External Regulation (ER), Amotivation
(AM). And ability was measured in three categories: ability
to use a smartphone (AUS), ability to use the diary (AUD),
and ability to use the relaxation exercise (AUR), using 7-point
Likert scale statements (e.g. BI know how I can respond to
notifications on my smartphone^) (Appendix 2 and 5).
Exploratory measures In order to perform more detailed,
exploratory analyses that fall outside the main focus of the
paper, the following measurements were taken. Firstly, an ear-
lier study showed that objective (logged) and subjective (self-
reported) adherence deviate from each other [22]. Therefore,
participants’ own estimation about their adherence was ex-
plored. This subjective adherence (SA) was measured by the
questions ‘How often did you fill in the sleep diary last
week?’, and ‘How often did you do the relaxation exercise
last week?’ (Appendix 3). Because both objective and subjec-
tive adherence were measured in this study these two concepts
could be compared to each other and the reliability of partic-
ipants’ own estimation about their behaviour and adherence
could be derived.
Behavioural intention (BI), locus of control (LoC), irrita-
tion (Irr) and appreciation, and easiness to use the app in daily
life (ETI) were measured to be able to examine possible asso-
ciations between these variables and adherence rates. The the-
ory of planned behaviour states that behavioural intention pre-
dicts behaviour [43]. Therefore, behavioural intention (BI)
was measured using six questions (e.g. BI will follow the
instructions/advice from the app^). Locus of control (LoC)
was measured via a 18-item Dutch questionnaire [44]. A
higher internal locus of control has been found to influence
diary adherence in an online lifestyle diary [45]. Irritation and
appreciation were respectively measured with four 7-point
Likert scale statements, and assigning a grade between 1 and
10 for the different reminders and app components.
Reminders that irritate people because they are disruptive, or
reminders that are not appreciated most likely decrease adhere
[13, 14, 46].
Similarly, if an activity is hard to integrate in people’s daily
life, the probability that people will perform the activity de-
creases, since people’s behaviour are affected by the principle
of least effort [47]. Therefore, easiness to use was measured
with six 7-point Likert scale statements. Furthermore, the
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UTAUT) measures technology acceptance and relates accep-
tance to usage [48], thereby possibly explaining adherence.
Moreover, to investigate the possible effect of this minimal
prototype on sleep the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) was used
[49]. See the appendices for more details about these
measures.
At the end of the experiment participants were contacted
for a semi-structured telephone interview to explore their rea-
sons for (none-)adherence. The subjects of the questions were:
why people used the app, what their opinion was about the app
and the separate parts of the app, how people used the app, if
they noticed any effect (on sleep or in other ways), if there
were any irritations, and if people had ideas for improvements
or additions (See appendix 6 for the used interview guide).
3.5 Participants
In total there were 45 participants who used the app for three
weeks (Fig. 3), 30 females and 15 males. The average age was
35 years (SD = 14). Their average ISI score was 13.5
(SD = 6.6), which is above the score of 10 (t = 2.60,
p < .05) that is used as a cut-off for clinical levels of insomnia
[32]. The self-reported average of the ability to use a
smartphone was 5.7 (SD = 1.3) on a scale from 1 to 7, which
is an average rating on the positive side of the scale (t = 6.26,
p < .01).
Although no strong conclusions can be drawn from a rela-
tively arbitrary comparison with of the middle of the scale,
participants seem positive about their smartphone abilities.
Intention to use the app was 6.5 (SD = 0.7) on a score from
1 to 7, which also is an average rating on the positive side of
the scale (t = 17.25 , p < .01). These scores suggested an
adequate level of ability and motivation. As shown in
Figs. 3, 143 participants filled out the online informed consent
form and the pre-measurements and 87 participants
downloaded the app. From all those 87 participants automatic
log files were received which describe their app usage (behav-
iour data). However, not everyone filled in the weekly online
questionnaires. Sixteen participants filled in all three question-
naires, whereas 8 participants only filled in two question-
naires. The data of these 24 participants was used for the
analyses regarding hypotheses two and three. Twenty-one par-
ticipants filled in less than two questionnaires. Their logged
behavioural data, together with the data from the 24 previous-
ly mentioned participants, was used for analysis regarding
hypothesis one. Thirty-four participants only used the app
for a few days, and 8 participants did not use the app at all.
As a consequence their data was not used for the analyses.
3.6 Statistical analyses and data preparation
For data management and analyses, SPSS version 22 was
used. To test hypothesis 1 Friendman’s ANOVA tests were
performed. Furthermore, posthoc Wilcoxon’s test were done
to investigate the differences between the separate conditions.
Hypotheses 2 and 3 were tested by repeated measures media-
tion analyses. The analyses were done in line with the method
described by Judd et al. [50]. The first step in this method is to
test the overall treatment effects for the dependent variable
(adherence), as well as for the mediators (self-empowerment
and opportunity). This means testing for a difference in adher-
ence between the three conditions using Friedman’s ANOVAs
178
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

(the same as used to test hypothesis 1), and testing for a dif-
ference in self-empowerment between the two reminder con-
ditions using Wilcoxon’s test, and testing for a difference in
opportunity between the two reminder conditions using
Wilcoxon’s test. Although the original procedure suggests
not to proceed with mediation analysis if no differences are
found in this first step, Zhao et al. [51] claim this is too strict.
Zhao explains that mediation can occur even when there is no
total effect of independent variable on the dependent variable,
so the guidelines of Zhao et al. [51] were followed. The sec-
ond step was estimating the regression equation given by Judd
et al. [50] (Box 1) that indicates mediator and moderator ef-
fects. Four different regression equations were used with a
bootstrapping samples of 1000. Each analysis took as depen-
dent measure either adherence to the diary or relaxation exer-
cises. Self-empowerment (SE) score or Opportunity (Opp)
score were included as mediator in these analyses.
Box 1 Regression equation belonging to repeated measure mediation
(Judd et al., 2001)
Y Di ¼ δ2−δ1
ð
Þ þ 1
2 δ22−δ11
ð
ÞX Si þ 1
2 δ22 þ δ11
ð
ÞX Di (1)
YDi: Difference in diary/relaxation adherence between COM-B and
Self-set condition
YSi: Sum of self empowerment/opportunity score in COM-B and Self-set
condition
YDi:Difference between self empowerment/opportunity score in COM-B
and Self-set condition
Mediation is suggested if the 3rd coeffecient
1
2 δ22 þ δ11
ð
Þ


is significanct.
Moderation is suggested if the 2nd coeffecient
1
2 δ22−δ11
ð
Þ


is significanct.
For testing hypothesis 1 the behavioural data collected via
the app of 45 participants was used (Fig. 3). For testing hy-
potheses 2 and 3 the questionnaire data was needed. We
hypothesised that participants just forgot to fill in a weekly
questionnaire unrelated to the week and condition, so that the
data was missing completely at random. Little’s MCAR test
confirmed this assumption (Chi-square < 0.001, df = 1692,
p > 0.99). Therefore, hypotheses 2 and 3 were tested using
the data of the 16 complete datasets plus 8 datasets which
missed one weekly questionnaire (amount of missing values:
388/5064 = 8% data points). This missing data was filled in
using the expectation maximization method [52] using all var-
iables except the demographics.
3.6.1 Exploratory analyses
To explore a possible effect of the app on insomnia a t-test
with the ISI scores measured before and after the experiment
was performed. Furthermore, Cronbach’s alphas were calcu-
lated for the concepts that were measured with multiple ques-
tions, such as opportunity (Opp), self-empowerment, and irri-
tation (Irr). Items that affected Cronbach’s alphas negatively
were deleted resulting in Cronbach’s alphas ranging from .43
to .99 (see appendices). The average scores for each concept
were calculated with the remaining items. Next, Friedman’s
and Wilcoxon’s tests were performed to test differences be-
tween conditions for repeated measures (Table 3). Besides,
correlations between adherence and repeatedly measured var-
iables were calculated using the procedure of Bland and
Altman [53].
Fig. 3 Flow diagram of participants in the experiment. Qs = Questionnaires
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
179

The interviews were analysed in line with the method
of thematic analysis [54]. The first author (CH) familiar-
ized herself with the data by conducting the interviews
and transcribing the audio files. The data of all the par-
ticipants was then organized per question, and codes were
added to the answers. Lastly, the codes were grouped
together in themes and a brief summary of the general
gist was written.
4 Results
4.1 Hypothesis 1 – the effect of reminders
The results confirmed hypothesis 1. In the no reminder condi-
tion a median of 4 (IQR = 6) filled in diaries per week was
found, and a median of 0 (IQR = 6) performed relaxation ex-
ercises were done. In the self-set reminder condition in median
of 6 (IQR = 2) was found for the diaries, and a median of 1
(IQR = 3) for the relaxation exercise. In the COM-B condition a
median of 7 (IQR = 3) filled in diaries was found, and a median
of 1 (IQR = 5) for the relaxation exercises (Table 1). Friedman’s
ANOVA’s showed differences between the conditions for the
number of diaries filled in (χ2(2) = 14.63, p = .001), and for the
number of relaxation exercises done (χ2(2) = 9.04, p = .011).
To further investigate the differences, Wilcoxon tests were per-
formed in which the p-values were tested against Bonferroni
corrected α-level of .0167. These analyses showed a difference
between the condition without reminders and the conditions
with reminders, but no differences were found between the
two reminder conditions (Table 1).
4.2 Hypothesis 2 and hypothesis 3 – mediation
Hypotheses two and three were confirmed by repeated
measures mediation analyses. The first step of Judd’s
[50] procedure contains difference tests for the depen-
dent variable and the mediators. The analyses done for
hypothesis 1 already showed a difference in adherence
(dependent variable) between the two conditions. The
differences for the mediators are shown in Table 3.
Self-empowerment scores were on average higher in
the self-set condition than in the COM-B condition
(Table 3). The opportunity scores were on average
higher in the self-set condition than in the COM-B con-
dition for the relaxation exercise, for the diary this dif-
ference was not significant (Table 3). The second step
of the repeated measures mediation analyses contains
the four regression equations (Box 2). In the mediation
analysis on the number of diary entries for self-
empowerment (SE) we found a significant positive me-
diation effect, whereby increase in self-empowerment
was associated with increase in adherence. The second
mediation analysis on diary adherence included oppor-
tunity (Opp) score as mediator. The analysis found also
a significant mediation effect. Here an increase in op-
portunity score coincides with increase in number of
diary entries filled out. Two similar mediation analyses
were conducted on the adherence of the relaxation ex-
ercise. No significant mediation effects were found.
The COM-B model assumes that participants are able
and motivated to perform the targeted behaviour. To test
these assumptions the scores for ability and motivation
are reported. On a seven-point scale (values 1–7) gen-
eral ability (AUS) to use a smartphone was 5.7, ability
to fill in the diary was 6.6, and ability to do the relax-
ation exercise was 5.5. These high values seem to con-
firm our assumption about participants’ capability. The
identified regulation (IR) scores were the highest among
the motivation scores, which suggests that participants
were mostly using the app, because they wanted to use
the app. Furthermore, the average amotivation (AM)
scores were low. These values again seem to confirm
our assumption about participants’ motivation.
Box 2 Regression equations belonging to the repeated mediation analyses
Regression functions
Diary adherence
(diary self-empowerment):
YDi = −2.39 + 0.14XSi + 0.39 * XDi
Diary adherence
(diary opportunity):
YDi = −3.17 + 0.32XSi + 0.48 ** XDi
Relaxation adherence
(relaxation
self-empowerment):
YDi = 0.31 −0.05XSi −0.24XDi
Relaxation adherence (relaxation
opportunity):
YDi = 2.22 −0.35XSi −0.25XDi
*p <.001, 95% CI 0.14–0.59,
mediation
**p = 0.45, 95% CI 0.03–0.95,
mediation
Table 1
Wilcoxon tests with Bonferroni correction showing
differences between no reminder and a reminder, but not between the
two types of reminders
Number of filled in diaries:
No Reminder (Mdn = 4) vs.
Self-Set (Mdn = 6)
T = 95.5, p = .002, r = −.27
No Reminder (Mdn = 4) vs.
COM-B (Mdn = 7)
T = 67.0, p < .001, r = −.31
Self-Set (Mdn = 6) vs.
COM-B (Mdn = 7)
T = 152.0, p = .78, r = −.02
Number relaxation exercises done:
No Reminder (Mdn = 0) vs.
Self-Set (Mdn = 1)
T = 42.5, p = .001, r = −.28
No Reminder (Mdn = 0) vs.
COM-B (Mdn = 1)
T = 84.0, p = .011, r = −.22
Self-Set (Mdn = 1) vs.
COM-B (Mdn = 1)
T = 192.5, p = .81, r = −.02
180
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

4.3 Exploratory analyses
Table 2 shows that four variables were associated with adher-
ence. Diary adherence was correlated to behavioural intention
and ability to use the diary (AUD). Relaxation adherence was
correlated to the appreciation for the relaxation exercise and
the general ability to use a smartphone (AUS). As can be seen
the UTAUT concepts were not found to be correlated neither
to diary nor relaxation adherence. There was a significant
difference in sleep severity (ISI) before (M = 13.50,
SD = 6.60) and after intervention (M = 11.28, SD = 6.03)
t(23) = 2.74, p = .012, r = .50 . Although people suffer less
from insomnia after using the app, it was not a clinically
meaningful difference, which is set on a 6-point reduction
[55].
Table 3 shows the variables that were measured repeatedly.
Self-empowerment (SE) differed over the conditions for both
the diary and the relaxation exercise. The opportunity score
(Opp) only differed for the relaxation exercise, not for the
diary. In addition, there was a correlation between self-
empowerment and diary adherence, and between opportunity
and diary adherence. These correlations were not found for the
relaxation exercise.
4.4 Drop-outs
Thirty people responded to the question why they did not
download the app or used it very little. The main reasons were
a) unsuccessful in downloading the app, b) problems with the
technology, c) inappropriate timing, and d) other reasons. The
most prevalent problem was downloading the app. The app
was provided via the Google Playstore as a test version, mean-
ing participants had to become part of a Google group, as a
result, people had to perform extra steps, which caused prob-
lems for people. Furthermore people experienced problems
with the technology, e.g. their Android version was too old,
or their smartphone broke. Besides technology-related prob-
lems, people mentioned that the timing for using the app was
not convenient because they were, for example, rehousing or
on holiday. Other reasons for dropping out were that people
found another solution for their sleeping problem, they did not
notice an effect, or they simply forgot to use it.
4.5 Interviews
The interviews indicated that most people were positive about
the sleep diary B[about the diary] It just worked well, it was
crisp and clear, I did not have any problems.^ (female, 35 yr).
In contrast to the relaxation exercise, which induced more
diverse opinions. Some people had a positive attitude towards
the relaxation exercise B I was surprised that such an easy
relaxation exercise helped me that much. I just had to do it
every day.^ (female, 39 yr), others thought the exercise was
boring BThe relaxation exercise was so-so, especially because
every time it was the exact same exercise, so after three days I
was bored with it.^ (female, 34 yr), and others prefered to do
their own relaxation exercises with which they were already
familiar BI only did the relaxation exercise once or twice,
Table 2
Means and standard deviations of the measurements, and their correlations with behavioural adherence
Measures (n = 24)
Mean (SD)
Pearson’s Correlations
Mean (SD)
Pearson’s Correlations
Diary
Relax
Diary
Relax
Pre-measures
UTAUT-concepts (post)
AUS
5.71 (1.28)
–.20
–.43*
Utility
5.03 (1.26)
.37
.20
Behavioural intention
6.48 (0.70)
.62**
.30
Effort
6.41 (0.58)
.39
.33
Locus of Controla
7.08 (3.44)
.10
.05
Social influence
2.30 (1.45)
–.15
–.13
Insomnia Severity
13.50 (6.60)
.18
-.15
Facilitating conditions
4.93 (1.48)
.21
.16
Attitude
5.91 (0.81)
.09
.31
Post-measures
Self-efficacy
6.73 (0.53)
.25
–.21
Appreciation diaryb
8.09 (1.77)
.39
-
Anxiety
1.95 (1.12)
.27
.19
Appreciation relaxb
5.74 (2.36)
-
.53**
Trust
5.43 (1.19)
.36
.16
Appreciation appb
7.31 (1.55)
.35
.32
Behavioural intention
5.87 (0.81)
.27
.10
AUD
6.63 (0.76)
.59**
-
AUR
5.46 (1.64)
-
–.04
Insomnia Severity
11.28 (6.03)
–.01
–.21
AUS Ability to Use a Smartphone, AUD Ability to Use the Diary, AUR Ability to Use the Relaxation exercise
a scale ranges from 0 to 18, higher scores mean higher external locus of control
b grade given by the participant for the indicated component measured on a scale from 1 to 10
* p < .05, ** p < .01
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
181

because I already do breathing and meditation exercises. So,
the relaxation exercise in the app didn’t have any added
value.^ (male, 27 yr). About the reminders participants said
that the COM-B reminders were annoying and that the timing
was bad BWell, the reminders came randomly, and then I ex-
perienced them as bothersome.^ (female, 54 yr). In general,
the self-set reminders were perceived as timed better BI have
the impression that the self-set reminders worked best for me.
Those reminders came at the right moments.^ (female, 20 yr),
although a few people thought differently BThe self-set re-
minders were actually not much better than the automatic
ones. Both came often at inconvenient times.^(female,
56 yr). In case people do not get any reminders, they just
forget to do an activity BIt was inconvenient when I did not
get a reminder, because then I forget to do the activities.^
(female, 34 yr). Interesting was that some people were waiting
for the reminder to arrive and perform the activity, even in the
No Reminder condition BWhen I did not get any reminders, I
was kind of waiting for them^ (female, 56 yr).
5 Discussion and conclusion
In this paper, we tested reminders in a mobile sleep interven-
tion. On average, participants filled out the sleep diary more
often with reminders than without reminders. Also, the relax-
ation exercise was performed more frequently with reminders
compared to the no reminder condition. Both reminders in-
creased adherence thereby supporting the first hypothesis. The
results showed that it did not matter which kind of reminder
participants received. Support for hypotheses two and three
was also obtained, as we found significant mediating effects
of self-empowerment and opportunity on adherence for the
sleep diary in the regression analysis. However, no support
for hypothesis two and three were found regarding mediation
effects of self-empowerment and opportunity on adherence to
the relaxation exercise. The results of the regression analyses
showed a partly mediation, this means that for the self-set re-
minders, the associated feeling of self-empowerment can ex-
plain part of the diary adherence. For the COM-B reminder,
one explaining factor is people’s perception that the reminders
were given at opportune moments. Besides self-empowerment
and opportuneness, different mechanisms are likely at play to
why people adhere to the reminders.
The findings show that perceived self-empowerment was
higher in the self-set reminder condition than in the COM-B
reminder condition, as expected. Opportuneness of the re-
minders between the two conditions only differed for the re-
laxation exercise (in opposite direction to expectation), but
was not found for the diary entries. The lack in difference in
opportuneness has probably been caused by the actual timing
of the reminders for the diary, which did not differ that much
between the two conditions. In the COM-B condition a diary
reminder was sent the first time someone turned on their
Table 3
Means and standard deviations of the repeated measures, the difference between conditions for these measures, and their correlations across
conditions with behavioural adherence
Diary
Relaxation
NR
Self-Set
COM-Bc
r
NR
Self-Set
COM-Bc
r
Measures
SE
4.72 (0.86)
3.84 (0.78)**
.50*
4.36 (1.06)
3.07 (0.89)**
–.18
Opp
5.46 (1.17)
5.33 (1.46)
.45*
3.70 (1.50)
2.98 (1.59)*
.11
SA
6.21 (1.76)
6.56 (1.01)
6.26 (1.59)
.67**
6.65 (5.31)
7.63 (5.09)
6.44 (4.14)
.82*
Sat
5.89 (1.62)
6.22 (1.32)
6.19 (1.43)
.57**
3.84 (2.14)
4.18 (1.99)
3.48 (1.97)*
.18
ETI
5.65 (1.24)
5.67 (1.10)
5.94 (1.08)
.33*
3.79 (1.81)
3.96 (1.49)
3.45 (1.59)
.00
Irra
5.31 (1.01)
5.44 (1.31)
.62**
5.12 (1.36)
4.23 (1.79)*
–.13
IM
3.88 (1.07)
4.39 (1.28)
4.52 (1.20)**
.30*
3.46 (1.01)
3.62 (1.12)
3.57 (1.20)
.28*
IR
5.19 (1.17)
5.22 (1.06)
5.36 (0.99)
.25
4.92 (1.37)
5.07 (1.27)
5.07 (1.32)
.19
ER
3.19 (1.31)
3.34 (1.56)
3.53 (1.18)
.01
3.23 (1.44)
3.19 (1.39)
3.35 (1.56)
.14
AM
1.91 (1.32)
2.21 (1.08)
2.12 (1.39)
.27
2.80 (1.55)
2.59 (1.26)
2.64 (1.33)
.09
Measured after the condition
Measured after the whole experiment
Self-Set
COM-Bc
NR
Self-Set
COM-Bc
Appreciation b
5.78 (2.80)
4.96 (2.29)
4.74 (3.04)
7.78 (2.04)
4.22 (2.67)**
AM Amotivation, ER External Regulation, ETI Easy to initiate, IM Intrinsic Motivation, IR Identified Regulation, Irr Irritation, Opp Opportunity, r
Pearson’s correlation between measured variable and adherence, SA Subjective Adherence, Sat Satisfaction with adherence, SE Self-Empowerment
a the lower the number, the higher the irritation
b appreciation of the reminder type measured from 1 to 10 after a condition, and after the whole experiment
c *in this column means there is a significant difference between conditions
* p < .05, ** p < .01
182
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

phone which is most likely shortly after they wake-up, in the
self-set condition people probably set the diary reminder a
short time after they wake-up as well. So, timing for the diary
reminder in the two conditions were most likely very similar.
Exploratory analyses provided more insights in which
cases underlying principles, such as self-empowerment
and opportuneness, play a role. From the interviews
we learned that participants had a negative attitude to-
wards the relaxation exercise. This observation was sup-
ported by the relative low appreciation scores given to
the relaxation exercise (5.7 on a scale from 1 to 10).
This suggests that a positive attitude towards the activ-
ity might be a precondition for factors such as self-
empowerment and opportuneness to come into play. In
case of a negative attitude, which is the case for the
relaxation exercise, self-empowerment and opportunity
did not explain adherence. A negative attitude probably
deters people from exhibiting the targeted behaviour,
irrespective of the level of perceived self-empowerment
or opportuneness of the moment. Therefore, another sort
of trigger might be more suitable for the relaxation
exercise.
Several mechanisms have been suggested for why
people adhere to reminders. Fogg describes three types
of triggers in his behavioural model [7]. If we apply
Fogg’s categorization of triggers, the reminders in this
experiment mostly resemble signals. We speculate how-
ever that the relaxation exercise would benefit more
from sparks than from signals, since the appreciation
for the relaxation exercise was low. According to Fogg
(2009) there are three core motivators that sparks can
use: pleasure-pain, hope-fear, and social acceptance-re-
jection. For the relaxation exercise the reminder could
for example emphasize the relaxed state people experi-
ence (pleasure) while doing the relaxation exercise.
Future research could explore the effect of these differ-
ent types of reminders.
When examining adherence, it is important to study the
participants who dropped-out. By studying the drop-outs in-
sight can be gained about the underlying reasons for not doing
something. Approximately half of the participants who
downloaded the app only used it for a few days or even did
not use it at all. We did our best to contact those people and
discover their reasons, which were mainly technical problems,
and inappropriate timing to participate in the study. The pos-
sible implications of these drop-outs for our results are un-
known. It might be the case that more persevere people, or
people that already heavily use their phone participated longer
in the experiment. Apart from drop-outs, increasing experi-
mental compliance (e.g. filling in weekly questionnaires) also
requires attention to obtain the required data set, especially in
experiments in the field. In this study approximately 50% of
the participants who used the app filled in the questionnaires.
Therefore not all participants could be included in the analy-
sis, and some missing data was estimated. Nonetheless, field
studies are necessary to ecologically validate mobile interven-
tions, and irreplaceable when studying adherence.
To fully appreciate the findings, it is important to
consider the study’s limitations. The main limitation of
this study is the implementation of the COM-B re-
minders. A relative simple algorithm was implemented
to detect opportune moments to perform the target be-
haviour. However, as mentioned before, this might have
resulted in diary reminders to occur at similar moments
in the two reminder conditions. Furthermore, the algo-
rithm did not anticipate on participants who use their
phone minimally. For example, participants might not
have received COM-B reminders, if they did not use
WiFi. Future research might therefore explore ways to
improve the algorithm. Another limitation is the extent
of the intervention system. Applications that offer more
support, such as cognitive therapy or sleep restriction,
might elicit more positive usage attitude. Adherence to
reminders might be higher in these applications. On the
other hand, applications that offer little support to which
people have negative attitudes might also benefit from
reminders. For example, adherence to mundane tasks
such as hour registration, might improve due to re-
minders. Next to self-empowerment and opportuneness,
other underlying principles, like obligation to employers,
probably play a role in such processes.
The main contribution of this study can be summarized by
two new insights. First, the study shows that reminders do
improve adherence to target behaviours such as keeping a
sleep diary and performing relaxation exercises. This is im-
portant as adherence has been associated with treatment effect
[22]. Second, self-empowerment and opportunity can partly
explain why people follow up on reminders and perform the
desired activity.
Compliance with ethical standards
All procedures performed in stud-
ies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical
standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with
the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable
ethical standards.
Informed consent
Informed consent was obtained from all individual
participants included in the study.
Funding
This research is funded by Philips and Technology
Foundation STW, Nationaal Initiatief Hersenen en Cognitie NIHC under
the Partnership program Healthy Lifestyle Solutions.
Conflict of interest
Corine Horsch declares that she has no conflict
of interest.
Sandor Spruit declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Jaap Lancee declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Rogier van Eijk declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Robbert Jan. Beun declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
183

Mark Neerincx declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Willem-Paul Brinkman declares that he has no conflict of interest.
Appendix
Measurement overview
Pre-measures
Week 1,2, and 3
Post-measures
Insomnia Severity
Objective adherence
Insomnia Severity
Index
GSM usage ability
Subjective adherence
Ability to perform
activity
Behavioural
intention
Satisfaction with
adherence
Score for the reminders
Locus of Control
Easy to initiate
Ranking of the
reminders
if reminder
UTAUT:
Score/grade
for reminder
Utility
Opportunity
Effort
Control
Social influence
Predictability
Facilitating
conditions
Commitment
Attitude
Motivation Diary
Self-efficacy
Motivation Relax
Anxiety
Irritation
Trust
Remarks*
Behavioural intention
All measures were used in the ex-
pectation maximisation algorithm
to fill in missing data, except the
remarks denoted by *
Pre-treatment questionnaire
GSM ability
I know how to use my smartphone
I know how I can respond to notifications on my
smartphone
Other apps that I use, send me reminders sometimes
I regularly set reminders myself using my smartphone
Behavioural intention
The theory of planned behaviour states that behavioural inten-
tion predicts behaviour [43]. Therefore, behavioural intention
(BI) was measured using the six questions below.
I plan to use the app for 3 weeks
I will follow the instructions/advice from the app
I plan to complete my sleep diary every day
I will definitely look at the overview of my sleep data
I am planning to do the relaxation exercise twice a day
If I have a question about the app, I will search for an
answer
Locus of control
Locus of control (LoC) was measured via a 18-item Dutch
questionnaire [44]. A higher internal locus of control has been
found to influence diary adherence in an online lifestyle diary
[45]. Higher scores indicate a higher external locus of control
[44].
Weekly questionnaire
Adherence
Diary
How many times did you fill in the diary last week? If you
don’t know it exactly, estimate it to your best ability
Why did you not fill in the diary on some days?
I am satisfied with how often I have completed the diary
last week.
How many reminders did you get the past week about
filling in the diary? If you are not sure, try to estimate it.
Relaxation
How many times did you do the relaxation exercise
last week? If you don’t know it exactly, estimate it to
your best ability
Why did you not do the relaxation exercise on some days?
I am satisfied with how often I have done the relaxation
exercise last week.
How many reminders did you get the past week
about doing the relaxation exercise? If you are not sure,
try to estimate it.
General
On a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being the lowest and 10
being the highest rating. What grade would you give this kind
of reminder?
Easy to initiate
Easiness to use was measured with four 7-point Likert
scale statements. If an activity is hard to integrate in
people’s daily life, the probability that people will per-
form the activity decreases, since people’s behaviour are
affected by the principle of least effort [47].
Diary
It was hard to make time to fill in the diary
Filling in the diary was kind of a habit for me
Relaxation
The relaxation exercises were easy to integrate into my
daily routines
I had to put in a lot of effort to not forget to do the relaxation
exercise
184
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

Motivation
For measuring motivation the Situational Motivation Scale
(SIMS) [42] was used.
Weekly Reminder questionnaire
Opportunity
Diary
The reminders for the diary arrived at inopportune times.
The reminders for the diary were timed well.
I always responded to the reminders of the diary.
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .443, COM-B: .718
Relaxation
The reminders for the relaxation exercise were sent at the
right time.
I often dismissed the reminder for the relaxation exercise,
because it the time was inappropriate.
Reminders for the relaxation exercises came at times that
did not suit me.
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .776, COM-B: .789
Self-Empowerment
Control - Diary
I think that I had enough influence on the reminders for the
diary
I had enough control over the reminders for the diary
I had no control over the reminders for the diary
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .944, COM-B: .861
Control - Relaxation
I did not have enough control over the reminders for the
relaxation exercise
I was in control regarding the reminders for the relaxation
exercise
I could not influence the reminders for the relaxation exer-
cise enough
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .867, COM-B: .923
Predictability - Diary
I was not able to predict the reminder times for the diary
Reminders for the diary came unexpectedly
The reminders for the diary came at predictable times
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .636, COM-B: .711
Predictability - Relaxation
I regularly wondered when the reminders for the relaxation
exercises would come
The reminders for the relaxation exercises came at moment
that I expected them to come
I think the reminders for the relaxation exercises arrived at
predictable moments
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .987, COM-B: .824
Commitment - Diary
I felt uncomfortable ignoring the reminders for the diary
When I acted on the reminders for the diary I felt content
I felt guilty when I did not respond to the reminders for the
diary
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .527, COM-B: .797
Commitment - Relaxation
I had the feeling I did not stick. to an agreement if I ignored
the reminders for the relaxation exercises
I owned it to myself to follow the reminders of the relaxa-
tion exercise.
I did not have any trouble ignoring the reminders for the
relaxation exercises.
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .629, COM-B: .616
Irritation
Irritation was measured with six 7-point Likert scale state-
ments. If people were irritated by the reminders the chance
they will adhere decreases [46].
Diary
I got to many reminders for the diary
I appreciated the reminders for the diary
I was annoyed by the reminders for the diary
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .627, COM-B: .744
Relaxation
I think the reminders for the relaxation exercises are nice
I got mad with the reminders of the relaxation exercises
I got to many reminders for the relaxation exercises
Cronbach’s alpha’s: Self-set: .688, COM-B: .809
Final questionnaire – users’ experiences
Ability
I found it easy to fill in the diary
I thought it was difficult to perform the relaxation exercise
I totally understood the instructions of the relaxation
exercise
I did not understand the instructions of the sleep diary
Appreciation
Reminder preference: You have received three types of re-
minders; no reminders; self-set reminders; automatic re-
minders. Indicate which reminder you preferred. Start on the
top with your favourite reminder and end with your least
favourite reminder.
Appreciation reminders: On a scale from 1 to 10, in which
10 is the highest score, which scores would you give the
reminder types below?
&
No reminder
&
Self-set reminder
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
185

&
Automatic reminder
Appreciation app components:On a scale from 1 to 10, in
which 10 is the highest score, which scores would you give
the components below?
&
The sleep diary
&
The relaxation exercise
&
The app in total
UTAUT
The users’ experiences measure was based on the Unified
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT)
[48]. The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of
Technology (UTAUT) defines eight concepts that measure
technology acceptance and link them to intention and usage,
and thereby possibly explain adherence. In addition, trust has
been added to the UTAUT model as a predictor, since a lack of
trust could negatively influence usage [56, 57].
Utility/Effect
With the app I could track my sleep pattern very well
By using the app I could detect problems in my sleep
pattern
Using the app improved my daily quality of life
Cronbach’s alpha: .712
Effort
It was easy for me to figure out how the app worked
The app was easy to use in daily life
The app was complicated, therefore it was hard for me to
understand
Cronbach’s alpha: .724
Social Influence
People who are important to me think I should use the app
My family supported me in using the app
My friends think I should use the app
Cronbach’s alpha: .799
Facilitating Conditions
The app was not compatible with other products I use
I had the knowledge necessary to use the app
Someone was available for assistance with app difficulties
Cronbach’s alpha: .549
Attitude
Using the app was a good idea
I liked using the app
I hated using the app
Cronbach’s alpha: .751
Self-efficacy
I could use the app without any help
Using the app went well as long nothing unexpected
happened
If there was no one around to help me, I preferred not to use
the app
Cronbach’s alpha: .871
Anxiety
The app was somewhat intimidating to me
It scared me to think that I could lose information by press-
ing the wrong button
I think the app could invade my privacy
Cronbach’s alpha: .588
Trust
I trusted the information the app gave me
I felt distressed using the app
I have confidence in the app working well
Cronbach’s alpha: .600
Behavioural Intention
I was determined to insert information into to app at the
right time
I intended to look at the graphs of my sleep
My intention was to use the app for 3 weeks
Cronbach’s alpha: .678
Interview questions
Why did you use the app?
Did you have any specific goals?
What do you think of the app?
How often did you plan on filling in the diary? And were
you successful with that? / How well / often did you fill in the
diary? / Every day or did you sometimes not fill it in?
If you filled out the diary when and where you did you
usually do it?
Were there certain reasons (obstacles / things / events), why
it sometimes did not work out to fill in the diary?
If so, what were those obstacles?
How well did filling in your diary fit in your daily life?
Did the different types of reminders affect whether or not
you filled out the diary?
How often did you plan to do the relaxation exercise?
And were you successful with that? / How well / often did
you do the relaxation exercise? / Every day or did you some-
times not do it?
If you did the relaxation exercise when and where you did
you usually do it?
Were there certain reasons (obstacles / things / events), why
it sometimes did not work out to do the relaxation exercise? If
so, what were those obstacles?
How well did the relaxation exercise fit in your daily life?
Did the different types of reminders affect whether or not
you did the relaxation exercise?
Did you look at your sleep data? If so, when did you look at
it? What exactly did you want to know / see? Did you find it?
What do you think about the way the data is displayed?
To what extent was the app beneficial and effective?
186
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

&
What effect had the diary in your sleep?
&
What effect had the relaxation exercise on your sleep?
&
What kind of effect did the app have on yourself?
&
Did the app had an effect on something else in your life?
Were there any irritations regarding the app?
Did it cause irritation when you received reminder, or did
you thought it was fine? What did you think about the re-
minders? What kind of reminder irritated you the most?
What would you like to see improved in the app? And what
else?
What properties would you like to add to the app?
What can be added to the app, so you would adhere (even)
longer or better?
Would you recommend the App to others? Why?/ Why not?
What did you think of the experiment itself, not the app, but
everything else, such as emails, surveys, downloading, etc.?
Are there other things you want to say about the app that I
have not covered?
Do you have any other comments or questions?
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1.
McDaniel MA, Einstein GO. Prospective memory: An overview
and synthesis of an emerging field. Sage Publications; 2007.
2.
Kliegel M, Martin M. Prospective memory research: why is it rel-
evant? Int J Psychol. 2003;38(4):193–4.
3.
Rothschild JM, Landrigan CP, Cronin JW, Kaushal R, Lockley SW,
Burdick E, et al. The critical care safety study: the incidence and
nature of adverse events and serious medical errors in intensive
care*. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(8):1694–700.
4.
Unni EJ, Farris KB. Unintentional non-adherence and belief in
medicines in older adults. Patient Educ Couns. 2011;83(2):265–8.
5.
Jones RK, Darroch JE, Henshaw SK. Contraceptive use among US
women having abortions in 2000-2001. Perspect Sex Reprod
Health. 2002:294–303.
6.
Smith JD, Oakley D. Why do women miss oral contraceptive pills?
An analysis of Women's self-described reasons for missed pills.
Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health. 2005;50(5):380–5.
7.
Fogg BJ, editor. A behavior model for persuasive design.
Persuasive 2009; 2009; Claremont, California, USA. 2013–07-
24: ACM.
8.
Dismukes RK. Prospective memory in workplace and everyday
situations. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2012;21(4):215–20.
9.
Turner LD, Allen SM, Whitaker RM, editors. Interruptibility pre-
diction for ubiquitous systems: conventions and new directions
from a growing field. Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing,
ACM;2015.
10.
Hudson S, Fogarty J, Atkeson C, Avrahami D, Forlizzi J, Kiesler S
et al., editors. Predicting human interruptibility with sensors: a
Wizard of Oz feasibility study. Proceedings of the SIGCHI confer-
ence on Human factors in computing systems, ACM;2003.
11.
Ho J, Intille SS, editors. Using context-aware computing to reduce
the perceived burden of interruptions from mobile devices.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in com-
puting systems; ACM;2005.
12.
Pejovic V, Musolesi M, Mehrotra A, editors. Investigating The Role
of Task Engagement in Mobile Interruptibility. Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct; ACM;2015.
13.
Smith J, Lavygina A, Ma J, Russo A, Dulay N, editors. Learning to
recognise disruptive smartphone notifications. Proceedings of the
16th international conference on Human-computer interaction with
mobile devices & services; 2014. 2016–06-13: ACM.
14.
Fischer JE, Greenhalgh C, Benford S, editors. Investigating epi-
sodes of mobile phone activity as indicators of opportune moments
to deliver notifications. Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services; 2011: ACM.
15.
Pielot M, De Oliveira R, Kwak H, Oliver N, editors. Didn't you see
my message?: predicting attentiveness to mobile instant messages.
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors
in computing systems; 2014. 2016–06-15: ACM.
16.
Andersson G. The promise and pitfalls of the internet for cognitive
behavioral therapy. BMC Medicine. 2010;8:82. doi:10.1186/1741-
7015-8-82.
17.
Kaltenthaler E, Cavanagh K. Computerised cognitive behavioural
therapy and its uses. Progress in Neurology and Psychiatry.
2010;14(3):22–9.
18.
Wantland DJ, Portillo CJ, Holzemer WL, Slaughter R, McGhee
EM. The effectiveness of web-based vs. non-web-based interven-
tions: a meta-analysis of behavioral change outcomes. J Med
Internet Res. 2004;6(4):e40.
19.
Eysenbach G. The law of attrition. J Med Internet Res. 2005;7(1):
e11.
20.
World Health Organization W. Adherence to long-term therapies:
evidence for action. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization 2003 Accessed 2015–30-Aug. Report No.:
9241545992.
21.
Gould RA, Clum GAA. Meta-analysis of self-help treatment ap-
proaches. Clin Psychol Rev. 1993;13(2):169–86.
22.
Horsch CHG, Lancee J, Beun RJ, Neerincx MA, Brinkman WP.
Adherence to technology-mediated insomnia treatment: a meta-
analysis, interviews with users, and focus groups with users and
experts. Journal of medical Internet research. 2015;17(9):e214.
doi:10.2196/jmir.4115.
23.
Donkin L, Christensen H, Naismith SL, Neal B, Hickie IB, Glozier
NA. A systematic review of the impact of adherence on the effec-
tiveness of e-therapies. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(3):e52.
24.
Edinger JD, Means MK. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for primary
insomnia. Clin Psychol Rev. 2005;25(5):539–58. doi:10.1016/j.
cpr.2005.04.003.
25.
Donkin L, Glozier N. Motivators and motivations to persist with
online psychological interventions: a qualitative study of treatment
completers. J Med Internet Res. 2012;14(3):e91.
26.
Deng X, Wang Y, Zhu T, Zhang W, Yin Y, Ye L. Short message
service (SMS) can enhance compliance and reduce cancellations in
a sedation gastrointestinal endoscopy center: a prospective random-
ized controlled trial. J Med Syst. 2015;39(1):1–11.
27.
Vidal C, Garcia M, Benito L, Milà N, Binefa G, Moreno V. Use of
text-message reminders to improve participation in a population-
based breast cancer screening program. J Med Syst. 2014;38(9):1–7.
28.
Armstrong AW, Watson AJ, Makredes M, Frangos JE, Kimball AB,
Kvedar JC. Text-message reminders to improve sunscreen use: a
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188
187

randomized, controlled trial using electronic monitoring. Arch
Dermatol. 2009;145(11):1230–6.
29.
Bentley F, Tollmar K, editors. The Power of Mobile Notifications to
Increase Wellbeing Logging Behavior. ACM SIGCHI International
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 2013.
30.
Krishna S, Boren SA, Balas EA. Healthcare via cell phones: a
systematic review. Telemedicine and e-Health. 2009;15(3):231–40.
31.
Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a
new method for characterising and designing behaviour change
interventions. Implement Sci. 2011;6(1):42.
32.
Morin CM, Barlow DH, Dement WC. Insomnia: psychological
assessment and management. New York: Guilford Press; 1993.
33.
Rosekind MR, Gregory KB. Insomnia risks and costs: health, safe-
ty, and quality of life. Am J Manag Care. 2010;16(8):617–26.
34.
Ohayon MM. Epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what
we still need to learn. Sleep Med Rev. 2002;6(2):97–111.
35.
Espie CA, MacMahon K, Kelly H, Broomfield NM, Douglas NJ,
Engleman HM, et al. Randomized clinical effectiveness trial of
nurse-administered small-group cognitive behavior therapy for per-
sistent insomnia in general practice. Sleep-New York Then
Westchester. 2007;30(5):574.
36.
Dimatteo MR, Giordani PJ, Lepper HS, Croghan TW. Patient ad-
herence and medical treatment outcomes: a meta-analysis. Med
Care. 2002;40(9):794–811.
37.
Fenerty SD, West C, Davis SA, Kaplan SG, Feldman SR. The effect
of reminder systems on patients’ adherence to treatment. Patient
Prefer Adherence. 2012;6:127–35.
38.
Krueger KP, Felkey BG, Berger BA. Improving adherence and
persistence: a review and assessment of interventions and descrip-
tion of steps toward a national adherence initiative. Journal of the
American Pharmacists Association. 2003;43(6):668–79.
39.
Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilitation
of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am
Psychol. 2000;55(1):68.
40.
Festinger L. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston: Row,
Peterson; 1957.
41.
Campbell JD, Tesser A. Motivational interpretations of hindsight
bias: an individual difference analysis. J Pers. 1983;51(4):605–20.
42.
Guay F, Vallerand RJ, Blanchard C. On the assessment of situation-
al intrinsic and extrinsic motivation: the situational motivation scale
(SIMS). Motiv Emot. 2000;24(3):175–213.
43.
Ajzen I, Madden TJ. Prediction of goal-directed behavior: attitudes,
intentions, and perceived behavioral control. J Exp Soc Psychol.
1986;22(5):453–74.
44.
PCd H. Instrumenteel onderzoek. De ‘IE-18 locus of con-
trol’- vragenlijst: betrouwbaarheid en validiteit van een
gewijzigde versie. Nederlands tijdschrift voor de
psychologie. 1992;47:82–7.
45.
Blanson Henkemans OA, van der Boog PJM, Lindenberg J,
van der Mast CAPG, Neerincx MA, Zwetsloot-Schonk
BJHM. An online lifestyle diary with a persuasive computer
assistant providing feedback on self-management. Technol
Health Care. 2009;17(3):253–67.
46.
Bickmore T, Mauer D, Crespo F, Brown T. Persuasion, task
interruption and health regimen adherence. Persuasive
Technology: Springer; 2007. p. 1–11.
47.
Zipf GK. Human behavior and the principle of least effort.
Cambridge: Addison-Wesley Press; 1949.
48.
Venkatesh V, Morris MG, Davis GB, Davis FD. User accep-
tance of information technology: toward a unified view. MIS
Q. 2003:425–78.
49.
Bastien CH, Vallières A, Morin CM. Validation of the insomnia
severity index as an outcome measure for insomnia research.
Sleep Med. 2001;2(4):297–307.
50.
Judd CM, Kenny DA, McClelland GH. Estimating and testing me-
diation and moderation in within-subject designs. Psychol
Methods. 2001;6(2):115.
51.
Zhao X, Lynch JG, Chen Q. Reconsidering baron and Kenny:
myths and truths about mediation analysis. J Consum Res.
2010;37(2):197–206.
52.
Pigott TDA. Review of methods for missing data. Educ Res Eval.
2001;7(4):353–83.
53.
Bland JM, Altman DG. Calculating correlation coefficients with
repeated observations: part 2—correlation between subjects. BMJ.
1995;310(6980):633.
54.
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res
Psychol. 2006;3(2):77–101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
55.
Yang M, Morin CM, Schaefer K, Wallenstein GV.
Interpreting score differences in the insomnia severity index:
using health-related outcomes to define the minimally im-
portant difference. Current Medical Research & Opinion.
2009;25(10):2487–94.
56.
Cheung C, Lee MK. Trust in Internet shopping: A proposed model
and measurement instrument. AMCIS 2000 Proceedings.
2000;406.
57.
Gefen D, Karahanna E, Straub DW. Trust and TAM in online shop-
ping: an integrated model. MIS Q. 2003;27(1):51–90.
188
Health Technol. (2017) 7:173–188

