A randomized controlled trial of digital cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia in pregnant women
David A. Kalmbacha,*, Philip Chenga, Louise M. O’Brienb, Leslie M. Swansonc, Roopina 
Sanghad, Srijan Senc, Constance Guillee, Andrea Cuamatzi-Castelana, Alasdair L. Henryf,g, 
Thomas Rotha, Christopher L. Drakea
aThomas Roth Sleep Disorders & Research Center, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA
bDepartments of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA
cDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
dDepartment of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA
eDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA
fBig Health Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA
gSleep and Circadian Neuroscience Institute, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Objective: Despite high rates of prenatal insomnia, efficacious treatment options for this 
population are quite limited. Early evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) support the 
efficacy of face-to-face cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTI) for prenatal insomnia. 
*Corresponding author. Thomas Roth Sleep Disorders & Research Center, Henry Ford Health System, 39450 W 12 Mile Rd, Novi, MI 
48377, USA. Fax: +248 344 8084. dkalmba1@hfhs.org (D.A. Kalmbach).
Authors’ data sharing statement
Will individual participant data be available (including data dictionaries)? Yes.
What data in particular will be shared? Individual participant data that underlie the results reported in this article, after deidentification 
(text, tables, figures, and appendices).
What other documents will be available? Study protocol.
When will data be available (start and end dates)? Beginning 9 months and ending 36 months following article publication.
By what access criteria will data be shared (including with whom, for what types of analyses, and by what mechanism)? With whom: 
Investigators whose proposed use of the data has been approved by an independent review committee identified for this purpose. For 
what types of analyses: For individual participant data meta-analysis. By what mechanism: Proposals should be directed to the 
corresponding author and may be submitted up to 36 months following article publication. After 36 months, the data may be available 
from the corresponding author but without investigator support other than metadata.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
David A. Kalmbach: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Funding acquisition. 
Philip Cheng: Writing - review & editing. Louise M. O’Brien: Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. Leslie M. Swanson: 
Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. Roopina Sangha: Writing - review & editing. Srijan Sen: Writing - review & 
editing. Constance Guille: Writing - review & editing. Andrea Cuamatzi-Castelan: Project administration. Alasdair L. Henry: 
Writing - review & editing, Resources. Thomas Roth: Writing review & editing, Conceptualization. Christopher L. Drake: 
Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - review & editing.
Conflict of interest
The ICMJE Uniform Disclosure Form for Potential Conflicts of Interest associated with this article can be viewed by clicking on the 
following link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2020.03.016.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Sleep Med. 2020 August ; 72: 82–92. doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2020.03.016.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Yet, as many patients are unable to access this specialist-driven care, a critical need exists to 
increase its accessibility. This RCT examined the efficacy internet-based digital CBTI in pregnant 
women with insomnia.
Methods: Single-site RCT. A total of 91 pregnant women (29.03 ± 4.16 years) nearing/entering 
the third trimester who screened positive for clinical insomnia on the Insomnia Severity Index 
(ISI) were randomized to digital CBTI or digital sleep education control. The ISI, Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index (PSQI), Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), and Pre-Sleep Arousal 
Scale’s Cognitive factor (PSAS-C) served as study outcomes, which were collected before 
treatment and after treatment during pregnancy, then six weeks after childbirth.
Results: From pre to posttreatment, CBTI patients reported reductions in ISI (−4.91 points, p < 
0.001) and PSQI (−2.98 points, p < 0.001) and increases in nightly sleep duration by 32 min (p = 
0.008). Sleep symptoms did not change during pregnancy in the control group. After childbirth, 
CBTI patients, relative to controls, slept longer by 40 min per night (p = 0.01) and reported better 
sleep maintenance. No pre or postnatal treatment effects on depression or cognitive arousal were 
observed.
Conclusions: Digital CBTI improves sleep quality and sleep duration during pregnancy and 
after childbirth. To better optimize outcomes, CBTI should be tailored to meet the changing needs 
of women as the progress through pregnancy and early parenting.
Name: Insomnia and Rumination in Late Pregnancy and the Risk for Postpartum Depression.
URL: clinicaltrials.gov. Registration: NCT03596879.
Keywords
Pregnancy; Perinatal; Postpartum; Cognitive arousal; Depression; RCT
1. Introduction
Sleep disturbance and insufficient sleep are endemic to pregnant women [1–6]. Over half of 
pregnant women meet the diagnostic criteria for insomnia disorder [7] or endorse clinically 
significant insomnia symptoms [1,5,8]. Compelling evidence including prospective data 
indicate that these sleep disturbances increase across pregnancy and are most severe in the 
third trimester [2,4,8–10], although some evidence suggests that the prevalence of insomnia 
is unchangingly high across pregnancy [1]. Insomnia and insufficient sleep during pregnancy 
are associated with negative maternal outcomes such as depression and suicidal ideation 
[7,11–15], cognitive-emotional dysregulation [12,16,17], and reduced quality of life [17] 
among myriad other consequences [10]. Despite alarmingly high rates of prenatal insomnia 
and known associated complications, empirically supported treatment options for insomnia 
have been very limited for pregnant women [18].
In the broader US adult population, individuals with insomnia often seek treatment via 
prescription and/or over-the-counter (OTC) sleep aids [19,20]. However, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) categorizes most prescription sleep-promoting medications as 
pregnancy Category C or D and thus are not considered safe for use during pregnancy [21]. 
The FDA designates common OTC sedating antihistamine medications, namely doxylamine 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 2
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and diphenhydramine, as Category A or B, respectively. These medications are typically 
recommended for use during pregnancy for allergy symptoms and nausea. However, no large 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been conducted to thoroughly examine the 
efficacy and safety profiles of these OTC antihistamines for mother and child based on 
medication dosage and duration needed to alleviate perinatal insomnia [21,22]. Therefore, 
no sleep aids, prescription or OTC, are presently considered safe and efficacious for 
insomnia during pregnancy. Even so, over 90% of pregnant women self-treat insomnia 
symptoms with OTC antihistamines [21].
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTI), the guideline recommended treatment 
for insomnia [23], is highly effective and confers benefits over pharmacotherapy including 
superior long-term insomnia outcomes [24,25]. Recent evidence has begun to support the 
efficacy of CBTI during pregnancy. An open-label trial showed medium to large effect sizes 
in reducing sleep disturbances including latency to sleep and wake after sleep onset for 
pregnant women who completed a five-week CBTI group therapy program [26]. 
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) also support CBTI efficacy in this population. CBTI 
delivered in individual and group formats produce superior treatment effects on insomnia 
symptoms during pregnancy compared to control [27,28]. Not only is CBTI efficacious in 
pregnancy, but pregnant women perceive CBTI as a more credible treatment option than 
pharmacotherapy and acupuncture [22], thus supporting its potential for patient engagement 
and real-world uptake.
Despite emerging efficacy and positive appraisals for CBTI for prenatal insomnia, access to 
this treatment is severely limited. Few US adults with insomnia have access to behavioral 
sleep medicine specialists who provide CBTI treatment [29,30]. This limited access is due to 
a shortage of CBTI practitioners and, further complicating matters, uneven geographic 
distribution of certified practitioners clustered in select urban areas [29]. Efforts to increase 
CBTI access have leveraged web and mobile health technology and clinical trials is the 
general US adult population show efficacy for CBTI delivered automated mobile health apps 
[31–39].
Despite the critical need for safe alternatives to pharmacological treatment in this population 
and the shortage of healthcare providers capable of delivering CBTI, the efficacy of web-
based CBT-I in this population has not been established. Not only do pregnant women face 
the same access barriers as insomnia patients in the broader population [29,30], but pregnant 
women also have additional unique logistical barriers including managing other recurring 
prenatal health appointments, reserving medical leave for other prenatal and postnatal 
appointments, and preserving personal time off for maternity leave. Thus, it is critical to 
increase access to insomnia treatment for pregnant women that maximizes flexibility while 
preserving efficacy. As digital CBTI has proven highly efficacious at improving sleep in 
broader adult populations [40], leveraging this technology to increase reach and accessibility 
of insomnia care for pregnant women has immense potential to improve sleep and mental 
wellbeing in this vulnerable population.
The present study was a single-site RCT comparing digital CBTI and digital sleep education 
control for the treatment of clinically significant insomnia symptoms in pregnant women 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 3
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

nearing/entering the third trimester. We targeted pregnant women in mid-to-late pregnancy 
based on evidence that prenatal sleep quality is worst in the third trimester [2,4,8–10]. We 
examined acute treatment effects in the prenatal period as well as longer term effects in early 
postpartum, which is a transition period of sleep instability for mother and child. We 
hypothesized that pregnant patients receiving digital CBTI would report greater 
improvements in sleep (decreased insomnia symptoms, decreased sleep disturbance, 
increased sleep duration), depressive symptoms, and nocturnal cognitive arousal relative to 
control patients. In addition, we hypothesized that these treatment group differences would 
be maintained six weeks after childbirth.
2. Methods
2.1. Study design
In a 6-hospital healthcare system, we randomized patients nearing or entering the third 
trimester of pregnancy in a randomized controlled trial comparing the efficacy of digital 
CBTI versus digital sleep education control. The study was approved by the Internal Review 
Board at the site where the study was located. All patients provided written consent to 
participate. The trial was registered at the US National Institutes of Health 
(ClinicalTrials.gov) #NCT03596879.
2.2. Study populations
Pregnant women receiving prenatal care in the health system were invited to be assessed for 
eligibility. Inclusion criteria were clinically significant insomnia symptoms on a validated 
self-report instrument (ISI score ≥ 10 [41], see Measures below) and gestational age between 
25 and 30 weeks at time of eligibility screening. Exclusion criteria included high risk 
pregnancy per self-report (any reason), being in the care of the maternal-fetal medicine team 
for high risk pregnancy (any reason) per electronic medical records, multiple pregnancy, 
prescription or over-the-counter sleep aid use at the time of screening, alcohol or 
recreational drug use at time of screening, current rotating and/or night shift work, epilepsy 
or seizures, bipolar disorder, diagnosis of a sleep disorder that is untreated (other than 
insomnia), and severe depression (Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale [EPDS] score ≥ 19 
[42], see Measures below).
Invitations advertising a study on perinatal sleep (without mentioning either that we were 
focused on poor sleep or that we were evaluating sleep treatments) were sent via email and 
phone calls to 3585 patients. A total of 535 women contacted us with interest in our study. 
Of these patients, 272 women consented to participating in the study, 267 of whom provided 
sufficient data for full eligibility determination, which were collected between September 
12, 2018 and March 9, 2019. Of these 267 screeners, 156 women met insomnia symptom 
inclusion criteria for the RCT. However, 65 of these women were not enrolled into the trial 
for the following reasons: completed eligibility screening after gestational age limit for RCT 
inclusion (n = 39), high risk pregnancy (most cases were considered high risk due to age; n 
= 10), sleep medications (only doxylamine and diphenhydramine reported; n = 10), severe 
depression (n = 3), did not want to participate (n = 2), shift work (n = 2), patient-reported 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 4
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

untreated sleep apnea (n = 2), multiple pregnancy (n = 2), and current alcohol or recreational 
substance use (n = 2). See Fig. 1 for study flowchart.
2.3. Study interventions
Enrolled patients were randomly assigned to receive either digital CBTI or digital sleep 
education control. For randomization, we used blocked randomization with a block size of 
10 and an allocation ratio of 1:1. Research assistants uninvolved in hypothesis generation or 
data analysis generated randomization allocation, enrolled patients, and assigned patients to 
interventions. Due to the nature of the interventions, patients were not blinded to 
intervention, but they were not informed as to whether their treatment was considered active 
or control.
2.3.1. Digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia—Patients randomized to 
CBTI completed the Sleepio program via the internet (www.sleepio.com, Big Health Inc.). 
Sleepio is among several currently available digital CBTI programs and was selected for this 
study because it is evidence-based, standardized, fully automated, and has been tested in 
multiple RCTs comprising several thousand patients including several of our own trials [31–
39]. In the present study, patients were granted access to Sleepio until either (A) they 
completed six sessions of digital CBTI or (B) they gave birth. The intervention covered 
behavioral components (sleep restriction, stimulus control), cognitive components (eg, 
cognitive restructuring, paradoxical intention), progressive muscle relaxation, and sleep 
hygiene. Only one modification was made to accommodate our pregnant patients: in sleep 
restriction, time in bed could not be prescribed as <6 h, which is consistent with other 
perinatal CBTI trials [27,43]. Sessions were directed by an animated ‘virtual therapist’ who 
reviews and guides progress with the patient based on submitted sleep data. Participants 
were granted access to new sessions weekly (ie, new session became available a week after 
completing a previous session).
2.3.2. Digital sleep education control—Patients randomized to the online sleep 
education condition received six weekly emails based on the National Institutes of Health 
guide to healthy sleep [44]. Information was provided on the basics of sleep regulation; 
relationships between sleep and health problems such as obesity, diabetes, and 
cardiovascular disease; effects of sleep-disruptive substances such as caffeine, nicotine, and 
alcohol; and tips on creating a sleep-conductive bedroom environment. Psychoeducation and 
sleep hygiene were selected because they are common in clinical practice, especially in 
primary care [45,46], and also because they are commonly used as an attention control in 
clinical trials of insomnia. Importantly, sleep education is not considered an effective 
standalone treatment for insomnia [47].
2.4. Study outcomes
All study outcomes were assessed via online surveys hosted by Qualtrics. Assessment 
schedule included assessments at (1) pretreatment: 1–2 weeks before treatment, (2) 
posttreatment: a week after completing treatment or upon discontinuing treatment (indicated 
by informing study personnel of their discontinuation or after two weeks of not engaging in 
treatment), and finally (3) postnatal follow-up: six weeks after childbirth. All pretreatment 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 5
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

measures retained their original assessment windows, whereas posttreatment and follow-up 
measures were modified to assess symptoms over ‘the prior week’ to ensure that symptom 
levels after treatment were estimated for a uniform time period across measures and to 
minimize likelihood of administering posttreatment assessments after childbirth (note: all 
posttreatment assessments in the present study were completed before childbirth).
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) measured global insomnia symptom severity [41,48], which 
was a primary outcome in this RCT. Scores range from 0 to 28 with higher scores indicating 
greater severity. ISI ≥10 indicates clinically significant insomnia symptoms. Per standard 
practice, treatment response was operationalized as a reduction of ≥6 points on the scale and 
remission was defined as ISI ≤7.
Global sleep disturbance was measured using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index [49] 
(PSQI), which was a primary outcome in this RCT. The PSQI measures a wide range of 
sleep parameters over the past month including sleep duration, sleep latency, sleep aid use, 
and sleep difficulties related to insomnia, breathing difficulties, environmental stimuli, and 
other factors. A global cutoff score of PSQI >5 is the original cutoff for differentiating good 
vs poor sleepers, which has been widely supported. We used item-level data to classify 
patients as having sleep onset insomnia symptoms (item 5a: endorsing inability to fall asleep 
within 30 m on ≥3 nights/week) and sleep maintenance insomnia symptoms (item 5b: 
endorsing difficulties with nighttime awakening and/or early morning awakenings on ≥3 
nights/week). This method of classifying sleep onset insomnia symptoms and sleep 
maintenance insomnia symptoms with the PSQI has been supported by prior research [5,50–
52]. In addition to measuring sleep disturbances, we used the PSQI to assess habitual sleep 
duration (item #4a) as a secondary outcome due to CBTI’s documented inconsistent effects 
on sleep duration. We operationalized women sleeping <6 h as short sleepers, which is 
consistent with current practices for objective and self-reported sleep duration [53,54].
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) measured depression [42], which served as a 
secondary outcome. Scores range from 0 to 30 with higher scores indicating greater severity. 
EPDS scores ≥10 suggest clinically significant minor or major depression [55]. EPDS scores 
≥19 represent severe depressive symptoms [56]. To assess suicidal ideation, we examined 
item #10 and operationalized any level of endorsement as a positive case.
Presleep Arousal Scale – Cognitive factor (PSAS-C) [57] measures trait tendency for 
cognitive arousal while trying to fall asleep at night, which served as a secondary outcome. 
Example items from the PSAS-C are “review or ponder events of the day” and “can’t shut 
off thoughts.” Scores range from 8 to 40 with higher scores indicating greater nocturnal 
cognitive arousal. PSAS-C scores >19 may indicate clinically significant insomnia and 
affective symptoms [58].
2.5. Sociodemographics, health information, and potential covariates
At screening, patients provided standard sociodemographic and health information including 
age, race, and parity. In addition, patients reported whether they snore (Yes/No) and 
estimated the timing of their insomnia onset, which we dichotomized into pre-pregnancy vs 
gestational onset for analysis. We collected data in both conditions on number of sessions 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 6
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

completed to assess adherence. In postnatal assessments, patients were asked ‘Over the past 
week, has your baby been difficult to soothe or has your baby been colicky?’ to which 
patients responded on a 4-point Likert-type scale (1 = No, my baby has not been fussy much 
at all and is very easy to soothe to 4 = Yes, my baby has been very colicky and/or difficult to 
soothe). Body mass index (BMI) as an indicator of obesity (operationalized as BMI ≥35) 
was derived from electronic medical records from visit notes closest to the screening date.
2.6. Analysis plan
Power analyses indicated that with an anticipated sample size of n = 90 and anticipating 
medium-large posttreatment group differences in insomnia outcomes (Cohen’s d = 0.65), we 
would have 0.86 power to detect effects at a significance level of α = 0.05. Study outcomes 
were downloaded directly from Qualtrics and all analyses were performed in SPSS version 
25 (IBM Corp) with a significance value of 0.05. Our primary analyses were conducted 
using an intent-to-treat approach using last observation carried forward, which is a 
conservative approach and includes all randomized patients. We first examined descriptive 
data for sample characteristics and compared treatment conditions on sociodemographics, 
pregnancy-related information, snoring, insomnia onset timing, pretreatment values of study 
outcomes, and treatment adherence. Independent samples t-tests were used to compare 
groups on continuous variables, whereas chi-square analysis was used to compare groups on 
dichotomous variables. To examine treatment effects, we ran two series of repeated 
measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models and univariate ANCOVA models. First, 
we used repeated measures ANCOVA to analyze acute main effects of Time and interaction 
effects of Treatment X Time on study outcomes from pre to posttreatment. When a 
significant Treatment X Time effect was observed, we conducted posthoc paired samples t-
tests to examine within group changes in study outcomes. For all study outcomes, we then 
conducted univariate ANCOVAs to test for group differences in posttreatment values while 
controlling for relevant covariates. This process was then repeated to examine changes in 
study outcomes from pretreatment to postnatal follow-up. In all ANCOVA models, we 
entered timing of insomnia onset (pre-pregnancy vs gestational) as a covariate to test 
whether treatment outcomes were associated with insomnia symptom onset. In addition, we 
entered pretreatment group differences as covariates into all ANCOVA models to control for 
potential confounds. In ANCOVA models testing postnatal outcomes, we controlled for 
reported infantile colic due to potential effects on maternal sleep and mood. When 
significant treatment effects were observed, we conducted posthoc analyses to compare rates 
of treatment response and disease remission when applicable.
3. Results
3.1. Sample characteristics and differences by treatment condition
A total of 91 women (aged 29.03 ± 4.16y, gestational week: 27.76 ± 0.87) participated in 
this study. We sought a total RCT sample size of 90. However, the number of eligible 
patients with insomnia exceeded this target by one in our last wave of recruitment. Instead of 
excluding this patient from the trial, she was randomly assigned to treatment (1:1 ratio). 
Trial recruitment ended when we reached our target sample size. The sample mostly 
identified as non-Hispanic white (51.6%) or non-Hispanic black (31.9%). Prior to treatment, 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 7
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

mean ISI scores were in the clinical range (14.49 ± 3.47), mean PSQI scores indicated 
elevated sleep disturbances in the sample (9.36 ± 2.84), and women estimated sleeping an 
average of 6.29 ± 1.23 h per night (24.6% of the sample reported sleeping < 6 h/night before 
treatment). Pretreatment mean EPDS scores were slightly below the clinical cutoff for 
possible depression (8.45 ± 4.47) and mean PSAS-C scores were elevated (22.34 ± 6.54) 
indicating high nocturnal cognitive arousal. Please see Table 1 for additional 
sociodemographic, sleep, and pregnancy-related information.
Next, we compared treatment groups on sociodemographics, pretreatment symptoms, and 
treatment compliance indices. Sociodemographic characteristics did not differ between 
treatment conditions. However, CBTI patients, relative to controls, reported higher rates of 
snoring (Table 1). Despite CBTI patients reporting greater pretreatment depressive 
symptoms (Table 2), the two groups did not differ in frequency of pretreatment suicidal 
ideation (CBTI vs control: 4.3% vs 6.7%, χ2 = 0.24, p = 0.63). Additionally, an association 
suggesting that CBTI patients completed fewer sessions that controls approached 
significance (Table 1). Attrition was low overall, and rates did not differ significantly by 
group: 1.1% of posttreatment outcome data were missing (1 control, 0 CBTI patients) and 
5.5% of six-week postnatal follow-up data were missing (3 controls, 2 CBTI patients).
3.2. Treatment effects on sleep and cognitive-emotional symptoms
All repeated measures and univariate ANCOVA models examining Treatment X Time 
interactions and group differences controlled for insomnia onset timing and group 
differences in snoring, depressive symptoms, and number of sessions completed as potential 
confounds. In addition, models predicting postnatal study outcomes controlled for maternal 
reports of infantile colic.
3.2.1. Insomnia—We first conducted a repeated measures ANCOVA examining changes 
in ISI from pre to posttreatment as estimated by Treatment as a between-subjects factor (see 
Table 2 for full results and Fig. 2 for visual representation of data). In the full sample, 
insomnia symptoms did not change from pre to posttreatment [F(1,85) = 1.58, p = 0.21]. 
However, we observed a significant Treatment X Time interaction [F(1,85) = 8.22, p = 
0.005]. Paired samples t-tests showed that ISI scores significantly decreased in the CBTI 
group by 4.91 points [t(45) = −5.61, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.86], whereas no significant 
change in ISI was observed in the control group. We observed no significant Covariate X 
Time effects. A univariate ANCOVA comparing posttreatment ISI scores between groups 
showed that CBTI patients reported lower insomnia symptoms on the ISI by 2.89 points 
after treatment than controls [F(1,85) = 4.15, p < 0.05, see Table 2 for means]. Consistent 
with these posttreatment differences, treatment response rates were higher in the CBTI 
group than control (37.0% vs 13.3%, χ2 = 6.72, p = 0.01) and a similar group difference in 
remission rates approached significance (34.8% vs 17.8%, χ2 = 3.39, p = 0.07).
To explore which aspects of nocturnal sleep improved with treatment, posthoc chi-square 
tests compared rates of sleep onset insomnia symptoms and sleep maintenance insomnia 
symptoms before and after treatment between conditions. Before treatment, CBTI and 
control conditions did not differ in rates of sleep onset insomnia (41.3% vs 44.4%, χ2 = 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 8
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

0.09, p = 0.76) or sleep maintenance insomnia (84.8% vs 77.8%, χ2 = 0.74, p = 0.39). Yet, 
after treatment, CBTI patients, relative to controls, reported lower rates of both sleep onset 
insomnia (15.2% vs 35.7%, χ2 = 4.92, p = 0.03) and sleep maintenance insomnia (67.4% vs 
85.7%, χ2 = 4.06, p = 0.04).
Next, we ran a repeated measures ANCOVA examining changes in ISI from pretreatment to 
six-week postnatal follow-up. We observed a significant main effect of time [F(1,84) = 
11.32, p = 0.001] revealing that ISI scores for the full sample were 5.06 points lower after 
childbirth relative to pretreatment levels. The Treatment X Time interaction, however, was 
non-significant and a univariate ANCOVA revealed that postnatal ISI scores did not differ 
between treatment conditions (Table 2).
Although Treatment X Time effects were not observed after childbirth, we conducted 
exploratory posthoc comparisons of sleep onset and maintenance symptom rates. CBTI and 
control patients did not differ on rates of postnatal sleep onset insomnia (6.8% vs 7.3%, χ2 = 
0.01, p = 0.93). However, CBTI patients, relative to controls, reported lower rates of sleep 
maintenance insomnia after childbirth (65.9% vs 85.4%, χ2 = 4.32, p = 0.04).
3.2.2. Sleep disturbance—To examine changes in global sleep disturbance, we 
conducted a repeated measures ANCOVA examining changes in PSQI from pre to 
posttreatment as estimated by Treatment as a between-subjects factor (see Table 2 for full 
results and Fig. 2 for visual representation of data). No main effect of time was observed 
[F(1,85) = 0.75, p = 0.39], but we observed a significant Treatment X Time interaction 
[F(1,85) = 16.72, p < 0.001]. Paired samples t-tests showed that PSQI scores significantly 
decreased in the CBTI group by 2.98 points [t(45) = −6.31, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.93], 
whereas no significant change in PSQI was observed in the control group. A univariate 
ANCOVA comparing posttreatment PSQI scores showed that CBTI patients reported lower 
levels of sleep disturbance after treatment relative to control patients [F(1,85) = 9.97, p = 
0.002]. Among poor sleepers before treatment (PSQI > 5), 44.2% (19/45) of CBTI patients 
were re-classified as good sleepers after treatment, which was nearly 3 times greater than the 
frequency of 15.0% (6/40) in the control group (χ2 = 7.20, p = 0.007). We observed no 
significant Covariate X Time effects.
Next, we ran a repeated measures ANCOVA examining changes in PSQI from pretreatment 
to postnatal follow-up. A main effect of time was observed such that PSQI scores in the full 
sample decreased by 2.10 points between pretreatment and postnatal follow-up [F(1,84) = 
5.13, p = 0.03]. However, the Treatment X Time interaction was non-significant [F(1,84) = 
1.16, p = 0.13, Table 2] as were Covariate X Time effects. A univariate ANCOVA revealed 
that postnatal PSQI scores did not differ between treatment conditions [F(1,84) = 0.27, p = 
0.61, Table 2].
3.2.3. Sleep duration—To examine changes in sleep duration, we conducted a repeated 
measures ANCOVA examining changes in sleep duration from pre to posttreatment as 
estimated by Treatment as a between-subjects factor (see Table 2 for full results and Fig. 2 
for visual representation of data). We observed a significant main effect of time such that 
mean sleep duration in the full sample increased by 7 min per night [F(1,84) = 3.97, p < 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 9
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

0.05]. Importantly, we observed a significant Treatment X Time interaction [F(1,85) = 4.94, 
p = 0.03]. Paired samples t-tests showed that sleep duration significantly increased in the 
CBTI group by 32 min per night [t(45) = 2.79, p = 0.008, Cohen’s d = 0.41], whereas no 
significant change in sleep duration was observed in the control group. A univariate 
ANCOVA comparing posttreatment sleep duration showed that CBTI patients reported 
longer sleep than controls by 55 min [6 h 51 min vs 5 h 56 min; F(1,85) = 6.78, p = 0.01, 
Table 2]. We observed no significant Covariate X Time effects.
Next, we ran a repeated measures ANCOVA examining changes in sleep duration from 
pretreatment to postnatal follow-up as estimated by Treatment (Table 2). The main effect of 
time on sleep duration between pretreatment and postnatal follow-up was non-significant (p 
= 0.27). However, the Treatment X Time interaction was again significant [F(1,84) = 4.67, p 
= 0.03]. Relative to pretreatment sleep duration, paired samples t-tests showed that sleep 
duration decreased by 30 min per night after childbirth in the control group [t(44) = −3.97, p 
< 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.60], but that postnatal sleep duration in the CBTI group did not differ 
from pretreatment sleep duration. A univariate ANCOVA revealed that CBTI patients slept 
significantly longer than controls after childbirth by 40 min per night [6 h 6 min vs 5 h 26 
min; F(1,84) = 6.50, p = 0.01, Table 2].
3.2.4. Depression—See Fig. 2 for visual representation of data. A repeated measures 
ANCOVA examining changes in EPDS from pre to posttreatment showed no significant 
main effect of time (p = 0.94), but revealed a significant Treatment X Time interaction 
[F(1,86) = 4.02, p < 0.05, Table 2]. However, a univariate ANCOVA showed that 
posttreatment EPDS scores did not differ between CBTI and control patients [F(1,85) = 
0.62, p = 0.43], indicating that the significant Treatment X Time interaction was due to 
pretreatment group differences in depressive symptoms (Table 2). No Covariates X Time 
interactions were significant.
A repeated measures ANCOVA examining EPDS changes from pretreatment to postnatal 
follow-up revealed a significant main effect of time such that EPDS scores decreased by 
3.48 points from pretreatment to postnatal follow-up [F(1,85) = 7.50, p = 0.008]. However, 
no Treatment X Time interaction was observed [F(1,85) = 2.52, p = 0.12] and a univariate 
ANCOVA showed that postnatal EPDS scores did not differ by treatment condition [F(1,85) 
= 0.00, p = 0.95].
Analyses comparing frequency rates of suicidal ideation between conditions revealed a 
statistical trend to suggest that CBTI may reduce suicidal ideation as posttreatment rates 
were lower in the CBTI than in the control group (0.0% vs 6.7%, χ2 = 3.17, p = 0.08). 
Specifically, all three patients in the control condition who were suicidal before treatment 
remained suicidal after treatment. In comparison, both of the 2 CBTI patients who were 
suicidal before treatment reported no suicidal ideation at posttreatment. Later, at six-week 
postnatal follow-up, 1 CBTI patient endorsed suicidal ideation (2.2%) compared to two 
controls (4.4%), but the difference was non-significant (p = 0.54).
3.2.5. Nocturnal cognitive arousal—We then ran these analyses predicting changes 
and treatment group differences on the PSAS-C. From pre to posttreatment, no main effect 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 10
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of time (p = 0.27) or Treatment X Time interaction (p = 0.45) was observed. Between 
pretreatment and postnatal follow-up, a main effect of time was observed as PSAS-C 
decreased in the full sample by 7.99 points [F(1,84) = 4.09, p = 0.046], whereas no 
Treatment X Time effect was observed (Table 2).
4. Discussion
In a sample of 91 perinatal women, we evaluated the efficacy of digital CBTI in comparison 
to digital sleep education control for prenatal insomnia. Evidence supported the efficacy of 
digital CBTI for this population with improvement in sleep onset and maintenance 
symptoms and sleep duration. Importantly, this RCT was the first to show that CBTI during 
pregnancy protects against sleep loss after childbirth. Despite these improvements in sleep, 
we observed no treatment effects of digital CBTI on depressive symptoms or cognitive 
arousal. Taken together, these data suggest that digital CBTI may be a viable treatment 
option for pregnant women with insomnia, but that it likely requires modifications to 
maximize outcomes in pregnant and postpartum women.
4.1. Digital CBTI improves sleep during pregnancy
The primary sleep complaint prior to treatment was the inability to maintain sleep, thus 
confirming sleep maintenance difficulties as the most common feature of prenatal insomnia 
[1,2,5]. Regarding CBTI efficacy, women in the CBTI arm of the present trial, relative to 
those receiving sleep education, were more likely to respond to treatment, slept longer at 
night, and were less likely to have difficulty falling and staying asleep during pregnancy. 
Indeed, the ability to fall asleep normalized in the CBTI group during pregnancy. 
Nevertheless, rates of difficulty staying asleep remained above normal limits after treatment 
in both groups despite significant improvement with CBTI. This refractory sleep 
maintenance insomnia suggests that standard CBTI is presently ill-designed to adequately 
address these difficulties in pregnant women. Important to emphasize here is that some 
aspects of pregnancy that disrupt sleep may not be fully amenable to CBTI. For instance, 
awakenings related to frequent urination or difficulty finding a comfortable position that are 
common in late pregnancy [5] may not be solved by CBTI strategies. Even so, successful 
implementation of CBTI may minimize the duration of these awakenings.
These RCT results are highly consistent with a recently published RCT of digital CBTI in 
pregnant women by Felder and colleagues that showed that CBTI outperformed waitlist 
control for improving prenatal insomnia and sleep efficiency [59]. Despite promising results 
for digital CBTI in these two RCTs, digital CBTI produced remission rates <50% in both 
trials, which may suggest that standard CBTI may not be ideally equipped to treat prenatal 
insomnia.
Although Felder and colleagues’ RCT [59] and our own treated pregnant women with the 
same digital CBTI program, some notable differences in study outcomes were produced. 
First, we observed significant effects on sleep duration before and after childbirth, whereas 
Felder’s team did not. We cannot precisely identify why trial findings diverged on sleep 
duration during pregnancy, but it is notable that women in our trial reported sleeping <6.5 h 
per night before treatment, whereas average pretreatment sleep duration in Felder’s trial 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 11
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

neared 7 h. This may have created a ceiling effect in their study. Regarding postpartum 
outcomes, Felder’s team did not report postpartum outcomes, thus it is presently unknown 
whether CBTI during pregnancy had longer lasting effects after childbirth in their trial. 
Regarding non-sleep outcomes, Felder’s trial observed antidepressant effects for CBTI, 
whereas our study did not. CBTI effects on depression are often modest especially for 
patients with mild depressive symptoms before treatment [60,61], and it is possible that our 
smaller sample size may have limited our ability to detect such effects.
4.2. Digital vs face-to-face CBTI for perinatal insomnia
Findings from Felder’s RCT [59] and our own are mostly consistent with results from an 
RCT supporting the efficacy of CBTI of clinician-administered face-to-face CBTI to 
substantially improve sleep quality and modestly alleviate depressive symptoms during 
pregnancy in women with insomnia disorder [27]. In all three studies, pretreatment ISI 
scores were ~15, whereas posttreatment scores were 8 in the face-to-face CBTI RCT and 9 
in this trial for digital CBTI (posttreatment ISI mean not reported in Felder’s RCT [59]). 
Notably, posttreatment means in this study and Manber’s face-to-face RCT were not in full 
remission range, thus indicating the need for refinements to this treatment modality or 
additional treatment options to achieve remission in many pregnant women with insomnia.
Even so, early evidence suggests that face-to-face CBTI may be more efficacious for 
perinatal insomnia than presently available digital CBTI programs that are not tailored to 
pregnancy or postpartum. Despite similar changes in mean ISI scores in the active treatment 
arms of this RCT and Manber’s face-to-face CBTI trial, we observed lower remission rates 
after digital CBTI than previously observed for face-to-face CBTI (35% in digital CBTI vs 
64% in face-to-face CBTI [27], based on the same operationalization of remission). Indeed, 
Felder’s RCT produced [59] remission rates of 44% with digital CBTI, which was lower 
than Manber’s face-to-face CBTI.
Important to emphasize, however, is that differential rates of remission between CBTI and 
control appear similar for digital and face-to-face CBTI: 17e22% difference in remission 
rates between digital CBTI and control, compared with 12% difference in remission rates in 
face-to-face RCT [27]. It is unclear why control remission rates were so high in the previous 
face-to-face study (52%) compared with 18e22% in the digital CBTI trials. However, high 
remission rates in the control condition of Manber’s RCT may be attributable in part to 
including psychoeducation on maternal and infant sleep (potentially normalizing dramatic 
changes in maternal sleep), differences in method of contact (digital control vs face-to-face 
control), sampling differences (eg, patients who engage in face-to-face treatment may be 
more highly motivated than those who engage in digital treatment), or some combination. 
Even so, these early data suggest that, for pregnant women with insomnia, face-to-face 
CBTI (in-person or real-time video telemedicine) may be more efficacious than digital CBTI 
for which currently available programs are not tailored for pregnancy or postpartum.
4.3. Digital CBTI improves sleep after childbirth
In early postpartum, patients who received digital CBTI were less likely to have sleep 
maintenance insomnia symptoms and slept an average of 40 min longer per night. To 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 12
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

emphasize the magnitude of difference between groups, patients in the control condition 
reported sleeping an average of <6 h per night, which is linked to serious morbidity and 
early mortality [54,62], whereas treated patients averaged > 6 h per night. Our study is the 
first trial to provide evidence to suggest that improving sleep during pregnancy via CBTI 
also benefits postpartum sleep and possibly offers protection for new mothers from against 
postnatal disruptions to maternal sleep. In other words, although many new moms 
experience frequent nighttime awakenings due to infant feeding or poor infant sleep, moms 
who receive cognitive and behavioral direction in promoting good sleep may be better 
equipped to re-initiate sleep after middle-of-the-night awakenings, whereas those without 
this guidance may be susceptible to prolonged and excessive nighttime wake bouts. This is 
consistent with prospective data showing that CBTI (face-to-face and digital) produces long-
term improvements in sleep and prevents the development of mental illness over months and 
years in the broader patient population [32,63].
Although digital CBTI produces improvement in postnatal sleep duration, we also observed 
that postnatal insomnia symptoms decreased significantly in both the CBTI and sleep 
education control conditions and that few patients reported difficulty falling asleep in early 
postpartum. This pattern may reflect two non-mutually exclusive possibilities. For women 
who developed insomnia gestationally, childbirth may represent a removal of the insomnia 
trigger and thus allow some sleep normalization in postpartum. In addition, newborn infants 
have highly dysregulated sleep and also need to feed during the night, thus high levels of 
sleep restriction in the newborn period may have washed out some of the postnatal treatment 
effects on insomnia symptoms by sleep depriving moms. Thus, it remains unclear to what 
extent insomnia symptoms re-emerge after infant sleep patterns stabilize and whether 
mothers who received CBTI may be protected against worsening insomnia later in the 
postpartum period.
4.4. The need to enhance the antidepressant effects of CBTI
Digital CBTI in the general adult population improves depressive symptoms [31,32,35,64], 
and the prior face-to-face and digital CBTI RCTs for prenatal insomnia revealed small but 
significant effects on depression in patients with mild symptoms before treatment [27,59]. In 
the present study, however, patients who received digital CBTI did not report lower 
depressive symptoms during pregnancy following treatment or at postnatal follow-up. Given 
that RCTs of CBTI show modest to no therapeutic benefit for perinatal depressive 
symptoms, it appears that standard CBTI—irrespective of delivery method—may be ill-
designed to reduce perinatal depressive symptoms in a substantial and clinically meaningful 
way.
Even so, we observed a statistical trend to suggest that CBTI may reduce suicidal ideation 
after treatment. In other trials, improving sleep quality with digital CBTI effectively reduces 
two-year risk of developing clinical depression [32]. It is possible that reducing insomnia 
symptoms (particularly difficulty falling asleep, which is closely linked to perinatal 
depression and suicidality [12]) and extending sleep duration may reduce suicidal thoughts 
and behaviors and protect women against perinatal increases in depression. Larger RCTs 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 13
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with follow-up assessments across the postpartum year are needed to better characterize 
potential protective qualities of insomnia treatments for depression and suicidal ideation.
4.5. Standard CBTI does not reduce cognitive arousal: a critical limitation
Digital CBTI had no effect on nocturnal cognitive arousal. This is consistent with evidence 
from a prior face-to-face CBTI RCT also showing minimal or no effect of standard CBTI on 
cognitive arousal [61]. Given that individuals with insomnia have cognitive-emotional 
profiles similar to patients with depression and anxiety [65–69], it is unsurprising that 1–2 
sessions of cognitive therapy in a standard 6-session CBTI protocol has minimal impact on 
the manner in which poorly sleeping pregnant women process stress and other negative 
information. Augmentation strategies to enhance CBTI effects on cognitive arousal (eg, 
rumination, worry) may improve acute treatment response by reducing faulty cognitive 
processing known to fuel insomnia [70,71] and may even enhance long-term outcomes for 
treatment responders by reducing a robust risk factor for insomnia relapse [72]. As pregnant 
women, especially those with insomnia, endorse high levels of cognitive arousal and stress-
related sleep reactivity, which are linked to depression and suicidal ideation during 
pregnancy [11,12], directly targeting concomitant cognitive arousal and depressive 
symptoms should be primary goals of insomnia therapy in perinatal populations.
4.6. Limitations
The present study should be interpreted in light of certain limitations. Our primary limitation 
concerns a lack of follow-up assessments beyond the newborn period. Longer-term 
prospective data are needed to improve our understanding of the durability of these effects in 
new mothers and the potential for prevention of depression and other consequences of 
insomnia including quality of life, and economic outcomes. Indeed, our postnatal follow-up 
was during the newborn period, which is typically marked by chronic sleep deprivation due 
to nighttime infant feeding and unstable infant sleep patterns. Postnatal sleep studies should 
assess sleep at least throughout the first postpartum year and account for key environmental 
factors that may impact maternal sleep and wellbeing such as maternity leave and partner 
support. It is possible that this transition period of sleep instability may have masked 
therapeutic effects of CBTI on insomnia symptoms that could potentially re-emerge after 
infant sleep stabilizes. Future studies should characterize patterns of insomnia re-emergence 
and relapse across treatment conditions as well as trajectories of postpartum depressive 
symptoms over the longer-term. In addition, we did not collect sleep diary data in the present 
study, which would have enriched our study outcomes. Special consideration may be given 
to sleep pattern stability, especially after childbirth. If CBTI patients continued to implement 
behavioral sleep strategies, it is possible that they may have more stable sleep patterns, even 
in the newborn period. Future studies should collect sleep diary data in pregnant and 
postpartum women to determine whether CBTI helps moms stabilize their sleep schedules.
Another key limitation regards a lack of objective sleep assessments and physiological 
markers of cognitive arousal. CBTI produces minimal to no effect on objective sleep 
disturbance in non-pregnant patient populations [73]. And although patient-reported 
outcomes best represent the clinical experience of insomnia, there has been a resurgence of 
interest in objective sleep disturbance within insomnia [74], given its association with 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 14
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

morbidity, mortality, and treatment-resistance [53,75–78]. Notably, cognitive arousal while 
trying to fall asleep is associated with objective sleep disturbances [79–84], thus enhancing 
CBTI effects on cognitive arousal (both objective and self-report measures) has potential to 
improve objective sleep. Lastly, our study was underpowered to test treatment effects on 
suicidal ideation, which has a relatively low base rate, especially considering that severely 
depressed women were excluded. Notably, just 3 controls and 2 CBTI patients endorsed 
suicidal ideation before treatment. Although both CBTI patients denied suicidal ideation 
after treatment, whereas all controls continued to endorse this symptom, the analysis was 
non-significant due to insufficient statistical power.
4.7. Tailoring CBTI for perinatal women with insomnia
Data from this RCT and prior CBTI trials suggest that standard CBTI is not currently 
designed to maximally treat prenatal insomnia. Further, digital interventions may be at an 
added disadvantage due to the lack of personalization to the variable perinatal experience. 
Given the unique factors that trigger and/or perpetuate perinatal sleep problems (eg, 
pregnancy/maternal-specific worries and concerns, physical discomfort, urinary frequency, 
fetal activity, difficult infant temperament and sleep [5,7,12,85–87]), combined with 
potential obstacles to insomnia therapy adherence for new and expectant mothers (eg, 
difficulty adhering to sleep restriction), perinatal insomnia patients will likely best benefit 
from mobile health interventions designed to account for the experiences of pregnancy and 
new motherhood.
Indeed, CBTI–whether delivered by sleep or mental health clinicians or digitally–should be 
better tailored for new and expectant mothers. In the present study, the only modification 
was to ensure that time-in-bed was never restricted below 6 h. In the prior face-to-face CBTI 
RCT, the authors also included this modification in addition to adding an extra 30 min to 
time-in-bed (added to self-reported habitual sleep duration) and providing perinatal 
psychoeducation. It is possible that these additional modifications enhanced their treatment 
outcomes in this patient population. Potential modifications to consider may be scheduling 
limited naps to ensure opportunity to obtain adequate sleep [43], augmenting CBTI with 
mindfulness meditation to reduce cognitive arousal [88–90] and to improve healthy coping 
with perinatal stress and sleep problems [91–95], and implementing postpartum follow-up 
visits to monitor maternal sleep and to teach mothers behavioral interventions to improve 
infant sleep [96–98].
5. Conclusions
Despite over half of pregnant women experiencing clinically significant insomnia, few 
empirically supported insomnia treatment options are available for this population. Early 
evidence indicates that CBTI is efficacious for improving sleep during pregnancy, which 
also has longer-term benefits for the postnatal period but perhaps to a lesser extent. Although 
evidence supports CBTI efficacy when delivered through a fully-automated digital 
intervention, treatment outcomes may be superior for pregnant women receiving the 
intervention from a specialist with expertise in maternal and infant sleep, who may be better 
able to navigate patient factors unique to the perinatal period. Even so, digital CBTI 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 15
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

represents a more widely available and more cost-effective alternative for pregnant women 
with insomnia who have difficulty accessing CBTI specialty care. Future studies are needed 
to better tailor CBTI—face-to-face and digital—for treating insomnia in the perinatal period.
Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (198-FP-18, PI: Kalmbach). Dr. Cheng’s 
effort was supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (K23 HL13866, PI: Cheng). Dr. Swanson’s 
effort was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (K23 HL122461, PI: Swanson). We would like 
to thank Colin Espie, Christopher Miller, and everyone at Sleepio for their support of our research.
Disclosure statement
Dr. Kalmbach reports receiving nonfinancial support from Big Health Inc (provision of Sleepio for use in this 
clinical trial). Dr. Cheng has received research support from Harmony Biosciences. Dr. Henry reports being an 
employee of Big Health Inc, which owns Sleepio. Dr. Roth has received research support from Aventis, Cephalon, 
Glaxo Smith Kline, Neurocrine, Pfizer, Sanofi, Schering-Plough, Sepracor, Somaxon, Syrex, Takeda, TransOral, 
Wyeth and Xenoport and has acted as a consultant for Abbott, Acadia, Acoglix, Actelion, Alchemers, Alza, Ancil, 
Arena, Astra Zeneca, Aventis, AVER, BMS, BTG, Cephalon, Cypress, Dove, Elan, Eli Lilly, Evotec, Forest, Glaxo 
Smith Kline, Hypnion, Impax, Intec, Intra-Cellular, Jazz, Johnson & Johnson, King, Lundbeck, McNeil, Medici 
Nova, Merck & Co., Neurim, Neurocrine, Neurogen, Novartis, Orexo, Organon, Prestwick, Procter-Gamble, Pfizer, 
Purdue, Resteva, Roche, Sanofi, Schering-Plough, Sepracor, Servier, Shire, Somaxon, Syrex, Takeda, TransOral, 
Vanda, Vivometrics, Wyeth, Yamanuchi, and Xenoport. No other financial or non-financial interests exist. Dr. Drake 
has received financial research support from Eisai Co., Procter & Gamble, Jazz, Suven; and has served on speakers 
bureau for Harmony Biosciences.
References
[1]. Mindell JA, Cook RA, Nikolovski J. Sleep patterns and sleep disturbances across pregnancy. Sleep 
Med 2015;16(4):483–8. [PubMed: 25666847] 
[2]. Mindell JA, Jacobson BJ. Sleep disturbances during pregnancy. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 
2000;29(6):590–7.
[3]. Hutchison BL, Stone PR, McCowan LM, et al. A postal survey of maternal sleep in late pregnancy. 
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2012;12(1):144. [PubMed: 23228137] 
[4]. Facco FL, Kramer J, Ho KH, et al. Sleep disturbances in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
2010;115(1):77–83. [PubMed: 20027038] 
[5]. Kalmbach DA, Cheng P, Sangha R, et al. Insomnia, short sleep, and snoring in mid-to-late 
pregnancy: disparities related to poverty, race, and obesity. Nat Sci Sleep 2019;11:301–15. 
[PubMed: 31807103] 
[6]. Fernández-Alonso AM, Trabalón-Pastor M, Chedraui P, et al. Factors related to insomnia and 
sleepiness in the late third trimester of pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2012;286(1):55–61. 
[PubMed: 22331224] 
[7]. Drheim SK, Bjorvatn B, Eberhard-Gran M. Insomnia and depressive symptoms in late pregnancy: 
a population-based study. Behav Sleep Med 2012;10(3):152–66. [PubMed: 22742434] 
[8]. Kızılırmak A, Timur S, Kartal B. Insomnia in pregnancy and factors related to insomnia. Sci 
World J 2012;2012.
[9]. Pien GW, Schwab RJ. Sleep disorders during pregnancy. Sleep 2004;27(7): 1405–17. [PubMed: 
15586794] 
[10]. Reichner CA. Insomnia and sleep deficiency in pregnancy. Obstet Med 2015;8(4):168–71. 
[PubMed: 27512475] 
[11]. Palagini L, Cipollone G, Masci I, et al. Stress-related sleep reactivity is associated with insomnia, 
psychopathology and suicidality in pregnant women: preliminary results. Sleep Med 
2019;56:145–50. [PubMed: 30803833] 
[12]. Kalmbach DA, Cheng P, Ong JC, et al. Depression and suicidal ideation in pregnancy: exploring 
relationships with insomnia, short sleep, and nocturnal rumination. Sleep Med 2019;65:62–73. 
[PubMed: 31710876] 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 16
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

[13]. Volkovich E, Tikotzky L, Manber R. Objective and subjective sleep during pregnancy: links with 
depressive and anxiety symptoms. Arch Wom Ment Health 2016;19(1):173–81.
[14]. Okun ML, Mancuso RA, Hobel CJ, et al. Poor sleep quality increases symptoms of depression 
and anxiety in postpartum women. J Behav Med 2018;41(5): 703–10. [PubMed: 30030650] 
[15]. Manber R, Steidtmann D, Chambers AS, et al. Factors associated with clinically significant 
insomnia among pregnant low-income Latinas. J Wom Health 2013;22(8):694–701.
[16]. Swanson LM, Pickett SM, Flynn H, et al. Relationships among depression, anxiety, and insomnia 
symptoms in perinatal women seeking mental health treatment. J Wom Health 2011;20(4):553–8.
[17]. Mourady D, Richa S, Karam R, et al. Associations between quality of life, physical activity, 
worry, depression and insomnia: a cross-sectional designed study in healthy pregnant women. 
PloS One 2017;12(5):e0178181. [PubMed: 28542529] 
[18]. Bacaro V, Benz F, Pappaccogli A, et al. Interventions for sleep problems during pregnancy: a 
systematic review. Sleep Med Rev 2019:101234.
[19]. Roehrs T, Roth T. Insomnia pharmacotherapy. Neurotherapeutics 2012;9(4): 728–38. [PubMed: 
22976558] 
[20]. Ohayon MM. Epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what we still need to learn. Sleep 
Med Rev 2002;6(2):97–111. [PubMed: 12531146] 
[21]. Okun ML, Ebert R, Saini B. A review of sleep-promoting medications used in pregnancy. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2015;212(4):428–41. [PubMed: 25448509] 
[22]. Sedov ID, Goodman SH, Tomfohr-Madsen LM. Insomnia treatment preferences during 
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2017;46(3): e95–104.
[23]. Qaseem A, Kansagara D, Forciea MA, et al. Management of chronic insomnia disorder in adults: 
a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 
2016;165(2):125–33. [PubMed: 27136449] 
[24]. Riemann D, Perlis ML. The treatments of chronic insomnia: a review of benzodiazepine receptor 
agonists and psychological and behavioral therapies. Sleep Med Rev 2009;13(3):205–14. 
[PubMed: 19201632] 
[25]. Mitchell MD, Gehrman P, Perlis M, et al. Comparative effectiveness of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia: a systematic review. BMC Fam Pract 2012;13(1):40. [PubMed: 22631616] 
[26]. Tomfohr-Madsen LM, Clayborne ZM, Rouleau CR, et al. Sleeping for two: an open-pilot study 
of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in pregnancy. Behav Sleep Med 2017;15(5):377–93. 
[PubMed: 27124405] 
[27]. Manber R, Bei B, Simpson N, et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy for prenatal insomnia: a 
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2019;133(5):911. [PubMed: 30969203] 
[28]. Cain MA, Brumley J, Louis-Jacques A, et al. A pilot study of a sleep intervention delivered 
through group prenatal care to overweight and obese women. Behav Sleep Med 2019:1–11.
[29]. Thomas A, Grandner M, Nowakowski S, et al. Where are the behavioral sleep medicine providers 
and where are they needed? A geographic assessment. Behav Sleep Med 2016;14(6):687–98. 
[PubMed: 27159249] 
[30]. Koffel E, Bramoweth AD, Ulmer CS. Increasing access to and utilization of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia (CBT-I): a narrative review. J Gen Intern Med 2018;33(6):955–62. 
[PubMed: 29619651] 
[31]. Cheng P, Luik AI, Fellman-Couture C, et al. Efficacy of digital CBT for insomnia to reduce 
depression across demographic groups: a randomized trial. Psychol Med 2018:1–10.
[32]. Cheng P, Kalmbach DA, Joseph C, et al. Depression prevention via digital CBT for insomnia: a 
randomized controlled trial. Sleep 2019;42(10):zsz150.
[33]. Pillai V, Anderson JR, Cheng P, et al. The anxiolytic effects of cognitive behavior therapy for 
insomnia: preliminary results from a web-delivered protocol. J Sleep Med Disord 2015;2(2):a–7.
[34]. Freeman D, Sheaves B, Goodwin GM, et al. The effects of improving sleep on mental health 
(OASIS): a randomised controlled trial with mediation analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 
2017;4(10):749–58. [PubMed: 28888927] 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 17
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

[35]. Espie CA, Emsley R, Kyle SD, et al. Effect of digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia 
on health, psychological well-being, and sleep-related quality of life: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2019;76(1):21–30. [PubMed: 30264137] 
[36]. Espie CA, Kyle SD, Williams C, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of online cognitive 
behavioral therapy for chronic insomnia disorder delivered via an automated media-rich web 
application. Sleep 2012;35(6): 769–81. [PubMed: 22654196] 
[37]. Bostock S, Luik AI, Espie CA. Sleep and productivity benefits of digital cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia: a randomized controlled trial conducted in the workplace environment. J 
Occup Environ Med 2016;58(7): 683–9. [PubMed: 27257747] 
[38]. Barnes CM, Miller JA, Bostock S. Helping employees sleep well: effects of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia on work outcomes. J Appl Psychol 2017;102(1):104. [PubMed: 27690480] 
[39]. McGrath ER, Espie CA, Power A, et al. Sleep to lower elevated blood pressure: a randomized 
controlled trial (SLEPT). Am J Hypertens 2017;30(3):319–27. [PubMed: 28391289] 
[40]. Zachariae R, Lyby MS, Ritterband LM, et al. Efficacy of internet-delivered cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for insomniaea systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Sleep Med Rev 2016;30:1–10. [PubMed: 26615572] 
[41]. Morin CM, Belleville G, Bélanger L, et al. The Insomnia Severity Index: psychometric indicators 
to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep 2011;34(5):601–8. [PubMed: 
21532953] 
[42]. Cox JL, Holden JM, Sagovsky R. Detection of postnatal depression: development of the 10-item 
Edinburgh postnatal depression scale. Br J Psychiatry 1987;150(6):782–6. [PubMed: 3651732] 
[43]. Swanson LM, Flynn H, Adams-Mundy JD, et al. An open pilot of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for insomnia in women with postpartum depression. Behav Sleep Med 2013;11(4):297–307. 
[PubMed: 23216373] 
[44]. Health NIo. Your guide to healthy sleep. Southern Medical Association; 2011.
[45]. Irish LA, Kline CE, Gunn HE, et al. The role of sleep hygiene in promoting public health: a 
review of empirical evidence. Sleep Med Rev 2015;22:23–36. [PubMed: 25454674] 
[46]. Grandner MA, Chakravorty S. Insomnia in primary care: misreported, mishandled, and just plain 
missed. J Clin Sleep Med 2017;13(8):937–9. [PubMed: 28728626] 
[47]. Morgenthaler T, Kramer M, Alessi C, et al. Practice parameters for the psychological and 
behavioral treatment of insomnia: an update. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report. 
Sleep 2006;29(11):1415–9. [PubMed: 17162987] 
[48]. Bastien CH, Vallières A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome 
measure for insomnia research. Sleep Med 2001;2(4):297–307. [PubMed: 11438246] 
[49]. Buysse DJ, Reynolds III CF, Monk TH, et al. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new 
instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatr Res 1989;28(2):193–213.
[50]. Fichtenberg NL, Putnam SH, Mann NR, et al. Insomnia screening in postacute traumatic brain 
injury: utility and validity of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 
2001;80(5):339–45. [PubMed: 11327555] 
[51]. Fichtenberg NL, Zafonte RD, Putnam S, et al. Insomnia in a post-acute brain injury sample. 
Brain Inj 2002;16(3):197–206. [PubMed: 11874613] 
[52]. Kalmbach DA, Conroy DA, Falk H, et al. Poor sleep is linked to impeded recovery from 
traumatic brain injury. 2018.
[53]. Vgontzas AN, Fernandez-Mendoza J, Liao D, et al. Insomnia with objective short sleep duration: 
the most biologically severe phenotype of the disorder. Sleep Med Rev 2013;17(4):241–54. 
[PubMed: 23419741] 
[54]. Kalmbach DA, Pillai V, Arnedt JT, et al. DSM-5 insomnia and short sleep: comorbidity landscape 
and racial disparities. Sleep 2016;39(12):2101–11. [PubMed: 27634805] 
[55]. Matthey S, Henshaw C, Elliott S, et al. Variability in use of cut-off scores and formats on the 
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scaleeimplications for clinical and research practice. Arch Wom 
Ment Health 2006;9(6):309–15.
[56]. McCabe-Beane JE, Segre LS, Perkhounkova Y, et al. The identification of severity ranges for the 
Edinburgh postnatal depression scale. J Reprod Infant Psychol 2016;34(3):293–303.
Kalmbach et al.
Page 18
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

[57]. Nicassio PM, Mendlowitz DR, Fussell JJ, et al. The phenomenology of the pre-sleep state: the 
development of the pre-sleep arousal scale. Behav Res Ther 1985;23(3):263–71. [PubMed: 
4004706] 
[58]. Puzino K, Frye SS, LaGrotte CA, et al. Am I (hyper) aroused or anxious? Clinical significance of 
pre-sleep somatic arousal in young adults. J Sleep Res 2019: e12829.
[59]. Felder JN, Epel ES, Neuhaus J, et al. Efficacy of digital cognitive behavioral therapy for the 
treatment of insomnia symptoms among pregnant women: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Psychiatry 2020. 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.4491.
[60]. Manber R, Bernert RA, Suh S, et al. CBT for insomnia in patients with high and low depressive 
symptom severity: adherence and clinical outcomes. Focus 2014;12(1):90–8.
[61]. Kalmbach DA, Cheng P, Arnedt JT, et al. Treating insomnia improves depression, maladaptive 
thinking, and hyperarousal in postmenopausal women: comparing cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for insomnia (CBTI), sleep restriction therapy, and sleep hygiene education. Sleep Med 
2019;55:124–34. [PubMed: 30785053] 
[62]. Sivertsen B, Pallesen S, Glozier N, et al. Midlife insomnia and subsequent mortality: the 
Hordaland health study. BMC Publ Health 2014;14(1):720.
[63]. Castronovo V, Galbiati A, Sforza M, et al. Long-term clinical effect of group cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia: a case series study. Sleep Med 2018;47:54–9. [PubMed: 29753926] 
[64]. Christensen H, Batterham PJ, Gosling JA, et al. Effectiveness of an online insomnia program 
(SHUTi) for prevention of depressive episodes (the GoodNight Study): a randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2016;3(4): 333–41. [PubMed: 26827250] 
[65]. Baglioni C, Spiegelhalder K, Lombardo C, et al. Sleep and emotions: a focus on insomnia. Sleep 
Med Rev 2010;14(4):227–38. [PubMed: 20137989] 
[66]. Fernandez-Mendoza J, Calhoun SL, Bixler EO, et al. Sleep misperception and chronic insomnia 
in the general population: the role of objective sleep duration and psychological profiles. 
Psychosom Med 2011;73(1):88. [PubMed: 20978224] 
[67]. Fernandez-Mendoza J, Vela-Bueno A, Vgontzas AN, et al. Cognitive-emotional hyperarousal as a 
premorbid characteristic of individuals vulnerable to insomnia. Psychosom Med 2010;72(4):397–
403. [PubMed: 20368477] 
[68]. Pillai V, Drake CL. Sleep and repetitive thought: the role of rumination and worry in sleep 
disturbance. In: Babson KA, Feldner MT, editors. Sleep and affect. London: Elsevier; 2015. p. 
201–25.
[69]. Fernandez-Mendoza J, Shaffer ML, Olavarrieta-Bernardino S, et al. Cognitive-emotional 
hyperarousal in the offspring of parents vulnerable to insomnia: a nuclear family study. J Sleep 
Res 2014;23(5):489–98. [PubMed: 24889269] 
[70]. Harvey AG. Unwanted intrusive thoughts in insomnia. 2005.
[71]. Harvey AG. A cognitive theory and therapy for chronic insomnia. J Cognit Psychother 
2005;19(1):41.
[72]. Ong JC, Shapiro SL, Manber R. Mindfulness meditation and cognitive behavioral therapy for 
insomnia: a naturalistic 12-month follow-up. Explore J Sci Heal 2009;5(1):30–6.
[73]. Mitchell L, Bisdounis L, Ballesio A, et al. The impact of cognitive behavioural therapy for 
insomnia on objective sleep parameters: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Sleep Med Rev 
2019;47:90–102. [PubMed: 31377503] 
[74]. Dietch JR, Taylor DJ. The enigma of objective and subjective measurement of response to 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia: call to action. Sleep Med Rev 2019;47:119–21. 
[PubMed: 31522979] 
[75]. Bathgate CJ, Edinger JD, Krystal AD. Insomnia patients with objective short sleep duration have 
a blunted response to cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Sleep 2017;40(1).
[76]. Miller CB, Espie CA, Bartlett DJ, et al. Acceptability, tolerability, and potential efficacy of 
cognitive behavioural therapy for Insomnia Disorder subtypes defined by polysomnography: a 
retrospective cohort study. Sci Rep 2018;8(1): 6664. [PubMed: 29703951] 
[77]. Fernandez-Mendoza J. The insomnia with short sleep duration phenotype: an update on it’s 
importance for health and prevention. Curr Opin Psychiatr 2017;30(1):56–63.
Kalmbach et al.
Page 19
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

[78]. Edinger JD, Krystal AD. Subtyping primary insomnia: is sleep state misperception a distinct 
clinical entity? Sleep Med Rev 2003;7(3):203–14. [PubMed: 12927120] 
[79]. Hall M, Buysse D, Reynolds C, et al. Stress-related intrusive thoughts disrupt sleep onset and 
continuity. Sleep Res 1996;25:163.
[80]. Wuyts J, De Valck E, Vandekerckhove M, et al. The influence of pre-sleep cognitive arousal on 
sleep onset processes. Int J Psychophysiol 2012;83(1): 8–15. [PubMed: 21963535] 
[81]. Galbiati A, Giora E, Sarasso S, et al. Repetitive thought is associated with both subjectively and 
objectively recorded polysomnographic indices of disrupted sleep in insomnia disorder. Sleep 
Med 2018;45:55–61. [PubMed: 29680429] 
[82]. Gross RT, Borkovec T. Effects of a cognitive intrusion manipulation on the sleep-onset latency of 
good sleepers. Behav Ther 1982;13(1):112–6.
[83]. Zoccola PM, Dickerson SS, Lam S. Rumination predicts longer sleep onset latency after an acute 
psychosocial stressor. Psychosom Med 2009;71(7): 771–5. [PubMed: 19622710] 
[84]. Kalmbach DA, Buysse DJ, Cheng P, et al. Nocturnal cognitive arousal is associated with 
objective sleep disturbance and indicators of physiologic hyperarousal in good sleepers and 
individuals with insomnia disorder. Sleep Med 2020;71:151e60. 10.1016/j.sleep.2019.11.1184. 
[PubMed: 32247571] 
[85]. Krystal AD. Insomnia in women. Clin Cornerstone 2003;5(3):41–50.
[86]. Martini J, Asselmann E, Einsle F, et al. A prospective-longitudinal study on the association of 
anxiety disorders prior to pregnancy and pregnancy-and child-related fears. J Anxiety Disord 
2016;40:58–66. [PubMed: 27115070] 
[87]. Bayer JK, Hiscock H, Hampton A, et al. Sleep problems in young infants and maternal mental 
and physical health. J Paediatr Child Health 2007;43(1–2): 66–73. [PubMed: 17207059] 
[88]. Ong JC, Shapiro SL, Manber R. Combining mindfulness meditation with cognitive-behavior 
therapy for insomnia: a treatment-development study. Behav Ther 2008;39(2):171–82. [PubMed: 
18502250] 
[89]. Ong JC, Manber R, Segal Z, et al. A randomized controlled trial of mindfulness meditation for 
chronic insomnia. Sleep 2014;37(9):1553–63. [PubMed: 25142566] 
[90]. Deyo M, Wilson KA, Ong J, et al. Mindfulness and rumination: does mindfulness training lead to 
reductions in the ruminative thinking associated with depression? EXPLORE J Sci Heal 
2009;5(5):265–71.
[91]. Vieten C, Astin J. Effects of a mindfulness-based intervention during pregnancy on prenatal 
stress and mood: results of a pilot study. Arch Wom Ment Health 2008;11(1):67–74.
[92]. Goodman JH, Guarino A, Chenausky K, et al. CALM Pregnancy: results of a pilot study of 
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for perinatal anxiety. Arch Wom Ment Health 
2014;17(5):373–87.
[93]. Beddoe AE, Yang C-PP, Kennedy HP, et al. The effects of mindfulness-based yoga during 
pregnancy on maternal psychological and physical distress. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 
2009;38(3):310–9.
[94]. Wong MY, Ree MJ, Lee CW. Enhancing CBT for chronic insomnia: a randomised clinical trial of 
additive components of mindfulness or cognitive therapy. Clin Psychol Psychother 
2016;23(5):377–85. [PubMed: 26497535] 
[95]. Felder JN, Laraia B, Coleman-Phox K, et al. Poor sleep quality, psychological distress, and the 
buffering effect of mindfulness training during pregnancy. Behav Sleep Med 2018;16(6):611–24. 
[PubMed: 28060531] 
[96]. Gradisar M, Jackson K, Spurrier NJ, et al. Behavioral interventions for infant sleep problems: a 
randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics 2016;137(6): e20151486.
[97]. Hiscock H, Bayer J, Gold L, et al. Improving infant sleep and maternal mental health: a cluster 
randomised trial. Arch Dis Child 2007;92(11):952–8. [PubMed: 17158146] 
[98]. Wolfson A, Lacks P, Futterman A. Effects of parent training on infant sleeping patterns, parents’ 
stress, and perceived parental competence. J Consult Clin Psychol 1992;60(1):41. [PubMed: 
1556284] 
Kalmbach et al.
Page 20
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1. 
Flow chart of study enrollment and participation.
Kalmbach et al.
Page 21
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2. 
Means and 95% confidence intervals of sample mean standard errors presented for insomnia 
symptoms, sleep disturbance, sleep duration, and depressive symptoms by condition (CBTI 
vs Control) at pretreatment, posttreatment, and 6-week postnatal follow-up (* represents 
significant group differences in mean outcome scores per univariate ANCOVA).
Kalmbach et al.
Page 22
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Kalmbach et al.
Page 23
Table 1
Sample demographics and characteristics (n = 91)
All subjects
Sleep Education
CBTI
Sample size
91
45
46
Age (M±SD)
29.03 ± 4.16y
29.16 ± 4.11
28.91 ± 28.91
t(89) = −0.28, p = 0.78
Poverty (n; %)
16/90; 17.8%
9/44; 20.5%
7/46; 15.2%
χ2 = 0.42, p = 0.52
Obesity (BMI ≥ 35) (n; %)
12/86; 14.0%
3/42; 7.1%
9/44; 20.5%
χ2 = 3.17, p = 0.08
Multiparous (n; %)
59/91; 64.8%
15/45; 33.3%
17/46; 37.0%
χ2 = 0.13, p = 0.72
Snore (n; %)
28/91; 30.8%
9/45; 20.0%
19/46; 41.3%
χ2 = 4.85, p = 0.03
Gestational onset of insomnia (n; %)
20/91; 22.0%
11/45; 24.4%
9/46; 19.6%
χ2 = 0.32, p = 0.57
Race (n; %)
χ2 = 0.38, p = 1.00
 White
47; 51.6%
23; 51.1%
24; 52.2%
 Black
29; 31.9%
14; 31.1%
15; 32.6%
 Asian
6; 6.6%
3; 6.7%
3; 6.5%
 Middle Eastern or Arabic
4; 4.4%
2; 4.4%
2; 4.3%
 Hispanic or Latino
2; 2.2%
1; 2.2%
1; 2.2%
 Multiracial
3; 3.3%
2; 4.4%
2.2%
Number of sessions completed (M±SD)
5.14 ± 1.75
5.47 ± 1.58
4.83 ± 1.88
t(89) = −1.76, p = 0.08
Note: Age = age (in years) at study screening. BMI = body mass index derived from electronic medical records. Obesity was operationalized as BMI ≥35 as this cutoff is a robust and sensitive predictor of 
sleep-disordered breathing in pregnant women. M±SD = mean and standard deviation. n; % = number of participants and percentage within that group. t = t-statistic from independent samples t-test 
comparing means between sleep education and CBTI conditions. χ2 = chi-square value derived from comparing treatment conditions on binary variables. p = significant value. Age, income, parity, 
insomnia onset, and race were all reported by patients. Poverty was operationalized as <$20,000 annual household income
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Kalmbach et al.
Page 24
Table 2
Comparing digital CBTI and sleep education control on sleep and cognitive-emotional outcomes during pregnancy and after childbirth.
Pretreatment
M±SD
Posttreatment
M±SD
Postnatal
M±SD
Δ Pre- to posttreatment
Δ Pre- to 6-week Postnatal
ISI
t(89) = 1.17, p = 0.25
F(1,85) = 4.15, p < 0.05
F(1,84) = 2.56, p = 0.11
F(1,85) = 8.22, p = 0.005
F(1,84) = 2.56, 0.11
 Control
14.07 ± 3.37
12.89 ± 4.84
9.91 ± 5.64
t(44) = −1.45, p = 0.16
-
 CBTI
14.91 ± 3.55
10.00 ± 5.66
8.96 ± 5.46
t(45) = −5.61, p < 0.001, d = 0.86
-
PSQI
t(89) = 0.76, p = 0.45
F(1,85) = 9.97, p = 0.002
F(1,84) = 0.27, p = 0.61
F(1,85) = 16.72, p < 0.001
F(1,84) = 1.16, p = 0.13
 Control
9.13 ± 3.06
9.29 ± 4.12
7.53 ± 3.47
t(44) = 0.27, p = 0.79
-
 CBTI
9.59 ± 2.61
6.61 ± 2.99
7.00 ± 3.22
t(45) = −6.31, p < 0.001, d = 0.93
-
Sleep Duration
t(89) = 0.19, p = 0.85
F(1,85) = 6.78, p = 0.01
F(1,84) = 6.50, p = 0.01
F(1,85) = 4.94, p = 0.03
F(1,84) = 4.67, p = 0.03
 Control
6.27 ± 1.21
5.94 ± 1.32
5.44 ± 1.16
t(44) = −1.51, p = 0.14
t(44) = −3.97, p < 0.001, d = 0.60
 CBTI
6.32 ± 1.26
6.85 ± 1.17
6.10 ± 1.53
t(45) = 2.79, p = 0.008, d = 0.41
t(45) = −0.88, p = 0.39
EPDS
t(89) = −2.19, p = 0.03
F(1,85) = 0.62, p = 0.43
F(1,84) = 0.00,p = 0.95
F(1,86) = 4.02, p < 0.05
F(1,84) = 2.52, p = 0.12
 Control
9.47 ± 4.62
5.93 ± 5.29
5.18 ± 5.40
-
-
 CBTI
7.46 ± 4.14
5.87 ± 4.28
4.76 ± 4.07
-
-
PSAS-C
t(89) = −0.47, p = 0.64
F(1,85) = 0.22, p = 0.64
F(1,84) = 0.04, p = 0.84
F(1,85) = 0.58, p = 0.45
F(1,84) = 0.08, p = 0.78
 Control
22.67 ± 7.02
16.51 ± 6.35
14.11 ± 5.53
-
-
 CBTI
22.02 ± 6.09
15.70 ± 6.16
14.35 ± 5.96
-
-
Note: In the Pretreatment column, t-statistics were derived from independent samples t-tests comparing mean levels of study outcomes between treatment conditions. In the Δ Pre-to posttreatment and Δ 
Pre-to 6-week Postnatal columns, F-ratios were derived from repeated measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models for Treatment X Time effects, and t-statistics were derived from paired samples t-
tests which were only conducted if the corresponding Treatment X Time interaction was significant. In the Posttreatment and 6-week Postnatal columns, F-ratios were derived from univariate ANCOVA 
models. All ANOVA models presented in this table included the following covariates: insomnia onset timing, snoring, pretreatment depressive symptoms (except in repeated measures ANCOVA models), 
number of sessions completed, and maternal reports of infantile colic (postnatal models only). M = mean. SD = standard deviation. ISI = insomnia severity index. PSQI = Pittsburgh sleep quality index. 
Sleep duration = average total sleep time per night, reported in hours in half-hour increments, derived from PSQI item 4a. EPDS = Edinburgh postnatal depression scale. PSAS-C = presleep arousal scale, 
cognitive factor.
Sleep Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.

