Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131
DOI10.1186/s12891-015-0591-5
RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
The effect of changing movement and posture
using motion-sensor biofeedback, versus
guidelines-based care, on the clinical outcomes of
people with sub-acute or chronic low back pain-a
multicentre, cluster-randomised, placebo-controlled,
pilot trial
Peter Kent1,2*, Robert Laird3 and Terry Haines3,4
Abstract
Background: Theaimsofthispilottrialwereto(i)testthehypothesisthatmodifyingpatternsofpainfullumbo-pelvic
movementusingmotion-sensorbiofeedbackinpeoplewithlowbackpainwouldleadtoreducedpainandactivity
limitationcomparedwithguidelines-basedcare,and(ii)facilitatesamplesizecalculationsforafullypoweredtrial.
Methods:Amulticentre(8clinics),cluster-randomised,placebo-controlledpilottrialcomparedtwogroupsof
patientsseekingmedicalorphysiotherapyprimarycareforsub-acuteandchronicbackpain.Itwaspoweredfor
longitudinalanalysis,butnotforadjustedsingle-timepointcomparisons.Theinterventiongroup(n=58)received
modificationofmovementpatternsaugmentedbymotion-sensormovementbiofeedback(ViMove,dorsaVi.com)
plusguidelines-basedmedicalorphysiotherapycare.Thecontrolgroup(n=54)receivedaplacebo(wearingthe
motion-sensorswithoutbiofeedback)plusguidelines-basedmedicalorphysiotherapycare.
Primaryoutcomeswereself-reportedpainintensity(VAS)andactivitylimitation(RolandMorrisDisabilityQuestionnaire
(RMDQ),PatientSpecificFunctionalScale(PSFS)),allon0–100scales.Bothgroupsreceived6–8treatmentsessions.
Outcomesweremeasuredseventimesduring10-weeksoftreatmentandat12,26and52weekfollow-up,with
17.0%dropout.Patientswerenotinformedofgroupallocationorthestudyhypothesis.
Results:Acrossone-year,thereweresignificantbetween-groupdifferencesfavouringtheinterventiongroup
[generalizedlinearmodelcoefficient(95%CI):groupeffectRMDQ−7.1(95%CI–12.6;–1.6),PSFS−10.3(−16.6;−3.9),
QVAS−7.7(−13.0;−2.4);andgroupbytimeeffectdifferences(per100days)RMDQ−3.5(−5.2;−2.2),PSFS−4.7
(−7.0;−2.5),QVAS−4.8(−6.1;−3.5)],allp<0.001.Riskratiosbetweengroupsofprobabilityofimprovingby>30%
at12-months=RMDQ2.4(95%CI1.5;4.1),PSFS2.5(1.5;4.0),QVAS3.3(1.8;5.9).
Theonlydevice-relatedside-effectsinvolvedtransientskinirritationfromtapeusedtomountmotionsensors.
(Continuedonnextpage)
*Correspondence:pkent@health.sdu.dk
1InstituteofSportsScienceandClinicalBiomechanics,UniversityofSouthern
Denmark,Campusvej55,OdenseM,5230,Denmark
2ResearchDepartment,SpineCentreofSouthernDenmark,Hospital
Lillebaelt,InstituteofRegionalHealthServicesResearch,Universityof
SouthernDenmark,Middelfart,Denmark
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©2015Kentetal.;licenseeBioMedCentral.ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreative
CommonsAttributionLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycredited.TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomain
Dedicationwaiver(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,
unlessotherwisestated.
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page2of19
(Continuedfrompreviouspage)
Conclusions:Individualisedmovementretrainingusingmotion-sensorbiofeedbackresultedinsignificantand
sustainedimprovementsinpainandactivitylimitationthatpersistedaftertreatmentfinished.Thispilottrialalso
refinedtheproceduresandsamplesizerequirementsforafullypoweredRCT.
Thistrial(AustralianNewZealandClinicalTrialsRegistryNCT01572779)wasequallyfundedbydorsaViP/Landthe
VictorianStateGovernment.
Keywords:Lowbackpain,Rehabilitation,Movement,Posture,Clinicaltrial,Technology
Background inLBPtreatmentguidelines[31–33]andtheirpositiveef-
Low back pain (LBP) is highly prevalent and globally is fects may be due to adaptive movement countering the
the leading cause of disability, ahead of ischaemic heart potential for dysfunctional patterns to become habituated
disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, major de- [34].Inaddition,excessiveloadingisrepeatedlyimplicated
pressive illness, and other musculoskeletal disorders, in- asariskfactorforbackpainandthismayoccurforavar-
cludingosteoarthritis[1].Itisalsocostly,bothatapersonal iety of reasons, including protective movement patterns
andsocietallevel,withestimatesofdirectandindirectcosts adopted during functional activity. For example, spend-
ranging from 0.4 % to 1.7 % of GDP, depending on the ing >5 % of the working day in >60 % of lumbar spine
countryandtheeconometricmodelused[2,3]. flexion is a risk factor for incident LBP (risk ratio 1.5)
Approximately 1 % of LBP in primary care is caused [35]. As a result, many intervention approaches are de-
by serious pathology (cancer, spinal osteomyelitis, frac- signed to target movement pattern aberrations associated
ture,spinalstenosis,caudaequinesyndrome,ankylosing withepisodicandpersistentLBP[36,26,37,38,16].
spondylitis, visceral-referred pain) and approximately Translating kinematic and biomechanical findings from
20 % is due to nerve root irritation caused by disc dis- the laboratory to routine clinical practice is challenging
ease or other forms of stenosis [4–6]. However, the and more complicated when the targeted movement pat-
majority of LBP seen in primary care is labelled ‘non- terns are diverse and subtle. It likely that such interven-
specific’ LBP, due to uncertainty about the accuracy and tions would be facilitated by the use of technology but
validity of other patho-anatomical diagnoses or descrip- there have been limitations in the available non-invasive
tive labels, such as ‘facet syndrome’,‘contained disc le- technology for measuring and monitoringmovement pat-
sion’or ‘instability’[7]. terns of individual patients in the clinic, especially during
Compared with placebo or no treatment, most non- their normal activities of daily living. Similarly, there have
surgical treatments for non-specific LBP show small to been limitations to clinicians’ ability to provide accurate
moderate effects, with one treatment showing little real-time feedback to people with LBP on the way they
superiority over another [8]. In addition, short-term move during daily activities of work, rest and play. These
treatment effects typically reduce over the subsequent limitations were constraining because there is evidence
12months[9–11]. that such biofeedback can help people develop greater
One explanation for this lack of demonstrated effect is awareness of their activity and increase their voluntary
that non-specific LBP is not one condition and that the controloverotherwiseinvoluntaryprocesses[39].
wide heterogeneity of treatment response reflects clinic- Recently, new technology has resulted in wearable wire-
ally important subgroups with different treatment needs less motion-sensors that can quantify and analyse kine-
[12].Therefore,meandifferencesintrialsmayconcealim- matic musculoskeletal function. This technology canassist
portant effects in subgroups of patients [13]. This has re- in the evaluation of lumbopelvic movement patterns and
sulted in considerable clinical and research interest in postures, both in the clinic and in the patient’s daily func-
identifyingsuchsubgroupsandbettertargetingofcarefor tional activity (dorsaVi Ltd, Melbourne, Australia). These
individualpatients[14–17]. devices can also be easily programmed to provide indivi-
Oneoftheapproachestoindividualisedcareistotarget dualised biofeedbackto peoplewithbackpainto reinforce
pain-related, dysfunctional movement patterns (muscle clinician-determinedrehabilitationstrategiesintheirevery-
activation,lumbo-pelvickinematicorposturalpatterns). day vocational, social and recreational activities, where
Movement pattern aberrations reported in people with changestohabituatedmovementbehavioursmostneedto
persistentLBPincludeincreasedtrunkstiffness[18,19], be reinforced. No previous clinical trials have investigated
poor proprioception [20–22], postural dysfunction [23– theeffectofsuchtechnology-assistedapproachestothere-
25], and altered patterns of abdominal [26, 27] and ex- habilitationoflumbopelvicmovementpatterns.
tensor muscle activation [28–30]. Advice to stay active Randomised controlled trials are the gold standard
andexercisetherapyarecommonkeyrecommendations method for studying the effects of treatment and one
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page3of19
type of trial design, cluster-randomised controlled trials, party audit the whole trial after it was completed, includ-
has some advantages in certain situations. Cluster- ingadherencetotheprotocol.
randomised trials, where randomisation occurs at the
level of clinicians, practices, hospitals or geographic lo- Participants
cations, instead of at the level of participating patients, Inclusionandexclusioncriteria
have the advantage of better controlling for ‘contamin- Patients were recruited by their treating clinicians. The
ation’ across clinicians or patients, where changing the inclusion criteria wereany adultperson agedbetween 18
behaviour or treatment of one person being studied may and 65 years, presenting with a primary complaint of LBP
affectthebehaviourortreatmentofanother[40].Another (or back-related leg pain) with an average pain intensity of
advantage is that cluster trials typically focus on effective- 3ormoreona0–10scale,andaLBPepisodedurationthat
ness, studying interventions in settings that more closely waseither sub-acute(3–12 weeks) or chronic (>12 weeks).
approximatetheiruseinroutinecare.However,compared Exclusion criteria were low back surgery or other inva-
with individually randomised controlled trials, cluster tri- sive procedure within the previous 12 months, current
als need more participants to have the same statistical pregnancy, severe hearing impairment, implanted elec-
powerandrequiremorecomplexdesignsandmethodsof trical medical device, known allergic skin reaction to
analysis [41, 42]. During the planning phase of a cluster tapesandplasters,neoplasm,infection,inflammatoryor
trial,oneoftherequirementsfordeterminingtherequired neurologicaldisorder,fractureorother jointormedically-
sample size is to have an estimate of the statistical inter- relateddisorders.
dependence between individuals in the same cluster Potential participants were informed about the study
(intracluster/interclass correlation). Usually the best way and given the option of providing written informed con-
to estimate this Intraclass Coefficient Correlation is to sent at theindexconsultation, or taking time toconsider
conductapilotstudy. the decision and telling their clinician at the next con-
Therefore, the hypothesis investigated in this study sultation. All participants were advised that the purpose
was that ‘changing patterns of lumbo-pelvic movement of the trial was to test if wearing the device would assist
and/orpostureusingmotion-sensorbiofeedbackinpeople in the management of back pain but were not informed
with LBP would lead to reduced pain and activity limita- ofthedirectional hypothesisbeinginvestigated.
tion, when compared with Guidelines-based medical or
physiotherapy care and placebo. The aims of this cluster- Settingsandlocationswherethedatawerecollectedand
randomised pilot clinical trial were to: (i) estimate the ef- treated
fect size and its variability, (ii) testthe study protocol and Theclinicalsiteswherethetrialwasconductedwereeight
procedures, and (iii) provide data to calculate sample size hospitals or outpatient primarycare clinicsin theState of
requirements that would allow adjusted individual time- Victoria in Australia. The Movement Biofeedback Group
point comparisons in a fully powered cluster-randomised sites were: Austin Hospital – Heidelberg, Bounce Health
clinicaltrial. Group – Ringwood, Olympic Park Sports Medicine
Centre – Melbourne, The Clinic Werribee – Werribee.
Methods The Guidelines-based Care Group sites were: Epworth
Trialdesign Hospital Richmond – Richmond, Stanlake Specialist
Thisstudywasamulticentre,cluster-randomised,placebo- Centre – Footscray, Myers Street Family Medical –
controlled,pilotclinicaltrial,withone-to-oneallocationto Geelong,PeakMusculoskeletal–Hampton.Thepartici-
intervention(MovementBiofeedback)andcontrol(Guide- pating clinicians were two physicians, four GPs and
lines-basedCare)groups.Thekeyelementsoftheproto- threephysiotherapists,allwithaspecialinterestinmus-
col, including the primary outcome measures, were culoskeletal conditions. The medical practitioners had
registered in the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials an average of 25.8 years (SD6.9) post-graduate experi-
Registry (NCT01572779) prior to the study commen- ence and the physiotherapists 19.0 years (SD 7.9).
cing. The full trial protocol for this proof-of-concept Clinicsandclinicianswererecruitedbystaffadminister-
study has notbeen published but is available on request ingthetrial.
from the first author (PK). As one function of a pilot
study is to determine what to do when unforeseeable Randomisation
situations occur, we anticipated that protocol amend- Randomisationlevel
ments would be required. Therefore, our strategy for In this cluster trial, randomisation only occurred at the
managing them was to document every amendment, level of clinics (clusters). As a result, clinicians at each
seek the approval of the relevant ethics committees for clinic delivered only one type of treatment. Patient re-
thesechanges,haveindependentexternalresearcherspro- cruitment occurred from each clinician’s usual patient
vide project oversight, and have an independent external flowandclinicians werenotblind totreatment.
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page4of19
Sequencegeneration advice on staying active and general self-management of
The random allocation of clusters (clinics) occurred in back pain. This advice was based on the 2003 Australian
the following manner. Each of the three physiotherapy National Health and Medical Research Council guidelines
clinics was randomly paired with one of the medical for the management of Acute LBP [43], and European
clinics to form three pairs, and the remaining two med- guidelines for the management of chronic non-specific
ical clinics formed a fourth and final pair. Each pair was LBP [44] in the absence of similar Australian guidelines
arbitrarily given a number from 1 to 4, and each pair forchronicLBP.Theparticipantscouldalsohavereceived
contained an arbitrary Clinic A and Clinic B. These four whatever usual medical and physiotherapy care was
numbered and paired codes, without clinic identification deemed essential by their clinicians, and such guidelines-
(blinded), were given to a researcher (TH) who gener- based[44,43]co-interventionswerenoted.
ated a random number between 0.0 and 1.0 for Clinic A All participants wore the ViMove motion-sensor sys-
in each of the four pairs using Excel (Microsoft Corp, tem (dorsaVi.com) for 4 to 10 hours in their activities of
Redmond WA, USA). If the number was >0.5, Clinic A daily living, during and after each treatment session (6
wasassignedtobeaMovementBiofeedbackGroupclinic to 8 times) over the 10-week treatment period. This
and its paired Clinic B to be a Guidelines-based Care system consists of: (i) two wireless motion-sensors that
Groupclinic.Ifthe numberwas<0.5, the assignmentdir- measure three-dimensional movement, movement vel-
ection was the reverse. This procedure resulted in one ocity andacceleration,and orientationtogravity,(ii) two
physician, one GP and two physiotherapists being rando- wireless surface electromyography (EMG) sensors that
mised to the intervention (movement biofeedback) group measure paraspinal muscle activation, (iii) a wireless re-
andonephysician,twoGPsandonephysiotherapistbeing cording device (approximately the size of a cigarette
randomisedtothecontrol(guidelines-basedcare)group. packet) that captures the sensor data, has a button that
patientscanpushwhenaneventoccurs(suchasanonset
Ethics or increase in pain), an audio and vibration function that
Ethics approval was obtained from three ethics commit- can be programmed to provide patient-specific biofeed-
tees:theRoyalAustralianCollegeofGeneralPractice(ap- back alerts, and (iv) a charging dock for these wireless
provalnumberNREEC08/005,11February,2009),Austin devices. The system also has a comprehensive computer
Health (H2009/03544, 25 August, 2011), and Epworth software application that clinicians use to observe move-
HealthCare(53111,23September,2011).Allrecruitedpa- ment characteristics in real-time, to download movement
tientsgavewritteninformedconsent. data from the recording device captured during activities
of daily living, to analyse these data with the use of
Funding graphics-rich reports, and to compare an individual’s
Funding for this study was equally provided by (i) a grant movementpatternwiththeirpreviousassessmentsorwith
fromtheDepartmentofBusinessandInnovation(Market reference values. Using gyroscopes built into the two
Validation Program), Victorian Government, Australia, motion-sensors, the system also records whether the pa-
and (ii) dorsaVi P/L (the Australian company who man- tient is sitting, standing, walking or lying down, at every
ufacturestheViMovemotion-sensorsystemusedinthis time point during measurement. One motion-sensor is
study). The Department of Business and Innovation mounted on the thoraco-lumbar junction using a hypo-
helped in the governance of the trial. DorsaVi supplied allergenic, disposable adhesive pad and the other motion-
the motion-sensor equipment and coordinated the trial, sensor is mounted on the upper sacrum. This positioning
assisted by a contract research organisation (Kendle P/L, allows isolation of the lumbar spine and pelvic compo-
Oakleigh, Victoria, Australia). All data and trial-related nents of three-dimensional lumbo-pelvic movement. The
documentation were independently audited by Paul L ViMove system has displayed good inter-tester (ICC
Clark and Associates (BeaumarisVictoria, Australia). The (2,1)>0.86) and intra-tester reliability (ICC(2,1)>0.89)
authors analysed the results and wrote this paper inde- forlumbarmovements[45]andexcellentaccuracy/con-
pendentlyof bothfunders,andneitherfunderhadanyin- current validity with standard errors of measurement of
fluence over how these data were presented and the 0.9° (95 % CI=±1.8°) for the sagittal and 1.8° (3.6°) cor-
conclusionsreached. onalplanes[46]relativetothereferencestandardofthe
Optotrak 3D-motion tracking system (NaturalPoint Inc.
Interventions Corvallis,OregonUSA)Fig.1.
Bothgroups
All participants in both groups were assessed at baseline MovementBiofeedbackGroup
and attended a total of 6 (sub-acute episode duration Patients in the Movement Biofeedback Group had an
patients)to8(chronicepisodedurationpatients)consulta- individualised assessment to determine whether, in their
tionsovera10-weektreatmentperiod.Theyalsoreceived clinician’s judgement, there was a relationship between
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page5of19
Fig.1ViMovewearablemotion-sensorsystem(thisimagehasnocopyrightrestrictions)
their movement or posture and their pain. This judge- simple graphical feedback on a computer screen, patients
ment was determined from the case history, the physical could see in real-time their movement in the sagittal and
examinationandthedetailedkinematicinformation sup- frontal planes, the relative contributions of their lumbar
plied by theViMove system, worn both in the clinic and spine and pelvic movement, and their habituated pos-
during the patient’s activities of daily living. Typically, tural starting position. They could also be trained to
this judgement involved the clinician identifying a dys- perform movement in ways determined by the clinician
functional movement pattern, changing the patient’s to be more optimal. In this way, patients could gain a
movement behaviour or posture and assessing whether greater understanding of their own spinal kinematics
there hadbeen achangeinpain. and rehearse rehabilitation exercises that the clinician
The movement dysfunctions identified were diverse, believedtobeuseful.
butbroadlycouldbe classified intothreepotentiallyover- Secondly, using the ViMove software, clinicians could
lapping categories. Firstly, excessive end-range postural easily program motion-sensor biofeedback alerts (audio
positions or repeated end-range movements, which may ‘beeps’and/or vibration of the wireless recording device)
have occurred in sitting, standing, walking, or bending in that would occur during the 4- to 10-hours periods of
any anatomical plane or combination of planes. For ex- theactivitiesofdailylivinginwhich theyworethedevice.
ample, a person who performed sustained end range This biofeedback would prompt the patient when they
flexion by habitually sitting fully slumped, whose pain ‘broke a rule’ that the clinician had programmed. For ex-
wasrelievedbyassumingamoreneutralsittingposture. ample, in the case of a patient who demonstrated painful
Secondly, reduced muscle activation resulting in re- slumpedsittingposture,analertwouldsoundwhenseated
duced load or stiffness control. For example, a person lumbo-pelvic flexion exceeded a pre-determined angle for
withinadequatehipandtrunkmuscle contributiondur- a sustained pre-determined period of time. Alternatively,
ing repetitive occupational bend and lifting. Thirdly, and at clinician discretion, these alerts could have been
over-active muscle activation resulting in excessive load triggered for a variety of other reasons, such as prompts
orstiffnesscontrol.Forexampleapersonwhoselumbar to: (i)movefollowingaprolongedperiodof posturalin-
flexion was restricted by excessive activity or guarding activity,(ii)reducetheamountofend-rangerepeatedor
from superficial thoracolumbar extensor muscles, due static loading, or (iii) perform recommended rehabilita-
tohabituatedfearoflumbarmovement.Theseapproaches tionexercises.
tomovementclassificationhavebeenpreviouslydescribed Thirdly,specificexercisesthatsupplementedthepatient-
indiversesubgroupingsystems[47,37,48,49,38,16]. specific movement biofeedback. For example, a patient
The clinician then devised a patient-specific rehabilita- whose habituated posture involved painful excessive
tion strategy designed to address any identified deficits lumbar spine extension (near end-range extension in a
in the patient’s pattern of lumbo-pelvic movement and/ hyper-lordotic standing posture) would have been taught
or posture. That strategy included up to three modes of posterior pelvic tilt exercises and been encouraged to
intervention. Firstly,‘live training’ in the clinic, where pa- practisealesslordoticstandingposture.
tientswereinstructedinhowtoaltertheirmovementpat- The intervention and the real-time movementbiofeed-
tern (s) or posture using real-time on-screen biofeedback, back were recalibrated at each treatment session in re-
while wearing the ViMove device. For example, using sponse to the patient’s pain, clinical presentation and the
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page6of19
movement information provided by the ViMove device. everytimeperiod,exceptpatient-reportedGlobalImpres-
Therefore, the specific characteristics of the movement/ sion of Change, which was measured only at 12 months.
posture targeted in the rehabilitation would change over Outcomesduringthefollow-upperiodweremeasuredvia
time inresponsetothe patient’sprogress. postalquestionnaires.
Guidelines-basedCareGroup Primaryoutcomes
In addition to guidelines-based medical or physiotherapy There were three primary outcomes that were measured
care, the only other procedure undertaken by patients in via patient self-report questionnaires: activity limitation
the Guidelines-based Care Group was the wearing of the assessedintwo waysandpainintensity.
ViMove device 6 to 8 times over the 10-week treatment Pain-relatedactivitylimitationwasmeasuredusingboth
period. Their clinicians were blind to any motion-sensor/ the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) and
EMGinformationasthesoftwarereportswereblockedvia the Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS). The 23-item
a software lock during the trial, with no capacity to pro- version [50] of the RMDQ (RMDQ-23) was used to
gram biofeedback for their patients. However, theViMove measure condition-specific activity limitation, this ver-
system automatically uploaded the movement data to a sion being able to accommodate back-related leg pain.
centralserversothatitcouldbeusedbytheresearchersto The RMDQ-23 is the most commonly used question-
comparetothemovementcharacteristicsoftheMovement naire for measuring this construct in people with LBP
Biofeedback Group. Patients in the Guidelines-based Care [51], and has demonstrated a reliability, responsiveness
GroupwereinformedthattheViMovesystemwasameas- and validity comparable to the available alternative
urementdevice. questionnaires [52–54]. Using proportional recalculation,
The Movement Biofeedback Group and Guidelines- RMDQ-23 scores were transformed into a 0–100 scale
based Care Group treatments were similar to the extent (0=no activity limitation, 100=maximum activity limita-
that they both received guidelines-based care and they tion)[55].
wore the motion sensing equipment. Where they differed Using the PSFS, patients nominated three functional
wasthatonlytheMovementBiofeedbackGrouphadindi- activities that were important to them and with which
vidualised movement pattern/postural rehabilitation, bio- they were experiencing some activity limitation (original
feedbackandexercisesbasedontheinformationmeasured metric: a 0–10 scale for each item, where 0=unable to
bythemotionsensingequipment. perform activity, 10=able to perform activity at the same
levelasbeforeinjuryorproblem).Rawscoreswerepropor-
Trainingofparticipatingclinicians tionally recalculated and reversed to create a 0–100 scale
All clinicians participated in a 2-hour technical work- (0=no activity limitation, 100=maximum activity limita-
shop on how to set up the ViMove system and attach it tion),comparabletotheotherprimaryoutcomemeasures.
to a patient. Clinicians in both groups received a laptop The PSFS has been shown to be valid for group-level
loaded with the basicViMove software, oneViMove sen- change comparisons, between-group discrimination [56]
sor unit, and were able to receive additional training in and it is more responsive than the RMDQ-23 for people
thetechnicalsetupandattachmentoftheViMovedevice, withlowlevelsofactivitylimitation[57].
if they requested it. In total, this occurred on seven occa- Pain intensity wasmeasured using the average score(0
sions, for four clinicians who were distributed approxi- to 100 scale) of the Quadruple pain Visual Analogue
mately evenly between the Movement Biofeedback and Scale (QVAS), which consisted of four questions (a)
Guidelines-basedCareGroups. ‘What is your back pain intensity right now?’, (b) ‘What
The Movement Biofeedback Group clinicians also re- was your typical or average pain?’, (c) ‘What was your
ceived theViMove biofeedback software and an additional pain level at its best?’, and (d) ‘What was your pain level
4hoursoftraininginidentifyingmovementorposturaldys- at its worst?’. The reference time periods for the last
functions, understanding the software reports, conducting three questions at baseline was ‘over the last 6 months’
the live training and programming the biofeedback. Two andwas‘sinceyourlastvisit’atallotherassessmenttime
Movement Biofeedback Group clinicians also requested points. The anchors for all four questions were 0=‘No
and received some additional training in the technical as- pain’ and 100=‘Worst possible pain’. Visual analogue
pectsoflivetrainingandprogrammingthebiofeedback. scales have been shown to have good reliability [58] and
validity formeasuring painintensity[59,60].
Outcomes
Outcomes were measured at baseline (Week 0), during Secondaryoutcomes
the 10-week treatment period (Weeks 1, 3, 6, 8, 10) and Therewereeightsecondaryoutcomemeasuresthatwere
during the follow-up period 12 months after baseline patient-reported on daily diary cards during the treat-
(Weeks 12, 26 and 52). All outcomes were measured at ment period: (i) daily pain score, (ii) LBP analgaesic use,
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page7of19
(iii) number of pain-free and medication-free days, (iv) Samplesize
LBP recurrence, (v) time away from work or usual daily This study was powered for longitudinal analysis, but
activity, (vi) care seeking for LBP outside of the treat- not for adjusted single-time point comparisons. A sam-
ment in the trial, (vii) fear of movement, and (viii) pa- ple size calculation indicated that a total sample of 64
tient global impression of change. Change in range of participantswouldhaveprovided80%powertodetectan
movement over the treatment period was an additional effect size of 0.4 given eight site-level clusters, a mean of
secondary outcome measure, recorded by the ViMove eight participants per cluster, a two-tailed alpha of 0.05,
motion-sensor system. one baseline assessment, eight follow-up assessments, a
Participating patients completed a diary card at the correlation between follow-up assessments within partici-
end of each day that included a number of questions pantsof0.5andanICCatsitelevelof0.01.However,this
and this diary card was reviewed by their participating calculation assumed no missing data within participants,
clinician at each consultation. One of these questions no participant withdrawal and equal numbers of partici-
was a daily pain score ‘Considering the day overall, on a pants at each site. Therefore, a 20 % inflation factor was
scale of 0 to 10, how would you rate your low back included to accommodate missing data, withdrawals, an
pain?’ (0=no pain, 10=very severe pain). LBP analgae- imbalance in cluster sizes, resulting in a total sample size
sic use was assessed by two questions on the daily diary requirementof98patients.
card ‘Did you take any pain medication today?’ (yes/no),
and ‘How many different pain products did you take Blinding
today?’ (patients’ wrote the number). Number of pain During data analysis, the statistician was blind to group
and medication free days was calculated from patients’ allocation by the use of mock codes for group allocation
responses to the daily pain score and analgaesic use (0,1). Clinicians were not blind to treatment allocation
questions on their daily diary card. Recurrence of LBP but clinicians in the Guidelines-based Care Group clus-
was assessed by the daily diary card question ‘Have you ters were blind to the information within the ViMove
re-injured your back today or had a recurrence of your system, and therefore could not modify their treatment
pain?’ (yes/no). Recurrence was defined as ‘a period of in- based onthismovement sensortechnology.Patientswere
creasedpainlastingatleast24hours’[61].Timeawayfrom blind to treatment allocation and the directionality of the
workorusualdailyactivitywasself-reportedbypatientsas hypothesisbeinginvestigated.
the number of days off work or of non-participation in
their usual social role due toLBP (a health economic out- Statisticalmethods
come). Care seeking for LBP was self-reported by patients Data were initially described in a comparison of baseline
as the number of health practitioner visits in which they scores(meanscores,standarddeviations)thatalsotested
sought care for LBP after the treatment period (also a differences between groups using linear regression (ad-
healtheconomicoutcome). justed for clusters). If data were not normally distributed,
Fear of movement was measured using the Fear comparisonwasmadeusingorderedlogitregression,clus-
Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire physical activity sub- teredbysite.
scale (FABQpa, 0 to 24 scale) [62]. The FABQpa is a Next,mixed-effects,multi-level,generalizedlinearmodel
widely used outcome measure, with high internal analysiswasperformed,adjustedfor(fixedeffects)baseline
consistency,constructandpredictivevalidity[63,64]. scoresfortheoutcomeofinterest,age,gender,durationof
Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) was back pain, time since baseline consultation, and (random
measured on a seven-point ordinal Likert scale at the effects) cluster, clinician and individual patient. For each
12-month time-point only(Very much improved, Much outcomemeasure,longitudinalmodelswerecreatedtode-
improved, Minimally improved, No change, Minimally terminethegroupeffectandthetime-by-groupinteraction
worse, Much worse,Very much worse). PGIC has shown effect. Each model was tested to determine if three as-
highreliability[65]andconstructvalidity[66]. sumptions about the random errors were met: (i) normal
Lumbopelvic range of motion (measured in degrees) distribution, (ii) constant variance (homoscedasticity),
was recorded in the upright standing and sitting posi- and (iii) zero mean (unbiased). Beta coefficients and
tions for sagittal (flexion and extension) and coronal Intraclass Correlation Coefficients were reported for
(lateralflexion)planemovementsusingtheViMovede- each outcome, along with their 95 % confidence inter-
vice. In the Movement Biofeedback Group, this was vals(95%CI)andp-value.
assessed during treatment sessions, to inform treat- Change in range of motion was calculated using the
ment decisions. In all patients, at baseline and each same multi-level regression analysis, from the standard
outcome measurement time point, the ViMove device deviations of the range of motion for the sagittal (flexion
measured lumbopelvic range of motion in activities of and extension) and coronal (lateral flexion) planes re-
dailyliving,asanoutcomemeasure. cordedduringeachpatient’swearingoftheViMovedevice
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page8of19
intheiractivitiesofdailyliving.Thestandarddeviationof conducted up until June 2013. Almost all patients pro-
the range of motion was used to more accurately capture vided written informed consent at the initial consult-
thevariationofmovementsperformedduringtheirnor- ation, and trial-specific treatment commenced at that
malfunctionalactivities,undertheassumptionthatpar- time, including the initial wearing of the motion-sensor
ticipants would show higher variation (and thus higher device. For the remaining few patients, these occurred at
standard deviation of movements) as their activity limi- thesecondconsultation,whichbecametheindexconsult-
tation improved. To account for movement variability ation for the trial. They wore the ViMove motion-sensor
in standing and sitting positions, we computed separate systemfor4hoursormoreinalmostallthemeasurement
standarddeviationsforeachoftheseposturalpositions. sessions of their activities of daily living (Movement Bio-
As the Patient Global Impression of Change outcome feedback Group 94 % of all sessions, Guidelines-based
was only assessed at 12-months, these data were re- Care Group 93 %). The trial ended when the required
ported descriptively and the (unadjusted for clustering) sample size had been exceeded and all their 12-month
number needed to treat was calculated using the dichot- follow-updatahadbeenmeasured.
omised score threshold of those ‘very much improved’
and‘much improved’versusallotherresponses. Baselinedata
The primary outcomes at the 3- and 12-month time The baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of
points were also reported for both groups (point esti- both groups are shown in Table 1. The groups differed
mates of the mean, mean improvement from baseline, from each other on age (on average, participants in the
percentage improvement from baseline, number of pa- Movement BiofeedbackGroupwere9yearsyounger than
tients who improved by >30 % of their baseline score) intheGuidelines-basedCareGroup)andagewasadjusted
[67],andalsoacrossthegroups(differencebetweengroup forinalllongitudinalanalyses.
means, difference in percentage improvement, and com-
parison between groups of probability of improving by Co-interventionsadministered
>30 % of baseline score (expressed as a risk ratio)). How- The co-interventions received in addition to advice on
ever, as this pilot study was not powered for adjusted staying active and general self-management of back pain
comparisons of single time-point outcomes, these results (both groups), and the technology-assisted movement/
were only reported for descriptive purposes and were not postural re-education received by the Movement Bio-
tested for statistical significance. Similarly, the confidence feedbackGroup,aresummarisedinTable2.
intervals for the crude risk ratios should be interpreted
withcaution,astheyarenotadjustedforanybaselineim- Numbersanalysed
balancesorclusteringeffects. To adhere to the intention-to-treat principle, all recruited
All statistical analyses were performed using Stata patients contributed all their measured data regardless of
version 12.1 (Stata Corp, College Station, Texas, USA). drop out (longitudinal analysis manages missing data
Graphs were created using Excel 2011 (Microsoft Corp, well), and analysis was by original assigned group. As pa-
Redmond, Washington, USA) or Adobe Indesign CS6 tients could have had six to eight treatment sessions, and
(AdobeSystems,SanJose,California,USA). as treatments could have varied on which week they oc-
curred, these data are somewhat statistically unbalanced.
Results This did not affect the statistical integrity of the longitu-
Participantflow dinalanalyses,butdidcreatesomearbitrarinessregarding
The participant flow chart is shown in Fig. 2. Of the 112 the allocation of data in the visual figures that diagram-
patients recruited, 58 participants (52 %) were enrolled matically represent the clinical course of the two groups,
intheMovementBiofeedbackGroupand54participants as individual patient consultations were simply allocated
(48 %) in the Guidelines-based Care Group. Eighty per- totheclosestdescriptiveweek.
cent had an episode duration greater than 12 weeks, and
therefore most patients had eight consultations over the Outcomesandestimation
10-week treatment period. No data were available detail- Primaryoutcomes
ing how many eligible patients were not invited by the The estimated effects of the Movement Biofeedback inter-
recruitingclinicians,thenumber orcharacteristics ofpa- vention are shown numerically in Table 3 for the primary
tients who declined participation, nor the reasons for outcome measures and in Table 4 for the secondary out-
drop-out orloss tofollow-up. comemeasures.Resultsfortheprimaryoutcomemeasures
at all time-points are also summarised visually in Figs. 3,
Recruitment 4 and 5. All of the primary outcomes were similar at
Patients were recruited between November 2009 and baseline but over time favoured the clinical course of the
September 2012, and the follow-up assessments were Movement Biofeedback Group at a statistically significant
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page9of19
Fig.2Trialflowdiagram
Table1Baselinecharacteristics
MovementBiofeedbackGroupn=58 Guidelines-basedCareGroupn=54 p-value
Age(years,mean) 39(SD12) 48(SD12) 0.013
Gender(women,proportion) 30(52%) 31(57%) 0.729
Painepisodeduration(weeks,median)* 52(IQR17,52) 52(IQR16,312) 0.184
Activitylimitation(RMDQ-23)(0–100scale,mean) 51.1%(SD38.1) 49.1%(SD30.1) 0.758
Activitylimitation(PSFS)(0–100scale,mean) 60.2(SD10.1) 57.9(SD34.8) 0.660
Painintensity(QVAS)(0–100scale,mean) 60.0(SD23.6) 61.0(SD6.6) 0.758
Fearofmovement(FABQpa)(0–24scale,mean) 13.8(SD6.8) 14.4(SD8.0) 0.674
RMDQ-23=RolandMorrisDisabilityQuestionnaire(23itemversion)wherelowscoresarebetter
PSFS=PatientSpecificFunctionalScale,convertedtoa0–100scalewherelowscoresarebetter
QVAS=AverageoffourpainintensityVASscales,wherelowscoresarebetter
FABQpa=FearAvoidanceBeliefsQuestionnaire(physicalactivitysubscale)
*Datapresentedaremedian(IQR)duetoskewindata,groupcomparisonundertakenusingorderedlogitregressionclusteredbysite
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page10of19
Table2Co-interventionsreceivedduringtreatmentperiod
MovementBiofeedbackGroup Guidelines-basedCareGroup
InterventionType Numberofpatientsreceiving Meannumberof Numberofpatientsreceiving Meannumberof
eachinterventiontype treatmentsperpatient eachinterventiontype treatmentsperpatient
Adviceoreducation 18(31.0%) 0.58(SD1.02) 19(35.2%) 1.48(SD2.62)
Exercise 32(55.2%) 1.40(SD1.77) 40(74.1%) 4.78(SD3.25)
Imaging 3(5.2%) 0.07(SD0.32) 8(14.8%) 0.13(SD0.34)
ManualTherapy 36(62.1%) 1.89(SD1.98) 30(55.6%) 1.26(SD1.73)
Medication 6(10.3%) 0.16(SD0.53) 36(66.7%) 2.91(SD2.96)
Other 15(25.9%) 0.35(SD0.74) 8(14.8%) 0.20(SD0.56)
TapingorBracing 1(1.7%) 0.02(SD0.13) 2(3.7%) 0.02(SD0.14)
level. Of note is that the differences present at the end of the72-daytreatmentperiod,was0.62pointsmoreforthe
the treatment period persisted over the follow-up period, Movement Biofeedback Group than for the Guidelines-
and at the 12-month period, appeared to have continued based Care Group. Similarly, for every 10 days in the
togrow. treatment period, the daily pain score reduced by 0.051
The main effect of group, indicating the average differ- more in the Movement Biofeedback Group than in the
ence between the groups across treatment and outcome Guidelines-basedCareGroup.
time points, significantly favoured the Movement Bio- For LBP analgaesic use, there was a significant
feedback Group on all the primary outcomes, being 7.1 group-by-time effect. For every 10 days in the 72-day
RMDQ points, 10.3 PSFS points and 7.7 QVAS points in treatment period, the proportion of days reported tak-
size (confidence intervals reported inTable 3). The time- ing analgaesics reduced by 0.007 more in the Move-
by-group interaction effect, indicating the average differ- ment Biofeedback Group, than in the Guidelines-based
encebetween thegroups intherate ofchange overtime, CareGroup.
also significantly favoured the Movement Biofeedback There were significant group and group-by-time effects
Group on all the primary outcomes, being 3.5 RMDQ onthenumberofpainandmedicationfreedays.Thepro-
points, 4.7 PSFS points and 4.8 QVAS points in size, for portion of pain and analgaesic medication free days over
every100dayssincethebaselineconsultation.Inaddition, the72-daytreatmentperiodwas0.042moreintheMove-
the unadjusted risk ratios for the proportion of patients ment Biofeedback Group than in the Guidelines-based
whoimprovedbyaclinicallyimportantamount(>30%of Care Group. Also, for every 10 days in the treatment
baseline scores) [67], all significantly favoured the Move- period,theproportionofdaysreportedasnothavingpain
ment Biofeedback Group and ranged from 1.4 to 2.6 at or taking any analgaesics increased by 0.004 more in the
3monthsandfrom2.4to3.3at12-months. Movement Biofeedback Group than in the Guidelines-
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients were also reported basedCareGroup.
in Tables 2 for each primary outcome, which provide an Global impression of change was analysed separately
estimate of the lack of statistical independence between using the unadjusted number needed to treat. A larger
individualsinthesame cluster. proportion of participants in the Movement Biofeedback
Group reported that they were very much or much im-
Secondaryoutcomes proved than in the Guidelines-based Care Group (num-
In the mixed-effects, multi-level, generalized linear model ber needed totreat=2.8(95%CI:1.9to5.8)).
analysis, there were statistically significant group effects
on two of the eight secondary outcome measures and Harms
significantgroup-by-timeeffectsonthreeofthesesecond- Across the 629 total consultations in which the ViMove
ary outcomes, all favouring the Movement Biofeedback devices were worn by the patients, there were 17 in-
Group. Therewerenosignificantgroup or group-by-time stances (2.7 %)of device-related side effects.Allinvolved
effects for the following five secondary outcome mea- some form of transient skin irritation from the hypo-
sures: LBP recurrence, fear of movement, time away allergenic tape used to mount a motion-sensor. These
from work or usual daily activity, care seeking for LBP, occurred in six Movement Biofeedback Group patients
andrangeofmovement. and 11 Guidelines-based Care Group patients but did
There were significant group and group-by-time effects not preclude wearing the device at the next scheduled
onthedailypainscore.Thepainreduction,averagedover outcomemeasurement time-point.
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page11of19
Table3Resultsforprimaryoutcomemeasures
Activitylimitation Activitylimitation Painintensity
(RMDQ23:0to100scale) (PSFS:0to100scale) (QVAS:0to100scale)
Preplannedanalysis-Clinicalcourse*
MovementBiofeedbackGroupeffect#
Betacoefficient(95%CI) −7.1(−12.6to−1.6)p<0.014 −10.3(−16.6to−3.9)p=0.001 −7.7(−13.0to−2.4)p<0.004
GroupeffectIntraclassCorrelationCoefficients
Clinics 0.00 0.04 0.00
Clinicians 0.00 0.00 0.00
Patients 0.50 0.37 0.55
MovementBiofeedbackGroup-by-time
(per100days)effect#
Betacoefficient(95%CI) −3.5(−5.2to−2.2)p<0.001 −4.7(−7.0to−2.5)p<0.001 −4.8(−6.1to−3.5)p<0.001
Group-by-timeeffectIntraclassCorrelation
Coefficients
Clinics 0.00 0.00 0.00
Clinicians 0.00 0.00 0.00
Patients 0.51 0.38 0.59
Analysisn= Sites=8 Sites=8 Sites=8
Clinicians=8 Clinicians=8 Clinicians=8
Participants=106 Participants=96 Participants=106
Assessments=644 Assessments=524 Assessments=650
Additionalanalysis-Unadjustedcomparison
atindividualtimepoints**
3-monthoutcomes
MovementBiofeedbackGroup
Mean(95%CI) 40.1(20.7to59.5) 40.0(24.0to56.0) 39.5(21.4to55.7)
Meanimprovementfrombaseline(95%CI) 11.4(7.3to15.5) 18.9(6.1to31.7) 22.1(13.6to30.5)
n(%)ofpatientswhoimprovedby≥30%of 15(43%) 16(55%) 17(49%)
baselinescore
Analysisn= 35 29 35
Guidelines-basedCareGroup
Mean(95%CI) 53.7(31.8to75.6) 58.0(34.0to82.0) 54.5(41.1to67.8)
Meanimprovementfrombaseline(95%CI) −1.6(−8.4,5.2) 1.3(−8.7,11.4) 9-4(2.4to16.3)
n(%)ofpatientswhoimprovedby≥30%of 6(16%) 12(40%) 12(32%)
baselinescore
Analysisn= 37 30 37
Differencebetweengroupmeans# −13.0(−18.5to7.5) −17.6(−28.9to−6.3) −12.7(−20.2to−5.1)
Comparisonbetweengroupsofprobabilityof 2.6(1.2to6.0) 1.4(0.8to2.4) 1.5(0.8to2.7)
improvingby≥30%=riskratio(95%CI)†
12monthoutcomes
MovementBiofeedbackGroup
Mean(95%CI) 31.3(8.9to53.7) 31.0(22.0to41.0) 33.1(17.7to48.6)
Meanimprovementfrombaseline(95%CI) 19.7(15.4to24.0) 28.1(20.4to35.9) 27.5(21.7to33.3)
n(%)ofpatientswhoimprovedbaselinescore 26(60%) 31(78%) 30(68%)
by≥30%ofbaselinescore
Analysisn= 43 40 44
Guidelines-basedCareGroup
Mean(95%CI) 47.7(36.2to59.2) 54.0(42.0to64.0) 56.2(52.4to60.1)
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page12of19
Table3Resultsforprimaryoutcomemeasures(Continued)
Meanimprovementfrombaseline(95%CI) 1.5(−4.2to7.2) 3.2(−8.6to15.0) 5.4(3.3to7.4)
n(%)ofpatientswhoimprovedbaselinescore 12(25%) 12(32%) 10(21%)
by≥30%ofbaselinescore
Analysisn= 47 38 48
Differencebetweengroupmeans## −18.2(−23.1to−13.2) −24.9(−34.7to−15.2) −22.2(−26.4to−17.9)
Comparisonbetweengroupsofprobabilityof 2.4(1.4to4.1) 2.5(1.5to4.0) 3.3(1.8to5.9)
improvingby≥30%=riskratio(95%CI)†
*Calculatedbyuseofmultilevelmixed-effectslinearregressionadjustedforbaselinevalueoftheoutcomemeasure,age,gender,anddurationofbackpain
episode(fixedeffects)andtreatmentsite,clinicianandindividualpatient(randomeffects)
**Thispilotclustertrialwasnotpoweredforindividualtimepointcomparisonsandthereforetheseunadjusteddescriptiveresultswerenottestedfor
statisticaldifference
#Themaineffectofgroupindicatestheaveragedifferencebetweenthegroupsacrosstreatmentandoutcometimepoints.Thetime-by-groupinteractioneffect
indicatestheaveragedifferencebetweenthegroupsintherateofchangeovertime
##Differencebetweengroupmeans=Guidelines-basedCareGroupminusMovementBiofeedbackGroup.Analysesadjustedforclusteringbysiteandrobust95%
confidenceintervalsused
†Cruderiskratio=MovementBiofeedbackGroup/Guidelines-basedCareGroup.Theseunadjustedconfidenceintervalsshouldbecautiouslyinterpreted,asthey
donotaccountforanybaselineimbalancesorclusteringeffects
RMDQ-23=RolandMorrisDisabilityQuestionnaire(23itemversion)wherelowscoresarebetter,PSFS=PatientSpecificFunctionalScaleconvertedtoa0–100
scalewherelowscoresarebetter,QVAS=AverageoffourpainintensityVASscaleswherelowscoresarebetter
Discussion of the Movement Biofeedback Group patients improv-
This cluster-randomised pilot trial investigated whether ing by a clinically important amount at 3 months was
changingpatternsoflumbo-pelvicmovementand/orpos- from 1.4 to 2.6 times more likely than the Guidelines-
tureusing motion-sensor biofeedback in people withLBP based Care Group patients, and from 2.4 to 3.3 times
would lead to reduced pain and activity limitation, when morelikely at12months.Theseresultsareunusual and
comparedwithguidelines-basedmedicalorphysiotherapy encouraging because they show moderate to large ef-
care. It aimed to: (i) estimate the effect size and its vari- fects at the end of the 10-week treatment period that
ability, (ii) test the study protocol and procedures, and remained or increased at the 12 month follow-up, in a
(iii)providedata(ICCs)tocalculatesamplesizerequire- healthconditionwhereinterventionstypicallyshowsmall
ments that would allow adjusted individual time-point to moderate effects [8] that are not sustained 12 months
comparisonsinafullypoweredcluster-randomisedclin- later[9–11].Ourresultssuggest thatwherearelationship
ical trial. All three aims were achieved; there were sig- betweenmovementandpaincanbeidentified,movement
nificant treatment effects favouring the intervention retrainingusingbiofeedbackiscapableofresultinginsus-
group on all primary outcomes, insights were gained tained improvements in pain and activity limitation, even
about refining a protocol for a fully powered trial and after treatment finishes, and indicate that a fully powered
ICCswerecalculated. trialiswarranted.
In addition, there was no difference in fear of move-
Treatmenteffect ment over time between the treatment groups. This is
Patients in the Movement Biofeedback Group showed reassuring, as it indicates that the focus in the Movement
significant improvements in the primary outcome mea- BiofeedbackGrouponretrainingmovementpatterns/pos-
sures of activity limitation and pain intensity, compared ture and having six to eight sessions of biofeedback did
with those in the Guidelines-based Care Group, as seen notincreaseparticipants’fearofmovement.
by the group effects and group-by-time interaction ef- The only other clinical trial of similar individualised
fects all favouring the Movement Biofeedback Group. movement rehabilitation for persistent LBP, of which we
The group effect indicates the average difference between are aware, was recently published by Vibe Fersum et al.
the groups across treatment and outcome time points, [17]. It included movement and postural re-education as
andthetime-by-groupinteractioneffectindicatestheaver- part of a comprehensive biopsychosocial approach (Cog-
age difference between the groups in the rate of change nitiveFunctionalTherapy).Althoughitdidnotusetech-
over time. Furthermore, across all these outcome mea- nology to assist in the assessment and management of
sures, the additional (unadjusted) percentage improve- LBP, and included physiotherapists but not GPs as clini-
ment in the Movement Biofeedback Group ranged from cians, it similarly showed moderate to large effect sizes
15%to27%at3monthsand35%to47%at12months, thatpersistedoverthefollow-upperiod.Thissimilarityof
whichwereallabovethethresholdforclinicallyimportant promisingresultsinthesetwostudiesinprimarycaresug-
difference (>30 % of baseline scores) [67]. Similarly, the gests that individualised movement rehabilitation should
unadjusted risk ratios all significantly favoured the Move- befurtherstudied,asmanyaspectsoftheseresultsremain
ment Biofeedback Group, indicating that the probability unaddressed. For example, it is unclear from our study
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page13of19
Table4 Resultsforsecondaryoutcomemeasures
Analysisn= MovementBiofeedback MovementBiofeedback Endoftreatmentperiod
Groupeffect# Groupbytimeeffect# Mean(SD)
Betacoefficient Betacoefficient(per10
(95%CI) daysinthetreatment
period)(95%CI)
Dailypainscore Sites=8 −0.62(−1.25to0.01) −0.051(−0.075to−0.026) MovementBiofeedbackGroup
(0to10scale) Clinicians=8 4.26(3.44to4.99)
Participants=98 p=0.053 p<0.001 Guidelines-basedCareGroup
Assessments=6,036 4.54(3.88to5.19)
LBPrecurrence(differencein Sites=8 −0.018(−0.129to0.093) 0.003(−0.002to0.008) MovementBiofeedbackGroup
proportionsofdayswith
Clinicians=8 0.230(0.098to0.362)
reportedrecurrence)
Participants=100 p=0.752 p=0.263 Guidelines-basedCareGroup
Assessments=5,999 0.173(0.070to0.276)
Analgesicuse Sites=8 0.056(−0.099to0.211) −0.007(−0.013to−0.002) MovementBiofeedbackGroup
(differenceinproportionof Clinicians=8 0.288(0.137to0.440)
dayswithreportedtaking
Participants=98 p=0.483 p=0.008 Guidelines-basedCareGroup
ofanalgesics)
Assessments=5,815 0.360(0.109to0.612)
Numberofpainand Sites=8 0.054(0.003to0.107) 0.004(0.002to0.007) MovementBiofeedbackGroup
medicationfreedays Clinicians=8 0.064(−0.034to0.163)
Guidelines-basedCareGroup
0.036(−0.006to0.077)
#Themaineffectofgroupindicatestheaveragedifferencebetweenthegroupsacrosstreatmentandoutcometimepoints.Thetime-by-groupinteractioneffect
indicatestheaveragedifferencebetweenthegroupsintherateofchangeovertime.Bothcalculatedbyuseofmultilevelmixed-effectslinearregressionadjusted
forbaselinevalueoftheoutcomemeasure,age,gender,anddurationofbackpainepisode(fixedeffects)andtreatmentsite,clinicianandindividualpatient
(randomeffects)
FABQpa=FearAvoidanceBeliefsQuestionnaire(physicalactivitysubscale)wherelowscoresarebetter
Statisticallysignificantp-valuesarebolded
what relative contributions to the results came from the dailyfunctionalactivities.However,thisneedstobeinves-
movement rehabilitation and those that came from the tigated. It is also not clear what might mediate that treat-
use of motion-sensor technology. Theoretically, this tech- ment effect, such as cognitive, motivational or movement
nologymayprovidegreaterprecisionofassessment,more awareness aspects resulting from wearing the motion-
specificity in movement re-education, and enhanced de- sensors. In addition, evidence of a relationship between
habituationofdysfunctionalmovementviabiofeedbackin modifiable movement aberrations and reductions in pain
Fig.3Meanoutcomesforactivitylimitation(RolandMorrisDisabilityQuestionnairescores)
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page14of19
Fig.4Meanoutcomesforactivitylimitation(Patient-SpecificFunctionalScalescores)
and activitylimitation would still leaveunaddressedques- of specific muscles such as Transversus Abdominus [76,
tions about whether movement aberrations precede the 26]. One possible explanation for this is that generic ‘one
onset of pain and involve some causative mechanisms, or size fits all’approaches poorly target any movement aber-
whethertheyaresecondarytotheonsetofpain,orboth. rations that may be present at an individual patient level.
Clinicians participating in the trial conducted by Vibe However,highlyindividualisedexerciseprogramsthataim
Fersum et al. [17] had an average of more than 100 hours toalterlumbo-pelvickinematicsorposturalpatterns,such
training in Cognitive Functional Therapy. In our pilot trial, as those based on the Alexander Technique [77, 78], the
cliniciansintheMovementBiofeedbackGrouphadanave- Feldenkrais Method [77] or Pilates [79], have also shown
rage of approximately 6 hours training in the use of the modest and inconsistent effects. One explanation could
device.Whiletheamountofpreviousexposuretoprinciples be that these approaches are too narrow to adequately
ofmovementrehabilitationinthe cliniciansinbothtrialsis cover the range of movement dysfunctions seen in a
unknown, it ispossiblethat theprecisionofpatient-specific LBP care-seeking population. Another possibility is that
kinematic information available to clinicians using motion- some movement dysfunctions are too subtle to be rou-
sensortechnologyallowssomedegreeof ‘learningbydoing’ tinelydetectedoutsideoflaboratorysettingsbynon-expert
andthisaspectshouldbeinvestigated. clinicians, unless assisted by technology such as motion-
In previous studies, the effectiveness of movement in- sensors. A further possibility is that changing movement
terventions for LBP, such as exercise, has been modest. patterns in people’s habituated daily activities requires
Ithas also notbeen consistently associated with any par- measurement and biofeedback during those activities, es-
ticular form of movement intervention [68–75], regard- pecially since there is evidence that practice withfeedback
less of whether it involves whole body movements such distributed across time is more effective for learning than
asaerobicexercise,Pilates,andyoga,ortargetstheactivity concentratedfeedbackatonetimepoint[80].
Fig.5Meanoutcomesforpainintensity(QuadrupleVisualAnalogueScalescores)
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page15of19
Of note is that there were no statistically significant dif- certaintyabouttheresultsandallowmoredirectcompari-
ferences between the groups in the variability in range of sonswithothertrials.
movement displayed by participating patients during their It would also be useful to collect data identifying each
normalfunctionalactivities.Thismayreflectthefindingin patient’s progress towards attaining the ‘more optimal
the trial conducted by Vibe Fersum et al. [17], that there movements/postures’ that were targeted in their particu-
were no differences between their groups in total range of lar case, as this would allow examination of a ‘dose-re-
movement, despite large differences in the primary out- sponse’ relationship between improvement in movement
comes. However, the experience of this pilot study taught andimprovementinpainandactivitylimitation.Perhaps
us that the movement parameters that were classified by this could be formalised by the creation of a ‘Patient-
clinicians as requiring modification were diverse and indi- SpecificMovementScale’.
vidualised, with some people already moving excessively It would also be ideal if recruitment were not per-
and requiring some aspect of their range of motion to be formed by the treating clinicians, as in the context of a
restricted. Therefore, metrics based on total range of vari- cluster-randomised controlled trial, this can introduce
ability in movement may not capture improvements in the potential for selection bias. One way that this could
movement patterns that are associated with less pain dur- be done would be for potential participants to answer
ingactivity.Theremaybebetterwaystocapturethekine- recruitment advertisements and then be randomised to
matic characteristics that are important at an individual clusters, however this would introduce the artificiality of
patient level and determine whether these were improved participants not having sought care from the clinician of
more in one group than another. One method to do so their choice. In addition, it would be helpful to measure
wouldbetocapturedataonwhichmovementcharacteris- whether patients guessed which group they were allo-
tics each clinician judged should be targeted in each pa- catedto,asanestimateofpatientunblinding.
tient(bymonitoringwhatmovementswereprogramedfor
biofeedback).Thiswouldallowthemotion-sensortechnol- Datatocalculatesamplesizerequirements
ogytobeusedtomeasuretheextenttowhichthosemove- The statistical power of a clustered sample, in which par-
mentre-educationgoalswereachieved.Wedidnotcollect ticipants are randomised at a group level but analysed at
the data to analyse this in our pilot study but it would be an individual level, is a function of (i) the relatedness of
idealtocollecttheseinafullypoweredtrial. clustered data (Intraclass Correlation Coefficient), (ii) the
sample size of the clusters, and (iii) the total sample size
Studyprotocolandprocedures (the number of patients per cluster times the number of
The study protocol and a number of the procedures clusters) [40]. The Intraclass Correlation Coefficients in
evolvedduringthispilottrial.Theseincludedarefinement theresultsofthistrialgreatlyfacilitateprecisioninsample
ofthetreatmentapproachandsoftware,aswellasgreater sizerequirementcalculationsforsubsequenttrialsinsimi-
clarity about how to measure appropriate outcomes. As larsettings.
this pilot study investigated the application of new tech- For example, we could now plan for a cluster-
nology, it was inevitable that the experience would teach randomised trial to detect a 0.5 standardised effect size
us betterways ofpresentinginformationto clinicians and fortheRolandMorrisDisabilityIndexprimaryoutcome
better ways of clinicians using that information. Testing atasingletimepoint.Ifweusedonlyasingle12-month
those ways within this pilot study was a component of follow-up measure, had 12 clinics/clusters, employed a
preparingforafullypoweredstudy. two-tailedalphaof0.05,wecouldconservativelyusea0.01
Based on the experience and results of this study, there ICCvalueforthe cliniclevelICCvaluebased onourpilot
areanumberoffeaturesthatwouldbeidealtoincorporate studyfindingof0.00(Table3)toestimatethateachcluster
in the protocol of a fully powered trial. For example, it would need to have 12 month data from approximately
would be pragmatic to add to the inclusion criteria the 11.5 participants to have 80 % power. Knowing that we
need for all participants to display some form of experienced approximately 20 % attrition between re-
movement-relatedpain[17](painaggravatedorrelievedby cruitment and 12-month follow-up in our pilot study
movement).Thatisbecausetheinterventionisdesignedto wouldmeanwewouldaimtorecruit14participantsper
target movement-related pain and patients without this cluster, with a total sample size requirement of 168
characteristic are likely to dilute the treatment effect size. patients.
It would also be sensible to use the more detailed treat-
ment protocol and software that evolved throughout this Limitations
study, as these show face validity for providing greater The study had a number of limitations. This pilot trial
specificity for targeting abnormal movement/posture. In involved co-funding and participation by the device
addition,adjustedstatisticalcomparisonsofmultipleindi- manufacturer. This was necessary to secure the external
vidual time-point outcomes would provide greater funding that made this study possible and was very
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page16of19
useful in the training/supporting of clinicians with this metropolitan area. However, the applicability of the re-
new technology and in the refining of the software/treat- sults outside of the research context is constrained by
ment protocol. This industry involvement can raise con- the need for clinicians to be trained in the use of the
cerns that the study objectivity might have been ViMove system and have access to it, and to be familiar
compromised. However, it was the role of the authors to with movement re-educationapproaches.
ensure that all analysis was performed per protocol and
not by a company representative, and that the interpret-
Conclusions
ation of the findings was completely independent of
This cluster-randomised pilot clinical trial found evidence
both the industry and governmental sponsors. Once the
that changing patterns of lumbo-pelvic movement and/or
trial protocol was approved by the ethics committees,
posture using motion-sensor biofeedback in people with
there were no changes to the primary outcome measures
lowbackpainleadstoreducedpainandactivitylimitation,
or statistical analysis protocol. Neither sponsor was sent,
when compared with guidelines-based medical or physio-
or requested, any version of this paper prior to publica-
therapy care and placebo. These treatment effects were
tion. In addition we, and the involved ethics committees,
moderate to large at the end of the 10-week treatment
the Trial Steering and Data Monitoring Committee and
period and were sustained or increased at the 12-month
the independent externalauditor, all provided governance
follow-up. Retraining movement patterns/posture using
functions designed to safeguard that the trial maintained
movement biofeedback did not increase participants’ fear
its scientific rigour. The independent external audit in-
of movement. The study protocol and procedures also
cluded verification that every measurement of every pa-
evolved during this pilot trial, including the treatment ap-
tient recruited into the trialwasanalysed and contributed
proach and software used with wearable motion-sensors.
totheresults.
Theseinsightswillallowgreaterprecisionoftreatmenttar-
Over the 12-month follow-up period, the Guidelines-
geting in a fully powered trial and the measurement of
based Care Group improved minimally (RMDQ-23 3.1 %,
additionalappropriateoutcomes.Theresultsprovideduse-
PSFS 5.5 %, QVAS 8.9 %), whereas it is typical for similar
ful data to calculate sample size requirements that would
LBPcontrolgroupstoimproveby10%ormore,regardless
allowadjustedindividualtime-pointcomparisonsinafully
oftreatment[17].Oneexplanationforthismaybethatthe
powered cluster randomised clinical trial. Collectively,
lackofclinicianblindingresultedinGuidelines-basedCare
these results indicate that motion-sensor biofeedback may
Group clinicians not delivering their intervention with the
have a role in treating people with back pain and thus, a
same enthusiasm as clinicians in the Movement Biofeed-
fullypoweredtrialiswarranted.
back Group (performance bias). It is also possible that
therewassomeselectionbias,althoughtheonlysignificant
differencemeasuredbetweenthegroupswasonageandas AvailabilityofSupportingData
the longitudinal analyses were adjusted for this baseline Supporting data is available on request from the first
imbalance,it maynot haveaffectedtheestimatesofeffect. author.
We cannot know whether either a performance or selec-
tionbiaswaspresentornot.
Abbreviations
In addition, there was a difference in the reference FABQpa:FearAvoidanceBeliefsQuestionnairephysicalactivitysubscale;
timeperiodforQVASatbaseline comparedwiththeref- LBP:Lowbackpain;PSFS:Patient-SpecificFunctionalScale;PGIC:Patient
GlobalImpressionofChange;QVAS:QuadruplepainVisualAnalogueScale;
erence period used at the follow-up time-points, which
RMDQ-23:23-itemversionoftheRolandMorrisDisabilityQuestionnaire.
potentially may have biased the results. However as the
size of the QVAS effect was very similar to that for the
Competinginterests
RMDQ-23,any impact waslikely tohavebeen minimal. AllthreeauthorswerepaidfromthefundingprovidedbytheVictorianState
We had intended to measure range of motion in the GovernmentanddorsaVi,amarket-rateconsultingfeeforparticipatingin
variousphasesofthestudy:PK,RL,TH-projectdesign,RL-datacollection,
horizontal plane (rotation) but technical limitations of
TH-dataanalysis.Theauthorsanalysedtheresultsandwrotethemanuscript
the ViMove motion-sensors resulted in this being im- independentlyofbothfunders,andneitherfunderhadanyinfluence
practical. As rotation has a smaller range of movement overhowthesedatawerepresentedandtheconclusionsreached.
PKandTHhavenootherfinanciallinks,directlyorindirectly,withdorsaVi,
in the lumbar spine than movement in the other two
exceptPKreceivedamarket-rateconsultingfeeforassistanceindesigninga
planes, and as no measured movements in those planes subsequentRCTprotocolbasedontheresultsofthispilottrial.
wassignificantly differentbetweenthe groups, thislimita- RLhasreceivedamarket-rateconsultingfeeforparticipatinginotherclinicaland
researchaspectsofdorsaVi’sproductdevelopment,andhasbeenreimbursedfor
tionwaslikelytohavebeenofnopracticalconsequence.
travel/conferenceexpensesrelatedtothedorsaVimotion-sensortechnology.He
The generalisability of these results is enhanced by the hasnootherfinanciallinks,directlyorindirectly,withdorsaVi.
trial’s cluster randomised design, as this directly adjusts Theparticipatingclinicianswerepaidamarketratefeetoreimbursethem
fortheirtimeconsultingpatients.Allpatientsreceivedupto40Australian
for the influences of clinician and site, and by the inclu-
dollarstoreimbursethemfortheirparkingandtravelexpenses,andto
sion of eight sites, albeit that all sites were within one assistwithcourierreturnoftheViMovedevice.
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page17of19
Authors’contributions 14. ChildsJD,FritzJM,FlynnTW,IrrgangJJ,JohnsonKK,MajkowskiGR,etal.A
Allauthorscontributedtothestudydesign,analysisandinterpretationof clinicalpredictionruletoidentifypatientswithlowbackpainmostlikelyto
thedata,draftingofthemanuscriptandapprovedthefinalversionofthe benefitfromspinalmanipulation:Avalidationstudy.AnnInternMed.
paper.PKwrotetheinitialdraftofthemanuscript,THperformedmost 2004;141(12):920–8.
statisticalanalysis,andRLtrainedtheparticipatingcliniciansandparticipated 15. HillJC,WhitehurstDG,LewisM,BryanS,DunnK,FosterNE,etal.
indatacollection. Comparisonofstratifiedprimarycaremanagementforlowbackpainwith
PKtakesresponsibilityforthewriting,THforthedataanalysisandallthree currentbestpractice(STarTBack):arandomisedcontrolledtrial.Lancet.
authorsfortheinterpretation. 2011;378(9802):1560–71.doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60937-9..
16. VanDillenLR,SahrmannSA,NortonBJ,CaldwellCA,McDonnellMK,Bloom
Trialinvestigators N.Theeffectofmodifyingpatient-preferredspinalmovementand
Clinicians:MsLeanneScown,MrJayceGilbert,MrRobLairdandDrStevede alignmentduringsymptomtestinginpatientswithlowbackpain:A
Graaff,DrJoeGarra,DrSteveJensen,DrAdrianJurey,DrDavidVivianand preliminaryreport.ArchPhysMedRehabil.2003;84(3Suppl1):22–313.
DrPeterBraun. 17. VibeFersumK,O’SullivanP,SkouenJS,SmithA,KvåleA.Efficacyof
TrialSteeringandDataMonitoringCommittee(independentmembers): classification-basedcognitivefunctionaltherapyinpatientswith
DrAnneDaly,DrCatherineSaid,DrJohnFergusson non-specificchroniclowbackpain:Arandomizedcontrolledtrial.EurJ
Pain.2012;17(6):916–28.doi:10.1002/j.1532-2149.2012.00252.x.
Acknowledgements 18. HodgesP,vandenHoornW,DawsonA,CholewickiJ.Changesinthe
Theauthorswarmlythankthepatientswhoparticipatedinthisproject. mechanicalpropertiesofthetrunkinlowbackpainmaybeassociatedwith
recurrence.JBiomech.2009;42(1):61–6.doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.10.001.
Authordetails 19. VanDaeleU,HagmanF,TruijenS,VorlatP,VanGheluweB,VaesP.
1InstituteofSportsScienceandClinicalBiomechanics,UniversityofSouthern Decreaseinposturalswayandtrunkstiffnessduringcognitivedual-task
Denmark,Campusvej55,OdenseM,5230,Denmark.2ResearchDepartment, innonspecificchroniclowbackpainpatients,performancecompared
SpineCentreofSouthernDenmark,HospitalLillebaelt,InstituteofRegional
tohealthycontrolsubjects.Spine.2010;35(5):583–9.doi:10.1097/
HealthServicesResearch,UniversityofSouthernDenmark,Middelfart, BRS.0b013e3181b4fe4d.
Denmark.3DepartmentofPhysiotherapy,MonashUniversity,Frankston, 20. BrumagneS,CordoP,LysensR,VerschuerenS,SwinnenS.Theroleof
Victoria,Australia.4AlliedHealthResearchUnit,MonashHealth,Clayton, paraspinalmusclespindlesinlumbosacralpositionsenseinindividualswith
Victoria,Australia.
andwithoutlowbackpain.Spine.2000;25(8):989–94.
21. DescarreauxM,BlouinJS,TeasdaleN.Repositioningaccuracyand
Received:8December2014Accepted:18May2015 movementparametersinlowbackpainsubjectsandhealthycontrol
subjects.EurSpineJ.2005;14(2):185–91.doi:10.1007/s00586-004-0833-y.
22. SheeranL,SparkesV,CatersonB,Busse-MorrisM,vanDeursenR.Spinal
positionsenseandtrunkmuscleactivityduringsittingandstandingin
References
nonspecificchroniclowbackpain:classificationanalysis.Spine.
1. VosT,FlaxmanAD,NaghaviM,LozanoR,MichaudC,EzzatiM,etal.Years
2012;37(8):E486–95.doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e31823b00ce.
livedwithdisability(YLDs)for1160sequelaeof289diseasesandinjuries
1990–2010:asystematicanalysisfortheGlobalBurdenofDiseaseStudy 23. DunkNM,CallaghanJP.Lumbarspinemovementpatternsduring
2010.Lancet.2012;380(9859):2163–96.doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(12)61729-2. prolongedsittingdifferentiatelowbackpaindevelopersfrommatched
asymptomaticcontrols.Work.2010;35(1):3–14.doi:10.3233/wor-2010-0953.
2. LuoX,PietrobonR,SunSX,LiuGG,HeyL.Estimatesandpatternsofdirect
24. GregoryDE,CallaghanJP.Prolongedstandingasaprecursorfor
healthcareexpendituresamongindividualswithbackpainintheUnited
States.Spine.2004;29(1):79–86.doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000105527.13866.0f. thedevelopmentoflowbackdiscomfort:aninvestigationof
possiblemechanisms.GaitPosture.2008;28(1):86–92.doi:10.1016/
3. ManiadakisN,GrayA.TheeconomicburdenofbackpainintheUK.Pain.
2000;84(1):95–103. j.gaitpost.2007.10.005.
4. DeyoR,RainvilleJ,KentD.Whatcanthehistoryandphysicalexamination 25. WilliamsMM,HawleyJA,McKenzieRA,vanWijmenPM.Acomparisonof
tellusaboutlowbackpain?JAMA.1992;268(6):760–5. theeffectsoftwosittingposturesonbackreferredpain.Spine.
5. HenschkeN,MaherCG,RefshaugeKM,HerbertRD,CummingRG,BleaselJ,
1991;16(10):1185–91.
etal.Prevalenceofandscreeningforseriousspinalpathologyinpatients 26. HodgesP,RichardsonC.Inefficientmuscularstabilisationofthelumbar
presentingtoprimarycaresettingswithacutelowbackpain.Arthritis spineassociatedwithlowbackpain-amotorcontrolevaluationof
Rheum.2009;60(10):3072–80.doi:10.1002/art.24853. transversusabdominis.Spine.1996;21(22):2640–50.
6. SpenglerDM,DavidDP.Industriallowbackpain:Apracticalapproach.In: 27. SilfiesSP,MehtaR,SmithSS,KardunaAR.Differencesinfeedforwardtrunk
WieselSW,editor.Industriallowbackpain:Acomprehensiveapproach. muscleactivityinsubgroupsofpatientswithmechanicallowbackpain.
Charlottesville,VA,USA:TheMichieCompany;1985.p.869–71. ArchPhysMedRehabil.2009;90(7):1159–69.doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2008.10.033.
7. KentPM,KeatingJL.Classificationinnon-specificlowbackpain-what 28. HidesJ,GilmoreC,StantonW,BohlscheidE.Multifidussizeandsymmetry
methodsdoprimarycareclinicianscurrentlyuse?Spine.2005;30:1433–40. amongchronicLBPandhealthyasymptomaticsubjects.ManTher.
8. KellerA,HaydenJ,BombardierC,vanTulderM.Effectsizesofnon-surgical
2008;13(1):43–9.doi:10.1016/j.math.2006.07.017.
treatmentsofnon-specificlow-backpain.EurSpineJ.2007;16(11):1776–88. 29. HidesJA,JullGA,RichardsonCA.Long-termeffectsofspecificstabilizing
doi:10.1007/s00586-007-0379-x.
exercisesforfirst-episodelowbackpain.Spine.2001;26(11):E243–8.
9. HaydenJA,vanTulderMW,MalmivaaraA,KoesBW.Exercisetherapyfor 30. WallworkTL,StantonWR,FrekeM,HidesJA.Theeffectofchroniclowback
treatmentofnon-specificlowbackpain.CochraneDatabaseSystRev. painonsizeandcontractionofthelumbarmultifidusmuscle.ManTher.
2005;3,CD000335.doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000335.pub2. 2009;14(5):496–500.doi:10.1016/j.math.2008.09.006.
10. RubinsteinSM,vanMiddelkoopM,AssendelftWJ,deBoerMR,vanTulder 31. deJagerJP,AhernMJ.Improvedevidence-basedmanagementofacute
MW.Spinalmanipulativetherapyforchroniclow-backpain:anupdate musculoskeletalpain:guidelinesfromtheNationalHealthandMedical
ofaCochranereview.Spine.2011;36(13):E825–46.doi:10.1097/BRS. ResearchCouncilarenowavailable.MedJAust.
0b013e3182197fe1. 2004;181(10):527–8.
11. WalkerBF,FrenchSD,GrantW,GreenS.Combinedchiropractic 32. SavignyP,KuntzeS,WatsonP,UnderwoodM,RitchieG,CotterellM,etal.
interventionsforlow-backpain.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.2010;4, Lowbackpain-Earlymanagementofpersistentnon-specificlowbackpain.
CD005427.doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005427.pub2. London:NationalCollaboratingCentreforPrimaryCareandRoyalCollege
12. ArtusM,vanderWindtD.Smalleffectsoftreatmentsfornon-specificlow ofGeneralPractitioners;2009.
backpain:howcanweimprovepatients’outcomes?Rheumatology. 33. vanTulderM,BeckerA,BekkeringT,BreenA,delRealMT,HutchinsonA,
2009;48(5):464–5.doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kep048. etal.Europeanguidelinesforthemanagementofacutenonspecificlow
13. KentP,MjøsundHL,PetersenDH.Doestargetingmanualtherapyand/or backpaininprimarycare.EurSpineJ.2006;15Suppl2:S169–91.
exerciseimprovepatientoutcomesinnonspecificlowbackpain?–A 34. HodgesPW,CholewickiJ.Functionalcontrolofthespine,inmovement,
systematicreview.BMCMed.2010;8:22.doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-22. stability&lumbopelvicpain.In:VleemingA,MooneyV,StoeckartR,
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page18of19
editors.Movement,Stability&LumbopelvicPain-IntegrationofResearch questionnairewhenactivitylimitationislow.EurSpineJ.2011;20(1):79–86.
andTherapy.Edinburgh:ChurchillLivingstone;2007. doi:10.1007/s00586-010-1521-8.
35. HoogendoornW,BongersP,deVetH,DouwesM,KoesB,MiedemaM, 58. ZusmanM.TheAbsoluteVisualAnalogueScale(AVAS)asameasureofpain
etal.Flexionandrotationofthetrunkandliftingatworkareriskfactorsfor intensity.AustJPhysiother.1986;32:244–6.
lowbackpain.Spine.2000;25(23):3087–92. 59. GatchelRJ,PolatinPB,KinneyRK.Predictingoutcomeofchronicbackpain
36. BryanM,HawsonS.ThebenefitsofPilatesexerciseinorthopaedic usingclinicalpredictorsofpsychopathology:aprospectiveanalysis.Health
rehabilitation.TechOrthop.2003;18(1):126–9. Psychol.1995;14(5):415–20.
37. McKenzieR,MayS.LumbarSpine,MechanicalDiagnosisandTherapy.2nd 60. OhnhausEE,AdlerR.Methodologicalproblemsinthemeasurementof
ed.Waikanae,NewZealand:SpinalPublicationsLtd;2003. pain:acomparisonbetweentheverbalratingscaleandthevisualanalogue
38. RichardsonC,JullG,HodgesP,HidesJ.Therapeuticexerciseforspinal scale.Pain.1975;1(4):379–84.
segmentalstabilizationinlowbackpain:scientificbasisandclinical 61. deVetHC,HeymansMW,DunnKM,PopeDP,vanderBeekAJ,Macfarlane
approach.Edinburgh:ChurchillLivingstone;1999. GJ,etal.Episodesoflowbackpain:aproposalforuniformdefinitions
39. DursunN,DursunE,KilicZ.Electromyographicbiofeedback-controlled tobeusedinresearch.Spine.2002;27(21):2409–16.doi:10.1097/01.brs.
exerciseversusconservativecareforpatellofemoralpainsyndrome.Arch 0000030307.34002.be.
PhysMedRehabil.2001;82(12):1692–5. 62. WaddellG,NewtonM,HendersonI,SomervilleD,MainCJ.AFear-Avoidance
40. KillipS,MahfoudZ,PearceK.Whatisanintraclustercorrelationcoefficient? BeliefsQuestionnaire(FABQ)andtheroleoffear-avoidancebeliefsinchronic
Crucialconceptsforprimarycareresearchers.AnnFamMed.2004;2(3):204–8. lowbackpainanddisability.Pain.1993;52(2):157–68.
41. MazorKM,SabinJE,BoudreauD,GoodmanMJ,GurwitzJH,HerrintonLJ. 63. ClelandJA,FritzJM,BrennanGP.Predictivevalidityofinitialfearavoidance
Clusterrandomizedtrials:opportunitiesandbarriersidentifiedbyleaders beliefsinpatientswithlowbackpainreceivingphysicaltherapy:isthe
ofeighthealthplans.MedCare.2007;45(10Supl2)):S29–37.doi:10.1097/ FABQausefulscreeningtoolforidentifyingpatientsatriskforapoor
MLR.0b013e31806728c4. recovery?EurSpineJ.2008;17(1):70–9.doi:10.1007/s00586-007-0511-y.
42. MurrayDM,VarnellSP,BlitsteinJL.Designandanalysisofgroup- 64. McCrackenLM,GrossRT,AikensJ,CarnrikeJrCL.Theassessmentofanxiety
randomizedtrials:areviewofrecentmethodologicaldevelopments.AmJ andfearinpersonswithchronicpain:acomparisonofinstruments.Behav
PublicHealth.2004;94(3):423–32. ResTher.1996;34(11–12):927–33.
43. GroupAAMPG.Chapter4:Acutelowbackpain.Evidence-basedmanagement 65. CostaLO,MaherCG,LatimerJ,FerreiraPH,FerreiraML,PozziGC,etal.
ofacutemusculoskeletalpain.BowenHills,Queensland:AustralianAcademic Clinimetrictestingofthreeself-reportoutcomemeasuresforlowbackpain
Press;2003. patientsinBrazil:whichoneisthebest?Spine.2008;33(22):2459–63.
44. AiraksinenO,BroxJI,CedraschiC,HildebrandtJ,Klaber-MoffettJ,KovacsF. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181849dbe.
Chapter4.Europeanguidelinesforthemanagementofchronicnonspecific 66. FarrarJT,YoungJrJP,LaMoreauxL,WerthJL,PooleRM.Clinicalimportance
lowbackpain.EurSpineJ.2006;15Suppl2:S192–300.doi:10.1007/s00586- ofchangesinchronicpainintensitymeasuredonan11-pointnumerical
006-1072-1. painratingscale.Pain.2001;94(2):149–58.
45. RonchiAJ,LechM,TaylorNF,CosicI,editors.AreliabilitystudyofthenewBack 67. OsteloRW,DeyoRA,StratfordP,WaddellG,CroftP,VonKorffM,etal.
StrainMonitorbasedonclinicaltrials.ConfProcIEEEEngMedBiolSoc. Interpretingchangescoresforpainandfunctionalstatusinlowbackpain
2008;2008:693-6.doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649247. towardsinternationalconsensusregardingminimalimportantchange.
46. CharryE,UmerM,TaylorS,editors.Designandvalidationofan Spine.2008;33(1):90–4.
ambulatoryinertialsystemfor3-Dmeasurementsoflowbackmovements. 68. FerreiraPH,FerreiraML,MaherCG,HerbertRD,RefshaugeK.Specific
ProceedingsofSeventhInternationalConferenceonIntelligent stabilisationexerciseforspinalandpelvicpain:asystematicreview.AustJ
Sensors,SensorNetworksandInformationProcessing(ISSNIP2011); Physiother.2006;52(2):79–88.
2011.IEEEConferencePublications(http://ieeexplore.ieee.org) 69. HauggaardA,PerssonAL.Specificspinalstabilisationexercisesinpatients
DOI:10.1109/ISSNIP.2011.6146618 withlowbackpain-asystematicreview.PhysTherRev.2007;12:233–48.
47. IkedaDM,McGillSM.Canalteringmotions,postures,andloadsprovide 70. MacedoLG,MaherCG,LatimerJ,McAuleyJH.Motorcontrolexercisefor
immediatelowbackpainrelief:astudyof4casesinvestigatingspineload, persistent,nonspecificlowbackpain:asystematicreview.PhysTher.
posture,andstability.Spine.2012;37(23):E1469–75.doi:10.1097/ 2009;89(1):9–25.doi:10.2522/ptj.20080103.
BRS.0b013e31826c97e5. 71. MayS,JohnsonR.Stabilisationexercisesforlowbackpain:asystematic
48. O’SullivanP.Diagnosisandclassificationofchroniclowbackpaindisorders: review.Physiotherapy.2008;94:179–89.
Maladaptivemovementandmotorcontrolimpairmentsasunderlying 72. RackwitzB,deBieR,LimmH,vonGarnierK,EwertT,StuckiG.Segmental
mechanism.ManTher.2005;10:242–55. stabilizingexercisesandlowbackpain.Whatistheevidence?A
49. O’SullivanPB,BealesDJ.Diagnosisandclassificationofpelvicgirdlepain systematicreviewofrandomizedcontrolledtrials.ClinRehabil.
disorders—Part1:Amechanismbasedapproachwithinabiopsychosocial 2006;20(7):553–67.
framework.ManTher.2007;12:86–97. 73. SladeSC,KeatingJL.Trunk-strengtheningexercisesforchroniclowback
50. PatrickD,DeyoR,AtlasS,SingerD,ChapinA,KellerR.Assessinghealth pain:asystematicreview.JManipulativePhysiolTher.2006;29(2):163–73.
relatedqualityoflifeinpatientswithsciatica.Spine.1995;20(17):1899–908. doi:10.1016/j.jmpt.2005.12.011.
51. FroudR,EldridgeS,UnderwoodM.Reportingmethodsinbackpaintrials. 74. SladeSC,KeatingJL.Unloadedmovementfacilitationexercisecomparedto
PartI:Outcomemeasures.PalmadeMallorca:PalmadeMallorca noexerciseoralternativetherapyonoutcomesforpeoplewithnonspecific
InternationalForumIXPrimaryCareResearchOnLowBackPain;2007. chroniclowbackpain:asystematicreview.JManipulativePhysiolTher.
52. DavidsonM,KeatingJL.Acomparisonoffivelowbackdisability 2007;30(4):301–11.doi:10.1016/j.jmpt.2007.03.010.
questionnaires:reliabilityandresponsiveness.PhysTher.2002;82(1):8–24. 75. vanMiddelkoopM,RubinsteinSM,VerhagenAP,OsteloRW,KoesBW,
53. DaviesC,NitzA.PsychometricpropertiesoftheRoland-MorrisDisability vanTulderMW.Exercisetherapyforchronicnonspecificlow-back
QuestionnaireccomparedtotheOswestryDisabilityIndex:asystematic pain.BestPractResClinRheumatol.2010;24(2):193–204.doi:10.1016/
review.PhysTherRev.2009;14(6):399–408. j.berh.2010.01.002.
54. LauridsenHH,HartvigsenJ,MannicheC,KorsholmL,Grunnet-NilssonN. 76. FerreiraPH,FerreiraML,HodgesPW.Changesinrecruitmentofthe
DanishversionoftheOswestryDisabilityIndexforpatientswithlowback abdominalmusclesinpeoplewithlowbackpainultrasoundmeasurement
pain.Part1:Cross-culturaladaptation,reliabilityandvalidityintwodifferent ofmuscleactivity.Spine.2004;29(2):2560–6.
populations.EurSpineJ.2006;15:1705–16. 77. ErnstE,CanterPH.TheAlexandertechnique:asystematicreviewof
55. KentP,LauridsenHH.ManagingmissingscoresontheRolandMorris controlledclinicaltrials.ForschendeKomplementarmedizinundklassische
DisabilityQuestionnaire.Spine.2011;36:1878–84. Naturheilkunde.Researchincomplementaryandnaturalclassicalmedicine.
56. AbbottJH,SchmittJS.ThePatient-SpecificFunctionalScalewasvalidfor 2003;10(6):9–325.75886.
group-levelchangecomparisonsandbetween-groupdiscrimination.JClin 78. LittleP,LewithG,WebleyF,EvansM,BeattieA,MiddletonK,etal.
Epidemiol.2014.doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.11.002. RandomisedcontrolledtrialofAlexandertechniquelessons,exercise,and
57. HallAM,MaherCG,LatimerJ,FerreiraML,CostaLO.Thepatient-specific massage(ATEAM)forchronicandrecurrentbackpain.BrJSportsMed.
functionalscaleismoreresponsivethantheRolandMorrisdisability 2008;42(12):965–8.
Kentetal.BMCMusculoskeletalDisorders (2015) 16:131 Page19of19
79. LimEC,PohRL,LowAY,WongWP.EffectsofPilates-basedexerciseson
painanddisabilityinindividualswithpersistentnonspecificlowbackpain:
asystematicreviewwithmeta-analysis.JOrthopSportsPhysTher.
2011;41(2):70–80.doi:10.2519/jospt.2011.3393.
80. DonovanJJ,RadosevichDJ.Ameta-analyticreviewofthedistributionof
practiceeffect:Nowyouseeit,nowyoudon’t.JAppPsychol.
1999;84(5):795–805.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
