JOURNAL OF PALLIATIVE MEDICINE
Volume 9, Number 1, 2006
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Outcome Evaluation of a Randomized Trial of the
PhoenixCare Intervention: Program of Case Management
and Coordinated Care for the Seriously Chronically Ill
LEONA S. AIKEN, Ph.D.,1 JONATHAN BUTNER, Ph.D.,2 CAROL A. LOCKHART, Ph.D.,3
BARBARA E. VOLK-CRAFT, Ph.D.,4 GILLIAN HAMILTON, M.D., Ph.D.,4
and FRANK G. WILLIAMS, Ph.D.5
ABSTRACT
Objective: To document outcomes of a randomized trial of the PhoenixCare demonstration
program of palliative care and coordinated care/case management for seriously chronically ill
individuals who simultaneously received active treatment from managed care organizations
(MCOs).
Design: Patients, continuously enrolled between July 1999, and March 2001, were randomly
assigned to the PhoenixCare program or a control group receiving usual MCO care.
Setting: Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona.
Participants: Participants were 192 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) or chronic heart failure (CHF), who had an estimated 2-year life expectancy.
Intervention: Intensive home-based case management provided by registered nurse case-
managers, in coordination with patients’ existing source of medical care, comprised the in-
tervention. Program foci included disease and symptom management, patient self-manage-
ment of illness and knowledge of illness-related resources, preparation for end-of life,
physical and mental functioning, and utilization of medical services.
Outcome measures: Outcomes, assessed every 3 months by telephone interview, included
measures related to all program foci; the SF-36™ was used to evaluate physical and mental
functioning; emergency department visits exemplified medical service utilization.
Results:Compared to controls, PhoenixCare patients exhibited significantly better outcomes
on self-management of illness, awareness of illness-related resources, and legal preparation
for end of life. They reported lower symptom distress, greater vitality, better physical func-
tioning and higher self-rated health than randomized controls. Emergency department uti-
lization was equivalent across groups. Patients with COPD showed stronger responsiveness
to the intervention.
Conclusion: A novel model of patient care that combined greatly enhanced palliative care-
focused case management with ongoing MCO-based treatment was associated with improved
functioning of chronically severely ill patients in the last years of life.
1Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.
2Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
3Lockhart Associates, Tempe, Arizona.
4Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona.
5Professor Emeritus, Department of Health Administration and Policy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.
111
112 AIKEN ET AL.
INTRODUCTION OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE OF
THE PHOENIXCARE PROGRAM
B OTH THE QUALITY and cost of health care at
end-of-life are matters of great concern to the Overview
health care delivery system.1–3 Patients with se-
PhoenixCare was a freestanding program of
rious advanced illness experience undertreat-
home-based palliative care case management de-
ment of symptoms while they receive aggressive
veloped specifically for The Robert Wood John-
life-prolonging treatments that are both physi-
son initiative.12 Distinct from the hospice model,
cally burdensome and costly.4 By design of
it was designed to reach patients receiving treat-
Medicare funding for the hospice benefit, these
ment from one of multiple managed care organi-
patients gain access to palliative care focused
zations (MCOs). Participants were home-resid-
on alleviation of symptoms, support for care-
ing, were diagnosed with congestive heart failure
givers/families, and preparation for end of life
(CHF) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
only after they have relinquished disease-modi-
(COPD), and had a life expectancy of up to 2 years
fying or curative treatment. Palliative care fund-
from time of enrollment (rather than the 6-month
ing through Medicare is available only for the
window of Medicare hospice). The goal of the
final 6 months of life. Yet many patients and fam-
PhoenixCare program was to expand the scope
ilies may face unmet clinical needs for a longer
of patient care and to improve patient quality of
period of time than the hospice benefit allows.4
life relative to a comparable group of managed
To address these issues of quality and cost of
care patients not receiving the additional
care The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
PhoenixCare intervention services. PhoenixCare
funded 22 demonstration projects in 1999
delivered home-based services focused on dis-
through a national initiative, Promoting Excel-
ease and symptom management, patient and
lence at End-of-Life Care. The initiative sought to
caregiver education on disease management, and
support novel care delivery models that “ex-
social and psychological support.12 Registered
tend(ed) palliative care upstream in the course of
nurse case managers delivered the primary
illness, concurrent with ongoing life-extending
PhoenixCare services and assumed a leadership
care”2 (p. 311) with the aim of identifying suc-
role in coordinating PhoenixCare services with
cessful models and approaches. Among the 22
the patient’s primary care physician, with any
projects was the PhoenixCare program, a demon-
case managers provided by the patient’s MCO,
stration program of palliative care and coordi-
and with community agencies. Patients’ health
nated care/case management services designed
care was funded by Arizona’s alternative to Med-
specifically for seriously chronically ill individu-
icaid, by Medicare(cid:1)Choice (Medicare Risk con-
als who were simultaneously receiving active dis-
tracts), or by commercial health insurance plans.
ease treatment through managed care plans. The
demonstration project was funded to Hospice of
the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona, one of the largest
Rationale
community-based hospice providers in the coun-
try. The rationale for the PhoenixCare approach to
This paper provides the outcome evaluation of integration of palliative care with treatment de-
a randomized trial to assess the impact of the livery through MCOs was fivefold in nature.
PhoenixCare program. From the perspective of First, at the time of study design, Arizona had the
outcome evaluation, randomized trials to evalu- greatest proportion of its health care delivered
ate community models of enhanced case man- by MCOs.12 Second, in 1998, the year before the
agement and palliative care for individuals are grant initiative, the federal government initiated
rare. Programs have been documented with case the managed care Medicare model (Medicare(cid:1)
studies,5,6demonstration projects showing effects Choice) as an alternative to fee-for-service; the
in treated groups in the absence of untreated model rapidly proliferated. A substantial portion
comparison groups7 or in nonequivalent control of chronically ill patients whom PhoenixCare
group designs.8–10Meier et al.,11describe the im- aimed to reach were Medicare or Medicaid eligi-
plementation of a randomized trial of an inter- ble. Third, most individuals with life-limiting ill-
vention to integrate formal palliative care with nesses reside at home rather than in care facili-
case management. ties.11Home-based palliative care for individuals
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 113
who were seriously ill but neither institutional- Focus 4. Utilization of medical services
ized nor imminently dying would reach the
Fourth, the PhoenixCare program aimed to
largest population needing palliation. Fourth, the
shift from utilization of high cost emergency
ability to link a single effective program of pal-
medical services and inpatient acute hospitaliza-
liative care to a multiplicity of MCOs was ex-
tion to proactive management of disease in out-
pected to yield efficiency in providing palliative
patient settings, through intensive management
care services while treatment continued. Fifth, it
and patient education on self-management of dis-
appeared that the MCOs would provide a natural
ease.
referral stream of clients to the study. In sum-
It was hypothesized that the PhoenixCare par-
mary, partnering with MCOs was expected to cre-
ticipants, compared to controls, would achieve
ate the combination of treatment and palliation
better self-management, preparation for end of
that might best serve a large population of pa-
life, and physical and mental functioning (Foci 1
tients with life-limiting illnesses who were still
through 3), with lower utilization of costly emer-
actively living. It was theorized that the Phoenix-
gency and inpatient services, specifically fewer
Care intervention would lead to better physical
emergency department visits and reduced length
and mental functioning, at less or no more cost
of stay (LOS) in hospitals (Focus 4).
to the health care system. Lockhart et al.12 pro-
vide an in-depth description of the PhoenixCare
program content, its delivery, patient recruit-
METHOD
ment, provider and patient reaction, and the gen-
eralizability of the PhoenixCare model to broad
Participants
medical contexts.
By design, all participants were residing at
home and were members of one of seven MCOs
FOUR PROGRAM FOCI in the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area that
agreed to partner with the PhoenixCare demon-
AND HYPOTHESES
stration project. Enrollment occurred during the
period July 1, 1999 through March 31, 2001. Pa-
The PhoenixCare intervention was organized
tients could be referred by community agencies,
around four foci.
hospitals, the MCOs, physicians, family/friends,
or by self-referral. Over the course of the enroll-
Focus 1. Self-management of illness and
ment period, 965 individuals were referred for
knowledge of resources
evaluation of eligibility for participation, 365 met
First, the PhoenixCare program aimed to in- eligibility criteria, and 240 agreed to participate.
crease patient self-management of illness and Of the 240 individuals, 192 were diagnosed
knowledge of health-related resources by pro- with either COPD (n(cid:2)62) or CHF (n(cid:2)130) and
viding information and education to patients and served as participants in the outcome evaluation.
caregivers. The remaining 48 patients had metastatic cancer;
they were originally included but were elimi-
Focus 2. Preparation for end of life nated because of structural changes in the insti-
tution housing the project. All participants met
Second, the PhoenixCare program aimed to im-
specific criteria designed to enroll patients who
prove patients’ preparedness for end of life by
might live for up to 2 years beyond enrollment,
promoting the acquisition of appropriate legal
based on expert judgment that drew on available
documents and discussion of legal documents
prognostic data.13–18
with significant others.
All participants were required to be 18 years of
age or older. Patients with CHF were required to
Focus 3. Physical and mental functioning
be diagnosed with either class IIIB heart failure
Third, the PhoenixCare program aimed to en- (i.e., symptoms with any activity) or class IV heart
hance the physical and mental functioning of failure (i.e., symptoms at rest). Patients with
clients through intensive case management by COPD were required to have oxygen saturations
PhoenixCare staff, as well as patient education for of less than 88% on room air, or baseline pO less
2
self-management of illness. than 55 on room air, and to be on continuous oxy-
114 AIKEN ET AL.
gen. Across the two diseases, all patients were re- tained for future interviews. During the inter-
quired to exhibit marked limitation of physical view, proxy respondents could read or translate
functioning, in that any activity resulted in fa- for patients. Proxy responses were not accepted,
tigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or angina. All pa- because they do not represent patients’ self-per-
tients were required to have exhibited recent ex- ceived health well.19,20
acerbation of their conditions as evidenced by
treatment in an emergency department, urgent Tracing procedures.PhoenixCare staff contacted
care facility, or hospital within the 3 months prior control participants monthly to verify managed
to enrollment. For purposes of data collection by care enrollment, required for eligibility, docu-
telephone interview, patients were required to ment changes in address and in living situation,
have a telephone in the home, and to either speak and to verify continued participation. Registered
English or have a translator present in the home. nurse case managers updated this information on
Participation in PhoenixCare was completely vol- an ongoing basis for PhoenixCare intervention
untary. Patients were not paid; nor did they or participants.
their MCO pay for any services provided by the
program. Patients did not relinquish any health PhoenixCare intervention. PhoenixCare pallia-
care services for which they were otherwise eli- tive intervention services were added to treat-
gible. ment services provided by the MCOs to consti-
tute the PhoenixCare intervention. The complete
PhoenixCare intervention is described in Lock-
Procedures
hart et al.12Registered nurse case managers, each
Eligibility evaluation, randomization to condition, with a caseload of 30–35 patients, provided ser-
and initial data collection. Randomization was car- vice. A medical director, social worker, and pas-
ried out within diagnosis, in blocks of 30 patients toral counselor provided support to case man-
(15 PhoenixCare, 15 control) by a member of the agers, who coordinated “care planning with
project administration staff. Sealed envelopes, PhoenixCare team members, primary care physi-
color-coded by diagnosis and containing the as- cian, health plan case manager (if there were one),
signment to condition, were shuffled and as- patient/family, and community agencies.”12(pp.
signed to participants in order of shuffling. 1003–1004). Three distinct care protocols ad-
A PhoenixCare staff Enroller completed an ini- dressed phases of service delivery: (1) admission
tial eligibility evaluation interview and intake and initial case management of medically unsta-
session. In this initial session, eligible patients ble patients, (2) management of stable patients
were informed (1) that there were two interven- following stabilization, and (3) support of unsta-
tion conditions, PhoenixCare and control, (2) that ble patients experiencing an exacerbation epi-
assignment to condition was random, and (3) that sode. All three protocols provided disease and
all study participants in both conditions would symptom management, educational services, and
receive telephone interviews every three months. support services. At admission, the disease and
Patients who agreed to participate gave written symptom protocol included assessing current
informed consent and completed the initial in- health status, identifying immediate symptom
terview that constituted the baseline (time 0) data management needs, establishing communication
point. Finally, the Enroller, blinded to condition, with the MCO contact and attending physician,
opened the sealed envelope that identified the pa- developing an emergency response plan and co-
tient’s study condition. All study procedures ordinating this plan with attending physician.
were approved by the Institutional Review Board Educational services included development of
of Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center, a advance care plans, providing education to pa-
collaborating organization. tient and family about the disease, about patient
self-monitoring and self-management of disease.
Measurement points. Every 3 months all partic- Support services included assessing psychologi-
ipants received a 30- to 45-minute telephone in- cal and spiritual needs, assisting with access to
terview administered by a professional inter- community resources that might provide custo-
viewing firm; interviewers were blind to dial care, transportation, and help with finances.
condition and diagnosis. Up to 5 callbacks were During periods of patient stability, the three
attempted. Patients not interviewed were re- classes of services continued as needed, with
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 115
evaluation of compliance with medication monitoring, weight/blood pressure and blood
regimes, assessment of new symptoms, rein- glucose monitoring, and implementation of prior
forcement of educational activities including ad- authorization mechanisms. Services were deliv-
vance care planning, and ongoing monitoring of ered via telephone by all seven MCOs and, in ad-
need for support services. During illness exacer- dition, through occasional home visits in five
bation episodes, the registered nurse case man- MCOs. Other support services included disease
agers took an active role in assessing medical and symptom education, nutrition and psycho-
status and implementing a symptom control in- logical counseling, transportation and coordina-
tervention, and in communicating with the at- tion of medical service. Each MCO provided its
tending physician and MCO contact concerning own individual case management to some por-
the exacerbation episode. They also provided ed- tion of their clients.
ucation concerning new symptoms or conditions
and use of new medications, developed new pa-
Measures
tient goals, supported patient decision making,
assessed psychological, spiritual, and emotional Four broad classes of measures, summarized
needs of the patient and family, and made coun- in detail in Table 1, informed the four foci of the
seling referrals when required. intervention.
Control condition. Usual care provided by the Intake interview and every-three–month follow-up
MCOs, including medication and technical treat- interview (Focus 1–3). Questions addressing the
ment, constituted the control condition. The fo- first three program foci were integrated into a sin-
cus of MCO case management was medical and gle l12-item questionnaire, of which 56 items,
disease oriented, including medication and lab summarized in Table 1, formed the basis of the
TABLE 1. OUTCOME MEASURES BY FOCUS OF INTERVENTION (k (cid:2) NUMBER OF ITEMS)
Focus 1: Patient self-management of illness and knowledge of resources
(every 3-month interview)
1. Resources: resources to help with illness, including community resources, family and friends, individuals to
help with medical problems (k (cid:2) 3 items)
2. Illness self-management: information to manage illness at home, in emergency (k (cid:2) 2 items)
3. Patient experienced an event in 4 weeks immediately preceding the interview for which he/she felt
unprepared (k (cid:2) 1 item)
Focus 2: Preparation for end of life (every 3-month interview)
1. Possession of appropriate legal documents, living will or advance directives, medical power of attorney
(k (cid:2) 2)
2. Discussion of legal documents with physician, with family and friends (k (cid:2) 2)
Focus 3: Physical and mental functioning (every 3-month interview)
1. Patient able to initiate or resume an enjoyable activity in the 4 weeks immediately preceding the interview
(k (cid:2) 1)
2. Symptom control, taken from Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale21 as integrated into the Surrogate
Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22 Patient identifies most troublesome symptom within the four
weeks just prior to the interview and then rates the frequency, severity, and distress associated with the
symptom. Up to three symptoms are considered with separate rating of frequency, severity, distress for each
symptom (k (cid:2) 9 items)
3. Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36™, Ware et al.23) which assesses “health-related
quality-of-life outcomes, namely, those known to be most directly affected by disease and treatment” (op.cit,
p.2:3). Eight subscales include Physical Functioning, General Health, Vitality, Social Functioning, Role-
Physical, Bodily Pain, Role-Emotional, Mental Health. Scale scores are derived as weighted sums of items
following Ware et al.19 and then are converted to 100 point scales (k (cid:2) 8 scale scores).
Focus 4: Medical system utilization (medical utilization data furnished by MCOs)
1. Number of emergency department visits in six months prior to study enrollment
2. Number of stand alone emergency department visits (not followed immediately by hospitalization) during
study
3. Hospitalizations, length of stay
Additional measures of study participation
1. Number of months in program
2. Reasons for withdrawal from study
116 AIKEN ET AL.
present evaluation. Two existing scales were in- a single emergency department visit; we thus
tegrated into the questionnaire. First, we incor- counted only one emergency department visit per
porated the symptom control items from the 24-hour period. We had originally intended to
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale,21 which characterize hospitalizations as discrete events, to
previously had been integrated into the Surrogate compute the LOS for each hospitalization, and
Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22 then to compute the cumulative LOS across hos-
Second, we assessed functional status and well- pitalizations over the same time period as for
being with the SF-36™ Health Survey23that char- emergency department visits. Inadequately re-
acterizes “health-related quality of life outcomes, ported hospital claims data did not permit calcu-
namely, those known to be most directly affected lation of length of stay. In a notable number of
by disease and treatment”23 (p. 2:3). The SF-36™ instances, admission date/discharge date pairs
is sensitive to chronic conditions that Phoenix- could not be unambiguously established from
Care targeted. A population of patients enrolled streams of MCO claims data; such pairs are re-
in Medicare(cid:1)Choice exhibited declining scores quired for each hospitalization episode for com-
on the SF-36™ in response to chronic condi- putation of the LOS of that hospitalization.b Be-
tions.24The remaining items of the questionnaire yond this, an extensive line-by-line review of
were developed specifically for this evaluation. medical claims data by the PhoenixCare Medical
Director and Project Director revealed that hos-
Utilization of medical services: Claims information pitalizations could not be sorted into those di-
records (Focus 4).MCOs furnished utilization data rectly related to the PhoenixCare target diagnoses
on each participating patient for the duration of (CHF, COPD) versus those related to other ancil-
his/her enrollment in the study, as well as for the lary conditions, because all hospitalizations were
6 months prior to enrollment (or all the time that identified by the primary diagnosis regardless of
the patient had been enrolled in the MCO up to the treatment provided.
6 months prior to enrollment in the study).a
We considered emergency department visits as
Statistical analysis
stand-alone events and LOS in the hospital. For
our enumeration of emergency department vis- We refer to the intake interview as time 0, the
its, we considered only those emergency depart- first 3-month follow-up interview as time 3, the
ment visits that did not result in an immediate next, as time 6, etc. All analyses of intervention
hospitalization. Emergency department visits re- outcomes examined effects as a function of ex-
sulting in hospitalizations were not counted. In perimental condition (PhoenixCare, control), di-
determining which emergency department visits agnosis (CHF, COPD), and their interaction. In
to count, we established that if a patient’s condi- these analyses, we controlled for any pretest dif-
tion was so severe and medically compromised ferences by including the corresponding time 0
that a hospitalization was required subsequent to score as a covariate. We report both the overall
an emergency department treatment, then that effect of the intervention and any differential pat-
patient could not have managed his/her own tern of intervention effects within diagnoses. The
symptoms adequately with the PhoenixCare in- number of patients available for analysis dropped
dividualized treatment plan at home. We derived from 192 at intake (time 0) to 112 at time 3, 92 at
two emergency department counts: (1) number of time 6. Our analytic strategies included as many
emergency department visits in the 6 months cases as possible for the analysis of each aspect
prior to entry into PhoenixCare, to characterize of the intervention. We examined outcomes at
normative emergency department use pattern by
the patient, and (2) total number of emergency
department visits during PhoenixCare enroll- bWe devoted extensive effort to rendering the streams
of claims data from the MCOs amenable to computation
ment. Multiple medical claims were possible for
of LOS. There was no consistent method for reporting of
claims data across MCOs. In our attempt to capture ad-
mission/discharge pairs, we found some measurements
aA fifth class of measures assessed program imple- so anomalous from the perspective of medical utilization
mentation, characterizing the extent, timing, and type of that we ultimately judged that the claims data could not
service provided to patients throughout the intervention. be used to compute LOS (e.g., pairs of admissions and
This last stream of data supported the evaluation of pro- discharges that were separated by a year and would have
gram implementation, reported in Lockhart et al.12 led to computation of 365-day hospitalizations.)
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 117
time 3 for all cases with time 3 data and outcomes standard deviation] for continuous outcomes and
at time 6 for all participants with time 6 measures. Hedges’ h(cid:2)[(PhoenixCare estimated propor-
We used analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for tion—Control estimated proportion)/pooled stan-
analysis of continuous variables; logistic regres- dard deviation] for binary outcomes.28 We chose
sion, for binary variables; and Poisson regres- standardized effect size estimates for two reasons.
sion,25 for counts of number of emergency de- First, with the exception of SF-36™, there are no
partment visits. norms on which to compare differences on our
scales. Second, these effect size estimates are used
Growth curve modeling of functional status over in meta-analyses of treatment outcome research.29
time. We expected that changes in functional sta- Effect sizes of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 are considered small,
tus, as measured on the SF-36™, might accrue moderate, and large, respectively30; these effect
gradually over time, even beyond the first 6 sizes have been supported in analyses of treatment
months of the intervention. We thus applied outcomes.29
growth curve modeling in the multilevel frame-
work26 to each of the eight scales of the SF-36™ Pretest equivalence. To evaluate the success of
to test hypotheses concerning the impact of the randomization, we compared PhoenixCare and
PhoenixCare intervention and to characterize control at time 0 on all outcome measures. We
whether groups improved, remained level, or de- used one-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA)
clined over time. For each SF-36™ scale, we fit a for continuous outcome measures and (cid:1)2 tests of
linear trajectory to all available data from each in- independence for binary outcome measures.
dividual. Each individual’s trajectory was char-
acterized by its intercept and slope. Intercepts Attrition analysis.We used the Jurs and Glass31
and slopes then became dependent variables for procedure to examine attrition. For each depen-
analysis as a function of condition, diagnosis, and dent variable listed in Table 1, initial data (time
the condition by diagnosis interaction. The aver- 0) were examined in a two-factor analysis of con-
age intercept of the individuals in a particular dition (PhoenixCare versus control) by retention
group (e.g., patients with COPD in the Phoenix- (retained, attrited). A main effect of retention re-
Care group) measures the overall level of func- flects difference between participants who re-
tioning of the group at one point in time. Differ- mained in versus left the study. An interaction
ences in intercepts across groups represent between condition and retention signals differ-
differences in level of functioning. By moving the ential attrition across conditions. Our statistical
intercept across the time scale in a series of analy- power to detect a small interaction accounting for
ses,27we could detect the point in time, if any, at 4% of variance at (cid:2)(cid:2)0.05 ranged between 0.79
which differences in levels of functioning be- and 0.84 depending on variance accounted for by
tween groups emerged. The average slope in a main effects.30
group characterizes the overall trend (decline,
stability, improvement) for physical and mental
health over time. Differences in slopes across
RESULTS
groups indicate that groups are changing differ-
entially over time. Each trajectory began at the
Participant characteristics and outcome
time 3 data point; trajectories continued through
of randomization
the full complement of data for each case. The Ini-
tial Interview point (time 0) was used as a co- Participant characteristics. Of the 192 patients
variate to control for any differences between enrolled, 101 (or 53%) were randomized to the
groups in their intercepts at the outset of the in- PhoenixCare intervention; the remaining 91
tervention. (47%) served as controls. Immediately after intake
and before the outset of treatment, 1 intervention
Treatment effect size estimates. We report a stan- and 1 control case dissenrolled. Analyses of out-
dardized effect size estimate for each observed dif- comes are based on these 190 cases. There were
ference between the PhoenixCare and control con- 67 CHF and 33 COPD PhoenixCare participants,
ditions (i.e., the number of standard deviations of and 62 CHF and 28 COPD controls. Participants
difference between the groups). We use Hedges’ were on average 68.5 years of age; 64% were fe-
g(cid:2)[(PhoenixCare mean-Control mean)/pooled male; 82% were Caucasian; 42% had greater than
118 AIKEN ET AL.
TABLE 2. DEMOGRAPHICS CHARACTERISTICS per month did not differ by diagnosis or by
OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS whether the participant lived alone or with some-
one else. The PhoenixCare social worker con-
Intervention Control
n (cid:2) 100 n (cid:2) 90 tacted 45% of patients; this subset of patients re-
ceived an average of 6 contacts from the social
Age in years
worker.
Mean 68 years 70 years
SD 14 13
Percent female 58% 70% Control case management services. PhoenixCare
Percent Caucasian 80% 84%
staff monitored the provision of MCO case man-
Percent married 40% 48%
agement services through quarterly interviews
Education
Percent (cid:4) HS degree 44% 41% with MCO directors of case management. In all,
Percent HS degree 42% 35% MCOs assigned their own case managers to 62%
Percent (cid:5) HS degree 14% 24%
of all control participants and to 51% of Phoenix-
Percent having someone 87% 88%
Care patients, (cid:1)2(1)(cid:2)2.36, p(cid:2)0.12. Over the
to help with illness
course of the study, the MCOs greatly narrowed
SD, standard deviation of age, in years. criteria for enrollment into case management and
diminished the services provided, in response to
financial pressures. Home visits and other sup-
port services were terminated by all MCOs;
a high school degree; 44% were married; 87% re-
phone monitoring was maintained by only two
ported having someone to help them with their
MCOs throughout the study. Only medical and
illness. Table 2 summarizes demographic charac-
disease management was maintained throughout
teristics by experimental condition (PhoenixCare,
the study by all MCOs, albeit to an increasingly
control).
narrow range of patients. Three MCOs began to
reinstate some services in the last quarter of the
Pretest equivalence. PhoenixCare and control
participants did not differ significantly (at p(cid:3) study, when actual enrollment into the Phoenix-
Care study was sparse.
0.10) on any outcome measures related to Focus
1, Focus 2, or Focus 4 (i.e., emergency department
visits in the 6 months prior to enrollment.) With Retention, and reasons for attrition, and
regard to Focus 3, PhoenixCare participants attrition effects by condition
tended to have higher scores on the SF-36™ So-
Retention. Potential length of stay in the pro-
cial Functioning Scale, F(1,189)(cid:2)3.45, p(cid:2)0.07,
gram depended on enrollment date; participants
g(cid:2)0.27, and on the SF-36™ Mental Health Scale,
enrolled from July 1, 1999 through March 31,
F(1,190)(cid:2)3.35, p(cid:2)0.07, g(cid:2)0.26.
2001, but all data collection terminated on Sep-
tember 30, 2001. Of the 101 PhoenixCare partici-
Delivery of the PhoenixCare intervention and
pants, 62%, 55%, and 43% provided time 3, time
control case management services
6, and time 9 interviews, respectively. Of the 91
PhoenixCare intervention. The PhoenixCare in- control participants, corresponding percentages
tervention remained constant in design over the were 54%, 38%, and 33% at time 3, 6, and 9, re-
course of the study. Delivery of service by regis- spectively.
tered nurse case managers combined home visits
and telephone calls. Patients averaged 44 contacts Reasons for attrition. At the end of data collec-
over the course of the intervention. Average tion 44% of the PhoenixCare participants and 25%
monthly frequency of these services per patient of control patients were still participating. Before
(visits plus calls) were 6.3, 4.9, 3.9, 3.9, 3.4, 3.3, in time 3, 6% of all PhoenixCare and 8% of all con-
the first 6 months of participation, of which 3.9, trol participants had died; 8% versus 9%, respec-
2.2, 1.8, 1.5, 1.4, and 1.4 contacts were home vis- tively, had entered hospice; and 1% versus 1%
its. These services were stable beyond the first 6 had entered skilled nursing facilities (SNFs). Cor-
months. Visits included seeing patients at home responding percentages across the whole study
and accompanying patients to the physician’s of- for PhoenixCare versus controls, respectively,
fice to discuss patient progress and treatment op- were 16% versus 13%, death; 12% versus 13%,
tions. The number of registered nurse contacts hospice; 1% versus 3%, SNF. In all 6% of Phoenix-
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 119
Care and 11% of controls declined to continue COVA, at time 3, PhoenixCare patients reported
participation; another 10% and 14%, respectively, having received more education concerning com-
disqualified by leaving their MCO. In sum, munity resources than controls, F(1,107)(cid:2)5.80,
PhoenixCare and control participants appeared p(cid:5)0.05, g(cid:2)0.45. At 6 months PhoenixCare pa-
to have left the study at equal rates for medical tients also exceeded controls in reporting that
causes (death, hospice, SNF), but controls left they had information about whom to speak con-
more often for other reasons. cerning medical problems, F(1,78)(cid:2)5.12, p(cid:5)
0.05, g(cid:2)0.50, and had sufficient information to
Attrition effects.Participants who were retained handle illness emergencies, F(1,86)(cid:2)8.19, p(cid:5)
had better physical and mental functioning (Fo- 0.05, g(cid:2)0.59.
cus 3) than those who left, because attrition in- After 3 months in the program, PhoenixCare
cluded transfer to a skilled nursing facility, to a participants were less likely than controls to have
hospice, or death. Specifically, those retained at had an experience for which they were unpre-
time 3 reported better General Health on the pared (see Table 3). In logistic regression of time
SF-36™ during the 3-month preenrollment pe- 3 outcomes, the Condition by Diagnosis interac-
riod, F(1,188)(cid:2)12.26, p(cid:5)0.001, g(cid:2)0.51; the tion, p(cid:5)0.05, OR(cid:2)6.07, [CI: 1.01, 36.53] re-
same result held for those retained versus lost at flected that COPD PhoenixCare patients were
time 6, F(1,188)(cid:2)12.03, p(cid:5)0.001, g(cid:2)0.50. much less likely to have had such an experience
Those retained at time 6 reported significantly than were COPD controls, p(cid:5)0.05, OR(cid:2)0.23,
lower bodily pain during preenrollment, [CI: 0.05, 0.97], 32% and 58% in PhoenixCare and
F(1,187)(cid:2)7.93, p(cid:5)0.01, g(cid:2)0.41, and also were control respectively, h(cid:2)0.73. At time 6, a condi-
more likely to have resumed a pleasant activity tion main effect, p(cid:5)0.05, OR(cid:2)3.22, [CI: 1.10,
during preenrollment, (cid:1)2(1)(cid:2)13.09, p(cid:5)0.001, 9.44] reflected less preparedness overall of pa-
OR(cid:2)3.25, [CI: 1.72, 6.16], with 48% and 23% tients in the PhoenixCare condition, 42% and 21%
among retained and attrited participants, respec- in PhoenixCare and control respectively, h(cid:2)
tively, h(cid:2)0.57. With regard to end-of-life prepa- (cid:6)0.45.
ration (Focus 2) those retained were less likely to In summary, the PhoenixCare participants re-
have discussed illness and death related legal ported a sense of having greater information for
documents with a physician during preenroll- self-management of illness, a greater appreciation
ment, (cid:1)2(1)(cid:2)4.95, p(cid:5)0.05, OR(cid:2)0.51, [CI: 0.28, of resources available to help with their illness.
0.92] , with 37% and 54% among retained and at- In the early months of intervention only, they re-
trited participants, respectively, h(cid:2)0.34. ported better preparedness for daily experiences,
Only one condition by retention interaction an effect that reversed at time 6.
was detected that signaled differential attrition,
that for having been given sufficient information
Focus 2: preparation for end of life
and education to manage illness at home,
F(1,183)(cid:2)3.93, p(cid:5)0.05. Among those retained, The percentages of affirmative responses to the
PhoenixCare patients had received less informa- four binary indicators (yes/no) reflecting prepa-
tion than had controls during pre-enrollment, ration for end of life are given in Table 4 (Focus
F(1,87)(cid:2)3.225, p(cid:5)0.08; g(cid:2)0.39. The reverse 2) as a function of condition and time. In logistic
was true for those who attrited, F(1,96)(cid:2)1.071, regression of time 3 outcomes, PhoenixCare par-
p(cid:4)0.20; g(cid:2)0.21. ticipants showed a higher rate of having a living
will or advance directive than did controls, p(cid:5)
0.05, OR(cid:2)4.47, [CI: 1.10, 18.18], with 71% com-
Focus 1: Outcomes for self-management of illness
pliance in PhoenixCare, 65% in control, h(cid:2)0.67.
and knowledge of resources
This represented a substantial gain for Phoenix-
Table 3 summarizes the means on the five in- Care patients (from 52% to 71%; see Table 4). No
dividual items measuring management of illness further effects of condition emerged.
and awareness of resources at time 0 and at times
3 and 6, adjusted for time 0. In all 10 comparisons
Focus 3: physical and mental functioning
of PhoenixCare versus control outcomes (5 items
at time 3 and at time 6), the PhoenixCare mean Participation in enjoyable activities.By the time 3
exceeded the control mean. As shown in AN- measurement point, patients in PhoenixCare re-
120 AIKEN ET AL.
TABLE 3. OUTCOMES FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT OF ILLNESS, KNOWLEDGE OF RESOURCES FOR MANAGEMENT, AND
PREPAREDNESS (FOCUS 1) AT INITIAL INTERVIEW, TIME 3 (THREE MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY) AND AT TIME 6
(SIX MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY)
Means adjusted for initial statusa
Initial interview
(unadjusted means) Time 3b Time 6c
Item PhoenixCare Control PhoenixCare Control PhoenixCare Control
Focus 1: Self-management of illness
and knowledge of resources
Focus 1: Self-management of illness
Participant has received sufficient 3.29 3.32 3.73 3.55 3.75 3.70
information to manage illness
at home
Participant has received sufficient 3.51 3.52 3.72 3.52 3.90d 3.51d
information to handle illness
emergency
Focus 1: Resources
Participant has received education 1.80 1.76 2.57d 2.02d 2.14 1.74
about community resources
Participant has received information 1.29 1.42 2.24 1.98 1.97 1.94
about how family and friends
can assist
Participant has received information 1.57 1.76 2.72 2.45 2.63d 2.19d
about who to talk to about a
medical problem
Focus 1: Preparedness (percent
affirmative response)
Participant had an experience which 47% 47% 32%e 40%e 42%f 21%f
they were unprepared for in the
last 4 weeks
Note: All items are on 4-point scales, where 1 (cid:2)mostly false and 4 (cid:2)mostly true.
aMeans reported are adjusted means from an analysis of covariance with response to the item at the initial time 0
interview as the covariate.
bThree-month data include all cases with data at time 3.
cSix-month data include all cases with data at time 6.
dCorresponding adjusted means for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p(cid:5)0.05).
eProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p(cid:5)0.05).
fProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p(cid:5)0.05).
ported having been able to initiate or resume an tom at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively.c At time 0,
activity they enjoyed (see Table 4, Focus 3). As the symptom mentioned as most troubling with
shown in logistic regression of time 3 outcomes, the greatest frequency was difficulty breathing
the condition by diagnosis interaction reached (by 64% of all participants); pain and fatigue were
significance, (cid:1)2(1)(cid:2)6.84, p(cid:5)0.01, OR(cid:2)8.5, [CI: also frequently mentioned. Mean ratings of the
1.69, 39.28]. In COPD, fully 63% of PhoenixCare frequency, severity, and distress associated with
patients responded “yes” as opposed to only 16% the most troublesome symptom are given in
of controls, z(cid:2)3.38, p(cid:5)0.01, h(cid:2)1.00. This dif- Table 5. In a series of ANOVAs of time 0 symp-
ference was not retained at time 6 for patients
with COPD. There was no effect at either time
cThe non-reporting of symptoms at time 0 by 22% of
point for patients with CHF.
patients was attributable to difficulties in initial intake in-
terview administration by one case manager. Whether or
Symptom control.At each interview participants not she had administered any particular interview that
identified, in open-ended fashion, up to three contained this difficulty in administration was unrelated
to diagnosis (CHF, COPD) or to condition (PhoenixCare,
troublesome symptoms; symptoms identified
control). Therefore, the lack of response weakened statis-
could vary across time points. In all, 78%, 90%,
tical power but did not affect conclusions about differ-
and 92% of patients reported at least one symp- ences between conditions, the focus of the analyses.
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 121
TABLE 4. OUTCOMES FOR PREPARATION FOR END OF LIFE (FOCUS 2) AND RESUMPTION OF ACTIVITIES (FOCUS 3)
Percent affirmative response
Initial interview Time 3a Time 6b
PhoenixCare Control PhoenixCare Control PhoenixCare Control
Focus 2: Preparation for end of life
Participant has living will or advance 52% 61% 71%c 65%c 70% 73%
directive for medical treatment desired
Participant has documents such as 56% 63% 66% 69% 68% 76%
medical power of attorney
Participant has discussed legal documents 40% 48% 48% 59% 34% 62%
with physician responsible for care
Participant has discussed legal documents 62% 71% 78% 90% 82% 94%
with family and friends
Focus 3: Physical and mental functioning
Participant has been able to begin or 34% 36% 49%d 37%d 45% 42%
resume an enjoyable activity in the
last 4 weeks
Note: All items have a binary (yes, no) response. Number responding: Initial interview, n (cid:2) 189; 3-month inter-
view, n(cid:2)111; 6-month interview, n(cid:2)90.
aPatients who remained in the program for 3 months.
bPatients who remained in the program for 6 months.
cAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p(cid:5)0.05).
dAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p(cid:5)0.05).
tom frequency, severity, and distress ratings as a provided the main characterization of function-
function of condition and diagnosis, conditions ing over time. Table 6 gives the mean transformed
were equivalent at outset. In a parallel series of scores on a 100-point scale at initial measurement
ANOVAs of Time 3 data,donly symptom distress (time 0) for all participants in the PhoenixCare
showed an effect, specifically in the form of an study; high scores reflect better functioning.
interaction between condition and diagnosis, These mean scores are far below those of com-
F(1,99)(cid:2)4.89, p(cid:5)0.05. PhoenixCare patients parably aged participants in the Medical Out-
with COPD reported lower symptom distress comes Study (MOS), who were diagnosed with
than did COPD controls (p(cid:5)0.05), g(cid:2)0.81. The CHF and COPD.23 The average score across the
interaction effect held at time 6, F(1,82)(cid:2)6.19, eight 100-point scales for PhoenixCare partici-
p(cid:5)0.05, and reflected that PhoenixCare patients pants was 29. This reflects exceptionally low func-
with COPD again tended to have lower (but not tioning compared to average scores of 55 and 56,
significant) distress ratings than did COPD con- respectively, for CHF and COPD patients in the
trols, F(1,22)(cid:2)1.97, p(cid:2)0.07, g(cid:2)0.58. However, MOS.
for clients with CHF, the reverse was true, with Table 6 summarizes the growth analyses. The
PhoenixCare participants reporting higher dis- slope of each of the four groups (condition(cid:7)di-
tress, F(1,60)(cid:2)5.26, p(cid:5)0.05, g(cid:2)0.60. agnosis) is reported. For the intercept, the mea-
surement point (month), if any, at which differ-
Trajectories of physical and mental functioning on ences among groups emerged is reported, along
the SF-36™. The eight subscales of the SF-36™ with a brief description of the difference.
Condition effects.As shown in Table 6, effects of
dFor the ANOVAs of symptom frequency, severity, and the PhoenixCare intervention emerged on three
distress at time 3 and time 6, we did not covary out time scales: (1) Physical Functioning, a measure of ac-
0 scores, since patients often reported different symptoms tivities of daily living, (2) General Health, a self-
at time 0, time 3 and time 6. However, there were no dif-
assessment of current health and expectation of
ferences in these ratings as a function of Condition and
future health, and (3) Vitality, a measure of level
Diagnosis at time 0 that would have led to bias in out-
comes, if ignored, at time 3 and 6. of energy. On Physical Functioning, PhoenixCare
122 AIKEN ET AL.
TABLE 5. MEAN FREQUENCY, SEVERITY, AND DISTRESS point the interaction between condition and di-
RATINGS OF THE MOST TROUBLESOME SYMPTOM (FOCUS 3) agnosis was significant, z(cid:2)2.52, p(cid:5)0.05. Specif-
Mean frequency at each point in timea ically, there was an intercept difference for
COPD, with PhoenixCare having higher Vitality
Time 0 Time 3 Time 6 scores than controls, z(cid:2)2.36, p(cid:5)0.05, g(cid:2)0.76;
no difference between conditions was observed
CHF
PhoenixCare 2.83 2.90 2.87 for CHF.
Control 2.90 2.68 3.00 In summary, the PhoenixCare intervention was
COPD associated with maintained or improved Physi-
PhoenixCare 3.08 3.35 3.08
cal Functioning and General Health, such that
Control 3.23 3.35 2.90
PhoenixCare patients exceeded controls by 9
Mean severity at each point in timeb months. PhoenixCare patients with COPD exhib-
ited enhanced Vitality relative to controls.
Time 0 Time 3 Time 6
CHF Focus 4: medical utilization
PhoenixCare 2.35 2.18 2.20
Control 2.24 2.18 2.13 In the 6 months prior to the outset of the
COPD PhoenixCare intervention, PhoenixCare partici-
PhoenixCare 2.54 2.35 2.08 pants averaged 0.12 emergency department vis-
Control 2.50 2.29 2.20 its per month (SD(cid:2)0.18). Control participants
Mean distress at each point in timec averaged 0.11 emergency department visits per
month (SD(cid:2)0.20). This level of utilization re-
Time 0 Time 3 Time 6 mained essentially unchanged during the inter-
vention, with averages of 0.11 (SD(cid:2)0.34) and
CHF
PhoenixCare 4.19 3.72 4.03d 0.10 (SD(cid:2)0.31) visits per month for PhoenixCare
Control 3.81 3.32 3.30d and control participants, respectively.
COPD
In an overdispersed Poisson regression
PhoenixCare 4.38 3.41d 2.85e
Control 4.35 4.29d 3.80e model25 we predicted number of emergency de-
partment visits during enrollment from condi-
Note: Number of respondents is n (cid:2) 146 for time 0, tion, diagnosis, and their interaction, controlling
n(cid:2)101 for time 3, and n(cid:2)85 for time 6.
aFrequency measured on a 4-point scale: 1 (cid:2)occasion- for total number of days in the program and num-
ally; 2 (cid:2)some of the time; 3 (cid:2)most of the time; 4 (cid:2)all ber of preenrollment emergency department vis-
of the time. its; there were no significant effects of condition.
bSeverity measured on a 3-point scale: 1 (cid:2) not at all Neither were there any effects of condition on
severe; 2 (cid:2)moderately severe; 3 (cid:2)extremely severe.
cDistress measured on a 5-point scale: 1 (cid:2) not at all; emergency department utilization for a subgroup
2 (cid:2) a little bit; 3 (cid:2) somewhat; 4 (cid:2) quite a bit; 5 (cid:2) very of participants we identified as being at high risk
much. for emergency department utilization.
dp(cid:5)0.05 for difference between means.
ep(cid:2)0.07 for difference between means.
Final statistical adjustment
Among all tests of pretest equivalence,
patients in both diagnoses remained the same PhoenixCare participants tended to exceed con-
over time (CHF) or improved (COPD) over time trols (p(cid:5)0.10) on two SF-36™ scales, Social Func-
(as reflected in their slopes), while control pa- tioning and Mental Health. We repeated all
tients declined over time, z(cid:2)2.50, p(cid:5)0.05 for analyses, statistically controlling these differ-
the difference in average slope as a function of ences. All effects we have reported were main-
Condition. At the 9-month point, the Phoenix- tained.
Care patients’ physical functioning exceeded that
of controls, as shown by the intercept difference,
z(cid:2)2.16, p(cid:5)0.05, g(cid:2)0.41. Similarly, on the Gen-
DISCUSSION
eral Health Scale, the average slope for Phoenix-
Care was higher than for controls, z(cid:2)2.16, p(cid:5)
Summary of results
0.05, and the PhoenixCare intercept exceeded that
of controls at 9 months, z(cid:2)2.51, p(cid:5)0.05, g(cid:2) Evaluation outcomes supported an association
0.47. On the Vitality scale at the 3-month time between participation in PhoenixCare and posi-
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 123
TABLE 6. GROWTH MODELING ANALYSIS OF SF-36™ TRAJECTORIES OF
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FUNCTIONING OVER TIME (FOCUS 3)
Slopesa
Intercept differencesb
Time 0 PhxCare Control
SF-36™ Scale Scale mean CHF COPD CHF COPD Monthc Description of finding
Physical 13.0 0.18 1.00 (cid:6)1.39 (cid:6)0.95 9 PhxCare Clients (cid:4) Control (COPD&CHF)
functioningd
General healthe 17.4 0.16 0.54 (cid:6)0.17 (cid:6)1.67 9 PhxCare Clients (cid:4) Control (COPD&CHF)
Vitality 18.8 0.02 0.09 (cid:6)0.91 0.61 3 PhxCare Clients (cid:4) Control (COPDonly)
Social functioning 33.9 (cid:6)0.80 1.09 (cid:6)2.15 3.72 3 CHF (cid:4) COPD
Role-physical 12.7 (cid:6)0.51 0.57 1.60 (cid:6)0.14 —
Bodily painf 48.5 (cid:6)0.57 2.98 (cid:6)0.09 (cid:6)0.45 —
Role emotional 31.3 0.00 1.77 (cid:6)0.24 3.08 —
Mental health 53.6 (cid:6)0.69 (cid:6)0.37 (cid:6)1.77 (cid:6)0.10 —
Note: All scores on the SF-36™ are transformed scores according to Ware et al.19, (p. 6.17) that range from 0 to 100,
as calculated by the formula: Transformed score (cid:2) {[actual raw score-lowest possible score]/highest possible raw
score} (cid:7)100.
aSlopes of average linear trajectory within a group, averaged across slopes of individual linear trajectories of
individual within the group.
bIntercept difference reflects difference in overall elevation of trajectories across groups at a particular time (month).
cMonth is month since enrollment in program; 3 months is at Time 3, and 9 months is at Time 9.
dOverall control slope is declining while overall PhoenixCare slope is rising (p(cid:5)0.05)
eControl slope is declining while PhoenixCare functioning remains stable (p(cid:5)0.05)
fHigh scores on the bodily pain scale represent freedom from pain, (i.e., lower experience of pain).
CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
tive outcomes. In support of Focus 1, Self-Man- fects associated with PhoenixCare for patients
agement of Illness, PhoenixCare patients re- with COPD. Successful management of the symp-
ported having received more information about toms of COPD has long been associated with
both management of illness and about resources adaptive psychological functioning and emo-
than did controls. In addition, after the first three tional stability of the patient.32,33 All the effect
months (time 3) PhoenixCare patients reported sizes associated with the PhoenixCare interven-
being less likely to have experienced health re- tion are moderate to large.
lated events for which they were unprepared For Focus 4, Utilization of Emergency Medical
(though this effect reversed at time 6). In support Services, there was no reduction in standalone
of Focus 2, Legal Preparation for End-of-Life, emergency department visits associated with
PhoenixCare patients were more likely to have a PhoenixCare. Study participants apparently ex-
living will or advance directive by time 3. With perienced extreme exacerbations of their condi-
regard to Focus 3, Physical and Mental function- tions that could not be handled at home. The
ing, more PhoenixCare COPD patients than con- illness level of participants cannot be overesti-
trols had returned to an enjoyable activity by time mated. On the SF-36™ Physica1 Functioning
3. PhoenixCare COPD patients also reported scale, which measures activities of daily living,
lower symptom distress time 3 (although the op- the mean scale score was 13 for PhoenixCare par-
posite was observed for PhoenixCare patients ticipants, a remarkably low level of functioning,
with CHF at time 6). On the SF-36™ scales, as compared to mean scale scores of 48 and 57 for
PhoenixCare patients with COPD reported patients with CHF and patients with COPD, re-
greater vitality (level of energy versus fatigue) spectively, in the MOS.19
than COPD controls by time 3. Control patients
declined in both Physical Functioning and Gen-
Limitations of PhoenixCare design and evaluation
eral Health while PhoenixCare patients did not.
At 9 months after treatment onset superior Phys- We experienced difficulties with recruitment of
ical Functioning and General Health emerged eligible participants, yielding fewer cases than
among PhoenixCare above control participants. planned.12 The prognostication criteria we em-
Across program foci there were more positive ef- ployed to predict life expectancy, while based on
124 AIKEN ET AL.
the best available data, were limited. We sought In contrast, palliative care services include estab-
participants expected to live for 2 years. One third lishing treatment goals in concert with patient
of all participants died or transferred to hospice and caregivers; pain and symptom relief; psy-
in the first 3 months, resulting in diminished sta- chological support, and coordination of care.4The
tistical power to detect effects associated with the PhoenixCare staff, particularly the registered
PhoenixCare intervention. Statistical power to de- nurse case managers, engaged in all these pallia-
tect moderate effect size differences between tive care activities. These registered nurse case
PhoenixCare and control participants fell from managers also advocated for care to be delivered
0.93 to 0.74 to 0.64 at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively. by the MCOs, and assumed a leadership role in
We may have failed to detect small, yet mean- coordination of care with MCO case managers
ingful, outcomes. (where they existed), physicians, family, and
The quality of medical claims data put severe community organizations. Because PhoenixCare
limitations on our ability to explore shifts in uti- participants were approaching death but at the
lization. Hospitalization claims could not be same time were actively living and pursuing
meaningfully explored, as previously explained. treatment, PhoenixCare registered nurse case
Moreover, we were unable to characterize po- managers had both their own role in palliation
tential shifts to less costly aspects of care (e.g., of- and an administrative role in bringing together
fice visits) because these services were not docu- palliation and treatment services.
mented by all plans.
We experienced from 0% to 2% missing data
Mechanism of action of PhoenixCare
on individual items, evenly distributed across
conditions. If this minimal nonresponse to indi- The potential mechanisms by which the
vidual items reflected greater patient illness, then PhoenixCare intervention was associated with
our data would be very slightly biased toward beneficial outcomes bear exploration.e One pos-
healthier overall responding. sibility is that the PhoenixCare intervention pro-
We carried out multiple statistical tests, in- vided an excess of usual care. PhoenixCare staff,
creasing the probability of collective type I error. particularly the registered nurse case managers,
Yet, the pattern of results is favorable to Phoenix- delivered specific palliative services focused on
Care. Of 14 effects reported, 12 favored Phoenix- education and patient empowerment, services
Care. If there were no difference between condi- designed to complement, not duplicate, MCO-
tions in the population, the probability of based treatment. A second possibility is that the
observing this pattern of results by chance alone PhoenixCare staff were exceptionally skilled at
would be less than or equal to 0.004. service delivery. PhoenixCare staff were selected
With regard to generality of findings, our re- to have experience in both chronic disease man-
sults in general apply to those participants whom agement and end-of-life care. They received spe-
we retained for at least three months. Results for cialized training in how to deliver the intensive
physical functioning pertain to those retained for PhoenixCare palliative care protocol. We at-
nine months. Retained individuals had better tribute any positive impacts associated with
health than those lost to the study. Our analysis PhoenixCare to delivery of the PhoenixCare pal-
of differential attrition across the PhoenixCare liation protocol, including advocacy for treat-
and control conditions suggests that the outcomes ment, by experienced registered nurse case man-
associated with PhoenixCare are not caused by agers. We believe that the staff training and the
differential health status across conditions. PhoenixCare program can be exported to other
settings.
Case management in treatment versus palliation
Alternative models of home-based palliative care
As characterized by Meier et al.11 case man-
agement programs delivered by MCOs for those The PhoenixCare program delivered home-
with life-threatening illnesses “typically focus based palliative care to individuals expected to
primarily on service coordination, to a lesser ex-
tent on medical evaluation and decision making,
eWe thank an anonymous reviewer for suggestions as
and only rarely incorporate standard palliative
to potential mechanisms that stimulate this discussion, as
care assessment and interventions. . . . “ (p. 120). well as the discussion of limitations of the study.
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION 125
live for 2 years who were still actively pursuing 2. Byock IR: End-of-life care: A public health crisis and
treatment through one of seven different MCOs. an opportunity for managed care. Am J Manag Care
PhoenixCare provided palliative care as an add- 2001;7:1123–1132.
3. Beresford, L, Byock, I., Twohig, JS: Financial implica-
on to the treatment services, including treatment-
tions of promoting excellence in end-of-life care.
oriented case management, provided by the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2002.
MCOs. In contrast, Meier et al.11furnished home-
4. Morrison RS, Meier DE: Palliative care. N Engl J Med
based palliative care by training case manage-
2004;350:2582–2590.
ment nurses to add palliative case management 5. Armes PJ, Addington-Hall JM: Perspectives on symp-
to treatment oriented case management they usu- tom control in patients receiving community pallia-
ally provided; an outcome evaluation of this pro- tive care. Palliat Med 2003;17:608–615.
gram is forthcoming. Alternative models of pal- 6. Bixby MB, Knoick-McMahon J, McKenna CG: Ap-
plying the transitional care model to elderly patients
liation funded through The Robert Wood Johnson
with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2000;14:53–63.
initiative3 included integrating hospice into a
7. Rosenfeld K, Rasmussen J: Palliative care manage-
hospital setting and adding palliative care ser-
ment: A Veterans Administration demonstration proj-
vices in outpatient treatment settings. We de- ect. J Palliat Med 2003;6:831–839.
signed our PhoenixCare model specifically to test 8. Bakitas M, Stevens M, Ahles T, Kirn M, Skalla K, Kane
whether a stand-alone organization especially de- N, Greenberg R: Project ENABLE: A palliative care
voted to delivery of high-quality home-based pal- demonstration project for advanced cancer patients in
three settings. J Palliat Med 2004;7:363–372.
liative care could partner with a variety of health
9. Brumley RD, Enguidanos S, Cherin DA: Effectiveness
care plans. We chose individualized case man-
of a home-based palliative care program for end-of-
agement in order to reach an essentially home-
life. J Palliat Med 2003;6:715–724.
bound population of seriously ill individuals. 10. Stuart B, D’Onofrio CN, Boatman S, Feigelman G:
CHOICES: promoting early access to end-of-life care
through home-based transition management. J Palliat
CONCLUSION Med 2003;6:671–683.
11. Meier DE, Thar W, Jordan A, Goldhirsch SL, Siu A,
Morrison RS: Integrating case management and pal-
Patients with severe illnesses who were still ac-
liative care. J Palliat Med 2004;7:119–134.
tively pursuing treatment appeared to benefit
12. Lockhart CA, Volk-Craft BE, Hamilton G, Aiken LS,
from the palliative services provided by the Williams FG: The PhoenixCare Program: Teaching the
PhoenixCare intervention. Our findings lend sup- seriously chronically ill skills for living and dying. J
port to the concept of palliation as integral to Palliat Med 2003;6:1001–1012.
treatment for severe life limiting disease.4 13. Christakis NAL: Predicting patient survival before
and after hospice enrollment. Hosp J 1998;13:71–87.
14. Connor SR: New initiatives transforming hospice
care. Hosp J 1999;14:3–4, 193–203.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
15. Finne-Soveri UH, Tilvis RS: How accurate is the ter-
minal prognosis in the minimum data set? J Am Geri-
This is a project of The Robert Wood Johnson atr Soc 1998;46:8,1023–1024.
Foundation: Promoting Excellence in End-of-Life 16. Fox E, Landrum-McNiff K, Zhong Z, Dawson NV, Wu
Care Program, which provided funding. It was AW, Lynn J: Evaluation of prognostic criteria for de-
termining hospice eligibility in patients with advanced
also supported in part by the Flinn Foundation,
lung, heart, or liver disease. SUPPORT Investigators.
Phoenix, Arizona, and St. Luke’s Health Initia-
Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for
tives, Phoenix, Arizona, which provided funding
Outcomes and Risks of Treatments. JAMA 1999;282:
for both clinical and research project staff. 17,1638–1645.
PhoenixCare was housed at Hospice of the Val- 17. Luchins DJ, Hanrahan P, Murphy K: Criteria for en-
ley, Phoenix, Arizona; the support of Executive rolling dementia patients in hospice. J Am Geriatr Soc
Director Susan Goldwater-Levine is gratefully ac- 1997;45:9,1054–1059.
18. Stuart B: The NHO Medical Guidelines for Non-Can-
knowledged.
cer Disease and local medical review policy: Hospice
access for patients with diseases other than cancer.
Hosp J 1999;14:3–4, 139–154.
REFERENCES 19. Shields M: Proxy reporting in the national population
health survey. Health Rep 2000;12:21–39.
1. Byock IR, Twohig JS: Expanding the realm of the pos- 20. Yip JY, Wilber KH, Myrtle RC, Grazman DN: Com-
sible. J Palliat Med 2003;6:311–313. parison of older adult subject and proxy responses on
126 AIKEN ET AL.
the SF-36 health-related quality of life instrument. Ag- 28. Hedges LV, Olkin I: Statistical Methods for Meta-Anal-
ing Ment Health 2001;5:136–142. ysis. New York: Academic Press, 1985.
21. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, Lepore JM, 29. Lipsey MW, Wilson DW: The efficacy of psychologi-
Friedlander-Klar H, Kiyasu E, Sobel K, Coyle N, Ke- cal, educational, and behavioral treatment. Am Psy-
meny N, Norton L, Scher H: The memorial symptom chol 1993;48:1181–1209.
assessment scale: An instrument for the evaluation 30. Cohen J: Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral
of symptom prevalence, characteristics, and distress. Sciences, 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1326–1336. 1988.
22. Teno J: Surrogate Integrated Care System Afterdeath 31. Jurs SG, Glass GV: The effect of experimental mor-
Interview. In: Toolkit of Instruments to Measure End of tality on the internal and external validity of the ran-
Life. Washington, DC: Center to Improve Care of the domized comparative experiment. J Exper Educ
Dying. George Washington University, 1997. (http:// 1971;40:62–66.
www.gwu.edu/(cid:1)cicd/toolkit/toolkit.htm) (cid:2)Last ac- 32. Dowson CA, Town GI, Frampton C, Mulder RT: Psy-
cessed 12/06/05.(cid:3) chopathology and illness beliefs influence COPD self-
23. Ware JE Jr, Snow KK, Kosinski M, Gandek B: SF-36 management. J Psychosom Res 2004;56:333–340.
Health Survey: Manual and Interpretation Guide. Boston 33. McCathie HC, Spence, Tate RL: Adjustment to chronic
MA: The Health Institute, New England Medical Cen- obstructive pulmonary disease: The importance of
ter, 1993. psychological factors. Eur Respir J 2002;19:47–53.
24. Ellis BH, Shannon ED, Cox JK, Aiken LS, Fowler BM:
Chronic conditions: Results of the Medicare Health
Address reprint requests to:
Outcomes Survey. Health Care Financing Rev
Leona S. Aiken, Ph.D.
2004;25:75–91.
25. McCullagh P, Nelder JA: Generalized Linear Models, Department of Psychology
2nd ed. London: Chapman & Hall, 1989. Arizona State University
26. Singer JD, Willett JB: Applied Longitudinal Data Anal- Box 871104
ysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. Tempe, AZ 85287-1104
27. Mehta PD, West SG: Putting the individual back into
individual growth curves. Psychol Methods 2000;
5:23–43. E-mail: Leona.Aiken@asu.edu
