doi:10.4269/ajtmh.13-0008
Copyright © 2013 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene

# Access to Waterless Hand Sanitizer Improves Student Hand Hygiene Behavior in Primary Schools in Nairobi, Kenya

Amy J. Pickering, Jennifer Davis, Annalise G. Blum, Jenna Scalmanini, Beryl Oyier, George Okoth,
Robert F. Breiman, and Pavani K. Ram*
Civil and Environmental Engineering and Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, California;
Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya;
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York

Abstract. Handwashing is difficult in settings with limited resources and water access. In primary schools within urban
Kibera, Kenya, we investigated the impact of providing waterless hand sanitizer on student hand hygiene behavior.
Two schools received a waterless hand sanitizer intervention, two schools received a handwashing with soap intervention,
and two schools received no intervention. Hand cleaning behavior after toilet use was monitored for 2 months using
structured observation. Hand cleaning after toileting was 82% at sanitizer schools (N = 2,507 toileting events), 38% at soap
schools (N = 3,429), and 37% at control schools (N = 2,797). Students at sanitizer schools were 23% less likely to have
observed rhinorrhea than control students (P = 0.02); reductions in student-reported gastrointestinal and respiratory illness
symptoms were not statistically significant. Providing waterless hand sanitizer markedly increased student hand cleaning
after toilet use, whereas the soap intervention did not. Waterless hand sanitizer may be a promising option to improve
student hand cleansing behavior, particularly in schools with limited water access.


INTRODUCTION

Diarrheal diseases and respiratory infections are major contributors to global child mortality, causing 1.7 million child
deaths annually.[1] Transmission of pathogens causing these syndromes is particularly prevalent in schools, where students are
in close contact with each other; classrooms in low-income
urban settings can be overcrowded because of limited space.
Communicable illnesses are a leading cause of missed school
days, and absenteeism correlates with low academic achievement.[2,3] It is estimated that hundreds of millions of school days
are lost each year globally because of diarrheal illness.[4]

Handwashing education and promotion is a proven strategy
to reduce diarrhea and respiratory illness globally.[5] However,
hand hygiene programs implemented in schools in various countries have yielded mixed results. Handwashing interventions
have been found to reduce illness-related absenteeism in Egypt
and China but not in rural Kenya and Israel.[6][–][9] Hand hygiene
compliance directly influences health impacts in such studies
and is dependent in part on the availability of water and soap.
The United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF) estimates that
only 51% of primary schools in 60 low-income countries have
access to adequate water supplies.[10] One strategy that addresses
the challenges of limited water supplies as well as the time and
effort requirements for hand hygiene is the use of waterless
alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
In high-income countries, promotion and/or provision of
hand sanitizer have been found to both improve hand hygiene
compliance and reduce incidence of infectious diseases in a variety of settings, including healthcare facilities, households, and
schools.[5,11][–][13] Hand sanitizer interventions conducted in elementary schools in the United States have reduced illness-related
absenteeism by 14–51%.[3,14][–][17] Home-based hand sanitizer interventions have also been found to reduce respiratory and gastrointestinal illness transmission among households with children
enrolled in daycare.[18,19] Alcohol-based hand sanitizers have lim
*Address correspondence to Pavani K. Ram, University at Buffalo,
State University of New York, Room 270, Farber Hall, 3435 Main
Street Buffalo NY 14214 E-mail: pkram@buffalo edu


ited efficacy against some enteric pathogens, such as the sporeforming bacteria Clostridium difficile and Norwalk virus.[20,21]

However, because of its broad effectiveness, proven improved
disinfection capabilities over plain soap, and ease of use, the
World Health Organization (WHO) now recommends alcoholbased hand sanitizer as the preferred hand cleaning method for
most clinical situations in healthcare facilities around the world.[22]

There is evidence that alcohol-based sanitizers perform as
well as handwashing with soap and water in settings where
hands are highly contaminated with fecal bacteria and show
visible dirt[23,24]; however, limited research has been conducted
on the behavioral and health impacts of hand sanitizer
use in low-income settings. A randomized controlled trial
in Colombia found that access to waterless hand sanitizer
in daycare centers reduced the risk of both gastrointestinal and
respiratory illnesses among enrolled children.[25] In Bangladesh,
a hand sanitizer intervention among households in a lowincome urban area was well-accepted but did not improve frequency of hand cleaning behavior compared with a soap and
water intervention.[26] These studies suggest that additional work
should be done to assess the circumstances under which access
to sanitizer can improve hand hygiene behavior and health.
The primary objectives of this study were to pilot implementation of a waterless hand sanitizer intervention in primary
schools in Kenya and evaluate the impact of the intervention
on student hand cleaning behavior. We compared waterless
hand sanitizer promotion with both standard practice (no intervention) and promotion of handwashing with soap. Key outcomes of interest included student hand cleaning rates after
toilet use and before eating lunch. A secondary objective of
the study was to evaluate the impact of the intervention on
self-reported symptoms of diarrheal and respiratory illness
among students. In addition, we assessed student and teacher
perceptions of waterless hand sanitizer as an alternative to
handwashing with soap and water.

METHODS

This study was conducted within the densely populated
urban community of Kibera in Nairobi Kenya Data were


-----

collected in two villages (Soweto and Gatwikira), where the
International Emerging Infections Program (IEIP), a collaboration between the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—Kenya
(CDC—Kenya), has been conducting population-based infectious disease surveillance since 2005. Households in this area
also exhibit high rates of pneumonia and diarrheal disease.[27][–][29]

All primary schools within the surveillance area were visited
to obtain information on their student population as well as
current water supply, sanitation, and hygiene services. Schools
with more than 100 students were considered eligible for the
study to ensure balance of school populations across treatment
arms. We excluded schools that shared latrines with community
members, because it would not have been feasible to prevent
public use of installed hand cleaning stations. Eight schools
meeting these eligibility criteria were identified within the surveillance area. One school among the eight was excluded
because it had substantially superior water supply services
(a borewell equipped with a water purification and bottling
facility on the school premises).
Consent was sought from the administrators and teachers
at the remaining seven schools; one school administrator
declined to allow his school to participate, leaving six participating schools. Two schools were randomly assigned to receive
a handwashing with soap intervention, two schools were randomly assigned to receive an alcohol-based hand sanitizer
intervention,and two schoolswere randomly assignedto receive
no intervention (controls). Treatment status was assigned
before obtaining consent from parents; the consenting process
informed parents of the assignment. Written consent was
sought from at least one parent or guardian of each student
in the enrolled schools. Students who did not turn in a signed
consent did not participate in individual interviews, although
their hand cleansing behavior may have been recorded during
structured observations; individual students were not identified during observations.
Interventions. Hygiene interventions consisted of an initial
teacher training session followed by the installation of soap or
sanitizer wall dispensers at the four intervention schools. Each
of these schools received two dispensers (containing either
liquid soap or hand sanitizer replenished throughout the
study), one of which was installed next to the toilets and one
of which was installed near the eating area. Wall dispensers
were mounted on wooden supports that could be padlocked
for security purposes, and they were removed each night for
safekeeping by teachers or school administrators. Schools provided with soap (soap intervention schools) also received a
plastic 60-L water tank with a spigot mounted on a metal stand
(Polytanks, Nairobi, Kenya). Handwashing soap and soap dispensers were purchased locally in Nairobi (Primark Trading
Company, Nairobi, Kenya), and the sanitizer product and
sanitizer dispensers were imported from a US company (Purell
sanitizer; GoJo Industries Inc., Akron, OH). Soap dispensers
were manually operated by pulling a lever; the sanitizer dispensers automatically dispensed product when hands were
placed underneath the motion sensor. Each intervention school
was visited daily by field staff (enumerators) to replenish soap
and sanitizer throughout the study period.
The teacher training session included a participatory discussion with teachers on germ theory and hand hygiene, demonstration and practice of correct handwashing or sanitizing
method and distribution of a culturally appropriate student


hand hygiene promotion kit. The kit was designed by
UNICEF for promoting handwashing with soap in Kenyan
schools. The kit included posters, stickers, a classroom activity
book, and a DVD presentation on handwashing along with a
promotional song. Control schools did not receive training
sessions or hygiene kits.
Data Collection. Baseline (before intervention) and endline
surveys were conducted with teachers and students at each
school. Students enrolled in pre-unit (typically age 5 years)
through level P5 (typically age 10 years) were interviewed.
Each enumerator was given a list of students by grade level in
random order, and students were invited for interview starting
at the top of the list. All teachers at each school were invited
for interviews. Respondents were questioned about frequency
and timing of hand cleaning behavior, when and why their most
recent school absence occurred, and their perceptions of soap
and sanitizer (during the follow-up survey only).
Field staff conducted structured observation of student
latrine use at each school from 10:30 AM to 1:30 PM on a
rotating schedule of 2–4 days/week per school. Teachers and
administrators were not informed of the structured observation schedule ahead of time. Enumerators positioned themselves so that they could observe when students entered the
toilets and whether and how students cleaned their hands
after exiting the toilet. For each toilet visit, enumerators
recorded the sex of the student and whether she or he cleaned
her or his hands after using the toilet. If multiple students
approached the toilets at one time, the enumerator selected
one student arbitrarily to observe and record (students were
not aware if they were selected). For each hand hygiene
event, enumerators recorded the materials used to clean
hands (e.g., sanitizer, water, and soap) and the method used
to dry hands. They also timed the duration of hand cleaning
(including rubbing, lathering, and rinsing) in seconds using
a stopwatch.
Hand cleaning supplies were typically positioned by teachers
at both intervention and control schools in a location that
students had to walk past to line up to get their free lunch.
During the beginning of lunch periods at each school (approximately 30 minutes), enumerators repositioned themselves in
the eating area. The proportion of students cleaning their
hands before eating lunch was determined by tallying the
number of students who approached and used the handwashing
or hand sanitizing station (or washed their hands at control
schools) and dividing that number by the total number of students eating lunch on the school premises on that day.
Presence of sanitizer, soap, and water was recorded daily by
field enumerators at the latrine and eating areas at all schools
during unannounced spot checks. To assess how water and
soap availability affected hand cleaning behavior, the enumerators also monitored the presence of water and soap
during structured observations.
Although the study was not designed to have sufficient power
to detect significant impacts on health, students at all study
schools were interviewed weekly regarding their health status.
Enumerators asked each student which of the following symptoms she or he had experienced in the 24 hours before the
interview: loose/watery stool, three or more stools, vomiting,
cough, difficulty breathing, sore throat, runny nose (rhinorrhea),
and skin rash. In addition, enumerators recorded whether each
student had visible rhinorrhea. The WHO case definition
of diarrhea (three or more loose/watery stools in 24 hours) was


-----

used as the primary classification of diarrhea.[30] Students were
also requested to indicate the consistency of feces produced
during their most recent bowel movement on a chart adapted
from the Bristol Stool Scale.[31] This visual aid includes seven
images of stools that range in consistency from hard spheres
to watery liquid. As a second indicator of diarrhea, respondents
who indicated that their most recent bowel movement matched
Bristol Scale images 6 or 7 (watery stool) were considered
to have had diarrhea.
In addition, endline in-depth interviews were conducted with
teachers at sanitizer and soap intervention schools to better
understand the teachers’ experiences with promoting sanitizer
or soap. Convenience sampling was used to invite teachers for
interviews until three teachers had been interviewed at each
school. These interviews were semistructured and included
open-ended questions about teachers’ personal experiences
with sanitizer or soap, positive and negative features of the
products, whether and how they felt that access to soap or
sanitizer changed their students’ behavior, and challenges that
students face with respect to practicing good hand hygiene
at school. The semistructured interviews were voice-recorded,
transcribed, and translated into English.
All structured observation, health, and survey data were collected with personal digital assistants (PDAs) using The Survey
System software (Creative Research Systems, Petaluma, CA).
The same field staff that conducted the teacher training were
also involved in data collection throughout the study. Enumerators rotated daily through schools on an assigned schedule for
all types of data collection. Human subjects research approval
was obtained from the Stanford Institutional Review Board
(Protocol Number 19143) and KEMRI Ethical Review Committee (Protocol Number 1840). Data analysis was conducted
with IBM SPSS Statistics 19 (IBM Company, Armonk, NY)
and STATA 11 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX).
Data analysis. The unit of analysis for modeling hand
cleaning behavior after toileting was the event (i.e., individual
student visit to latrine). The unit of analysis for modeling hand
cleaning behavior before eating was the school lunch period
(proportion of students that cleaned hands during an observed
lunch period), because individual data were not collected.
Poisson regression was used to determine prevalence ratios of
hand cleaning after toilet use and before lunch among students
in intervention schools compared with students in control
schools (robust SEs accounted for clustering at the school level).
Multilevel mixed effects Poisson regression models (with
random effects for schools and random effects for students
nested within schools) were used to generate risk ratios for
illness symptoms among students in intervention schools compared with students in control schools, students in sanitizer
intervention schools compared with control schools, and students at sanitizer intervention schools compared with students
at soap intervention schools. All behavior and health models
controlled for week of follow-up; health models additionally
controlled for individual age and sex.
Observed presence of soap and water (spot checks) at schools
was modeled with logistic regression to understand availability
over time (independent variables included study day and school
fixed effects). Self-reported student attendance at the conclusion of the study between groups was analyzed by logistic
regression with robust SEs to account for clustering at the
school level. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA; with
Bonferroni multiple comparison tests) was used to determine


significant differences in observed hand cleaning duration
between treatment groups. In-depth interviews were analyzed
by grouping the responses to each prompt, highlighting the
concepts mentioned by multiple respondents, summarizing the
themes that emerged, and finally, identifying illustrative quotes
representative of the dominant themes.

RESULTS

Based on school registrar data, a total of 1,364 students was
enrolled in the six participating schools (sanitizer = 435 students, soap = 460 students, and control = 469 students).
Signed parental consent was obtained for 82% of the students.
All study schools included grade levels pre-unit through P5
(ages 5–10 years); one school also included a nursery class
(ages 2–4 year), and four schools also included grades P6–P8
(ages 10–13 years). The number of teachers at each school
ranged from 5 to 21. Most schools purchased water from
piped public taps off site, although one control and one soap
school had a municipal water connection on the school premises
that provided intermittent supply. At baseline, none of the
schools was observed to have soap present for handwashing
at latrine or eating areas.
Afterinterventionsweredelivered,atotalof253 unannounced
daily spot checks was conducted at schools. In control schools,
soap was almost never available at latrines (2%) and eating
areas (0%); water was available approximately one-third of the
time at latrines and eating areas (Table 1). At soap intervention
schools, water was available for 54% of latrine checks and 68%
of eating area checks, whereas soap was available for over 90%
of all checks. Water and soap were overall less available
at sanitizer intervention schools than soap intervention schools
(Table 1). Analysis of spot check data over time across all the
schools showed that the odds of finding soap (odds ratio [OR] =
0.95, SE = 0.01) or water (OR = 0.80, SE = 0.05) present
at eating areas as well as the odds of finding soap at latrines
(OR = 0.94, SE = 0.02) were significantly negatively associated
with the number of study days that had passed (P < 0.05),
whereas the odds of finding water present at latrines was not
associated with study duration (OR = 0.99, SE = 0.02, P = 0.4).
Structured observation data from school latrines indicate that
water was not available during 39% and 29% of toilet use
observations at soap intervention and control schools, respectively. Water for handwashing was available during 68%
of lunch sessions observed at sanitizer schools, 81% of sessions
at soap schools, and 79% of sessions at control schools.
Hand cleaning behavior. A total of 8,733 student toilet use
events was observed throughout the study (post-intervention
delivery). Of these events, hand cleaning in any way (i.e., with
water alone, water and soap, or sanitizer) occurred at 82%

Table 1
Soap and water availability at school latrines and eating areas as
observed by field staff during unannounced spot checks


Water
available
at latrines
(%)


Soap
available
at latrines
(%)


Water
available
at eating area
(%)*


Soap
available
at eating area
(%)*


Sanitizer (N = 93)† 2 3 25 5
Soap (N = 93)† 54 91 68 93
Control (N = 67) 34 2 34 0

*Random spot checks usually occurred when the eating area was not being used.
†At intervention schools, soap and sanitizer were recorded as not available when the
dispensers had been temporarily removed from the eating or latrine areas


-----

Table 2
Proportion of events after toilet use and before lunch in which hand
cleaning occurred at hand sanitizer (sanitizer), handwashing
(soap), and control schools.

After toilet use Before lunch

Any type of Cleaning with Any type of Cleaning with
N hand cleaning product N hand cleaning product

Sanitizer 2,507 0.82* 0.82* 39 0.90 0.61*
Soap 3,429 0.38 0.37* 43 0.82 0.70*
Control 2,797 0.37 0.02 43 0.69 0.01

Product refers to hand soap or hand sanitizer. Analysis presented per toileting event
observed and per lunch session observed.
*Significantly different from control arm (P < 0.05).

of 2,507 toileting events in sanitizer intervention schools, 38%
of 3,429 events in soap intervention schools, and 37% of 2,797
events in control schools (Table 2). Students at sanitizer intervention schools were over twofold more likely to clean their
hands after visiting the toilet than students at control schools
(prevalence ratio = 2.2, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] =
1.2–4.3), whereas students at soap intervention schools were
not significantly more likely to clean their hands compared
with students in control schools (prevalence ratio = 1.0, 95%
CI = 0.3–3.8). Hand cleaning at soap intervention and control
schools was dependent on water access, which varied by
school as well as by day. When water was available, the rate
of students performing any type of hand cleaning increased
to 62% of toilet use events at soap intervention schools and
53% of toilet use events at control schools. The rate of hand
cleaning after toilet use at soap intervention and control
schools was much more variable over time than the rate
at sanitizer intervention schools (Figure 1).
Although the rate of hand cleaning after toilet use was not
significantly different between soap intervention schools and
control schools, the use of soap when cleaning hands was
significantly higher at soap intervention schools than control
schools throughout the study (Figure 2 and Table 2). Among
all toileting events, the rate of hand cleaning with product
(soap or sanitizer) was 82% at sanitizer schools (prevalence
ratio = 38.5, 95% CI = 18.1–81.5), 37% at soap intervention
schools (prevalence ratio = 17.2, 95% CI = 4.4–67.5), and 2%
at control schools (Table 2). At sanitizer intervention schools,
students used sanitizer whenever they cleaned their hands.
Notably, at soap intervention schools, when both soap and

Figure 1. Proportion of toilet use events during which a student
was observed to clean hands in any way (water only, soap and water,
or sanitizer) by school intervention status


Figure 2. Proportion of toilet use events during which a student
was observed to clean hands with soap or sanitizer by school intervention status.

water were observed to be present, the rate of hand cleaning
with soap was 61% (N = 2,058). Students using sanitizer took
significantly less time (P < 0.001) for cleaning hands (mean =
21 seconds, SD = 9 seconds, N = 1,575) than students at soap
intervention schools using soap and water (mean = 48 seconds,
SD = 33 seconds, N = 857). In addition, students at soap intervention schools were observed to clean hands for significantly
longer periods of time (P < 0.001) than students at control
schools (mean = 27 seconds, SD = 20 seconds, N = 830).
Field enumerators observed student hand cleaning behavior during 125 different lunch sessions (sanitizer intervention
N = 39, soap intervention N = 43, and control N = 43). Overall, rates of hand cleaning before lunch were observed to be
higher than rates after toilet use (Figure 3 and Table 2). The
mean proportion of students cleaning hands in any way before
lunch was not significantly different between schools, with the
mean proportion of students as follows: 0.90 at sanitizer
schools (prevalence ratio = 1.3, 95% CI = 0.8–2.2), 0.82 at
soap intervention schools (prevalence ratio = 1.2, 95% CI =
0.7–2.0), and 0.69 at controls schools (Figure 3 and Table 2).
However, the proportion of students cleaning hands with soap
or sanitizer (as opposed to water alone) was significantly higher
at both soap and sanitizer schools compared with control

Figure 3. Proportion of students observed to clean hands in any
way (water only, water and soap, or sanitizer) before lunch by school
intervention status


-----

Figure 4. Proportion of students observed to clean hands with
soap or sanitizer before lunch by intervention status.

schools throughout the entire study (Figure 4). The mean
proportion of students cleaning hands with product before
lunch was 0.61 at sanitizer schools (prevalence ratio = 126.8,
95% CI = 31.9–503.8), 0.70 at soap intervention schools (prevalence ratio = 143.0, 95% CI = 38.9–525.6), and 0.01 at control
schools (Table 2).
Health. A total of 4,667 health interviews was conducted
with students during 8 weeks after the intervention. During the
study, the mean prevalence of students reporting symptoms
consistent with the case definition of diarrhea was 8.8%
in sanitizer intervention schools, 9.5% in soap intervention
schools, and 11.3% in control schools. The mean prevalence
of students identifying their most recent stool as loose/watery
feces (image 6 or 7) on the Bristol Stool Chart was 20.1%
in sanitizer intervention schools, 23.7% in soap intervention
schools, and 23.0% in control schools. Throughout the followup period, a mean of 34.1% reported cough in the past 24 hours
at sanitizer intervention schools compared with 40.0% in soap
intervention schools and 39.6% in control schools. Enumerators
recorded visible rhinorrhea for 28.2% of interviewed students
at sanitizer intervention schools, 27.6% of students at soap
intervention schools, and 36.1% of students at control schools.
Compared with a control school student, a student at a
sanitizer intervention school was less likely to report three or
more loose/watery stools in the past 24 hours or any loose/
watery stool in the past 24 hours; identify image 6 or 7 on the
stool chart; report vomiting, cough, difficulty breathing, or
skin rash; or have observed rhinorrhea. Among these findings,


the only statistically significant difference was that students
in sanitizer schools were 23% less likely to be observed with
rhinorrhea than students in control schools (P = 0.02). Compared with soap intervention schools, students in sanitizer
intervention schools were 20% less likely to report loose/
watery stool (P = 0.01) (Table 3). Compared with students
at control schools, students at soap intervention schools were
less likely to report three or more loose/watery stools in the
past 24 hours, report vomiting or difficulty breathing, or have
observed rhinorrhea. The only statistically significant difference was that students at soap intervention schools were 23%
less likely to be observed with rhinorrhea than students in
control schools (P = 0.01) (Table 3).
The within-school intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs)
of health outcomes ranged from < 0.01 to 0.01, indicating low
correlation of health outcomes measured within schools compared with between schools. In contrast, the within-student
ICCs of repeated health measurements were much higher
(range = 0.09–0.38), suggesting that children were reporting
chronic illness or repeat episodes of acute illness. When schoolassociated random effects are removed from the model, the
modeling results are similar to those results of the main model.
However, when student-associated random effects are removed,
the observed reductions among sanitizer intervention students
are statistically significant for any loose stool (risk ratio [RR] =
0.86, P = 0.04), cough (RR = 0.88, P = 0.03), and diarrhea (RR =
0.76, P = 0.02) compared with students in control schools.
Knowledge and perceptions. A total of 858 surveys was
conducted with teachers (12%) and students (88%) at baseline and the end of the study. Three in-depth interviews were
conducted with teachers at each soap and sanitizer school for
a total of 12 interviews.
All (100%) teachers interviewed at sanitizer schools stated
that they would prefer provision of sanitizer over provision
of soap at their school. The majority (91%) of students at
sanitizer schools also stated that they would choose sanitizer
to clean their hands over soap and water. One teacher said,
“I find it [sanitizer] easy to use than soap . . . If both were
given, then you will find the hand sanitizer being used more
than soap and water.” Students at sanitizer schools reported
that they perceived cleaning hands with sanitizer to take a
shorter time than handwashing with soap and water. When
asked, 80% of students said that they disagreed with the
statement that sanitizer has an unpleasant odor, and 87%
of students disagreed that using sanitizer made their hands
feel dry.


Table 3
Hierarchical (Poisson) model results of self-reported student health symptoms at handwashing with soap and hand sanitizer intervention schools
compared with control schools

Sanitizer vs. control Soap vs. control Sanitizer vs. soap

RR (95% CI) P value RR (95% CI) P value RR (95% CI) P value

Diarrhea (defined as three or more 0.75 (0.52–1.10) 0.14 0.84 (0.58–1.22) 0.36 0.89 (0.61–1.30) 0.56
loose/watery stools in 24 hours)

Any loose/watery stool in 24 hours 0.87 (0.72–1.04) 0.12 1.09 (0.92–1.30) 0.33 0.80 (0.67–0.95) 0.01*
Loose/watery stool identified on stool chart 0.87 (0.70–1.08) 0.19 1.04 (0.85–1.29) 0.69 0.83 (0.67–1.03) 0.09
Vomiting 0.69 (0.44–1.09) 0.11 0.95 (0.62–1.46) 0.81 0.93 (0.53–1.63) 0.80
Cough 0.89 (0.75–1.05) 0.16 1.03 (0.88–1.21) 0.73 0.86 (0.73–1.01) 0.07
Observed rhinorrhea 0.77 (0.62–0.95) 0.02* 0.77 (0.62–0.95) 0.01* 1.00 (0.84–1.18) 0.99
Difficulty breathing 0.77 (0.55–1.08) 0.14 0.95 (0.70–1.29) 0.74 0.81 (0.59–1.12) 0.21
Skin rash 0.79 (0.48–1.29) 0.34 1.10 (0.68–1.77) 0.70 0.72 (0.44–1.16) 0.17

All models control for week of follow-up, child age, sex, and clustering at the student level. All models include 4,636 observations.
*P < 0 05


-----

Teachers at soap intervention schools identified water availability as a major barrier to regular handwashing for students.
As one teacher explained, “[W]e cannot afford the water and
it was straining us to get water.” Teachers and older students
typically have responsibility for fetching and refilling water
tanks at schools. Teachers reported having to spend more time
and money keeping the water tanks full because of the
increased rates of student handwashing post-intervention. One
teacher noted that “[a]t times you forget to refill [the tank with
water], then you find kids are there trying to pull the tank down
to check if it has water so you have to stop teaching to fill the
tanks first.”
Attendance. At baseline, 22% of students reported missing
at least 1 school day in the week before the interview because
of illness. There were no significant differences between intervention groups at baseline (P > 0.9). At the conclusion of the
study, students in control schools reported similar absenteeism
rates to baseline (20%). Significantly fewer students (11%)
in sanitizer intervention schools reported missing at least 1 day
of school because of illness in the prior week compared with
students at control schools (OR = 0.51, SE = 0.1, P < 0.01).
Students in handwashing intervention schools also reported
lower rates (14%) of illness-related absenteeism at follow-up
than students at control schools, although the difference was
not significant (OR = 0.66, SE = 0.3, P = 0.37).

DISCUSSION

The provision of sanitizer to urban water-limited schools
markedly improved hand hygiene practices in this pilot study
in a low-income community in Kenya. Access to sanitizer
resulted in significantly higher hand cleaning rates after using
the toilet and before eating lunch, times during which hands
could easily become contaminated or pathogens could be
transferred from hands to mouth. Sanitizer was well-accepted
by teachers and students alike. The high degree of acceptability
and proven improvements in hand cleansing behavior should
motivate development of strategies for sustainable dissemination of sanitizer to schools in settings with limited or unreliable
water supplies.
Students provided with waterless sanitizer were much more
likely to clean their hands after toileting than students in soap
intervention and control schools. The average rate of hand
cleaning with sanitizer was 82% after using the toilet, which is
much higher than observed hand cleaning rates post-toileting
reported among other studies. For example, a handwashing
intervention among pre-school students in Israel recorded
observed rates of handwashing with soap after toilet use in the
range of 43–47% (although pre-school children might be
expected to have lower compliance).[8] Observational data from
other school-based studies are not available; however, these
rates are also high compared with observed hand hygiene by
caregivers in similar settings. A review of data from 11 lowincome countries found that just 17% of caregivers were
observed to wash their hands with soap after using the toilet.[32]

Another study in Kenya found that only 25% of household
members washed their hands with soap after fecal contact.[33]

The lower hand hygiene compliance rates after toileting
in soap intervention schools compared with sanitizer schools
may be the result of a preference for sanitizer over soap and/or
limited water availability. Students and teachers reported that
they believe that sanitizer takes less time to use is more con

venient, and is better at killing germs than handwashing with
soap and water. Notably, soap intervention schools struggled to
keep handwashing tanks filled with water. The high variability
in hand cleaning behavior observed at soap and control schools
(shown in Figures 1 and 2) is likely caused by the variation
in water availability. Indeed, when water was present, hand
cleaning rates were significantly higher at soap intervention
schools than when water was not available. These findings
imply that a school-based handwashing intervention is more
likely to succeed if it includes an explicit soap and water
procurement plan, particularly if water must be fetched or
purchased from sources off campus.
Patterns of hand cleaning before lunch were different from
patterns observed post-toileting. Rates of any type of hand
cleaning before lunch were not significantly different between
sanitizer (82%), soap (90%), and control schools (69%). At
the same time, students at control schools almost never used
soap to clean their hands before lunch, whereas students at
soap intervention schools and sanitizer schools used soap or
sanitizer, respectively, the majority of the time. The rate of
hand cleaning with a product before lunch was slightly higher
at soap intervention schools than sanitizer intervention
schools. In Kenya, it is common to eat with one’s hands
instead of utensils. One potential explanation for the lower
use of sanitizer versus soap before lunch is that teachers and
students disliked the product’s odor. During an in-depth interview, one teacher reported that “[i]t smells alcoholic. For me
I can’t use it and eat directly, I have to use a spoon. I have to
wash my hands with water again, but the problem is the
water may be contaminated.” Indeed, at sanitizer schools, a
small subset of teachers and students was observed to rinse
their hands with water combined with sanitizer use before
eating. This behavior was observed at least once during 44%
of student lunch sessions at sanitizer intervention schools
(data not shown). These results suggest that students and
teachers may prefer to use soap and water over sanitizer
directly before eating.
This study found some evidence that hand cleaning with
sanitizer in primary schools in low-income settings reduces
both diarrheal and respiratory illness. Provision and promotion of sanitizer at schools resulted in reductions in all
health outcomes measured, including a significant reduction
in observed rhinorrhea (P = 0.02) and reductions in diarrhea,
vomiting, cough, and difficulty breathing suggestive of an
effect (P < 0.2). Notably, this trend was not observed across
all health outcomes in soap intervention schools (Table 3).
Furthermore, students in sanitizer intervention schools were
significantly less likely to report loose/watery stool than
students in soap intervention schools, suggesting more frequent or more effective hand cleansing in sanitizer intervention schools.
Students in sanitizer schools reported missing fewer days
of school because of illness after the intervention compared
with students in control schools. Whereas this result corresponds with reductions in student-reported illness, it should be
interpreted with caution considering that it was measured by
student self-report. It was not feasible to collect valid daily
attendance data during the study, because the schools did not
keep accurate records; also, the student population in each
school fluctuated during the study period. Furthermore, determining cause-specific absenteeism would have required contact
with parents which time and resource constraints precluded


-----

Additional research should be conducted to document the
impact of hand hygiene interventions on absenteeism in urban
low-income schools.
No adverse events were reported during the study period,
although teachers did report that some students attempted
to lick or eat both the sanitizer and liquid soap. The sanitizer
product used in the study includes isopropanol, which has an
unpleasant taste that discourages consumption. News reports in
the United States of children consuming alcohol-based sanitizers
suggest that close supervision of child sanitizer use is warranted.
In this study, sanitizer dispensers were installed at a height that
was out of reach of very young (crawling) children; the installation locations were chosen based on where teachers could easily
view them and oversee use.
There are several limitations to this study. The enrollment
of only six schools and the short length of the study (8 weeks
of follow-up) may have prevented detection of statistically significant health impacts. Reported diarrhea and other symptoms
were highly correlated within students, limiting the study’s
power to detect changes in health because of the interventions.
Treatment assignment was not blinded, and the self-reported
compliance data and health data could be subject to bias.
In addition, there may have been differential reactivity by students during structured observation of hand hygiene behavior
at treatment schools versus control schools. An extended
follow-up period of 12 months or more would have been ideal to
understandlong-termcompliancewiththeinterventions,because
the use of sanitizer might have decreased over time as the novelty
of the new product wore off. A longer-term study powered
to detect changes in objective outcomes, such as illness-related
absenteeism, would be useful in determining the health impact
of a sanitizer intervention among primary school students.
The high rates of compliance with sanitizer use by students
indicates that provision of waterless sanitizer can be an effective
strategy for increasing the rate of hand cleaning behavior at
critical times in water-constrained school settings. The interventions delivered in this study contained minimal behavior change
promotion (only one teacher training session per school), suggesting that high uptake of sanitizer may not require intensive
promotional efforts, which is an advantage for future scale-up
of use. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are becoming increasingly
available in Kenya and other low-income countries. Efforts
to build local manufacturing capacity, develop product delivery
supply chains, design bulk-refilling systems, and generate
demand could contribute to the financial and logistical feasibility
of implementing sustainable sanitizer interventions in primary
schools and other settings.

Received January 6, 2013. Accepted for publication May 20, 2013.

Published online July 8, 2013.

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Harun Njuguna, Lillyan
Githinji, and Mark Buyu Luta for excellent field assistance. We also
appreciate the cooperation of the study school administrators and
study participants.

Financial support: This study was funded by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention—Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
and the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies at Stanford
University; GOJO Industries provided the alcohol-based hand sanitizer
distributed to schools in this study.

Authors’ addresses: Amy J. Pickering, Jennifer Davis, Annalise G.
Blum, and Jenna Scalmanini, Civil and Environmental Engineering
and Woods Institute for the Environment Stanford University


Stanford, CA, E-mails: amyjanel@stanford.edu, jennadavis@stanford
.edu, annaliseblum@gmail.com, and jenscal6@gmail.com. Beryl Oyier,
George Okoth, and Robert F. Breiman, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—Kenya, Nairobi,
Kenya, E-mails: adhiamboyier@gmail.com, gokoth@ke.cdc.gov, and
rfbreiman@emory.edu. Pavani K. Ram, University at Buffalo, State
University of New York, Buffalo, NY, E-mail: pkram@buffalo.edu.

REFERENCES

1. Liu L, Johnson HL, Cousens S, Perin J, Scott S, Lawn JE, Rudan I,
Campbell H, Cibulskis R, Li M, Mathers C, Black RE, 2012.
Global, regional, and national causes of child mortality: an
updated systematic analysis for 2010 with time trends since
2000. Lancet 379: 2151–2161.
2. Moonie S, Sterling DA, Figgs LW, Castro M, 2008. The relationship between school absence, academic performance, and
asthma status. J Sch Health 78: 140–148.
3. Dyer DL, Shinder A, Shinder F, 2000. Alcohol-free instant hand
sanitizer reduces elementary school illness absenteeism. Fam
Med 32: 633–638.
4. Haller L, Hutton G, Bertram J, 2007. Estimating the costs and
health benefits of water and sanitation improvements at global
level. J Water Health 5: 467–480.
5. Aiello AE, Coulborn RM, Perez V, Larson EL, 2008. Effect of hand
hygiene on infectious disease risk in the community setting: a
meta-analysis. Am J Public Health 98: 1372–1381.
6. Jasper C, Le T-T, Bartram J, 2012. Water and sanitation in schools:
a systematic review of the health and educational outcomes.
Int J Environ Res Public Health 9: 2772–2787.
7. Freeman MC, Greene LE, Dreibelbis R, Saboori S, Muga R,
Brumback B, Rheingans R, 2012. Assessing the impact of a
school-based water treatment, hygiene and sanitation programme
onpupilabsenceinNyanzaProvince,Kenya:acluster-randomized
trial. Trop Med Int Health 17: 380–391.
8. Rosen L, Manor O, Engelhard D, Brody D, Rosen B, Peleg H,
Meir M, Zucker D, 2006. Can a handwashing intervention
make a difference? Results from a randomized controlled trial
in Jerusalem preschools. Prev Med 42: 27–32.
9. Talaat M, Afifi S, Dueger E, El-Ashry N, Marfin A, Kandeel A,
Mohareb E, El-Sayed N, 2011. Effects of hand hygiene campaigns
on incidence of laboratory-confirmed influenza and absenteeism
in schoolchildren, Cairo, Egypt. Emerg Infect Dis 17: 619–625.
10. UNICEF, 2010. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Annual Report
2010. New York, NY: UNICEF.
11. Bloomfield SF, Aiello AE, Cookson B, O’Boyle C, Larson EL,
2007. The effectiveness of hand hygiene procedures in reducing the risks of infections in home and community settings
including handwashing and alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Am
J Infect Control 35 (Suppl 1): S27–S64.
12. Meadows E, Le Saux N, 2004. A systematic review of the effectiveness of antimicrobial rinse-free hand sanitizers for prevention
of illness-related absenteeism in elementary school children.
BMC Public Health 4: 50.
13. Allegranzi B, Pittet D, 2007. Healthcare associated infection
in developing countries: simple solutions to meet complex
challenges. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 28: 1323–1327.
14. Hammond B, Ali Y, Fendler E, Dolan M, Donovan S, 2000.
Effect of hand sanitizer use on elementary school absenteeism.
Am J Infect Control 28: 340–346.
15. Sandora TJ, Shih MC, Goldmann DA, 2008. Reducing absenteeism from gastrointestinal and respiratory illness in elementary
school students: a randomized, controlled trial of an infectioncontrol intervention. Pediatrics 121: e1555–e1562.
16. Lau CH, Springston EE, Sohn MW, Mason I, Gadola E, Damitz
M, Gupta RS, 2012. Hand hygiene instruction decreases illnessrelated absenteeism in elementary schools: a prospective cohort
study. BMC Pediatr 12: 52.
17. Guinan M, McGuckin M, Ali Y, 2002. The effect of a comprehensive handwashing program on absenteeism in elementary
schools. Am J Infect Control 30: 217–220.
18. Sandora TJ, Taveras EM, Shih M-C, Resnick EA, Lee GM, RossDegnan D, Goldmann DA, Randomized A, 2005. Controlled
trial of a multifaceted intervention including alcohol-based hand


-----

sanitizer and hand-hygiene education to reduce illness transmission in the home. Pediatrics 116: 587–594.
19. Lee GM, Salomon JA, Friedman JF, Hibberd PL, Ross-Degnan
D, Zasloff E, Bediako S, Goldmann DA, 2005. Illness transmission in the home: a possible role for alcohol-based hand gels.
Pediatrics 115: 852–860.
20. Oughton MT, Loo VG, Dendukuri N, Fenn S, Libman MD, 2009.
Hand hygiene with soap and water is superior to alcohol rub
and antiseptic wipes for removal of Clostridium difficile. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 30: 939–944.
21. Liu P, Yuen Y, Hsiao H-M, Jaykus L-A, Moe C, 2010. Effectiveness of liquid soap and hand sanitizer against Norwalk virus
on contaminated hands. Appl Environ Microbiol 76: 394–399.
22. WHO, 2009. WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
23. Pickering AJ, Boehm AB, Mwanjali M, Davis J, 2010. Efficacy
of waterless hand hygiene compared with handwashing with
soap: a field study in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 82: 270–278.
24. Pickering AJ, Davis J, Boehm AB, 2011. Efficacy of alcoholbased hand sanitizer on hands soiled with dirt and cooking oil.
J Water Health 9: 429.
25. Correa JC, Pinto D, Salas LA, Camacho JC, Rondon M, Quintero
J, 2012. A cluster-randomized controlled trial of handrubs for
prevention of infectious diseases among children in Colombia.
Rev Panam Salud Publica 31: 476–484.
26. Luby SP, Kadir MA, Yushuf Sharker MA, Yeasmin F,
Unicomb L, Sirajul Islam M, 2011. A community-randomised
controlled trial promoting waterless hand sanitizer and
handwashing with soap, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Trop Med Int
Health 15: 1508–1516.


27. Breiman RF, Olack B, Shultz A, Roder S, Kimani K, Feikin DR,
Burke H, 2011. Healthcare-use for major infectious disease
syndromes in an informal settlement in Nairobi, Kenya. J Health
Popul Nutr 29: 123.
28. Feikin DR, Olack B, Bigogo GM, Audi A, Cosmas L, Aura B,
Burke H, Njenga MK, Williamson J, Breiman RF, 2011. The
burden of common infectious disease syndromes at the clinic
and household level from population-based surveillance in rural
and urban Kenya. PLoS One 6: e16085.
29. Breiman RF, Cosmas L, Njuguna H, Audi A, Olack B, Ochieng JB,
Wamola N, Bigogo GM, Awiti G, Tabu CW, 2012. Populationbased incidence of typhoid fever in an urban informal settlement
and a rural area in Kenya: implications for typhoid vaccine use
in Africa. PLoS One 7: e29119.
30. Gidudu J, Sack DA, Pina M, Hudson MJ, Kohl KS, Bishop P,
Chatterjee A, Chiappini E, Compingbutra A, da Costa C,
Fernandopulle R, Fischer TK, Haber P, Masana W, de Menezes
MR, Kang G, Khuri-Bulos N, Killion LA, Nair C, Poerschke G,
Rath B, Salazar-Lindo E, Setse R, Wenger P, Wong VC, Zaman
K; Brighton Collaboration Diarrhea Working Group, 2011. Diarrhea: case definition and guidelines for collection, analysis, and
presentation of immunization safety data. Vaccine 29: 1052–1071.
31. Lewis S, Heaton K, 1997. Stool form scale as a useful guide to
intestinal transit time. Scand J Gastroenterol 32: 920–924.
32. Curtis VA, Danquah LO, Aunger RV, 2009. Planned, motivated
and habitual hygiene behaviour: an eleven country review.
Health Educ Res 24: 655–673.
33. Wolf-Peter S, Robert A, Yolande C, Peninnah Mukiri M, Carol
Nkatha M, Adam B, Val C, 2009. Determinants of handwashing
practices in Kenya: the role of media exposure, poverty and
infrastructure. Trop Med Int Health 14: 1534–1541.


-----

