TRANSACTIONSOFTHEROYALSOCIETYOFTROPICALMEDICINEANDHYGIENE(1996)90,366-371


## Measuring the effect of a hygiene behaviour intervention by indicators of behaviour and diarrhoeal disease

John V. Pinfold1y2* and Nigel J. Horan 2 lEnvironmental Engineering Department, Khon Kaen University, Khon
40002, Thailand; ‘Civil Engineering Department, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK

Abstract
A social marketing approach used both qualitative and quantitative methods to develop a hygiene behaviour intervention in rural north-east Thailand. Behaviours were preselected from a previous study and the
intervention was designed to promote hand washing, especially before feeding a baby, cooking, eating, and
after defaecation or cleaning a baby’s bottom, and dish washing immediately after eating. A bacteriological
indicator (enumerating faecal streptococci using a finger impression technique) was developed to measure
changes in hand washing behaviour and observation (spot checks) of dirty dishes to indicate dish washing
practice. There was a significant improvement in both behaviours and a significant reduction in diarrhoeal
disease as a result of the intervention. Furthermore, both indicators were retrospectively found to be positively related to diarrhoeal disease incidence. However, receiving and being able to recall the intervention
messages was not necessarily sufficient to ensure behaviour change, as some adults found it difficult to
change old habits. Villages showing the greatest improvement tended to have a stronger sense of community than others and to have more people actively involved in the intervention.


## Measuring the effect of a hygiene behaviour intervention by indicators of


John V. Pinfold1y2* and Nigel J. Horan
40002, Thailand; ‘Civil Engineering Department, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK


intervention was designed to promote hand washing, especially before feeding a baby, cooking, eating, and
after defaecation or cleaning a baby’s bottom, and dish washing immediately after eating. A bacteriological


disease as a result of the intervention. Furthermore, both indicators were retrospectively found to be positively related to diarrhoeal disease incidence. However, receiving and being able to recall the intervention
messages was not necessarily sufficient to ensure behaviour change, as some adults found it difficult to


Introduction
Hygiene behaviour is receiving increasing attention as
an important strategy for preventing faecal-oral disease
transmission in developing countries. However, education programmes are notorious for generating long lists
of ‘good’ behaviours in the hope that these will be
adopted by the target group and consequently lead to a
reduction in disease transmission. LOEVINSHOHN (1990)
suggested that successful health education depends on
using few messages of proven benefit, repeatedly and in
many forums. Unfortunately, the evidence and documentation describing the effectiveness of health education programmes remains weak (FEACHEM, 1984; LOEVINSHOHN, 1990). This has also led to a lack of
empirical evidence for selecting the behaviours that are
most effective in disrupting disease transmission in any
given environment.
There is an obvious need to study how and why people behave, so as to understand the socio-economic and
cultural influences which affect hygiene behaviour
(BOOT & CAIRNCROSS, 1993). Qualitative information
obtained by open interviews and observations is crucial
to this process (PATTON, 1990), but behaviour is notoriously difficult to measure quantitatively. Although questionnaire type interviews may be useful for obtaining information about knowledge, evidence suggests that they
lead to over-reporting of ‘good’ behaviours (STANTON et
al., 1987; CURTIS et al., 1993). Structured observations
made by continuous monitoring have been successfully
applied to interventions involving behaviour modification (STANTON & CLEMENS,I~~~;BENTLEY etal., 1990).
However! this method is time consuming, difficult to
standardize and requires a great deal of skill in design to
avoid reactivity. Consequently, there is a need to develop
simple indicators of behaviour.

Materials and Methods
Site and study outline

The study was conducted in Khon Kaen province in
north-eastern Thailand, the largest and poorest region of
the country. Most of the population live in rural villages
which are fairly cohesive clusters of 60 to about 200
homes. Poor soils and unreliable patterns of rainfall have
led to a low-risk approach to farming and a large
number of people rely on seasonal migrant work to supplement their income. Typically, villagers rely on a variety of water sources for their domestic needs. Water

*Address for correspondence: Dr J. V. Pinfold, Punjab Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation Project, P.O. Box 1449, Lahore
540000, Pakistan; phone/fax +92 42 7310723, e-mail lahore@jvp.lhr.erum.com.pk


## behaviour and diarrhoeal disease

2 lEnvironmental Engineering Department, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen


indicator (enumerating faecal streptococci using a finger impression technique) was developed to measure
changes in hand washing behaviour and observation (spot checks) of dirty dishes to indicate dish washing
practice. There was a significant improvement in both behaviours and a significant reduction in diarrhoeal


from conveniently located tube wells is commonly used
for washing activities. However, much of the groundwater is saline and rarely used for drinking because of its
adverse taste. Artificial ponds provide softer water and
are sometimes preferred for specific washing activities.
Drinking water is traditionally supplied by shallow wells
located in special sites outside the village. However,
rainwater harvesting has developed dramatically over
the last decade and, when abundant, this is used for both
drinking and washing activities. Pour-flush toilets have
also proved popular and estimates suggest 70-80% coverage.
Although mortality rates from diarrhoeal disease have
diminished in Thailand due to effective measures for
treatment, morbidity rates are still high. Over the past
decade, there has been a sustained effort to improve the
health network in rural areas. All subdistricts now have
a clinic staffed by trained personnel and most districts
contain a hospital. In each village, there are volunteer

LEGEND    -    - mm

@   - PROVINCIAL CITY   -   - RAILW?.Y

a     - DISTRICT TOWNS _.‘. .,,,_. ._ - DISTP.LCT BOUNDARY


Abstract
A social marketing approach used both qualitative and quantitative methods to develop a hygiene behav-
iour intervention in rural north-east Thailand. Behaviours were preselected from a previous study and the


Keywords: hygiene behaviour, intervention, evaluation, diarrhoeal disease

Introduction from conveniently located tube wells is commonly used


tion programmes are notorious for generating long lists are sometimes preferred for specific washing activities.
of ‘good’ behaviours in the hope that these will be Drinking water is traditionally supplied by shallow wells
adopted by the target group and consequently lead to a located in special sites outside the village. However,


many forums. Unfortunately, the evidence and docu- also proved popular and estimates suggest 70-80% cover-
mentation describing the effectiveness of health educa- age.
tion programmes remains weak (FEACHEM, 1984; LO-


most effective in disrupting disease transmission in any decade, there has been a sustained effort to improve the
given environment. health network in rural areas. All subdistricts now have
There is an obvious need to study how and why peo- a clinic staffed by trained personnel and most districts


obtained by open interviews and observations is crucial
to this process (PATTON, 1990), but behaviour is notori-
ously difficult to measure quantitatively. Although ques-


al., 1987; CURTIS et al., 1993). Structured observations
made by continuous monitoring have been successfully
applied to interventions involving behaviour modifica-


avoid reactivity. Consequently, there is a need to develop
simple indicators of behaviour.


The study was conducted in Khon Kaen province in
north-eastern Thailand, the largest and poorest region of
the country. Most of the population live in rural villages


number of people rely on seasonal migrant work to sup-
plement their income. Typically, villagers rely on a vari-
ety of water sources for their domestic needs. Water


540000, Pakistan; phone/fax +92 42 7310723, e-mail la-
hore@jvp.lhr.erum.com.pk Figure. Map of study area: Khon Kaen province, Thailand.


-----

EVALUATING HYGIENE BEHAVIOUR INTERVENTION 367


village health workers (VHW) who generally assist clinic
staff in their work.
This study comprised 2 main parts. Initially, a case
study phase was used to formulate the hygiene intervention, train workers, and develop simple indicators of hygiene behaviour. The information obtained was used to
design an intervention study able to demonstrate
changes in the behavioural indicators, rather than diarrhoeal disease. However, data on diarrhoeal disease were
readily available and this information was used to select
subdistricts for the study.
Subdistricts in Khon Kaen province were ranked by
their incidence rate of diarrhoeal disease as recorded by
health services. Those containing large towns and district hospitals were excluded, and the 6 remaining, with
the highest rates, were selected for the study. The intervention was varied in terms of cost (high oriow) and administered to 25 villanes in 4 subdistricts IFiaure). Random allocation was o&ridden by logical conzderations,
2 districts containing a pair of subdistricts each being assigned to the intervention. The remaining 12 villages in
2 subdistricts from separate districts were assigned to
the control. A sample of homes (random sampling provided at least 20% of homes in each villages) from 3 of 6
villages in each subdistrict were subjected to the hand
washing indicator and the questionnaires for measuring
message knowledge. All homes in the 37 villages were
subjected to the dish washing indicator (see ‘Monitoring
instruments’, below).

Selection of behaviours
Two hygiene behaviours had previously been selected
in a study investigating the relationship between human
behaviour and faecal contamination within the home
(PINFOLD, 1990a, 1990b), which showed contamination
of all water sources to be far less than that found in the
home. Furthermore, comparing bacterial levels from
stored water and fingertips with observed behaviour,
food handling and other cooking-related activities were
found to be associated with much higher levels of contamination than drinking-related activities. In selecting
behaviours the following conditions were considered:
messages should be simple and few in number; behaviours should already be practised by at least some members of the community (thus ensuring acceptability);
and behaviour change should require very little extra effort or cost. Cooking and eating utensils were often left
to soak, thus providing a favourable environment for
bacterial growth. During food-related activities, crosscontamination was identified as the major mechanism
for transmitting faecal bacteria. Thus, only the 2 follow

ing behaviours were identified.
(i) Dish washing: emphasizing dish washing immediately after, rather than before, meal times.
(ii) Hand washing: emphasizing hand washing before
feeding a baby, cooking or eating, and after defaecation
or cleaning a baby’s bottom.

Description of the intervention
During the case study phase, a mixture of qualitative
and quantitative methods was used to collect information about hygiene practice and develop a strategy for
socially marketing the behaviours. Diarrhoeal disease
was not stressed in the messages, as it was rarely mentioned as a problem unless prompted. Most villagers,
apart from health workers, connected those behaviours
with cleanliness (religiously associated with spiritual
cleansing) and avoiding ‘germs’ (locally defined as invisible bodies causing illness or bringing bad spirits).
Therefore, the communication strategy was based on
these terms, with the added incentive of strong healthy
children, as this was identified as a high priority
amongst parents. Use of soap was not emphasized too
strongly for fear of alienating poorer families.
For the intervention study phase, a variety of media
(posters, stickers, leaflets, comic books, songs, slide
shows, T-shirts, badges) was developed to create awareness and support activities promoting the behaviours.
All printed media were illustrated, so messages could be
understood by the illiterate, and a project ‘logo’ provided
continuity. Songs about the hygiene messages were recorded in the traditional folk music, and tapes of this, as
well as a community-produced play, were broadcast
through village loudspeakers. The slide show demonstrated the effect of hand washing on ‘germs’ similar to
those used in other media. Bacterial plates were handed
round after the show to help stimulate more discussion.
Plastic containers with taps were developed to facilitate
hand washing in the home. These were distributed to
homes with young children (< 5 years of age) but only in
those intervention villages (in both high cost and low
cost schemes) subjected to the hand washing indicator.
The high cost intervention received a greater amount
and variety of communication materials than the low
cost scheme, in which slide shows and comic books were
not included. A free sample of soap was provided with
the leaflets to villagers in the hieh cost area. The costs
shown in Table 1 ire for this siecific research study,
where a variety of media was tested, and it should be
noted that actual costs are likely to be much lower for a
large scale intervention, especially if the existing health
infrastructure is effectively utilized. Each plastic con

village health workers (VHW) who generally assist clinic ing behaviours were identified.
staff in their work. (i) Dish washing: emphasizing dish washing immedi

giene behaviour. The information obtained was used to or cleaning a baby’s bottom.
design an intervention study able to demonstrate
changes in the behavioural indicators, rather than diar- Description of the intervention


tion about hygiene practice and develop a strategy for

Subdistricts in Khon Kaen province were ranked by socially marketing the behaviours. Diarrhoeal disease
their incidence rate of diarrhoeal disease as recorded by was not stressed in the messages, as it was rarely men

vention was varied in terms of cost (high oriow) and ad- cleansing) and avoiding ‘germs’ (locally defined as invisministered to 25 villanes in 4 subdistricts IFiaure). Ran- ible bodies causing illness or bringing bad spirits).
dom allocation was o&ridden by logical conzderations, Therefore, the communication strategy was based on


the control. A sample of homes (random sampling pro- strongly for fear of alienating poorer families.
vided at least 20% of homes in each villages) from 3 of 6 For the intervention study phase, a variety of media
villages in each subdistrict were subjected to the hand (posters, stickers, leaflets, comic books, songs, slide


instruments’, below). understood by the illiterate, and a project ‘logo’ provided

continuity. Songs about the hygiene messages were re

behaviour and faecal contamination within the home strated the effect of hand washing on ‘germs’ similar to
(PINFOLD, 1990a, 1990b), which showed contamination those used in other media. Bacterial plates were handed
of all water sources to be far less than that found in the round after the show to help stimulate more discussion.


found to be associated with much higher levels of con- those intervention villages (in both high cost and low
tamination than drinking-related activities. In selecting cost schemes) subjected to the hand washing indicator.
behaviours the following conditions were considered: The high cost intervention received a greater amount


and behaviour change should require very little extra ef- the leaflets to villagers in the hieh cost area. The costs
fort or cost. Cooking and eating utensils were often left shown in Table 1 ire for this siecific research study,


for transmitting faecal bacteria. Thus, only the 2 follow- infrastructure is effectively utilized. Each plastic con
Table 1. Details of intervention costs


Cost per
item
Materials (UK 2)
T-shirts 2.00
Posters 0.40 & 1.00
Leaflets 0.20
Soap bars 0.10
Stickers (small) 0.10
Stickers (large) 0.25
Badges 0.30
Folk song tapes 4.00
Comic books 0.40
Slide show 300
Washing facilities Drawing competition
Project workers &loo/month
Transport 
Total costs (UK 5)


This study comprised 2 main parts. Initially, a case ately after, rather than before, meal times.
study phase was used to formulate the hygiene interven- (ii) Hand washing: emphasizing hand washing before
tion, train workers, and develop simple indicators of hy- feeding a baby, cooking or eating, and after defaecation


health services. Those containing large towns and dis- tioned as a problem unless prompted. Most villagers,
trict hospitals were excluded, and the 6 remaining, with apart from health workers, connected those behaviours
the highest rates, were selected for the study. The inter- with cleanliness (religiously associated with spiritual


washing indicator and the questionnaires for measuring shows, T-shirts, badges) was developed to create awaremessage knowledge. All homes in the 37 villages were ness and support activities promoting the behaviours.
subjected to the dish washing indicator (see ‘Monitoring All printed media were illustrated, so messages could be


home. Furthermore, comparing bacterial levels from Plastic containers with taps were developed to facilitate
stored water and fingertips with observed behaviour, hand washing in the home. These were distributed to
food handling and other cooking-related activities were homes with young children (< 5 years of age) but only in


to soak, thus providing a favourable environment for where a variety of media was tested, and it should be
bacterial growth. During food-related activities, cross- noted that actual costs are likely to be much lower for a
contamination was identified as the major mechanism large scale intervention, especially if the existing health


Total
cost
(UK 0
504
111
345
182
209
317
146
132
258
300
300
220
1500
300

4823


rhoeal disease. However, data on diarrhoeal disease were During the case study phase, a mixture of qualitative
readily available and this information was used to select and quantitative methods was used to collect informasubdistricts for the study.


Selection of behaviours corded in the traditional folk music, and tapes of this, as
Two hygiene behaviours had previously been selected well as a community-produced play, were broadcast
in a study investigating the relationship between human through village loudspeakers. The slide show demon

Low cost scheme High cost scheme

Cost per Total Total


119 68
103 44
1382
204
1265 156
623
;z 22420
12

 -  
 
 - T4

 - 14
4 persons

 -  

2 districts containing a pair of subdistricts each being as- these terms, with the added incentive of strong healthy
signed to the intervention. The remaining 12 villages in children, as this was identified as a high priority
2 subdistricts from separate districts were assigned to amongst parents. Use of soap was not emphasized too


Total
cost
(UK &I
374
59
276
14220

166
75
152

   
380
280
1500
300

3724


messages should be simple and few in number; behav- and variety of communication materials than the low
iours should already be practised by at least some mem- cost scheme, in which slide shows and comic books were
bers of the community (thus ensuring acceptability); not included. A free sample of soap was provided with


180 ;5
88

1724
1594 228
1751 340
1180
281 2:;
50204 9
144

A2 12

  - 9
4 persons

  -   

item No. of items cost No. of items cost
Materials (UK 2) Village School (UK &I Village School (UK 0


Soap bars 0.10 204 14220 1594 228 182
Stickers (small) 0.10 1265 156 1751 340 209
Stickers (large) 0.25 623 166 1180 317


Slide show 300         - 300
Washing facilities         -         - T4 380 A2 12 300
Drawing competition        - 14 280        - 9 220


Total costs (UK 5) 3724 4823

Approximate costs per caput (UK &) 0.37 0.71


-----

368 JOHN V. PINFOLD AND NIGEL J. HORAN


tainer cost about UK &4.00 to produce, but this was not
included in Table 1 as only a small selection of the
homes received these containers.
At the beginning of the intervention phase, school
and village delegates were invited to workshops at the
subdistrict level, to discuss project aims and examples
of promotion activities. Participants were then invited to
generate their own ideas during ‘brainstorming’
sessions. Two staff members were assigned to each subdistrict for a period of 3 to 6 months and arranged further meetings in each of the villages and schools under
their responsibility. The workshops were designed to
stimulate community involvement in the planning and
implementation of the communication strategy. Although the main target was the maternal heads of the
households and mothers of young children, other family
members were not excluded.
A participatory approach in villages proved less effective and more difficult to organize than that in primary
schools. Although pupils were not the main target
group, it was hoped that they could be influential as
agents of change in their homes. The most successful
school activities were constructing dish washing and
hand washing facilities suited to the type of school water
supply, and drawing competitions (in conjunction with
art classes), with the best posters being displayed in the
villages. The actual involvement of villagers depended
more on individual personalities than official roles.
Wherever possible, village activities were adjusted to
stimulate interaction amongst villagers-e.g., the organization, preparation and distribution of media.

Monitoring instruments
Questionnaires. A simple questionnaire was developed
to measure message reception and recall. Questions on
the content of the messages were worded so as to eliminate leading questions and bias. Two separate questions
were asked for hand washing: ‘before/after which activities do you think you should wash hands?’ Respondents
were prompted for 2 answers per question, thus providing a maximum of 4 correct answers: before cooking and
eating, and after defaecation and cleaning a baby’s bottom. For washing dishes, the question was simply:
‘should you wash dishes immediately before or after eating?

Indicators of behaviour. Since hand washing, in this
context? is concerned with preventing faeco-oral disease
transmission, a microbiological indicator was developed
which involved examining the fingertips for the presence of transient faecal indicator bacteria. Faecal streptococci were preferred because Escherichia coli is shortlived on the skin and its inability to survive remote cross
contamination makes it an unsuitable indicator of hand
washing practice (KALTERNTHALER & PINFOLD, 1995).
Previously, a finger-rinse technique had been developed to determine the number of bacteria on fingertips
(PINFOLD et al:, 1988). This method was simplified to a
finger impression technique. Each fingertip was pressed
directly on to KF Streptococcus agar plates (9 cm diameter), which are large enough to sample both hands, leaving 10 prints. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 48 h and
enumerated by counting the number of prints containing faecal streptococci. As this was a novel technique,
particular attention was paid to the strain of organisms
grown. Staphylococcus colonies, a common contaminant,
were sometimes visually indistinguishable from Streptococcus, and were identified by their ability to produce gas
from hydrogen peroxide.
Although hand washing is an individual activity, the
local environment and practices of other household
members may also affect hand contamination. During
the case study phase, finger impression samples were
taken from 45 families visited on 4 occasions over a period of 6 weeks. Analysis of variance showed the variance within families to be far less than that between
families (P<O.OOOl). No apparent influence was detected


of sex, age, or number of family members. Therefore, it
was decided to produce a household index where the
mean fingertip counts (O-10) of at least 3 family members represented the whole’ family (thus prov:ding a
more normal distribution). In the results section. FSB
(‘faecal streptococci before’) refers to this index before
intervention and FSA (‘faecal streptococci after’) refers
to the index after the intervention was completed. To
help reduce daily variability, all sampling during the intervention study phase was conducted in the evening
when most people were at home.
In contrast to hand washing, dish washing behaviour
can be easily assessed by the presence of dirty dishes.
This greatly facilitated data collection, as the outcome
could be readily defined and it took only a few minutes
to check each home. Continuous observation of dish
washing behaviour, meal times, and number of dishes
washed-on each occasion helped to refine this method
and validate the indicator. More dishes were left dirtv in
the afternoon, but this also depended on whether there
were people present during the day. To help control for
this effect, all subsequent checks were conducted during
the morning.
Diarrhoeal disease. Active surveillance of children less
than 5 years of age was conducted in the same villages as
those in which the hand washing indicator was administered, including 6 villages from the high cost intervention, 6 from the low cost scheme, and 6 from the control.
The survey took place during the seasonal peak of diarrhoea incidence, but only after the intervention period.
VHW were trained in diarrhoeal surveillance and mothers were issued with special calendars for recording diarrhoea episodes of their children. For 3 months, VHW
visited homes every week whenever nossible. Each
month, project workers collected calendars from the
VHW and monitored their work by visiting a random
selection of homes. Diarrhoea was defined as 3 or more
watery stools per day. About 75% of homes returned calendars each month that were validated by interviews
with VHW. In addition, information on the reported incidence of diarrhoeal disease, for all ages, was collected
from hospitals and clinics serving the study area. These
data were checked with those compiled at the regional
health centre.
All quantitative data were entered on a micro-computer and analysed by the Statistical Package for Social
Scientists (SPSSx). Unless otherwise stated, Student’s ttest or analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used for comparing group means.

Results

Socio-economic data for the intervention study villages are summarized in Table 2. The mean duration of
education was 4-6 years, and this did not vary considerably between villages. Although primary school attendance is now compulsory, few pupils (< 5%) from the
project areas went on to secondary school or further edu
Table 2. Socio-economic details of study population

Low cost High cost
Control scheme scheme
Numbers
Subdistricts 2 2 2
Villages 12 13 12
Homes 1653 1842 1379
Schools 12
Population SO;:. 10017 655;
Proportions
<5 years old
With toilet 7;; 709; 799;
With wealth ifdicatora 37% 36% 23%
With rain jars 67% 68% 48%


tainer cost about UK &4.00 to produce, but this was not of sex, age, or number of family members. Therefore, it
included in Table 1 as only a small selection of the was decided to produce a household index where the


subdistrict level, to discuss project aims and examples (‘faecal streptococci before’) refers to this index before
of promotion activities. Participants were then invited to intervention and FSA (‘faecal streptococci after’) refers
generate their own ideas during ‘brainstorming’ to the index after the intervention was completed. To


their responsibility. The workshops were designed to In contrast to hand washing, dish washing behaviour
stimulate community involvement in the planning and can be easily assessed by the presence of dirty dishes.
implementation of the communication strategy. Al- This greatly facilitated data collection, as the outcome


A participatory approach in villages proved less effec- washed-on each occasion helped to refine this method
tive and more difficult to organize than that in primary and validate the indicator. More dishes were left dirtv in


school activities were constructing dish washing and the morning.
hand washing facilities suited to the type of school water Diarrhoeal disease. Active surveillance of children less
supply, and drawing competitions (in conjunction with than 5 years of age was conducted in the same villages as


Wherever possible, village activities were adjusted to The survey took place during the seasonal peak of diar-
stimulate interaction amongst villagers-e.g., the or- rhoea incidence, but only after the intervention period.
ganization, preparation and distribution of media. VHW were trained in diarrhoeal surveillance and moth-


to measure message reception and recall. Questions on month, project workers collected calendars from the
the content of the messages were worded so as to elimi- VHW and monitored their work by visiting a random

selection of homes. Diarrhoea was defined as 3 or more


were prompted for 2 answers per question, thus provid- with VHW. In addition, information on the reported in-
ing a maximum of 4 correct answers: before cooking and cidence of diarrhoeal disease, for all ages, was collected
eating, and after defaecation and cleaning a baby’s bot- from hospitals and clinics serving the study area. These


Indicators of behaviour. Since hand washing, in this puter and analysed by the Statistical Package for Social
context? is concerned with preventing faeco-oral disease Scientists (SPSSx). Unless otherwise stated, Student’s t-
transmission, a microbiological indicator was developed test or analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used for com-


lived on the skin and its inability to survive remote cross Socio-economic data for the intervention study vil-
contamination makes it an unsuitable indicator of hand lages are summarized in Table 2. The mean duration of
washing practice (KALTERNTHALER & PINFOLD, 1995).


(PINFOLD et al:, 1988). This method was simplified to a project areas went on to secondary school or further edu-
finger impression technique. Each fingertip was pressed
directly on to KF Streptococcus agar plates (9 cm diame- Table 2. Socio-economic details of study population


ing faecal streptococci. As this was a novel technique, Numbers
particular attention was paid to the strain of organisms Subdistricts 2 2 2
grown. Staphylococcus colonies, a common contaminant, Villages 12 13 12


Although hand washing is an individual activity, the

Proportions

local environment and practices of other household

<5 years old

members may also affect hand contamination. During


ance within families to be far less than that between aHomes with bricks or blocks enclosing area beneath house.
families (P<O.OOOl). No apparent influence was detected bHomes with 2 or more large rain jars (2000L).


-----

EVALUATING HYGIENE BEHAVIOUR INTERVENTION 369


Control Low cost scheme High cost scheme


Table 3. Respondents’ knowledge of intervention messages


25 37% 35% 24 50% 63%
1 40% 58% 58% 69% ::
t: 46% 48% is 57% 64% 33

: 46% 72% 48% 61% 27

5 :z 57% 60% z: 52% 68%
6 24 36% 54% 31 59% 77% z:
TotalsC 158 44% 55% 183 55%* 67%* 187

aHand washing scores (expressed as a percentage).
bDish washing (expressed as percentage answering correctly).
‘Significance of differences (ANOVA) compared with control values is expressed thus: *P<O.O5, ***P<O.OOl.

Table 4. Comparison of fingertip contamination in villages before and after intervention


Control Low cost scheme High cost scheme

No. of No. of No. of
Villages homes HWa DWb homes HWa DWb homes HWa DWb


59% 83%
61% 85%
66% 76%
52% 67%
58% 82%
63% 71%
60%*** 78%***


25 37% 35% 24 50% 63% 59% 83%
1 40% 58% 58% 69% :: 61% 85%


6 24 36% 54% 31 59% 77% z: 63% 71%
TotalsC 158 44% 55% 183 55%* 67%* 187 60%*** 78%***


No. of No. of No. of

Villages homes FSBa FSAb DifferenceC homes FSBa FSAb DifferenceC homes FSBa FSAb DifferenceC


;:;
2.1
3.8


t: 46% 48% is 57% 64% 33 66% 76%

: 46% 72% 48% 61% 27 52% 67%

5 :z 57% 60% z: 52% 68% 58% 82%


Table 4. Comparison of fingertip contamination in villages before and after intervention

Control Low-cost scheme High-cost scheme


:: 3.9 3.5 1.3 66% 63%
32 2.2 1.5 32%
192 3.7 1.3*** 65%


aHand washing scores (expressed as a percentage).
bDish washing (expressed as percentage answering correctly).
‘Significance of differences (ANOVA) compared with control values is expressed thus: *P<O.O5, ***P<O.OOl.


Villages
1
:

4
5
6
Totals


;5
30
25
166


Control
No. of
FSBa FSAb DifferenceC homes
::; 2.6 3.3 41% 48% 25

4.0 2.2 45% i:.
3.8 2.8 26% 26

3.5 3.3 :::, 34% 9% zt
4.1 2.7 34% 195


FSAb DifferenceC
1.4 78%

62%
;:; 32%
1.6 45%
1.1 52%
1.6 24%
1.7*** 55%


1 ::; 2.6 3.3 41% 48% 25 1.4 78%
: tz ;:; 62% 2 4.4 4.3 1.0 1.2 77% 72%

4.0 2.2 45% i:. 3.4 ;:; 32% 35 4.1 1.3 68%


Totals 166 4.1 2.7 34% 195 3.8 1.7*** 55% 192 3.7 1.3*** 65%


aHousehold index of finger contamination before intervention.
bHousehold index of finger contamination after intervention.
?tnpr,ovement from FSB to FSA expressed as a percentage.
Slgmticance of differences (ANOVA) compared with control values is expressed thus: *** P~O.001.


4 ;5 3.8 2.8 26% 26 1.6 45%
5 30 ;:; 1.1 52% :: 3.9 3.5 1.3 66% 63%
6 25 3.5 3.3 :::, 34% 9% zt 2.1 1.6 24% 32 2.2 1.5 32%


Slgmticance of differences (ANOVA) compared with control values is expressed thus: *** P~O.001.


cation. Without exception, the main occupation was agriculture, and in only 2 subdistricts, both located on major roads, did a significant proportion of families (but
still fewer than 5%) cite non-agricultural work as their
main occupation. Shallow wells, tube wells, rain jars and
ponds were the main water sources.
The main messages given during the intervention
reached the vast majority of people in the intervention
area, and less than 1% of those interviewed reported that
they had not heard about the intervention; respondents
were mainly female (98%) with a mean age of 39 years
(range 10-76). Table 3 gives a summary of knowledge of
the messages after intervention. Concerning hand washing, villagers receiving the intervention were more
knowledgeable than the controls, especially those from
the high cost area (P<O.Ol). Knowledge of dish washing
practice followed a similar pattern. A previous random
survey of the intervention area before intervention had
shown respondents to be less knowledgeable than those
in control villages, suggesting that there may have been
some contamination of the latter.
The results from the hand washing indicator before
(FSB) and after (FSA) intervention are shown in Table
4. Although there was a significant reduction from FSB
to FSA in the control villages, the reduction in the intervention villages was much greater. Comparing villages,
FSB was similar in all groups but FSA was significantly
less than the control value in both the low cost (PcO.01)
and high cost (P<O.OOl) intervention areas; villages in
the high cost scheme also gave lower values than those
in the low cost area (P~0.05). The provision of plastic
containers tended to show a marked improvement only
in the homes in low cost intervention villages with the
highest mean FSA values; overall, there was no signiticant difference between homes receiving containers and
homesnot receiving them. In order to test sustainability


aHousehold index of finger contamination before intervention.
bHousehold index of finger contamination after intervention.
?tnpr,ovement from FSB to FSA expressed as a percentage.


and reactivity, a selection of villages not previously subjected to the hand washing indicator was surveyed some
5 months later. Four control villages produced a mean
fingertip faecal streptococci index of 3.3, but intervention villages gave significantly lower values, 1.8 from 4
low cost intervention villages (P<O.OOl) and 1.9 from 4
villages in the high cost scheme (P~0.05).
All homes were subjected to the dish washing indicator. Overall, there were significant improvements in
both high cost (P<O.O5) and low cost intervention villages (P<O*O5), with no apparent change in the control
value. Six of 25 intervention villages showed a significant improvement at the 1% probability level and 4
more at the 5% level, while 2 deteriorated; 3 of the 12
control villages improved while 4 deteriorated (at the 5%
probability level).
Active surveillance of diarrhoeal disease in young
children was conducted only after the intervention during the seasonal peak of summer diarrhoea in 6 control
and 12 intervention villages. Diarrhoea was less common in young children from the intervention villages,
with 11 villages having lower incidence rates of diarrhoea than 5 control villages (PcO.05; Mann-Whitney
U test); overall this amounted to a 39% reduction.
Further evidence to support these results was provided by comparing the hand-washing indicator with
diarrhoeal disease data. Among a total of 220 homes,
those with sick children had higher mean FSA values
than those recording no diarrhoea (P<O.O5). Despite
there being only 50 valid cases, the same relationship
held true for the control villages, with mean values of 2.4
for homes without diarrhoea and 3.6 for those with diarrhoea (P<O.O5).

As might be expected, about 10 times more cases of diarrhoea in young children were recorded through active
surveillance than reported to clinics and hospitals. The


cation. Without exception, the main occupation was ag- and reactivity, a selection of villages not previously sub-
riculture, and in only 2 subdistricts, both located on ma- jected to the hand washing indicator was surveyed some


ponds were the main water sources. low cost intervention villages (P<O.OOl) and 1.9 from 4
The main messages given during the intervention villages in the high cost scheme (P~0.05).
reached the vast majority of people in the intervention All homes were subjected to the dish washing indica-


(range 10-76). Table 3 gives a summary of knowledge of value. Six of 25 intervention villages showed a signifi-
the messages after intervention. Concerning hand wash- cant improvement at the 1% probability level and 4
ing, villagers receiving the intervention were more more at the 5% level, while 2 deteriorated; 3 of the 12


practice followed a similar pattern. A previous random Active surveillance of diarrhoeal disease in young
survey of the intervention area before intervention had children was conducted only after the intervention dur-
shown respondents to be less knowledgeable than those ing the seasonal peak of summer diarrhoea in 6 control


(FSB) and after (FSA) intervention are shown in Table rhoea than 5 control villages (PcO.05; Mann-Whitney
4. Although there was a significant reduction from FSB U test); overall this amounted to a 39% reduction.
to FSA in the control villages, the reduction in the inter- Further evidence to support these results was pro-


and high cost (P<O.OOl) intervention areas; villages in than those recording no diarrhoea (P<O.O5). Despite
the high cost scheme also gave lower values than those there being only 50 valid cases, the same relationship
in the low cost area (P~0.05). The provision of plastic held true for the control villages, with mean values of 2.4


cant difference between homes receiving containers and arrhoea in young children were recorded through active
homesnot receiving them. In order to test sustainability surveillance than reported to clinics and hospitals. The


-----

370 JOHNV.PINFOLDANDNIGELJ.HORAN


study was not designed to show any significant difference in reported diarrhoea, and there was no notable difference as a result of the intervention or in comparison
to the control. However, homes reporting no diarrhoea
to health services in the year before intervention had
mean FSB values of 3.8. comnared to 4.6 in homes reporting one or more cases (fl<O+OOl). In the intervention villages, the same held true for FSA, with means of
2.1 for 34 homes reporting diarrhoea after intervention
and 1.2 from 107 homes with no diarrhoea P<O~Oll.
Some of the biases in reporting were eliminated by including only homes reporting diarrhoea in the previous
2 years.
In the control villages, 3 separate surveys of dish
washing behaviour were conducted at intervals of 4
months. Comparing 2 extremes of this indicator, homes
in which no dirty dish was seen in any of the 3 surveys
reported a mean of 0.31 episodes of diarrhoea, while
those in which dirty dishes were seen at all 3 surveys reported a mean of O-6 episodes, a 45% difference in the
disease incidence (P<O.Ol). Intervention homes with no
dirty dish after intervention reported 0.13 cases of diarrhoea (after intervention) compared with 0.17 from
homes with dirty dishes (PcO.05). The results from the
questionnaire showed no notable relationship with any
of the diarrhoea data.

Discussion

In questionnaires, hand washing before eating was invariably identified as routine practice and more important than at other times such as after visiting the latrine
or before cooking. However, observation before intervention revealed that, although hand washing was practised at ceremonies or when entertaining special guests,
it was rarely done before ordinary meals with family,
relatives or friends. Hand washing was far more common after eating when fingers were sticky, especially after eating the staple diet of glutinous rice. This was confirmed by information obtained from open interviews
and group discussions, when hand washing was said to
be more often done when hands were dirty rather than
being motivated by another activity. These findings are
in agreement with other studies on the limitations of using questionnaires for measuring behaviour (STANTON et
al., 1987; CURTIS et al, 1993).
In comparison to continuous structured observation,
the 2 indicators of behaviour readily provided quantifiable data. The dish washing indicator was rather more
straightforward, because there were tangible signs of this
activity. Hand washing, on the other hand, is a difficult
practice to measure by any means. Although the finger
impression technique appeared to be useful as an indicator of general hand washing practice, it did not show
specifically when hands were washed in relation to key
activities. However, it may be a better overall indicator
of the importance of different hygiene practices for disrupting faeco-oral disease transmission, as lingers play a
major role in cross contamination at the oral end of this
cycle. Even with good hand washing practice, the hand
washing indicator would still reflect a contaminated local environment (e.g., from handling food, utensils,
kitchen surfaces). Earlier studies have shown that householders living in modern homes with multiple water
points, surfaces which are easy to clean, sinks for containing contamination, and refrigerators for food have
considerably less hand contamination than those in the
present study (PINFOLD, 1990a). Thus the finger impression technique provides a simplified method for appraising the need for modifying hygiene behaviour.
Seasonal factors appeared to affect both indicators.
Dish washing practice appeared to be largely affected by
agricultural requirements, when rice planting and rice
harvesting demand intensive labour by the whole family
at certain times of the year. Climatic changes definitely
affect fingertip contamination, with much higher levels
apparent in the wet season than in the dry season (KAL

TENHALER et aZ., 1991; PINFOLD et aZ., 1991). This may
partly explain the reduction in fingertip contamination
found in the control villages and the high incidence of
diarrhoea usually found, at the beginning of the rainy
season. Despite the fact that surveys for each indicator
were never administered on the same day, families with
many dirty dishes after the intervention had higher levels of fingertip contamination than those with none
(P<O.Ol). No similar relationship was found in the control villages, implying that families conforming to the
intervention advice were likely to adopt both practices
rather than being selective. For larger programmes promoting 2 or more behaviours, it may be easier to select
the simplest indicator when a similar relationship of
adoption can be demonstrated.
Health education nrogrammes often assume that, once
their messages havebeen received by the intended-audience, behaviour change will invariably follow. In this
studv. although villages with better overall knowledge of
the messagesappeargd to have less hand contamina;ion,
this relationship did not hold true when analysing
homes within villages. Furthermore, unlike the indicators of behaviour, knowledge of the messages within the
intervention group showed no significant relationship
with diarrhoeal disease. Interviews conducted in depth
after intervention revealed that, although most people
knew the messages well, this alone was not enough to
change behaviour. The main reason for non-compliance
was the difficulty experienced by adults, as opposed to
children, in breaking habits. On the other hand, conformers gave a higher priority to cleanliness and avoiding ‘germs’. The results also suggested that active involvement in the intervention and discussion amongst
the community about the promoted behaviours were important factors for sustained improvement in the behaviours. Thus, actual practice was reinforced when these
actions were supported by neighbours, friends, relatives,
and schoolchildren. This process was more successful in
villages with a stronger sense of community.
In this intervention more attention was placed on
what the ‘consumer’ perceived to be the immediate
benefit from practising these particular hygiene behaviours. Education interventions usually emphasize disease prevention without seeking knowledge of how
benefits are perceived by the target group. When people
are sick there is a definite need to find a cure. However,
people are not sick most of the time and, given the poor
recall of past episodes of illness (STANTON et al., 1987), it
is difficult to envisage disease prevention as a priority
need. Moreover, an individual would not be able to notice changes in disease rates for his or her family, even
with the advantage of hindsight. Therefore, to some extent health education programmes are relying on the
communities’ faith in their proficiency. However, communities are likely to lose that trust if exposed to continual programmes that fail to take into account their environmental constraints, and use messages that are
patronizing.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful for assistance provided by Dr Wanpen Wirojanagud, Khon Kaen University. Special thanks go to all the
field workers (too numerous to name) for their loyalty and perseverance. This research project was funded by the Overseas
Development Administration of the UK, scheme R4649.

References
Bentley, M. E., Stallings, R. Y. & Gittelsohn, J. (1990). Guidelines for the Use of Structured Observations in Health Behaviour
Intervention Studies. Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins University.
Boot, M. T. & Cairncross, S. (1993). Action Speaks: The Study of
Hygiene Behaviour in Water and Sanitation Projects. The Hague:
International Water and Sanitation Centre.
Curtis, V., Cousens, S., Mertens, T., Traore, E., Kanki, B. &
Diallq, I. (1993). Structured observation of hygiene behaviours m Burkina Faso: validity, variability, and utility. BuZZetin of the World Health Organization, 71,23-32.


study was not designed to show any significant differ- TENHALER et aZ., 1991; PINFOLD et aZ., 1991). This may
ence in reported diarrhoea, and there was no notable dif- partly explain the reduction in fingertip contamination


mean FSB values of 3.8. comnared to 4.6 in homes re- were never administered on the same day, families with
porting one or more cases (fl<O+OOl). In the interven- many dirty dishes after the intervention had higher lev-
tion villages, the same held true for FSA, with means of els of fingertip contamination than those with none


cluding only homes reporting diarrhoea in the previous rather than being selective. For larger programmes pro-
2 years. moting 2 or more behaviours, it may be easier to select
In the control villages, 3 separate surveys of dish the simplest indicator when a similar relationship of


reported a mean of 0.31 episodes of diarrhoea, while ence, behaviour change will invariably follow. In this
those in which dirty dishes were seen at all 3 surveys re- studv. although villages with better overall knowledge of


rhoea (after intervention) compared with 0.17 from tors of behaviour, knowledge of the messages within the
homes with dirty dishes (PcO.05). The results from the intervention group showed no significant relationship
questionnaire showed no notable relationship with any with diarrhoeal disease. Interviews conducted in depth


In questionnaires, hand washing before eating was in- was the difficulty experienced by adults, as opposed to
variably identified as routine practice and more impor- children, in breaking habits. On the other hand, con-
tant than at other times such as after visiting the latrine formers gave a higher priority to cleanliness and avoid-


it was rarely done before ordinary meals with family, portant factors for sustained improvement in the behav-
relatives or friends. Hand washing was far more com- iours. Thus, actual practice was reinforced when these
mon after eating when fingers were sticky, especially af- actions were supported by neighbours, friends, relatives,


and group discussions, when hand washing was said to In this intervention more attention was placed on
be more often done when hands were dirty rather than what the ‘consumer’ perceived to be the immediate
being motivated by another activity. These findings are benefit from practising these particular hygiene behav-


In comparison to continuous structured observation, are sick there is a definite need to find a cure. However,
the 2 indicators of behaviour readily provided quantifi- people are not sick most of the time and, given the poor
able data. The dish washing indicator was rather more recall of past episodes of illness (STANTON et al., 1987), it


impression technique appeared to be useful as an indica- with the advantage of hindsight. Therefore, to some ex-
tor of general hand washing practice, it did not show tent health education programmes are relying on the
specifically when hands were washed in relation to key communities’ faith in their proficiency. However, com-


major role in cross contamination at the oral end of this patronizing.
cycle. Even with good hand washing practice, the hand


holders living in modern homes with multiple water

severance. This research project was funded by the Overseas

points, surfaces which are easy to clean, sinks for con- Development Administration of the UK, scheme R4649.
taining contamination, and refrigerators for food have


ing the need for modifying hygiene behaviour. Intervention Studies. Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins Uni-
Seasonal factors appeared to affect both indicators. versity.
Dish washing practice appeared to be largely affected by Boot, M. T. & Cairncross, S. (1993). Action Speaks: The Study of


affect fingertip contamination, with much higher levels iours m Burkina Faso: validity, variability, and utility. BuZZe-
apparent in the wet season than in the dry season (KAL- tin of the World Health Organization, 71,23-32.


-----

EVALUATING HYGIENE BEHAVIOUR INTERVENTION 371


Feachem, R. G. (1984). Interventions for the control of diarrhoeal diseases among young children: promotion of personal and domestic hygiene. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 62,467-476.
Kaltenthaler, E. C. & Pinfold, J. V. (1995). Microbiological
methods for assessing handwashing practice in hygiene behaviour studies. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 98,
101-106.
Kaltenthaler, E., Waterman, R. & Cross, I’. (1991). Faecal indicator bacteria on the hands and the effectiveness of handwashing in Zimbabwe. Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, 94,358-363.
Loevinshohn, B. I’. (1990). Health education interventions in
developing countries: a methodological review of published
articles. InternationalJournal of Epidemiology, 19,788-794.
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative Evaluation Methods. London:
Sage Publications.
Pinfold, J. V. (1990a). Faecal contamination of water and fingertip-rinses as a method for evaluating the effect of low-cost
water supply and sanitation activities on faecooral disease
transmission. I. A case study in rural north-east Thailand.
Epidemiology and Infection, 105,363-375.
Pinfold, J. V. (1990b). Faecal contamination of water and tin

gertip-rinses as a method for evaluating the effect of low-cost
water supply and sanitation activities on faeco-oral disease
transmission. II. A hygiene intervention study in rural
north-east Thailand. Epidemiology and Infection, 105, 377-389.
Pinfold, J. V., Horan, N. J. & Mara, D. D. (1988). The faecal
coliform fingertip count: a potential method for evaluating
the effectiveness of low-cost water supply and sanitation initiatives. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 87,
277-284.
Pinfold, J. V., Horan, N. J. & Mara, D. D. (1991). Seasonal effects on the reported incidence of acute diarrhoeal disease in
northeast Thailand. International Journal of Epidemiology, 20,
778-786.
Stanton, B. F. & Clemens, J. D. (1987). An educational intervention for altering water-sanitation behaviours to reduce
childhood diarrhea in urban Bangladesh. II. A randomized
trial to assess the impact of the intervention on hygienic behaviors and rates of diarrhea. American Journal of Epidemiology, 125,292-301.

Received 12 June 199.5; revised 22 January 1996; accepted
for publication 27 March 1996


Feachem, R. G. (1984). Interventions for the control of diar- gertip-rinses as a method for evaluating the effect of low-cost
rhoeal diseases among young children: promotion of per- water supply and sanitation activities on faeco-oral disease
sonal and domestic hygiene. transmission. II. A hygiene intervention study in rural


haviour studies. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 98, the effectiveness of low-cost water supply and sanitation in101-106. itiatives. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 87,
Kaltenthaler, E., Waterman, R. & Cross, I’. (1991). Faecal indi- 277-284.


Loevinshohn, B. I’. (1990). Health education interventions in 778-786.
developing countries: a methodological review of published Stanton, B. F. & Clemens, J. D. (1987). An educational interarticles. InternationalJournal of Epidemiology, 19,788-794. vention for altering water-sanitation behaviours to reduce


water supply and sanitation activities on faecooral disease
transmission. I. A case study in rural north-east Thailand.
Epidemiology and Infection, 105,363-375. Received 12 June 199.5; revised 22 January 1996; accepted


PRIZES

UNDERGRADUATE PROJECT PRIZE
The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene offers an annual prize of &200 for an account of work carried out in a tropical or developing country by a non-medical student of any nationality. The work will add to the
knowledge of human or veterinary health or hygiene in the broadest sense. Particular attention will be directed
towards originality and quality in the award of the prize. It is anticipated that the prize will act as a stimulus for
the pursuit of excellence in research carried out by undergraduates.

MEDICAL STUDENT ELECTIVE PRIZE
The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene offers an annual prize of 5200 for an account of work carried out by a medical student of any nationality during an elective period spent in a tropical or developing country. In awarding this prize emphasis will be laid on the originality of the work and on its contribution to knowledge or understanding of tropical diseases.

RULES

1. Two prizes of 5200 may be awarded annually in recognition of outstanding projects which increase knowledge
of tropical medicine and hygiene in the broadest sense.
2. Candidates shall be nominated by their head of department, supervisor or Dean, with a supporting statement
of up to 500 words.
3. The closing date for receipt of project reports is 31 December. The project should have been done or completed in the previous twelve months.
4. A Committee of three shall choose the prize winners.
5. The announcement of the prize winners will be made at the March meeting of the Society.
6. The prizes will be presented by the President of the Society at the Annual General Meeting in June or July.

Please note that the Society cannot provide funds to cover students’ elective travel expenses.

Application forms may be obtained from the Administrator, Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hy
giene, Manson House, 26 Portland Place, London, WlN 4EY, UK.


Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 62,467-476. north-east Thailand. Epidemiology and Infection, 105, 377-389.
Kaltenthaler, E. C. & Pinfold, J. V. (1995). Microbiological Pinfold, J. V., Horan, N. J. & Mara, D. D. (1988). The faecal
methods for assessing handwashing practice in hygiene be- coliform fingertip count: a potential method for evaluating


Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative Evaluation Methods. London: childhood diarrhea in urban Bangladesh. II. A randomized
Sage Publications. trial to assess the impact of the intervention on hygienic be-
Pinfold, J. V. (1990a). Faecal contamination of water and fin- haviors and rates of diarrhea. American Journal of Epidemiol-
gertip-rinses as a method for evaluating the effect of low-cost ogy, 125,292-301.


The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene offers an annual prize of &200 for an account of work car-
ried out in a tropical or developing country by a non-medical student of any nationality. The work will add to the
knowledge of human or veterinary health or hygiene in the broadest sense. Particular attention will be directed


MEDICAL STUDENT ELECTIVE PRIZE
The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene offers an annual prize of 5200 for an account of work car-
ried out by a medical student of any nationality during an elective period spent in a tropical or developing coun-


RULES

1. Two prizes of 5200 may be awarded annually in recognition of outstanding projects which increase knowledge
of tropical medicine and hygiene in the broadest sense.


3. The closing date for receipt of project reports is 31 December. The project should have been done or com-
pleted in the previous twelve months.
4. A Committee of three shall choose the prize winners.


Please note that the Society cannot provide funds to cover students’ elective travel expenses.


-----

