AMERICAN JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY Vol. 127, No. 4
Copyright © 1988 by The Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health Printed m U.S.A.
All rights re*erved
DIARRHEAL ILLNESS AMONG INFANTS AND TODDLERS IN DAY
CARE CENTERS: EFFECTS OF ACTIVE SURVEDLLANCE AND STAFF
TRAINING WITHOUT SUBSEQUENT MONITORING
ALFRED V. BARTLETT,1 BETTY A. JAR VIS,1 VIRGINIA ROSS,'
THEODORE M. KATZ,4 MARGARET A. DALIA/ STEVEN J. ENGLENDER,8 AND
LARRY J. ANDERSON8
Bartiett, A. V. (Oept of Internationa) Health, Johns Hopkins U. School of Hygiene
and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205), B. A. Jarvla, V. Ross, T. M. Katz, M. A.
Dalia, S. J. Englender, and l_ J. Anderson. Diarrheal illness among infants and
toddlers in day care centers: effects of active surveillance and staff training
without subsequent monitoring. Am J EpUemM 1988;127:808-17.
From October 1981 to September 1984, the authors conducted a three-year
longitudinal study of diarrhea among infants and toddlers attending day care
centers In Maricopa County, Arizona. In the third year of study, they evaluated
the effects on diarrhea rates of staff training without external monitoring and of
active surveillance conducted throughout the study. From 21 study day care
centers, they randomly selected 10 ("intervention day care centers") to receive
staff training in procedures to reduce transmission of Infectious diarrhea. Contin-
uing active surveillance in the 10 intervention and 11 control day care centers
found no difference between diarrhea rates in intervention day care centers in
the pre- and posttraining years and no difference between diarrhea rates in the
two groups of centers either before or after the training intervention. Biweekly
family-based surveys during the two months after training also demonstrated no
difference between infant-toddler diarrhea rates in intervention and control day
care centers. These surveys found the 21 study day care centers to have
significantly higher diarrhea rates than did day care homes or households not
using day care, but significantly lower rates than day care centers not included
In the active surveillance. Continuous surveillance without training was associ-
ated with a significant decrease in diarrheal illness during the course of longitu-
dinal study. One-time staff training without subsequent monitoring did not result
in additional decreases and did not lower day care center diarrhea rates to the
levels observed in day care homes and households not using day care.
day care; diarrhea; Glardla
Infectious diarrhea is an important prob- those caring for children who are not yet
lem in child day care centers, particularly toilet trained (1, 2). In such centers, many
Received for publication November 24, 1986, and 4 National Institute for Occupational Safety and
in final form June 8, 1987. Health, Centers for Disease Control, US Public Health
1 Department of International Health, The Johns Service, US Department of Health and Human Serv-
Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public ices, Atlanta, GA.
Health, Baltimore, MD. 8 Division of Disease Control Services, Arizona De-
1 Division of Disease Control, Maricopa County partment of Health Services, Phoenix, AZ.
Health Department, Phoenix, AZ. " Division of Viral Diseases, Center for Infectious
s Training and Laboratory Program Office, Centers Diseases, Centers for Disease Control, US Public
for Disease Control, Public Health Services, US De- Health Service, US Department of Health and Human
partment of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, Services, Atlanta, GA.
GA. Reprint requests to Dr. Alfred V. Bartlett at present
808
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
DIARRHEA IN DAY CARE CENTERS 809
opportunities exist for introduction and proaches, active day care center-based sur-
transmission of enteric pathogens. From veillance and family-based surveys. The
1981-1984, we conducted a three-year lon- purpose of this phase of study was to deter-
gitudinal study of diarrheal illness among mine whether this training strategy would
infants and toddlers attending day care result in a significant reduction of the
centers in Maricopa County (metropolitan infant-toddler diarrhea rate and whether
Phoenix), Arizona. Using continuous active this rate could be reduced to levels experi-
surveillance for infant-toddler diarrhea, in enced by children in day care homes and in
the first two years of study we found that households not using day care. This study
day care centers adhering to specific hy- phase also permitted assessment of the im-
giene procedures, especially child and staff pact of surveillance itself on day care center
handwashing, had lower risk of diarrheal diarrhea rates.
illness than those that did not (2). In the
second year, we also compared the rates of MATERIALS AND METHODS
infant-toddler diarrhea in our day care cen- Study populations
ter sample with those among age-matched
Day care centers. For the first two years,
children in day care homes and others cared
our study was conducted in 22 day care
for at home and found the rate of infant-
centers randomly selected from the 108 day
toddler diarrhea to be significantly higher
care centers in Maricopa County licensed
in day care centers than in the other set-
to care for infante and toddlers. To conduct
tings (3).
the training intervention study, we divided
Black et al. (4), in a study of four Atlanta these 22 study day care centers into three
day care centers, have shown that staff strata, based on surveillance rates of
training in handwashing and hygiene, com- infant-toddler diarrhea in the preceding 12
bined with close monitoring of staff com- months. Half of the centers in each stratum
pliance, is associated with a significant de- were then randomly assigned to the inter-
crease in infant-toddler diarrhea. However, vention group. After this procedure, one of
monitoring day-to-day staff practices in the the centers in the high-rate stratum ran-
more than 20,000 day care centers in the domized to the intervention group with-
United States would clearly exceed the re- drew from the study and was not replaced.
sources of public health agencies. There-
Because all day care centers in the inter-
fore, in the third year of study, we con-
vention and control groups had already par-
ducted a controlled trial of day care center
ticipated in study of diarrheal disease for
staff training in handwashing and other
at least one year before the intervention
hygiene practices without monitoring staff
study, we also created a third comparison
practices after training. We then evaluated
group ("new" day care centers) of four cen-
the effect of this training using two ap-
ters randomly selected from infant-toddler
day care centers that had never partici-
pated in our surveillance. The three groups
address: Division de Nutricion y Salud, INCAP, Apar- of day care centers did not differ signifi-
tado Postal 1J88, Guatemala, Guatemala, C.A.
cantly in several important characteristics
Supported by a grant from the McKnight Founda-
tion, Minneapolis, MN. including mean total enrollment, mean
Presented in part at the 26th Interscience Confer- infant-toddler enrollment, operating hours,
ence on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
percentage accepting drop-in children, per-
Minneapolis, MN, September 29 to October 2, 1985.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance centage accepting public agency payment,
of Beraita M. Steffi and of each of the nurses and and percentage of study children enrolled
student nurses from Arizona State University School
for six months or less at the beginning of
of Nursing who participated in this study. They also
thank Lois Vernon, Mary Felker, and Dr. Robert study year 3. At the beginning of study year
Parker for statistical assistance, and Barbara Nemitz, 3, there were 196 infants and toddlers en-
Anne Wright, and Krysti Clemons for preparing the
rolled in intervention day care centers and
manuscript.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
810 BARTLETT ET AL.
178 in control day care centers. Based on procedures for disease control including
surveillance rates of diarrhea in the preced- separation of child groups, physical orga-
ing year, this sample was adequate to detect nization of diapering and toilet areas, re-
a 25 per cent reduction, with alpha = 0.05, quirements for environmental cleaning,
power of a test = 0.90. Infant-toddler en- management of ill children, communication
rollment in the new day care centers was of policies to parents, supervision of staff
75. practices, and training of new workers. Di-
Day care homes A total of 30 day care rectors were also taught the hygiene-related
homes were randomly selected from listings tasks their classroom staffs would learn.
compiled by private, nonprofit, and public The directors then participated in the
agencies. Each day care home cared for two training sessions for their infant-toddler
or more children aged 0-36 months. The classroom staffs. These sessions taught
day care home sample was matched geo- schedules and procedures for caregivere'
graphically to the day care center sample tasks, including staff and child handwash-
by zip code to provide socioeconomic com- ing, diapering, food handling, environmen-
parability. If a day care home closed, with- tal cleaning, and other child care hygiene
drew from the study, or ceased to have two practices. Posters depicting the handwash-
or more children in the study age group, we ing and diapering procedures were provided
recruited a replacement using the same se- to each intervention center, and handouts
lection process. At the beginning of study describing the caregivers' tasks and sched-
year 3, the day care home sample included ules for performance of the tasks were pro-
a total of 85 infants and toddlers. vided to each participant.
Households not using day care. A sample One week after training, an examination
of children aged 0-35 months who did not was administered to all trained staff. Cor-
attend day care and whose parents did not rect description of 80 per cent of the care-
provide child care in their home was en- givers' tasks and correct execution of all
rolled by random selection from county steps of the handwashing and diapering
birth records combined with random tele- procedures were required to pass this ex-
phone calling. This sample was geographi- amination. New workers in intervention
cally matched to the day care center and centers were trained at the time of employ-
day care home samples by zip code. At the ment and required to pass the same exam-
beginning of study year 3, the household ination. This examination was also re-
sample included 111 infants and toddlers peated unannounced eight months after the
in 97 households. original training.
Since training might result in an increase
Day care center staff training
in diarrhea reporting in intervention cen-
The training program was implemented ters, during the last half of September 1983
in the intervention day care centers during we visited each control day care center to
the last two weeks of September 1983. give a presentation reviewing surveillance
Training provided background information procedures already in place, but providing
on infectious diarrhea and fecal-oral trans- no instruction in disease prevention or
mission and participatory learning of spe- management.
cific tasks for diarrheal disease prevention
and control. The training sessions, using a
Ascertainment of diarrheal illness
standard protocol, were conducted by the
principal investigator (A. V. B.) and study In both the day care center-based sur-
nurses with the assistance of training spe- veillance and the family-based survey, a
cialists. case of diarrhea was defined as occurrence
In the first phase of training, day care in a study child of stools that were unusu-
center directors were taught management ally loose or frequent compared with the
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
DIARRHEA IN DAY CARE CENTERS 811
usual pattern for that child, as determined blinded in regard to "intervention" or "con-
by the respondent caregiver. trol" status of the day care centers.
Day care center-based surveillance. Meth- Survey questionnaires identified diar-
ods of active surveillance in our interven- rheal illness in each study child and ob-
tion and control day care centers were iden- tained information on the number and ages
tical with those used during the first two of other family members and the occupa-
years of study (2). Briefly, this surveillance tion of the principal wage earner. If illness
included weekly visits and daily telephone occurred, information was obtained regard-
calls to each center on Monday through ing specific effects of that illness on the
Thursday to identify diarrheal illness family. The questionnaires for the house-
among children present that day and to hold sample also asked whether the study
record attendance in each age group. In- child had begun out-of-home care during
formed consent was obtained from a parent that two-week period; if so, that family
of each child involved in the study. Stool continued to be surveyed, but question-
specimens and epidemiologic data were ob- naires administered after the child began
tained from all children with sporadic cases day care were excluded from comparisons
of diarrhea and from all ill and well children with children in day care centers and day
in groups experiencing diarrhea outbreaks care homes.
(three or more cases in one day or five or In the day care centers and day care
more cases in any seven-day period in the homes, the survey included the families of
same day care center). Stool specimens all infants and toddlers actively enrolled.
were tested for Salmonella, Shigella, Cam- Study children who left a day care center
pylobacter, rotavirus, and Giardia lamblia or day care home during the survey period
by methods previously described (2). If a no longer participated in the survey; ques-
pathogen was identified in a sporadic case, tionnaires completed for such children be-
all asymptomatic children in the same fore they left were included in the analysis.
group were tested for that pathogen. In Children newly enrolled in a day care center
both intervention and control day care cen- or day care home in the sample were en-
ters, management of infected children was tered in the survey at the time of the next
mandated by state regulation and county questionnaire. In day care centers and day
policy, which required excluding such chil- care homes, questionnaires were distrib-
dren from the day care center until negative uted and collected at the facility; question-
stool specimens were documented after the naires were administered by telephone to
end of symptoms and treatment (if appro- families of study children not in attendance
priate). on the days of the survey. Biweekly ques-
tionnaires were distributed directly to in-
Family-based survey. This survey was de-
dividual families in the household sample.
veloped and used in study year 2 to provide
Based on actual attendance records, com-
uniform ascertainment of illness among
pletion rates for these surveys were greater
children attending different types of child
than 95 per cent in all three groups of day
care facilities. After day care center staff
care centers and in day care homes and 93
training, student nurses trained to admin-
per cent in households not using day care.
ister the family questionnaire surveyed the
families of all children aged 0-36 months
in each of the 25 day care centers, the 30 Statistical analysis
day care homes, and the 97 households that The proportions of specimens with path-
did not use day care. These questionnaires ogens identified and the attack rates in
were administered every two weeks during outbreaks were compared using the chi-
October and November 1983, the time of square test. Illness rates were calculated for
highest diarrhea incidence in our previous actual child-months of observation and
two years of study. Student nurses were compared using the z test for differences in
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
812 BARTLETT ET AL.
proportions, with correction for the number
of groups compared. Results of the post-
training family-based survey were also ana-
lyzed in stepwise logistic regression models
(BMDP Statistical Software, Inc., Los
Angeles, CA).
RESULTS
ti t- io
Diarrhea rates in study child care settings 8 CO (O CO a> ec t-
o d o
Day care center-based surveillance. The m
rates of infant-toddler diarrhea identified
c* S P S t> oq
by surveillance in intervention and control o o o o dd
day care centers during the pre- and post-
of &
training years are shown in table 1. There
were no significant changes in overall
aq •* CN c^ oo
infant-toddler diarrhea rates or in rates in CO Qi CO C^ »"H
t- CO «-H ^ -*•
the infant or toddler stratum from the pre-
training to the posttraining year and no
significant differences in these rates be-
eg g
tween intervention and control day care e
centers in either year. 1-9-3 8
d
Pathogen testing of children revealed dif- 3
ferences suggestive of impact of staff train-
S CO <O O H «
ing. In the pretraining year, the percentages
t— C— O 00 00
of infant-toddler diarrhea cases in which
one or more pathogens were identified were
almost identical in the intervention and
control day care centers (14.5 per cent of
138 cases vs. 16.0 per cent of 144 cases). In CI>O CCfOl tO- CO •* 00
d o S odd
the posttraining year, the percentage of
pathogen-positive cases declined substan-
tially in the intervention day care centers
(9.2 per cent of 152 cases), while it re- « CD 00
3 CO O5
mained essentially unchanged in the con-
trol day care centers (16.9 per cent of 154
cases). This posttraining difference in
pathogen-positive specimen rate ap-
proached but did not achieve statistical sig-
nificance (p = 0.07). However, in the post-
training year, intervention day care centers
experienced a significant decrease in the
number of infections by Giardia lamblia,
the most commonly identified enteric path-
ogen in our study. This decrease resulted
in the Giardia identification rates among ill
study children and their asymptomatic con-
tacts being significantly lower in interven-
tion day care centers than in control day
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
DIARRHEA IN DAY CARE CENTERS 813
care centers in the posttraining year (table higher than that in day care homes (p <
2). 0.01) and in households not using day care
Surveillance identified an additional dif- (p < 0.001). However, the highest rate oc-
ference between intervention and control curred in the four new day care centers
day care centers in diarrhea outbreaks. which had not previously been part of our
There were nine outbreaks in study day study, their rate was significantly higher
care centers in both the pre- and posttrain- than that in the centers participating in
ing years; three outbreaks in the pretrain- ongoing surveillance (p < 0.001).
ing year and five in the posttraining year The proportion of family survey child-
occurred in intervention day care centers. months of observation accounted for by
In the pretraining year, the attack rate in infants was 20 per cent in intervention day
outbreaks did not differ significantly be- care centers, 16 per cent in control day care
tween intervention and control day care centers, 18 per cent in day care centers not
centers: 11 of 24 children (46 per cent) previously studied, and 20 per cent in
became ill in groups experiencing outbreaks households not using day care. In day care
in intervention day care centers versus 36 homes, infants accounted for a significantly
of 97 (37 per cent) in control day care greater percentage of family survey child-
centers. In the posttraining year, the attack months (38 per cent). However, in day care
rate in intervention day care centers was homes, there was no significant difference
significantly lower than in control day care in diarrhea rates in the infant and toddler
centers: 50 of 91 children (55 per cent) strata (24.2 vs. 27.0 cases per 100 child-
versus 67 of 81 children (83 per cent). How- months), and the different age distribution
ever, this difference was due to a significant in day care homes therefore did not con-
increase in attack rate in control centers, tribute significantly to the differences in
rather than to a decline in attack rate in diarrhea rates between day care homes and
intervention centers. other settings.
Family-based survey. Consistent with the The surveys revealed significant differ-
surveillance data, the biweekly family- ences in the number and ages of other
based survey conducted during the two children in families using different types of
months after training also found the rates child care. We therefore examined these
of infant-toddler diarrhea in intervention surveys in a multivariate logistic regression
and control day care centers to be virtually model with occurrence of diarrhea! illness
identical (figure 1). When considered as a as the dependent variable and with type of
group, the 21 study day care centers had an child care and presence of other children
infant-toddler diarrhea rate significantly by age group as the independent variables.
TABLE 2
Identification of Giardia lamblia among study children with diarrhea and their asymptomatic contacts in
intervention and control day care centers, Maricopa County, AZ, October 1982 to September 1984
Asymptomatic children
Children with diarThea Total
in contact with ill child
No. positive/ No. positive/ No. positive/
% %
no. tested no. tested no. tested
Pretraining year
Intervention day care centers 15/149 10 35/168 22 50/307 16*
Control day care centers 20/203 10 23/127 18 43/330 13
Posttraining year
Intervention day care centers 11/189 6 4/50 8 15/239 6*t
Control day care centers 27/167 16 9/94 10 36/261 14t
* Comparison of pre- and posttraining year intervention day care centers, p < 0.001, chi-square test
t Comparison of posttraining year intervention and control day care centers, p < 0.001, chi-square test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
814 BARTLETT ET AL.
90n
80-
n 70-
60-
50-
40-
30-
20-
10
0
HOUSEHOLDS DAY CAflE INTERVENTION CONTROL DCCS NOT
NOT USING HOMES DCCS CtCC. s PREVKXJSLY
DAY CARE STUDIED
FIGURE 1. Rates of infant-toddler diarrhea by child care setting, Maricopa County, AZ, October to November
1983 (posttraining family-based survey). (I = 95% confidence interval).
In this model, risk of diarrhea was still Staff recall of training content
significantly associated with type of child
In accordance with our study protocol,
care. Compared with occurrence of diarrhea
we did not monitor staff compliance with
among children in households not using day
the procedures taught in the training. To
care, in day care homes the odds ratio was
assess recall of these procedures during the
1.33 (95 per cent confidence interval (CI)
posttraining year, we compared the results
= 0.73-2.40), in control day care centers
of the examination administered one week
the odds ratio was 2.12 (95 per cent CI =
after training with those of the same ex-
1.30-3.48), in intervention day care centers
amination administered eight months later.
it was 2.23 (95 per cent CI = 1.37-3.63),
A total of 41 of 44 originally trained work-
and in day care centers not previously stud-
ers passed the initial examination on their
ied it was 4.88 (95 per cent CI = 2.92-8.17).
first attempt. Eight months later, none of
Risk of diarrhea in the 21 study day care
the remaining 28 originally trained workers
centers was significantly greater than that
and none of 14 subseijuently trained work-
in day care homes (p < 0.02) and in house-
ers passed the same examination. However,
holds not using day care (p < 0.01) and
in the second examination, 17 of 42 workers
significantly less than in day care centers
correctly demonstrated the handwashing
not previously studied (p < 0.01). In this
procedure taught in the training, and 15 of
model, again there was no significant dif-
42 correctly demonstrated the diapering
ference in risk of diarrhea between day care
procedure.
homes and households not using day care.
These surveys also assessed the impact Impact of surveillance on diarrhea rates
on the family of diarrheal illness in a study
The finding that the rate of diarrheal
child. The rates of physician visits, medi-
illness was significantly higher in day care
cation usage, and subsequent diarrheal ill-
centers not previously included in our study
ness in other household members were ac-
than in those previously included was con-
tually higher in intervention than in con-
sistent with the hypothesis that two pre-
trol day care centers, although these differ-
vious years of surveillance had affected the
ences were not significant (table 3). In day
rate of infant-toddler diarrhea in our day
care centers not previously studied, each of
care center sample. To evaluate this hy-
these effects occurred at a rate significantly
pothesis, we compared the yearly rates of
higher than in either of the other two
infant-toddler diarrhea identified by active
groups of day care centers (p = 0.001-
surveillance in the day care centers. The
0.015). With the exception of physician vis-
surveillance rates of diarrhea in the pre-
its, rates in day care homes were lower than
training year (0.80 cases per child-year, 95
in any of the day care center groups; rates
per cent CI = 0.76-0.84) and the posttrain-
were generally lowest in households not
ing year (0.76 cases per child-year, 95 per
using day care.
cent CI = 0.72-0.80) were not significantly
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
DIARRHEA IN DAY CARE CENTERS 815
TABLE 3
Rates of occurrence of household effects associated with diarrheal illness in study child, by type of child care
used, posttraining family-based survey, Maricopa County, AZ, October to November 1983
Rate of occurrence per 100 child-months
Day care
Effect Intervention Control day centers not Day care Households
day care not using
care centers previously homes
centers day care
studied
Adult missed work 7.0 7.0 13.6 3.0 0
Child required visit to physician 10.4 4.3 21.7 5.4 0.5
Child required medication 10.4 5.0 16.7 3.0 0.5
Other household members with diar-
rhea or vomiting (£14 days after
study child) 15.2 7.7 28.3 4.2 4.6
different. However, both these rates were care centers) to modify health and safety
significantly lower than that in our first practices in their respective settings by act-
year of surveillance (1.20 cases per child- ing as "health advocates" (5, p. 318). Sys-
year, 95 per cent CI = 1.16-1.24). tematic evaluation of practices in the ad-
vocates' child care settings and in 19 com-
DISCUSSION parable settings in which training did not
The trend toward increasing utilization occur was conducted before and one year
of group day care for young children has after training. The periodic evaluation
caused concern about the potential for process alone was associated with signifi-
transmission of infectious diseases in day cant improvement in the practices under
care settings. Staff training has frequently study; training combined with the evalua-
been proposed as one of the principal meth- tion process was associated with additional
ods for reducing such disease spread. How- significant improvement. Rates of disease
ever, previous studies of the impact of and accident occurrence in the children
training day care center workers have not before and after training were not mea-
separated the effect of training from that sured.
of monitoring or have not evaluated the These studies have suggested that train-
impact of training and monitoring on mor- ing combined with outside monitoring of
bidity (4,5). Thus, the approach and results child care practices can modify staff behav-
of our study differ importantly from those ior as well as disease occurrence. However,
of previous investigations. neither study addresses the impact of train-
In 1976-1977, Black et al. (4) determined ing in the absence of such monitoring. Our
diarrhea rates among infants and toddlers approach avoided external monitoring after
in four Atlanta day care centers over a two- training; we initially trained directors of
month period. Two of these day care cen- our intervention day care centers and had
ters then received staff training in hand- them participate as cotrainere of their own
washing and hygiene, and staff practices in workers so that they might provide internal
these two centers were "rigorously moni- monitoring of the practices of their staff.
tored" (p. 446). During a nine-month fol- However, in terms of the principal outcome
low-up period, the diarrhea rate in the in- variable of our study—occurrence of
tervention day care centers declined signif- infant-toddler diarrhea—both day care
icantly, becoming significantly lower than center-based active surveillance and
that in the control day care centers. In family-based survey found no overall im-
1974-1975, Aronson and Aiken (5) trained pact of this training strategy in day care
selected staff members from 123 day care centers that had already participated in two
programs (at least 120 of which were day years of surveillance.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
816 BARTLETT ET AL.
Our results suggest possible impact of unmonitored behavior is perhaps not sur-
training on certain aspects of infectious prising since one study has documented
diarrhea transmission. The significant re- failure of physicians and hospital staff to
duction in identification of G. lamblia in practice handwashing, even in medical in-
intervention centers may reflect the com- tensive care units (9).
plex epidemiology of this pathogen in day While our training intervention did not
care centers; Giardia can be transmitted by lower diarrhea rates, several lines of evi-
children with diarrhea, but also by asymp- dence suggest that surveillance itself did.
tomatic shedding of cysts in stools or by First, the infant-toddler diarrhea rate in
cysts surviving in a contaminated environ- study day care centers was significantly
ment (6-8). In addition, the posttraining higher in the first study year than in years
year attack rates in diarrhea outbreaks in 2 and 3. A similar decline in diarrhea rates
intervention day care centers were signifi- during the course of surveillance without
cantly lower than in control day care cen- training was observed by Sullivan et al. (10)
ters; it is possible that, during a time when in a longitudinal study of 60 day care cen-
diarrheal illness was prominent in inter- ters in Houston. Second, diarrhea rates in
vention centers, the procedures learned our original study day care centers were
during training were more effective or more significantly lower than in day care centers
consistently practiced. However, this find- not previously studied.
ing is difficult to interpret because of the
The finding that the day care centers
increased attack rate in control day care
under our active surveillance, like the day
centers.
care centers trained and monitored by
Although this study indicates a failure of Black et al. (4), experienced a significant
staff training without subsequent monitor- reduction in diarrhea rate indicates that
ing to reduce diarrhea rates, it does not this rate can be lowered. In day care centers
differentiate between failure of the training not participating in surveillance, training
to modify staff practices and failure of mod- alone without subsequent monitoring
ified practices to reduce diarrhea occur- might contribute to reduction of diarrheal
rence. The fact that none of the trained illness. However, even with training added
workers passed the eighth month follow-up to the effect of surveillance, infant-toddler
examination suggests that these workers diarrhea rates in study day care centers
were not using the practices learned in were not as low as those in the small group
training, although the examination results settings of family day care homes; rates of
may not reflect modifications in their ac- diarrhea in day care homes did not differ
tual child care procedures. This failure to significantly from those of children cared
retain training content contrasts with the for at home. This result is consistent with
study of Aronson and Aiken (5), in which findings in our second year of study (3),
the performance of the trained health ad- and with other studies which have found
vocates on a seventh month follow-up ex- diarrheal illness (11), respiratory infection
amination nearly equaled that immediately (11, 12), and invasive Haemophilus influ-
posttraining. This difference might be ex- enzae type b disease (13) to be significantly
plained by differences between the health more common in the large child groups
advocate trainees—who were selected for associated with day care centers than in the
interest in health issues and many of whom smaller groups characteristic of day care
had training in child development, educa- homes. The findings of our family survey
tion, social work, or nursing—and more that diarrheal illness among approximately
typical child care staff. The fact that our 500 infants and toddlers in 25 day care
trainees did not know that they would be centers during two months resulted in 88
reexamined might also explain these differ- adults missing work, 108 physician visits,
ent findings. Failure of training to modify and 100 courses of medication indicate that
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
DIARRHEA IN DAY CARE CENTERS 817
diarrheal illness in day care centers is a centers. II. Comparison with day care homes and
substantial medical and public health con- households. J Pediatr 1985;107:503-9.
4. Black RE, Dykes AC, Anderson KE, et al. Hand-
cern.
washing to prevent diarrhea in day-care centers.
These results may have important impli- Am J Epidemiol 1981;113:445-51.
cations for the direction of infant-toddler 6. Aronson SS, Aiken LS. Compliance of child-care
programs with health and safety standards: im-
care. They indicate that type of day care
pact of program evaluation and advocate training
and size of child groups deserve attention Pediatrics 1980-,65:318-25.
in future studies of infectious diseases 6. Black RE, Dykes AC, Sinclair MS, et al. Giardiasis
in day care centers: evidence of person-to-person
among young children receiving out-of-
transmission. Pediatrics 1977;60:486-91.
home day care. In addition, they suggest 7. Pickering LK, Woodward WE, DuPont HL, et al.
that further attention must be directed to Occurrence of Giardia lamblia in children in day
effective promotion of hygienic practices care centers. J Pediatr 1984;104:522-6.
8. Centers for Disease Control. Child Day Care In-
among day care center workers without ex-
fectious Disease Study Group. Public health con-
ternal monitoring. Finally, additional study siderations of infectious diseases in child day care
is needed to identify specific practices other centers. J Pediatr 1984;105:683-701.
9. Albert RK, Condie F. Hand-washing patterns in
than handwashing that reduce introduction
medical intensive-care units. N Engl J Med
and transmission of infectious agents in 1981;304:1465-€.
child care groups. 10. Sullivan P, Woodward WE, Pickering LK, et aL
A longitudinal study of the occurrence of diarrheal
disease in day care centers. Am J Public Health
1984;74:987-91.
REFERENCES
11. Doyle AB. Incidence of illness in early group and
1. Pickering LK, Evana DG, DuPont HL, et al. Diar- family day-care. Pediatrics 1976;58:607-13.
rhea caused by Shigella, rotavirus, and Giardia in 12. Stahlberg M-R. The influence of form of day care
day-care centers: prospective study. J Pediatr on occurrence of acute respiratory tract infections
1981;99;51-6. among young children. Acta Paediatr Scand
2. Bartlett AV, Moore M, Gary GW, et al. Diarrheal 1980;(Suppl.)282:1-87.
illness among infants and toddlers in day care 13. Istre G, Conner J, Broome CV, et al. Risk factors
centers. I. Epidemiology and pathogens. J Pediatr for primary invasive Haemophilus influenzas dis-
1985;107:495-502. ease: increased risk from day care attendance and
3. Bartlett AV, Moore M, Gary GW, et al. Diarrheal school-aged household members. J Pediatr 1985;
illness among infants and toddlere in day care 106:190-5.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952
by University of Durham user
on 03 January 2018
