TRANSACTIOONFT SH ER OYAL SOCIETY OF T~OFICAL MEDICINE AND HYGIEN(1E99 1) 85, 819-821 819
Hand-washing reduces diarrhoea episodes: a study in Lombok, Indonesia
Jane M. Wilson*, Glenys N. Chandler, Muslihatun and Jamiluddin Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Project, 31 Swaramahardika 16, Mataram, Lombok, NTB, Indonesia
Abstract (JUDD, 1980) and innumerable deaths at these times
Sixty-five mothers from Balai Lua, Central Lom- have attracted foreign aid to the island.
bok, Indonesia were given soap and an explanation of The study was conducted as part of a rural water
the faecal-oral route of diarrhoea transmission. This supply and sanitation project. Two of the seven dusun
very simple health message was repeated and rein- (village administrative units) within the desa (small
forced fortnightly when mothers were also asked town) of Darek in Central Lombok were selected for
whether any members of their family had suffered the study: Tanggung Luak and Balai Lua Daya.
from diarrhoea over the previous 2 weeks. Children of These dusun were in the same neighbourhood but
these mothers experienced an 89% reduction in were not contiguous. Housing types were similar in
diarrhoea episodes compared to a control period both dusun but varied accordmg to the resources of
before the intervention. the familv. The richest households had tiled roofs.
brick walls and concrete floors while the poorest
Introduction homes were built with thatched roofs, woven bamboo
Many million children die of diarrhoea each year. walls and mud floors.
Many more are chronically debilitated and become Darek had piped drinking water available for about
malnourished as a result of frequent episodes of 3 years before the study. For washing, villagers used
diarrhoea which leave them susceptible to other small unprotected brackish wells close to their houses
infectious diseases. Much worthwhile effort has gone or, when these were dry, one of 3 communal bathing
into promotion of diarrhoea treatment with oral places each served by a deep protected well. There
rehydration salts but the interventions required to was a good tarmac road to Darek, a weekly market, a
prevent diarrhoea are less well understood. Hand- government health centre (PusKesMas) and several
washing breaks the cycle of diarrhoea acquisition schools. Most people worked in the rice fields but
(KHAN, 1982; FEACHEM, 1984). There have, how- there was also some paid employment, for example as
ever, been few community-based investigations of the cidomo drivers (communal horse cart taxis), in small
effect on diarrhoea control of encouraging hand- shops or as government employees.
washing through health education uroarammes.
In r&al Bangladesh, improved water-supply com-
Methods
bined with hygiene education reduced diarrhoea
All women in Balai Lua Daya with a live child
incidence bv more than 40% (ALAM et al.. 1989).
under the age of 11 years were approached and an
while in urban Burma hygiene education alone was as
interview requested. A small proportion (2%) were
effective in reducing episodes of diarrhoea (but not
out of the village becauseo f trading commitments and
dysentery) in the absence of better water and sanitary
2 other women were too shy to be interviewed. Thus,
facilities (AUNG MYO HAN & THEIN HLAING, 1989).
65 women were asked details of all children alive or
Promoting hand-washing with soap after defaeca-
dead; enquiries were also made about the mothers’
tion and before contact with food seems to be the
knowledge, attitudes and practices relating to
simplest, fastest and most cost-effective method of
hygiene, breastfeeding, weaning, and also about any
reducing the major cause of childhood death and adult
episodes of illness in the family over the previous two
morbidity in an underprivileged society. This paper
weeks. The same questions were asked of 65 mothers
reports a very limited pilot study in Lombok,
in Tanggung Luak.
Indonesia. The work suffers from some methodolo-
After 2 weeks all 130 mothers were asked about any
gical deficiencies (see BLUM & FEACHEM,1 983), but
episodes of illness in the family since the last interview
appears to have been effective in reducing diarrhoea
and how long these had lasted. This fortnightly
nevertheless.
disease review was repeated over the next 20 weeks.
Diarrhoea episodes (maceret or diare) were defined as
Study area
loose stools for more than 24 h. Since most women
Central Lombok has the highest infant mortality
were illiterate they were unable to record disease
rate in Indonesia: the 1985 SUPAS(S ensus Penduduk
episodes on calendars and it is possible that some
Antar Sensus) supplementary census estimated the
disease episodes were overlooked. Certainly multiple
rate as 120 per 1000 live births. Most deaths were due
disease episodes within one reporting period for the
to diarrhoea but little is known about its aetiology
same child were exceptional.
locally. The Sasak people of this region have poor
Eight weeks after the start of the study, meetings
expectations of health and survival. Since 1945 there
were held amonast the 65 mothers in Balai Lua, the
have been 8 major famines in south Central Lombok
village selected lfor the hand-washing intervention.
The women were told that diarrhoea comes from
‘Addressf or correspondenceD: r J. M. Wilson, 6 Sparrow faeces getting into the mouth by way of dirty hands,
Farm Road, Ewell, Epsom, Surrey, KT17 ZJL, UK. contaminated food, and flies which have first landed
820
on faeces. To prevent diarrhoea it was suggested that Table 1. Profiles of the two communities
the mothers should therefore (i) wash their hands with
soap before preparing food; (ii) wash their hands with Tmzgu*g Balai Lua
soap before eating; (iii) wash their childrens’ hands Luak Daya
with soap before they eat; and (iv) wash their hands
No. of mothers interviewed 65 65
with soap as soon as possible after defaecation. Each
Education
woman was given a plastic soap dish and a bar of
Schools
‘OK’@ soap (the brand most readily available in the
Primary 1 0
villages, costing Rp 50, equivalent to 2 UK pence). Middle 2
The fortnightly disease reviews continued and were Secondary 1
used to reinforce the hygiene messages, to talk about Mothers with no schooling 35% 42%
any health issues, and to replenish the soap as Mothers with >6 years education” 3% 10%
necessary. Health
Fortnightly diseaser eviews also continued in Tang- No. of children ever bottle fed 4% 3%
gung Luak (the control village). Here the women Distance from health centre 300 m 200 m
were not given soap, and information about diarrhoea No. of families using a latrine 2 2
acquisition was given only in response to specific Economic
questions. However, mothers were told about oral Approx. no. of households owning land 25% 25%
rehydration therapy and encouraged to use this to People employed or selling goods outside dusun
treat any childhood diarrhoea. Weavers 6 1
Teachers 7 8
Results Approx. no. of hajisb 50 30
The survey covered 130 mothers and 315 children. No. of small shops or stalls 15 4
The villages were similar in most indices, attitudes “Literate women.
and hygiene practices. Many women (23%) associated bThose who had raised f2000 to visit Mecca.
dirt or poor sanitation with diarrhoea transmission
and 25% thought that diarrhoea came from eating bad
food. A few (2%) thought that measlesw as caused by Table 2. Changes in hygiene behaviow and attitudes due
poor sanitation. Maternal educational levels in the 2 to hand-washing campaign: Balai Lua Daya (intervention
villages differed somewhat (Table l), but most village) compared to Tanggung Luak (control village)
women were illiterate. Childhood deaths over the
previous 10 years had all been of those aged 3 years or Tanggung Luak” Balai Lua Daya”
Before After Before After
less; child mortality rates were declining but were still
about 28%. Breastfeeding was almost universal; only Wash hands with soap after
3 children of 446 live births had been given formula defaecation 1 3 0 92
milk from a bottle before the age of 3 months. Always wash hands before
However, solid food (mashed banana or rice porridge) cooking 17 3 26 60
Sometimes wash hands before
was usually introduced in the first week of life.
ceding 20 20 14 35
Breastfeeding usually continued until about the age of
Rinse hands before eating 100 99 100 100
2 years. Always rinse children’s hands
Mothers reported that childhood diarrhoea was before they eat 82 71 65 97
commonest at the beginning of the rainy season in Soap is expensive 51 74 35 78
November. Not enough money to buy
Table 2 lists the questionnaire responsesr elating to soap 43 51 32 12
hygiene before and after the intervention. All adults ‘Figures are percentages.
claimed to wash their hands with water (but not soap)
after defaecation and before eating meals. About etc.; (ii) other water-related disease, i.e. skin and eye
three-quarters of mothers said they rinsed their infections; (iii) other communicable disease( respira-
childrens’ hands before they ate. Soap was rarely used tory and ear infections, measles, fever, malaria); and
but mothers knew the price and realized that it was (iv) non-communicable disease (dizziness, toothache
always readily available in their village. Surprisingly, and one scald). The results are summarized in Tables
when soap was given out it was greeted with much 3-5.
comment, touching and smelling as if it was un-
familiar. Discussion
In the intervention village after the campaign, most During the short period of this study, hygiene
women (92%) claimed to wash their hands with soap education combined with distribution of soap
after defaecation and! although more thought soap appeared to induce an 89% fall in diarrhoea episodes
was expensive (implymg perhaps that they had now compared to the pre-intervention phase of the study.
considered buying it)? the proportion who considered This dramatic result must largely have been due to the
that they had insufficient money dropped from 32% to very simple nature of the message and also to the
12%. This suggests that an attitudinal change regard- intensive and personal nature of the hygiene educa-
ing the importance of soap had been achieved. tion. Two of us (M. and J.) who were community
The survey and fortnightly disease reviews pro- organizers spent time discussing health issues with
vided a list of disease events in each family. There just 130 mothers at fortnightly intervals over 20
were no records of chronic diarrhoea. Each new weeks. Whether the good effects of this campaign will
diseasee pisode affecting children under 11 years was be sustained once the community organizers move to
classified into (i) diarrhoea and/or vomiting, typhoid, other villages remains to be seen.
821
Table 3. Effect of teaching hand-washing: Tanggung Luak (control village) and Balai Lua Daya (intervention
village)
No. of No. Disease episodes
Village Survey children of weeks Diarrhoea Skin/eye
Tanggung Luak Initial 179 9 z: 21
Follow-up 179 11 14
Balai Lua Daya FolIlnoiwtia-ul p 113366 117 285 t;
Table 4. Prevalence of diarrhoea, conjunctivitis and super&&l only hand-washing was stressed, not other aspects of
bacterial skin disease in Tanggong Luak (control village) and Balai personal hygiene.
Lua Daya (intervention village) before and after intervention This dramatic fall in the incidence of childhood
diarrhoea was achieved through health messages
Tanggung Balai
which simply encouraged people to wash their hands
Luak Lua Daya Total Significance
with soap after defaecation and before contact with
Diarrhoea food. Such simple messages seem to be appropriate
Initial 36 28 64 for mass health education campaigns.
Follow-up 31 5 36 x*=15
Total 67 33 100 P<O.Ol
Acknowledgements
Conjunctivitis This project was conducted as part of the Lomhok Rural
Initial 9 6 15 Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) Project, funded by the
Follow-up 6 0 6 x2=6,6 Australian Development Assistance Bureau. Geoff Drew
Total 15 6 21 lJ<o,o5 gave much linguistic and cultural advice and the help of the
Skin disease” entire RWSS team, especially team leader Robert Simpson,
Initial 10 15 25 is gratefully acknowledged. Simon Howarth helped with the
Follow-up 8 14 22 x2=0.3 statistics and Dr Sandy Cairncross offered valuable criticism
Total 18 29 47 NSb of this paper.
“KOW?l& References
bNor significant. Alam, N., Wojtyniak, B. & Henry, F. J. (1989). Mothers’
personal and domestic hygiene and diarrhoea incidence
in young children in rural Bangladesh. International
Table 5. Incidence of water-related disease in Tanggung 3oumal of Epidemiology, 18, 242-247.
Luak (control village) and Balai Lua Daya (intervention Aung Myo Han & Thein Hlaing (1989). Prevention of
village) diarrhoea and dysentery by hand washing. Transactions of
the Rqal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 83,
Episodes per 100 children per week 128-131.
Skin and Blum, D. & Feachem, R. G. (1983). Measuring the impact
Village Diarrhoea eye disease of water supply and sanitation investments on diarrhoeal
diseases: problems of methodology. ZntemationalJournal
Initial 2.23 1.30
Tanggung Luak Follow-up 1.57 0.71 of Epidemiology, 12, 357-365.
Reduction 30% 45% Feachem, R. G. (1984). Interventions for the control of
diarrhoeal diseases among young children: promotion of
Initial 2.94 2.31 personal and domestic hygiene. Bulletin of the World
Balai Lua Daya Follow-up 0.33 1.80 Health Organization, 62, 467-476.
Reduction 89% 22% Judd, M. P.-M. (1980). The Sociology of Rural Poverry in
Lombok, Indonesia. PhD thesis, University of California,
USA.
Khan, M. U. (1982). Interruption of shigellosis by hand-
There was also a significant fall in eye disease as a
washing. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical
result of encouraging hand-washing but the numbers Medicine and Hygiene, 76, 164-168.
of cases were too small to be conclusive. There was no
significant change in the incidence of skin disease as a Received 8 May 1991; accepted for publication 5 June
result of the interventions, but this is understandable: 1991
