JAMA Network Open
JAMA Netw Open. 2021 Apr; 4(4): e213046. PMCID: PMC8025125
Published online 2021 Apr 6. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.3046: PMID: 33822070
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.3046
Harvey S. Levin, PhD, 1,2 Nancy R. Temkin, PhD,3,4 Jason Barber, MS,3 Lindsay D. Nelson, PhD,5,6 Claudia Robertson, MD,2
Jeffrey Brennan, MS,1 Murray B. Stein, MD, MPH,7 John K. Yue, MD,8 Joseph T. Giacino, PhD,9,10 Michael A. McCrea, PhD,5,6
Ramon Diaz-Arrastia, MD, PhD,11 Pratik Mukherjee, MD, PhD,8 David O. Okonkwo, MD, PhD,12 Kim Boase, BA,3 Amy J. Markowitz,
JD, 8 Yelena Bodien, PhD,9,10 Sabrina Taylor, PhD,8 Mary J. Vassar, RN, MS,8 Geoffrey T. Manley, MD, PhD,8 and and the TRACK-
TBI Investigators
Opeolu Adeoye, MD,13 Neeraj Badjatia, MD,14 M. Ross Bullock, MD, PhD,15 Randall Chesnut, MD,3 John D. Corrigan, PhD, ABPP,16
Karen Crawford, MLIS,17 Sureyya Dikmen, PhD,18 Ann-Christine Duhaime, MD,19 Richard Ellenbogen, MD,3 V. Ramana Feeser,
MD,20 Adam R. Ferguson, PhD,8 Brandon Foreman, MD,13 Raquel Gardner, MD,8 Etienne Gaudette, PhD,17 Luis Gonzalez, BA,21
Shankar Gopinath, MD,1 Rao Gullapalli, PhD,14 J. Claude Hemphill, MD,8 Gillian Hotz, PhD,15 Sonia Jain, PhD,7 C. Dirk Keene, MD,
PhD,3 Frederick K. Korley, MD, PhD,22 Joel Kramer, PsyD,8 Natalie Kreitzer, MD,13 Chris Lindsell, PhD,23 Joan Machamer, MA,3
Christopher Madden, MD,24 Alastair Martin, PhD,8 Thomas McAllister, MD,25 Randall Merchant, PhD,20 Amber Nolan, MD, PhD,8
Laura B. Ngwenya, MD, PhD,13 Florence Noel, PhD,1 Eva Palacios, PhD,8 Ava Puccio, PhD,13 Miri Rabinowitz, PhD,12
Jonathan Rosand, MD, MSc,10 Angelle Sander, PhD,1 Gabriella Satris, MS,8 David Schnyer, PhD,26 Seth Seabury, PhD,17
Xiaoying Sun, PhD,7 Arthur Toga, PhD,17 Alex Valadka, MD,20 Kevin Wang, PhD,27 Esther Yuh, MD, PhD,8 and Ross Zafonte, DO28
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
2Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas
3Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle
4Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle
5Department of Neurosurgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
6Department of Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
7University of California, San Diego
8University of California, San Francisco
9Spaulding Rehabilitation Center, Boston, Massachusetts
10Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
11Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
12Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh
13University of Cincinnati, Ohio
14University of Maryland, College Park
15University of Miami, Miami, Florida
16Ohio State University, Columbus
17University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
18Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle
19MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
20Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
21TIRR Memorial Hermann, Houston, Texas
22University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
23Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
24University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas
25Indiana University, Bloomington
26University of Texas at Austin, Austin
27University of Florida, Gainesville
28Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Corresponding author.
Article Information
Accepted for Publication: January 11, 2021.
Published: April 6, 2021. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.3046
Open Access: This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License. © 2021 Levin HS et al. JAMA
Network Open.
Corresponding Authors: Harvey S. Levin, PhD, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, MS637, Houston, TX 77030
(hlevin@bcm.edu); Amy J. Markowitz, JD, Brain and Spinal Injury Center, University of California, San Francisco, Zuckerberg San
Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, 1001 Potrero Ave, Bldg 1, Room 101, Box 0899, San Francisco, CA 94143
(amymarkowitz@gmail.com).
Additional Authors/TRACK-TBI Investigators: Opeolu Adeoye, MD; Neeraj Badjatia, MD; M. Ross Bullock, MD, PhD; Randall
Chesnut, MD; John D. Corrigan, PhD, ABPP; Karen Crawford, MLIS; Sureyya Dikmen, PhD; Ann-Christine Duhaime, MD; Richard
Ellenbogen, MD; V. Ramana Feeser, MD; Adam R. Ferguson, PhD; Brandon Foreman, MD; Raquel Gardner, MD; Etienne Gaudette,
PhD; Luis Gonzalez, BA; Shankar Gopinath, MD; Rao Gullapalli, PhD; J. Claude Hemphill, MD; Gillian Hotz, PhD; Sonia Jain, PhD; C.
Dirk Keene, MD, PhD; Frederick K. Korley, MD, PhD; Joel Kramer, PsyD; Natalie Kreitzer, MD; Chris Lindsell, PhD; Joan Machamer,
MA; Christopher Madden, MD; Alastair Martin, PhD; Thomas McAllister, MD; Randall Merchant, PhD; Amber Nolan, MD, PhD; Laura
B. Ngwenya, MD, PhD; Florence Noel, PhD; Eva Palacios, PhD; Ava Puccio, PhD; Miri Rabinowitz, PhD; Jonathan Rosand, MD, MSc;
Angelle Sander, PhD; Gabriella Satris, MS; David Schnyer, PhD; Seth Seabury, PhD; Xiaoying Sun, PhD; Arthur Toga, PhD; Alex
Valadka, MD; Kevin Wang, PhD; Esther Yuh, MD, PhD; Ross Zafonte, DO.
Affiliations of Additional Authors/TRACK-TBI Investigators: Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas (Gopinath, Noel,
Sander); Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle (Chesnut, Ellenbogen, Keene, Machamer);
University of California, San Diego (Jain, Sun); University of California, San Francisco (Ferguson, Gardner, Hemphill, Kramer,
Martin, Nolan, Palacios, Satris, Yuh); Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston (Rosand); Department of Neurosurgery, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh (Rabinowitz); University of Cincinnati, Ohio (Adeoye, Foreman, Kreitzer, Ngwenya, Puccio); University of
Maryland, College Park (Badjatia, Gullapalli); University of Miami, Miami, Florida (Bullock, Hotz); Ohio State University, Columbus
(Corrigan); University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California (Crawford, Gaudette, Seabury, Toga); Department of
Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle (Dikmen); MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
(Duhaime); Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia (Feeser, Merchant, Valadka); TIRR Memorial Hermann,
Houston, Texas (Gonzalez); University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Korley); Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee (Lindsell);
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas (Madden); Indiana University, Bloomington (McAllister); University of
Texas at Austin, Austin (Schnyer); University of Florida, Gainesville (Wang); Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(Zafonte).
Author Contributions: Mr Barber and Dr Temkin had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Levin, Temkin, Nelson, Yue, McCrea, Diaz-Arrastia, Okonkwo, Bodien, Corrigan, Gaudette, Gopinath,
Kramer, Nolan, Rosand, Wang, Zafonte.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Levin, Temkin, Barber, Nelson, Robertson, Brennan, Stein, Yue, Giacino, Diaz-
Arrastia, Mukherjee, Okonkwo, Boase, Markowitz, Bodien, Taylor, Vassar, Manley, Adeoye, Badjatia, Bullock, Chesnut, Corrigan,
Crawford, Dikmen, Duhaime, Ellenbogen, Feeser, Ferguson, Foreman, Gardner, Gonzalez, Gullapalli, Hemphill, Hotz, Jain, Keene,
Korley, Kreitzer, Lindsell, Machamer, Madden, Martin, McAllister, Merchant, Ngwenya, Noel, Palacios, Puccio, Rabinowitz, Sander,
Satris, Schnyer, Seabury, Sun, Toga, Valadka, Yuh.
Drafting of the manuscript: Levin, Barber, Nelson, Yue, Okonkwo, Bodien, Taylor, Vassar, Bullock, Korley, Nolan, Noel, Puccio,
Rabinowitz.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Levin, Temkin, Nelson, Robertson, Brennan, Stein, Yue,
Giacino, McCrea, Diaz-Arrastia, Mukherjee, Okonkwo, Boase, Markowitz, Taylor, Manley, Adeoye, Badjatia, Chesnut, Corrigan,
Crawford, Dikmen, Duhaime, Ellenbogen, Feeser, Ferguson, Foreman, Gardner, Gaudette, Gonzalez, Gopinath, Gullapalli,
Hemphill, Hotz, Jain, Keene, Kramer, Kreitzer, Lindsell, Machamer, Madden, Martin, McAllister, Merchant, Ngwenya, Palacios,
Puccio, Rosand, Sander, Satris, Schnyer, Seabury, Sun, Toga, Valadka, Wang, Yuh, Zafonte.
Statistical analysis: Temkin, Barber, Yue, McCrea, Okonkwo, Ferguson, Jain, Lindsell.
Obtained funding: Temkin, Giacino, Diaz-Arrastia, Mukherjee, Okonkwo, Corrigan, Dikmen, Duhaime, Toga, Valadka.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Nelson, Robertson, Brennan, Mukherjee, Okonkwo, Markowitz, Bodien, Taylor,
Vassar, Manley, Adeoye, Badjatia, Duhaime, Ellenbogen, Ferguson, Gonzalez, Gopinath, Keene, Martin, Merchant, Puccio,
Rabinowitz, Satris, Seabury, Valadka, Zafonte.
Supervision: Diaz-Arrastia, Okonkwo, Bullock, Ferguson, Gopinath, McAllister, Rosand, Sander, Schnyer, Wang.
Other–data curation: Boase.
Other–monitoring: Noel.
Other–data site: Hotz.
Other–organized a team of TRACK-TBI investigators to coauthor the paper: Levin.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Temkin reported receiving grants from the US federal government during the conduct of
the study. Dr Nelson reported receiving grants from National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) Support for
the research during the conduct of the study, grants from the Department of Defense Funding for unrelated research, and grants
from the Medical College of Wisconsin Advancing a Healthier Wisconsin Endowment Funding for unrelated research outside the
submitted work. Dr Robertson reported receiving grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and from the Department of
Defense during the conduct of the study. Dr Stein reported receiving stock options from Oxeia Biopharmaceuticals outside the
submitted work. Dr Giacino reported receiving a subcontract from the University of California, San Francisco during the conduct
of the study. Dr McCrea reported receiving grants from the US Department of Defense and research funding to the Medical
College of Wisconsin during the conduct of the study. Dr Diaz-Arrastia reported receiving grants from the NIH/NINDS, the US
Department of Defense, and BrainBox Solutions during the conduct of the study; receiving stock options from Nia Therapeutics;
and receiving personal fees from Pinteon Therapeutics and Ischemix Inc outside the submitted work. Dr Mukherjee reported
receiving a pending patent for 15/782,005 University of California, San Francisco. Dr Boase reported receiving grants from the
US federal government during the conduct of the study. Dr Markowitz reported receiving grants from the US Department of
Defense Traumatic Brain Injury Endpoints Development Initiative (no. W81XWH-14-2-0176), a contract from the US Department
of Defense/Medical Technology Enterprise Consortium TRACK-TBI Network (no. W81XWH-15-9-0001), personal fees from the US
Department of Energy, and salary support from Precision Medicine Collaboration and One Mind during the conduct of the study.
Dr Vassar reported receiving grants from NINDS and the US Department of Defense during the conduct of the study. Dr Adeoye
reported receiving grants from NIH/NINDS and being a founder and equity holder of Sense Diagnostics Inc outside the submitted
work; in addition, Dr Adeoye reported receiving a patent related to Sense Diagnostics work. Dr Corrigan reported receiving
grants from the NIH during the conduct of the study. Dr Dikman report receiving grants from the US federal government during
the conduct of the study. Dr Ferguson reported receiving grants from the NIH/NINDS (grant no. U01NS086090, UH3NS106899,
R01NS088475), the US Department of Defense (grant no. W81XWH-14-2-0176), the Veterans Administration (grant no.
I01RX002787, I01RX002245), the Craig H. Neilsen Foundation Special Project, the Wings for Life Foundation Special Project, and
the US Department of Energy Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory during the conduct of the study. Dr Foreman reported
receiving speaking and consulting fees from Union Chimique Belge (UCB) Pharma and grants from the NIH/NINDS, the US
Department of Defense, and the National Science Foundation outside the submitted work. Dr Lindsell reported receiving grants
from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, the NIH, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and
the US Department of Defense; receiving institutional contracts for clinical trial coordination and data coordination from
Entegrion, Endpoint Health, and bioMerieux outside the submitted work; in addition, Dr Lindsell reported having a patent for risk
stratification in sepsis and septic shock issued during the conduct of the study. Dr Machamer reported receiving grants from the
US federal government during the conduct of the study. Dr McAllister reported receiving grants from the University of California,
San Francisco, and support for participating in the TRACK-TBI Outcomes Core during the conduct of the study. Dr Rosand
reported receiving grants from the NIH and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. Dr Sander
reported receiving grants from the NIH during the conduct of the study. Dr Schnyer reported receiving grants from the NINDS
during the conduct of the study. Dr Toga reported receiving grants from the NIH during the conduct of the study. Dr Yuh
reported receiving grants from the NIH and the US Department of Defense during the conduct of the study. Dr Zafonte reported
receiving royalties from Oakstone for an educational CD, “Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: a Comprehensive Review,” and
from Springer/Demos Publishing for serving as coeditor of the text Brain Injury Medicine. Dr Zafonte also reported serving on the
scientific advisory boards of Myomo, Oxeia Biopharma, ElMINDA, and Biodirection. No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This work was supported by the grant 5U01NS086090-05 from the NINDS/TRACK-TBI (Dr Manley), grant
R01NS110856 from NINDS (Dr Nelson), and grant W81XWH-14-2-0176 from the US Department of Defense (Dr Manley).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The primary funder of the study (NIH) contributed to the design and conduct of the study. They
played no role in collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the
manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The article contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of
the NIH and are not necessarily endorsed by the US Department of Defense or other study sponsors.
Received 2020 Sep 14; Accepted 2021 Jan 11.
Copyright 2021 Levin HS et al. JAMA Network Open.
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License.









