Brain Injury, November 2005; 19(12): 975–987
ORIGINAL PAPER
Factors related to recovery after mild traumatic brain injury
G. MOONEY, J. SPEED, & S. SHEPPARD
Division of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
(Received10 June2004; accepted14 February 2005)
Abstract
Primaryobjectives: Tostudy thevariables thatrelate to outcomeafter mild traumatic brain injury (TBI).
Methodsandprocedures:Sixty-sevenadultswithdisappointingrecoveriesaftermildTBImostoccurringinacompensationor
litigation context were studied with regard to pre-injury, neuro-trauma, physical, emotional and cognitive variables on
outcome.Validity ofphysical, emotional and cognitive symptoms was controlled for.
Main outcomes and results: Except for prior psychological traumatization, neither pre-injury, neuro-trauma or cognitive
variables were related to outcome. Variables most consistently related to outcome were depression, pain and symptom
invalidity on measures ofresponse bias.These factors accounted forthemajority ofvariance inoutcome.
Conclusions:IncasesofpoorrecoveryaftermildTBIwherecompensationorlitigationmaybeafactor,mostofthevariance
inrecoveryseemstobeexplainedbydepression,painandsymptominvalidity,ratherthanbytheinjuryvariablesthemselves.
Keywords:Traumatic brain injury, concussion,recovery, industrial injury, symptom validity testing
Introduction expected have been a clinically perplexing group
and various explanations have been proposed to
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a significant public
account for the atypical recoveries which people in
health problem. One study [1] concluded that
this group experience. These alternative diagnostic
(cid:1)1.5 million new cases of brain injury occur each
formulations include under-estimation of brain
yearintheUS,withthemajorityofthesebeinginthe
injury severity, concurrent dementia, pre-existing
mild severity category. In most cases of mild TBI,
psychiatric conditions, pre-existing personality
a good recovery can usually be anticipated. In those
factors and social and demographic factors which
cases of mild TBI with a good outcome, recovery
interact with injury circumstances. Post-injury
usuallyoccursoverashortperiodoftime;notusually
explanationsforfailuretorecoverasexpectedinclude
lasting longer than several weeks to 3 months in the
newpsychiatricconditionsoccurringsincetheinjury
majority of cases [2–4]. Other studies found that
such as depression, anxiety disorder and conversion
return to normal may not be complete at 3 months
disorder; headache and other non-cephalic pain;
[5] and those with residual symptoms which are still dizziness; insomnia; medication side effects; and the
presentat3monthsorlongertendtohaveproblems influenceofcompensationandlitigationfactors[6].
which are often quite persistent [2]. This raises the Severalstudieshavebeeninterpretedasindicating
possibilitythatdifferentunderlyingmechanismsmay thatfailuretorecoverasexpectedaftermildTBImay
account for those with mild TBI who recover early betheresultoftheneuro-traumaitself[7–10].These
vs.thosewhoserecoveryismuchmoreprolongedor studies have tended to rely on specialized neuro-
incomplete. imaging techniques to demonstrate the presence of
Those patients who apparently have mild TBI cerebral abnormalities not in evidence with conven-
but who fail to recover as quickly and completely as tional imaging methods. McAllister et al. [11] have
Correspondence: George Mooney, PhD, Division of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of Utah, 30 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City,
Utah84132,USA.Tel:8015812449.Fax:8015879466.E-mail:gmooney@hsc.utah.edu
ISSN0269–9052print/ISSN1362–301Xonline#2005Taylor&Francis
DOI:10.1080/02699050500110264
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
976 G. Mooney et al.
written a very comprehensive review of the use of ofemotionaldisordersinpatientswhohadsustained
both structural and functional imaging in mild TBI. mildTBI’sinmotorvehicleaccidents.Theinvestiga-
The relationship of pre-morbid psychiatric torconcludedthat‘emotionaldisordersaddedtoper-
conditions to mild brain injury recovery has also sistent cognitive loss and other neuropsychological
been proposed as another explanation for failure symptoms greatly impair the capacity to adapt after
to recover as expected. Qualitative analyses have TBI’. Several other studies have resulted in similar
identified pre-existing personality characteristics findings. For example, post-injury psychological
such as over-achievement, perfectionism and depen- distresswasstronglyassociatedwithprolongedpost-
dency which can sometimes complicate the recovery concussion syndrome [21]. A prospective study
process [12]. The relationship of pre-morbid affec- found that psychiatric conditions were often present
tive disturbance to recovery after mild TBI has also in those who fail to recover after mild TBI and that
been investigated and in the case of depression, in those patients with mild TBI without concurrent
not found to have a significant relationship to the psychiatric morbidity there usually could be the
development of chronic post-concussion syndrome expectation ofaquick and complete recovery [22].
after mild TBI [13, 14]. Anumberofstudieshavefoundthatthepresenceof
Post-injury motivational factors have been impli- a mild TBI was compatible with the development
cated in some cases of failure to recover after mild of injury-related psychological traumatization in the
TBI. A significant number of mild TBIs potentially form of acute stress disorder and post-traumatic
occur within a compensation or litigation context stress disorder [23–29]. One study even found that
and the possibility has been raised that symptoms post-concussionsyndromesymptomsweremorepre-
can become reinforced by their financial con- valentinmildTBIpatientswithpost-traumaticstress
sequences. A meta-analysis of this topic was carried disorderthaninthosewithoutit[30].Theinvestiga-
out on 17 reported studies and concluded that tors concluded that post-concussion symptoms may
financial incentives actually did have a moderate be ‘mediated by an interaction of neurological and
effect on mild TBI symptoms and disability [15]. psychologicalfactors’.
Other studies addressing this issue have produced Other studies have found depression to be a
results that may lend support to this conclusion, frequently occurring factor in cases of mild TBI
including post-injury symptom magnification [16] where the outcome is worse than expected. Major
and exaggeration of the quality of pre-injury depression after mild TBI has been found to be
functioning among individuals who have retained associated with poor functional outcome and high
attorney representation after acquired brain distress levels [31], with disability and cognitive
injury [17]. impairment [32] and with higher levels of post-
ManymildTBIsoccurasaresultofmotorvehicle concussion syndrome symptom endorsement
accidents. Post-injury psychiatric conditions in [31, 33, 34]. After treatment for depression, cogni-
general have been implicated in cases of failure tive impairments are significantly alleviated [35].
to recover after accidents and injuries. Especially Depersonalization is a feeling of detachment from
when accompanied by serious physical injuries, one’s body or sense of self that most people experi-
motor vehicle accidents themselves frequently have ence as alien. Patients with TBI often describe it
significant emotional effects and can result in such as feeling of being mentally foggy or as a sensation
mental health conditions as adjustment disorder, of being detached and off at a distance from things.
phobic disorder, panic attacks, acute stress disorder, Depersonalization is a form of dissociation or a
post-traumatic stress disorder, major depressive stateinwhichthereisadisturbanceintheintegration
disorder or one of the somatoform disorders [18]. of mind, body and environment. Depersonalization
Indeed,inamajortraumaoutcomestudy,functional has been reported to be common after head injury
outcomeafterserioustrauma,regardlessofthecause, and among those with mild TBI, more than 60%
wasfoundtobedeterminedasmuchbythepresence complained of depersonalization [36]. In the same
of psychological morbidity such as depression as it mild TBI sample, depersonalization had a high
was determined by physical dysfunction [19]. rate of co-morbidity with post-traumatic stress
Regardless of the presence of TBI, accidents in gen- disorder and vertigo. Relatedly, high scores on the
eral, especially when accompanied by injuries, seem Dissociative Experiences Scale, a probe for deper-
to be pre-disposing factors for the development of sonalization and other dissociative symptoms, have
post-accident psychiatric disorders. With regard to been found in those with mild TBI who had
injury situations which result in mild TBI, several prolonged or complicated recoveries [22].
studies have found that the development of Depersonalization and other symptoms of disso-
new psychiatric conditions since the injury may also ciation have been shown to have an impact on
play an important role in the success of the basic information processing and to be related
recovery process. One study [20] found a high rate to deficits of memory [37]. Thus, the development
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 977
of unusual symptoms such as depersonalization may differences with regard to endorsement of specific
also be a factor in the long-term maintenance of items,thetwogroupswerenotsignificantlydifferent
problems after mild TBI. At this point, it is not intheirtotalscoresonthepost-concussionsyndrome
yet clear if these unusual symptoms should be questionnaire [48]. These investigators concluded
considered to be neurological in origin or if they that post-concussion syndrome is not specific to
are more appropriately seen in connection with mild TBI and is also present in other conditions
co-morbid psychiatric conditions. such as chronic pain.
Anotherfactorwhichhasbeenproposedtoexplain Headache and other physical symptoms are
failure to recover as expected after mild TBI is common after mild TBI, but their actual influence
under-estimation of injury severity. Those cases of on recovery after mild TBI has not been sufficiently
injurywhich,onclinicalgrounds,wouldbeclassified studied. An investigation of the effects which these
as mild but which are also accompanied by skull symptomshaveonmildTBIrecoverywouldimprove
fracture or intra-cranial traumatic lesion appear to understanding of the full range of factors which
have a different recovery pattern than simple, mild complicate or prolong the recovery process after
TBI unaccompanied by such lesions [38–40]. Such mild TBI.
cases have sometimes been referred to as complex
mild TBI. The expectation for recovery after such
Method
injuries is probably different from simple mild TBI.
Mild TBI can frequently be accompanied by a Thestudywasan analysis ofpatient variables,injury
variety of physical symptoms including headache variables, neuro-cognitive status, neuro-emotional
and dizziness. Many instances of mild TBI also status and the relationship among these variables to
occur in the context of additional musculoskeletal outcome after mild TBI. The specific focus of the
injuryaccompanied bynon-cephalicpain.Headache studywastoinvestigatethecomplexityoffactorsthat
and dizziness are also among the more commonly influence outcome after mild TBI. The study had
occurringsymptomsofpost-concussionsyndrome. been reviewed and approved by the Institutional
Headache and non-cephalic pain might have an Review Board at the University of Utah Health
effect on mild TBI outcome through several inter- Sciences Center.
mediary mechanisms. Persistent, severe pain has
psychological consequences and can disorganize
Subjects
psychological functioning at several levels [20].
Headache and other pain are also known to have an The subjects were 67 adult (37 male, 30 female)
adverse effect on important cognitive functions such outpatients of the mild TBI clinic at the University
as attention and memory [41–43]. Specific to those of Utah Health Sciences Center. Participants were
with mild TBI, worse memory performance has referred from a variety of sources both within and
been found in those TBI subjects with headache outside of the Health Sciences Center. Most were
than in those without headache [44]. With regard to referredfromphysicianswithintheUniversityHealth
other clinical conditions that cause pain, there is a Sciences Center or from local community physi-
fairly well established relationship between level of cians. Participants were classified according to
painseverityandtheperson’sabilitytofunction[45]. whether or not they were recovering as expected
Studieshavefoundco-morbidratesofheadacheto from their injuries. Recovery as expected was
bequitehighinthemildTBIpopulation.Onestudy definedas a significant remission of post-concussion
[46] noted a headache rate of 89% in a sample of symptoms within 3 months after the trauma of
mild TBI patients. The investigators emphasized interest. Failure to recover as expected consisted of
the high rate of chronic pain in the mild TBI group having an actual or suspected mild TBI and having
and suggested that caution be exercised in misattri- three or more post-concussion syndrome symptoms
buting symptoms to brain injury that could just for a period of 3 months or longer after the accident
as likely be due to the co-morbid pain condition. of interest.
Other studies have presented evidence that symp- The average age of the participants was 41.36
toms of post-concussion syndrome are by no means years (SD¼13.26 years) and the median age was
unique or specific to mild TBI, but are commonly 41 years. Fourteen subjects were over the age of
found in chronic pain conditions. One study found 50 years, which may indicate that this sample is
that 81% of a non-brain injured chronic pain older than typical TBI samples. The possible expla-
sample endorsed three or more post-concussion nation for this may lie in the fact that many of them
syndrome symptoms [47]. Another study compared (85%)wereintheworkforce.Theaverageeducation
responses on a post-concussion syndrome question- level of the subjects was 13.01 years (SD¼2.34).
naire between a mild TBI sample and a chronic Most(n¼63,94%)oftheparticipantswereinvolved
pain sample. Although there were some group in productive activities consisting of either
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
978 G. Mooney et al.
employment or education at the time of their injury. published in a previous study [22]. In addition to
Fortyweremarried,10weresingleandnotpreviously symptom checklists and measures of emotional
married and 17 were divorced or separated. The functioning, the participants were also administered
majority of the subjects (n¼35,52%) were injured several measures of cognitive functioning which
in traffic accidents. The remainder were injured in consisted of: Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III,
other types of industrial accidents as well as falls, Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Trail Making Test,
sports and assaults. Forty-one (61%) of the injuries Part B, Hooper Visual Organization Test, Finger
occurred within a worker’s compensation context. Tapping Test and the Boston Naming Test
Eighteen (27%) were involved in litigation concern- [55–60]. As needed, the measures of cognitive
ing the injury. Thirteen (19%) were both workers functioning were accompanied by validity testing
compensation cases and were also involved in consisting of the Computerized Assessment of
litigation. Alcohol did not appear to be a factor in Response Bias, the Word Memory Test and the
any of the accidents as determined by self-report of Test of Memory Malingering [61–63]. In addition
subjects and by a review of the clinical records. The to measures of cognitive test taking validity, Scale F
median length of time from injury until of the MMPI-2 was used as the measure of validity
participation in the study was15months. for questionnaires about emotional symptoms and
Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 was used as the measure of
validity of physical symptom reporting [64]. Procedure
Information about the participants was then
Information about pre-injury history, injury history de-identified, coded and stored in analysis-ready
and post-injury clinical course was obtained from form in an electronic database. The data then
an interview with the subject, as well as a review of underwent statistical analysis using SPSS 11.5 for
eachparticipant’sclinicalrecords.Informationabout Windows.
pre-existing psychiatric history was obtained from
carefully interviewing the participants. In many,
although not in all cases, family members were Results
available as collateral informants. Data were not Pre-injury variables
obtained about which cases had information supple-
mented by collateral informants and which did not. Prior to injury, the individuals in the sample
Participants were classified as to whether they were a fairly high-functioning group. Ninety-four
had a mild TBI using the definition of the Mild per cent (n¼63) were engaged in productive social
Traumatic Brain Injury Committee of the Head roles either through employment or as students or
Injury Interdisciplinary Special Interest Group of homemakers. Only 5% (n¼3) had a prior history of
the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine substance abuse. This low figure possibly is a
[49]. Participants were also classified as to whether reflection of the predominant local religion and
they had a mental health condition using the culture which tends to avoid the use of alcohol and
diagnostic criteria of the American Psychiatric drugs. On the other hand, prior history of TBI
Association (DSM-IV) [50]. Failure to recover as was present in 25% (n¼17). Thirty-four per cent
expected was operationally defined as the presence (n¼23) had a prior history of psychological trauma,
of three or more post-concussion syndrome with 57% (n¼13) of these cases consisting of
symptoms at a moderate or severe level of symptom childhood physical or sexual abuse. Fifty-four
intensity noted on a symptom checklist 3 months or per cent (n¼36) had a life-time history of prior
more after the accident of interest. Disability after mental health problems, with 58% (n¼21) of these
injury was defined as subjective inability on the part consisting of depression and 17% (n¼6) consisting
of the subject to no longer perform previous social of an anxiety disorder. Although they were of a high
roles such as employee or student resulting functioning nature prior to injury, most of those
in withdrawal from work or school. in the failure to recover as expected sample were
The study included a battery of questionnaires disabled (n¼48,72%) after injury.
about symptoms and about emotional functioning Therelationshipofpre-injuryvariablestooutcome
designed to probe for the presence of those after injury was explored. Several variables appeared
conditions which previous studies had found to to have no significant relationship to outcome
be prevalent in the failure to recovery group. including level of social support ((cid:1)2¼3.00,df¼1,
The questionnaires consisted of the following: n¼67,p¼0.08),priorlevelofpsychologicaladapta-
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2, tion ((cid:1)2¼3.50,df¼2,n¼67,p¼0.17) and prior
Beck Depression Inventory-II, Dissociative history of TBI ((cid:1)2¼0.26,df¼1,n¼67,p¼0.61).
Experiences Scale, Impact of Event Scale [51–54] In contrast to this, a prior history of psychological
and the Post-Concussion Syndrome Checklist traumatization did seem to have an important
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 979
relationship to outcome after mild TBI ((cid:1)2¼6.67, don’t recover as expected after mild TBI have
df¼1,n¼67,p¼0.01). A prior history of TBI multiple diagnoses. Indeed, the largest group of
mightnothavebeen significantlyrelatedtooutcome patients (n¼33,49%) were those who had the
because of the mild nature of brain injuries in the combined diagnoses of mild TBI, psychiatric
present sample. diagnosis and pain. Among the sample as a whole,
Prior to injury, there was a lifetime rate of mental 56 subjects (85%) had a psychiatric diagnosis which
health problems in 54% (n¼36) of the sample. is a considerable increase over the 54% pre-injury
This study was concerned that this was higher than lifetime occurrence rate of mental health conditions
expected in the general population and so the present in the sample prior to injury.
relationship of pre-injury mental health problems Data were collected on a number of different
and post-injury functioning was analysed. This neuro-trauma variables that might be of interest
study first looked at how pre-injury mental health with regard to recovery after mild TBI. These
problems and pre-injury depression might affect included prior TBI, skull fracture, traumatic intra-
levelofpost-injurydepression.Pre-injurydepression cranial neuro-imaging abnormalities and abnormal
made no difference in post-injury scores on the physical signs on neurological exam. The frequency
Beck Depression Inventory-II (t¼1.03,df¼60, of neuro-trauma findings was low, consistent with
n¼62,p¼0.31). Likewise, pre-injury mental health the fact that this was a mildly injured group. Only
problems of any type made no difference in post- four of the 67 subjects (6%) had loss of conscious-
injury scores on the Beck Depression Inventory-II ness. The remainder had amnesia (n¼47,70%) or
(t¼1.26, df¼60, n¼62, p¼0.21). The relation- were only dazed or confused at the time of injury
(n¼16,24%). Data about amnesia or confusion at
ship between post-injury disability to pre-injury
the time ofinjury were obtained either from medical
depression, anxiety and mental health problems was
records or patient report. Objective medical record
alsoanalysed.Theredidnotappeartobeasignificant
observations were required to establish actual loss
relationship between pre-injury depression, pre-
of consciousness. None of the neuro-trauma
injury anxiety or pre-injury mental health problems
in general and post-injury disability ((cid:1)2¼0.51, variables had a significant relationship to disability
df¼1, n¼67, p¼0.48; (cid:1)2¼0.36, df¼1, n¼67, outcome after injury: prior TBI, (cid:1)2¼0.26, df¼1,
p¼0.55; (cid:1)2¼0.43, df¼1,n¼67, p¼0.51). n¼67, p¼0.61; skull fracture, (cid:1)2¼1.52, df¼1,
n¼67, p¼0.22; neuro-imaging abnormality,
(cid:1)2¼0.48, df¼1, n¼67, p¼0.49; and neurologi-
Injury variables cal exam abnormality, (cid:1)2¼0.37, df¼1, n¼67,
p¼0.54.
The sample consisted of individuals with actual or
suspected mild TBI who had not recovered as
expected according to the study’s criteria. Post-injury symptom variables
Diagnostic possibilities of interest to this study
Information about subjective symptoms was col-
consisted of mild TBI, psychiatric diagnosis, pain
lected in the sample. This included data about
or various combinations of these diagnoses. Table I post-concussion syndrome along with more specific
lists the final diagnoses for the sample under study. symptoms such as depression, headache, non-
It can be seen that there are very few subjects in cephalic pain and dizziness. The relationship of
the failure to recover as expected sample who had these subjective symptom variables to outcome was
a single diagnosis of mild TBI only (n¼2,3%). also evaluated.
Similarly, there were only a few subjects with a Headache,non-cephalicpainanddepressionwere
psychiatric diagnosis only (n¼4,6%) or with pain commoninthesampleofpatientsstudied.Dizziness
only(n¼1,2%).Rather,themajorityofpatientswho was somewhat common. Seventy-two per cent of
the patients had moderate-to-severe headache, 64%
had moderate-to-severe pain in other locations,
TableI. Finaldiagnosis. 32% had moderate-to-severe dizziness and 15%
had moderate-to-severe vertigo. Depression in the
Diagnosis n %
form of major depressive disorder or depressive
Nodiagnosis 1 2
disorder, not otherwise specified, was present in
MildTBIonly 2 3
61% of the failure to recover sample.
Psychiatricdiagnosisonly 4 6
Painonly 1 2 The measure of post-concussion syndrome (PCS)
MildTBIþpsychiatricdiagnosis 13 20 was a 25-item questionnaire about PCS symptoms.
MildTBIþpain 6 9 Theintensityofeachsymptomisratedbythesubject
Psychiatricdiagnosisþpain 6 9
on a1–5 Likert-type scale. The individual scores are
MildTBIþpsychiatricdiagnosisþpain 33 49
summed for a total PCS score. The relationship
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
980 G. Mooney et al.
of PCS to outcome after injury was evaluated in the level of non-cephalic pain (r¼0.40,p¼0.001).
samplebycomparingthePCSscoresofthedisabled Thus, non-cephalic pain, headaches and depression
group (n¼47) with the scores of the non-disabled appeared to be independent factors in their effect
group (n¼19). There was a significant difference on outcome after injury.
in PCS scores between the two groups (t¼3.26, Althoughthesespecificsymptomshadasignificant
df¼64,n¼66,p¼0.002), with the disabled group relationship to overall PCS score, their relationship
having higher scores than the non-disabled group. to outcome in terms of disability was also of interest
The relationship of specific symptoms to overall to the study. Scores on the Beck Depression
PCS was also evaluated in the case of depression, Inventory-II (BDI-II) as an overall reflection of
headache and non-cephalic pain. There was a signi- depression were significantly related to disability
ficant correlation between headache and PCS (t¼2.29,df¼60,n¼62,p¼0.03). However, none
(r¼0.49,n¼66,p<0.001), between non-cephalic of the other specific symptoms of interest individ-
pain levels and PCS (r¼0.44,n¼66,p<0.001) ually had a significant relationship to outcome after
and between scores on the Beck Depression injury in terms of disability, for example
Inventory-II and PCS (r¼0.58,n¼62,p<0.001). headache (t¼0.81,df¼65,n¼67,p¼0.42), non-
A small part of this relationship is undoubtedly cephalic pain (t¼0.19,df¼65,n¼67,p¼0.85) and
explained by the fact that each of these symptoms dizziness (t¼1.18,df¼65,n¼67,p¼0.24).
is itself an individual PCS symptom. The strong
relationship between these symptom variables and
Post-injury cognitive variables
overall intensity of post-concussion syndrome con-
tinued to hold up even after controlling for possible The subjects in the sample were administered a
response bias influences. The MMPI-2 Scale 3 and battery of cognitive tests. Mean scores were calcu-
the MMPI-2 Scale F were used as the measures of latedforthesubjectsinthesampleonthesemeasures
physical symptom validity and emotional symptom ofcognitivefunctioning,asshowninTableII.Other
validity, respectively. A partial correlation was than the abnormally long time to completion of
calculated for the relationship between headache Part B of the Trail Making Test, these scores are
level and PCS while controlling for MMPI-2 Scale inthenormalrangeincomparisontonormativedata
3 (r¼0.33, p¼0.02), for the relationship between derived from the general, non-injured population.
non-cephalic pain and PCS while controlling This study was also interested in the relationship
for MMPI-2 Scale 3 (r¼0.45,p¼0.001) and for of the cognitive test variables to outcome after mild
the relationship between Beck Depression Scale-II TBI in this sample who for the most part exhibited
and PCS while controlling for MMPI-2 Scale F poor recoveries. The relationship of performance on
(r¼0.52,p<0.001). the cognitive tests to total score on the PCS was
Pain and depression are well known to be highly analysed and is also displayed in Table II. In several
interactive with one another. Where both were cases, a significant relationship was present between
present, one wanted to have a method to study the cognitive test scores and post-concussion syndrome.
effect of each of these on outcome in isolation from However, when this relationship was analysed as a
the another. A series of partial correlations were partial correlation while controlling for the influence
conducted to accomplish this. The relationship of of a moderating variable such as performance
non-cephalic pain and PCS continued to be signifi- on symptom validity measures (e.g. CARB), the
cant while controlling for level of depression strength of the relationship diminished or became
(r¼0.37, p¼0.003). The relationship of depression absent. In this sample, cognitive test performance
to PCS remained significant while controlling had little, if any, independent relationship to
for non-cephalic pain (r¼0.54,p¼0.000) and the outcome.
relationship of headache to PCS was significant Another objective was to understand the relation-
while controlling for both level of depression and ship of cognitive test variables and outcome after
TableII. Neuro-cognitivetestscoresandtheirrelationshiptopost-concussionsyndromewhilecontrollingforresponsebias(CARB).
Test n M SD r significance partialr significance
WAIS-IIIfullscaleIQ 59 91.57 13.46 (cid:2)0.15 0.27 – –
AVLT 61 43.50 12.05 (cid:2)0.12 0.38 – –
HVOT 61 23.82 4.21 (cid:2)0.43 0.001 0.20 0.14
BNT 61 52.47 6.32 (cid:2)0.36 0.005 (cid:2)0.32 0.02
FTT 64 46.98 12.63 (cid:2)0.33 0.007 (cid:2)0.12 0.37
TrailsPartB 61 110.39 74.4 0.07 0.57 – –
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 981
TableIII. Relationshipofcognitivetestvariablestodisability. TableIV. Credibilitymeasuremeanscores.
Test n df t p M,current M,normative
Validitymeasure n sample SD group
WAIS-IIIfullscaleIQ 60 58 1.11 0.27
AVLT 62 60 0.36 0.27 MMPI-2ScaleF 54 9.31 6.44 –
FTT 65 63 1.33 0.19 rawscore
BNT 62 60 1.55 0.13 MMPI-2Scale3 53 35.00 5.92 30
TrailsPartB 61 59 0.19 0.85 rawscore
HVOT 61 59 1.03 0.31 CARB 57 88.86% 18.22 97%
WMTIR 34 78.09% 20.73% 96.5%
WMTDR 33 74.03% 22.54% 95.8%
TOMMTrial2 17 38.65 11.27 49
injury in terms of overall disability and this was
studied with a series of independent t-tests. None
of the cognitive variables had a significant relation-
(t¼2.29, df¼60, n¼62, p¼0.03). These elevated
ship to disability after injury, as shown in Table III.
depression scores are believed to be a reflection
of post-injury circumstances and not of pre-injury
factors as there appeared to be no relationship
Post-injury emotional variables
between the presence of self-reported pre-injury
The subjects in the sample of patients who failed to depression and post-injury scores on the BDI-II
recover as expected after mild TBI were adminis- (t¼1.03,df¼60,n¼62,p¼0.31). Similarly, there
tered a battery of questionnaires about emotional was no relationship between scores on the BDI-II
functioning. Mean scores were calculated for the and pre-injury psychological traumatization
sample of subjects on the measures of emotional (t¼1.35,df¼60,n¼62,p¼0.18) or the presence
functioning. The average score on the BDI-II was of pre-injury mental health conditions (t¼1.26,
22.03 (SD¼12.36). In clinical samples, scores in df¼60,n¼62,p¼0.21). These bi-variate analyses
thisrangearetypicallyfoundamongindividualswith were followed-up with a linear regression analysis
mild-to-moderately severe depression. The mean of depression, headache and non-cephalic pain
number of MMPI-2 scales elevated over a T-score on level of post-concussion syndrome. These three
of 70 was 4.45 (SD¼2.54). The mean raw score on variables together explained 44% of the variance in
the MMPI-2 Scale 1 was 20.17 (SD¼5.83) and the level of concussion syndrome. Several of the other
mean raw score on the MMPI-2 Scale 3 was 35.00 measures of emotional functioning were also found
(SD¼5.92). The average score on the DES was to be related to outcome. For example, there was
19.22 (SD¼13.57). The mean score on the a significant relationship between disabled status
Intrusive Thoughts factor of the IES was 20.17 and number of clinical scales elevated on the
(SD¼3.71) and the mean score on the Avoidance MMPI-2 (t¼4.08,df¼51,n¼53,p<0.001) and
factoroftheIESwas23.52(SD¼6.09).Allofthese on Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 (t¼4.28,df¼51,
mean scores are well above the normal range. n¼53,p<0.001).
The scores on many of the measures of emotional
functioningcorrelatedsignificantlywithoneanother.
Post-injury credibility variables
For example, the BDI-II and the number of clinical
scales of the MMPI-2 that were elevated (r¼0.77, Credibility measures were administered to the sub-
n¼52,p¼0.000) and the BDI-II with the DES jects in this study. These consisted of the MMPI-2
(r¼0.63, n¼40, p¼0.000). ScaleFtoassessemotionalsymptomover-reporting,
Depressionhaspreviouslybeenfoundinanumber the MMPI-2 Scale 3 to assess physical symptom
of studies of outcome after mild TBI to have an over-reporting and the Computerized Assessment
important connection to recovery after mild TBI of Response Bias (CARB), the Word Memory Test
and the relationship of scores on the BDI-II to sev- (WMT) and the Test of Memory Malingering
eraloutcomevariableswasanalysed.Theseincluded (TOMM) to assess exaggeration of cognitive symp-
some of the pain variables including headache toms.Meanscoresoneachofthesesymptomvalidity
(r¼0.23,n¼62,p¼0.07), non-cephalic pain (r¼ measures were calculated for the sample. These are
0.26,n¼62,p¼0.05) and post concussion syn- shown in Table IV. For the sake of comparison,
drome checklist scores (r¼0.58,n¼62,p<0.001). mean scores from normative samples of patients
There was also a significant relationship between with verified TBIs are also shown where available.
scores on the BDI-II and outcome in terms of dis- Inmostcases,themeanscoresforthesampleonthese
ability. Non-disabled subjects had a mean BDI-II validity measures were abnormal. In all cases, the
score of 16.61, while disabled subjects had a mean abnormality for the sample was in the direction
BDI-IIscoreof24.24.Thisdifferencewassignificant ofinvaliditycomparedtonormativedata.
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
982 G. Mooney et al.
TableV. Percentageofsubjectsbelowcut-offscoresonsymptom n¼57,p<0.001) and Part B of the Trail Making
validitytests. Test (r¼(cid:2)0.55,n¼53,p<0.001). This suggests
Test n Cut-off Numberbelowcut-off Percentage that a certain amount of the cognitive impairment
in the failure to recover as expected sample may
CARB 57 89% 16 28%
be due to poor test-taking effort and not to actual
WMT-IR 34 82% 19 44%
impairment. The MMPI-2 Scale 3 was selected as
WMT-DR 33 82% 19 58%
TOMM 17 46 10 59% themeasureofphysicalsymptomover-reportingand
therelationshipofthismeasuretophysicalsymptoms
was analysed. Scale 3 raw scores did not have a
significant relationship to headache level (r¼0.16,
TableVI. Inter-relationshipsamongcredibilitymeasures.
n¼53,p¼0.26) or to level of non-cephalic pain
WMT-IR WMT-DR TOMM ScaleF Scale3 (r¼0.03,n¼53,p¼0.84), but were significantly
related to subjective level of dizziness (r¼0.34,
CARB 0.86 0.82 0.83 (cid:2)0.50 (cid:2)0.30
WMT-IR 0.90 0.71 (cid:2)0.47 (cid:2)0.45 n¼53,p¼0.01).
WMT-DR 0.82 (cid:2)0.64 (cid:2)0.45 Symptom exaggeration as a mediator of outcome
TOMM (cid:2)0.66 (cid:2)0.63 after mild TBI was also a focus of the study and the
ScaleF 0.17
relationship of the validity measures to outcome
after injury was analysed. Lower scores on the
CARB were related to higher scores on the PCS
The mean scores for the present sample that
(r¼(cid:2)0.44,n¼56,p¼0.001).HighscoresonScale3
are shown in Table IV deviated substantially from
oftheMMPI-2werestronglyrelatedtohighlevelsof
the scores found in previous normative groups.
symptom reporting on the PCS (r¼0.54,n¼53,
This raised concern that many of the subjects in
p<0.001). The relationship of scores on Scale F,
the sample might have invalid response patterns.
the measure of emotional symptom over-reporting
To investigate this concern further, the number of
to post-concussion syndrome symptoms on the
subjects in the sample with symptom validity scores
PCS was significant but less strong (r¼0.29,n¼54,
below cut-off levels established by prior research
p¼0.04). Symptom invalidity had a significant
on the credibility measures was calculated. This is
relationship to outcome in terms of scores on the
shown in Table V.
PCS. Indeed, when a linear regression of CARB,
The investigators were interested in any relation-
the TOMM and WMT-DR on level of PCS was
ships that were present among the various symptom
conducted, these variables together explained 37%
validity measures. The measures of cognitive symp-
ofthevarianceinlevelofpost-concussionsyndrome.
tom exaggeration were all very highly correlated
A linear regression analysis of CARB, TOMM,
with one another. The MMPI-2 F Scale, which was
WMT-DR, BDI-II, headache level and level of
the measure of emotional symptom over-reporting,
non-cephalic pain was then conducted all on PCS.
was inversely related to many of the cognitive
This analysis indicated that 63% of the variance
symptom validity measures. Scores on the F Scale
in post-concussion syndrome intensity could be
of the MMPI-2 and Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 did
explained by pain, depression and level of invalidity
not seem to be related, suggesting a lack of relation-
oncognitivetesttaking.
ship between the degree of physical symptom over-
Finally, the relationship of the validity measures
reporting and the degree of emotional symptom
to disability after mild TBI was also analysed. Raw
over-reporting. These relationships are shown in
Table VI. scores on Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 were significantly
How well each validity measure related to related to disability status (t¼4.28,df¼51,n¼53,
symptoms in its content area was also analysed. p¼0.00), but no significant relationship was found
For example, scores on Scale F of the MMPI-2 for raw scores on Scale F of the MMPI-2 (t¼1.46,
had a significant relationship to scores of the df¼52,n¼54,p¼0.15) or for scores on the CARB
BDI-II (r¼0.49,n¼53,p<0.001)m suggesting (t¼1.59,df¼55,n¼57,p¼0.12).
that emotional symptom exaggeration may account In the case of some validity measures, there was
for some portion of the depression reported by a relationship between level of invalidity and length
patients in the failure to recover as expected of time in months since injury. Such relationships
sample. Similarly, scores on validity measures for were present for the CARB r¼(cid:2)0.29,p¼0.03) and
cognitive symptoms showed a significant relation- for MMPI-2 Scale F (r¼0.41,p¼0.002) but not
ship to scores on the actual cognitive tests them- for any of the other validity measures. This
selves. For example, scores on the CARB were suggests that, in certain cases, invalidity may be an
significantly related to scores on the AVLT evolving process over time and not something
(r¼0.55,n¼55,p<0.001), the FTT (r¼0.65, present immediately after injury.
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 983
Discussion endorsement of a symptom was further defined as a
score of four or higher on a 1–5 rating scale of
This study focused on the minority of people with
symptom intensity. Defined in this way, 91% of the
mild TBI who fail to recover as expected.Thestudy
sample had post-concussion syndrome. The partic-
attempted to understand which factors are related
ular post-concussion syndrome checklist used in
to failure to recover and which are not. A strength
thisstudywasselectedbecauseoftheauthors’famil-
of this study lies in the fact that it simultaneously
iarity with it from a previous study [22] and because
studied a fairly large number of factors that might
it included a numerical rating scale that allowed
be related to outcome after mild TBI. A potential
for quantification of symptom intensity. The ques-
weakness of this approach is the risk of false positive
tionnaire itself is published as an appendix to that
results when multiple analyses are conducted. This
study [22]. The study also collected information on
problem is mitigated by the fact that many of the
disability after mild TBI. Disability was present in
study’s statistical analyses had highly significant
72% of the sample, which indicates the significant
results that probably corrected for the potential
impact on functioning which occurs in the failure
additive error issue.
to recover group after mild TBI. The significance
This study did not involve a consecutive series of this finding is highlighted by the fact that, before
of patients with mild TBI. Rather, it relied on a
injury, 94% of the sample were engaged in produc-
sample of patients who were referred to a mild TBI
tive roles. Level of post-concussion syndrome and
specialty clinic. For this reason, a significant selec-
presence of disability were significantly associated
tion bias may have been introduced into the process
with one another.
by which subjects were enrolled into the study.
As in a number of previous studies, the present
Additionally, 61% of the subjects had injuries that
study also found that, for the most part, pre-injury
occurred within a worker’s compensation context
factors had little relationship to post-injury factors
and 27% were involved in litigation. It is, therefore,
or to outcome after mild TBI, even though there
unlikely that this sample is representative of the
was a fairly high pre-injury rate of mental health
general population of patients with mild TBI. On
problems. The exception to this was the prominent
the other hand,the sample quite likely is representa- association between a pre-injury history of psycho-
tive of the minority of mild TBI patients who fail logical traumatization and outcome after mild TBI.
to recover as expected, many of whose injuries
This might be a general injury recovery phenom-
occur in a compensation or litigation context. In a enon, in that a similar association has been found
number of respects, this sample resembles typical between early, pre-injury psychological trauma and
clinical groups described in the mild TBI literature recovery from surgery for back pain [65].
and there is some confidence that the results of ThesampleconsistedofindividualswithmildTBI
the present study can be extended to patients likely who had failed to recover as expected. Data were
to be seen in mild brain injury clinics, particularly collected about brain injury diagnosis, post-injury
those that treat a significant proportion of those mental health diagnosis and pain. Potentially, these
injured in industrial settings. diagnoses could occur singly or in any combination
There are several classification systems for mild with one another. Interestingly, there were very few
TBI. The diagnostic criteria for mild TBI used in people in the failure to recover sample with a single
this study were those of the Mild Brain Injury diagnosis of mild TBI only. This suggests that mild
Special Interest Group of the American Congress TBI itself rarely accounts for the presence of severe
ofRehabilitationMedicine(ACRM).Thisdefinition or chronic post-concussion syndrome or disability
has been gaining in recognition over the past decade after such injuries. The largest single group in the
and is consistent with the diagnostic criteria used failure to recover sample (49%) were those with
in a number of other recent mild TBI studies. mild TBI, a new mental health condition and pain.
The ACRM definition could be criticized for This suggests that an overly parsimonious approach
having diagnostic criteria which are overly inclusive to diagnosis that attempts to place patients in only
and the risk of using these criteria would be that of one category is inappropriately restrictive. The next
committing a Type I error and labelling a condition largestsub-groupinthefailuretorecoverasexpected
a brain injury when in fact it was not. On the other sample were those with both mild TBI and a new
hand, the consistent use of the same criteria among psychiatric condition. These trends suggest that the
a large number of studies results in a uniform presence of a new mental health condition since
standard of how mild TBI is defined. the injury may be a particularly important influence
Post-concussion syndrome was operationally on outcome after mild TBI.
defined as agreement with three or more symptoms Datawerecollectedonanumberofneuro-trauma
on a post-concussion syndrome symptom question- variables such as prior TBI, skull fracture and
naire 3 months or longer after injury. Significant imaging abnormality. Consistent with the fact that
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
984 G. Mooney et al.
this was a mildly injured group, such abnormalities The depression that is important as an influence
were infrequently present and, upon analysis, had on outcome is that which develops after the injury.
no significant relationship to outcome. This is A strength of this study was that it included
consistent with the previous finding that there were an array of credibility measures. This is particularly
few subjects in the failure to recover sample with a important in light of the fact that so many of the
diagnosis of brain injury only [22]. subjects in the failure to recover as expected sample
The relationship of symptoms to outcome was had injuries which occurred in a compensation or
ofspecial interestinthisstudy.Firstofall,symptom litigation context. Many of the subjects in the
level in general, as reflected by severity of post- sample were in this category and, in many of these
concussion syndrome, was of importance and those cases, the mean scores on the cognitive validity
who were disabled after mild TBI has significantly measures were indicative of response bias. Thus,
higher scores on the post-concussion syndrome the data support the need for these measures when
questionnaire. With regard to specific symptoms, testing is done under conditions where response
however,onlylevelofdepressionwasstronglyrelated bias is possible. Similarly, the mean score for the
to disabled status, making this one of the more sample on the MMPI-II Scale 3 which was the
important influences on outcome. measure of physical symptom invalidity was also
Anumberofcognitive variables were studied with indicative of response bias. Response bias seemed
regard to their relationship to outcome after mild less of an issue for exaggeration of emotional
TBI. With one exception, the mean scores on these symptoms as indicated by a more moderate mean
tests for the sample were close to the mean for score for the sample on the MMPI-II Scale F.
normative samples derived from the general popula- There was a high degree of correlation among
tion. Especially after the cognitive test results were many of the validity measures. This was interpreted
controlled for the effects of symptom exaggeration, to mean that, generally, if there was symptom
they had no significant relationship to outcome, exaggeration in one symptom area it would
even though cognitive problems are some of the probably also be found in other areas as well. The
symptoms that patients in this group complain of high levels of symptom exaggeration found in the
the most. sample was felt to be a significant mediator of out-
This study also looked at a number of variables come after mild TBI because the symptom validity
in the area of emotional functioning as well as at scores were all strongly correlated with number and
their relationship to outcome after mild TBI. In all intensity of PCS symptoms and in the case of
cases, the mean scores on these measures for the the MMPI-II Scale 3, with disability itself. There
sample were significantly in the pathological direc- was also an intriguing relationship between the
tion compared to the mean scores for normative length of time since injury and responses on some
groups from the general population. Additionally, ofthevaliditymeasures.Thissuggeststhatsymptom
the indicators of emotional problems in the sample exaggeration may be a complex, dynamic process
are probably an accurate reflection of the actual that evolves over time in response to a variety of
level of emotional pathology in that the average potentialinfluences.Asimilarpatternofunexplained
MMPI-2 Scale F score does not indicate significant late developing cognitive impairment accompanied
emotional symptom over-reporting. The high level by worsening somatization after TBI has been
of emotional symptoms also seemed to have a reported in a previous paper [66]. The authors
significant relationship to outcome and this is illus- do not have an opinion as to why this effect
trated quite well by the relationship of post-injury seemed to be present with some of the validity
depression and outcome. Subjects in the disabled measures, but not with others.
group had a mean score on the Beck Depression Finally, one of the consequences of having
Scale-II of 24, a score which would ordinarily be collected data on response bias is that it allowed
found in those with depression of moderate severity. theeffectsofcognitiveresponsebiastobecontrolled
The importance of this finding is perhaps strength- for when analysing the actual cognitive test results.
ened by the fact that even when other factors such In most cases where the cognitive test results corre-
aspainaresimultaneouslycontrolledfor,depression lated with PCS, this relationship disappeared after
still continues to have a significant independent controlling for response bias.
relationship to outcome. Lastly, the importance
of depression as an influence on outcome is not
Conclusions
simply an extension of pre-injury mental health
problemsasnosuchrelationshipwasfoundbetween A previous (n¼80) study found that there was
pre-injury depression and post-injury depression. a significant relationship between post-injury
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 985
psychiatric morbidity and recovery after mild TBI of invalidity. This observation may have impli-
[22].Thisconclusionfromapreviousstudyaswellas cations for understanding the development of
similar conclusions found by other investigators was psychological factors and their ability to alter or
againconfirmedbytheresultsofthepresentstudy. mitigate recovery from illness and injury.
The study investigated the relationship of
pre-injury and neurotrauma variables to outcome
after mild TBI. Other than a pre-injury history of
References
psychological traumatization, no other pre-injury
factors evaluated by the study appeared to have a 1. SosinDM,SniezekJE,ThurmanDJ.Incidenceofmildand
moderatebraininjuryintheUnitedStates,1991.BrainInjury
relationship to outcome after mild TBI. Similarly,
1996;10:47–54.
neuro-trauma variables included in this study 2. AlvesWM,ColohanART,O’LearyTJ,etal.Understanding
did not appear to significantly relate to outcome. posttraumatic symptoms after minor head injury. Journal of
A number of post-injury variables were analysed HeadTraumaRehabilitation1986;1:1–12.
3. GentiliniM,NichelliP,SchoenhuberR,etal.Neuropsycho-
with regard to their association with outcome.
logicalevaluationofmildheadinjury.JournalofNeurology,
Cognitive test variables appeared to have little if any
Neurosurgery,andPsychiatry1985;48:137–140.
relationship to outcome after mild TBI, after con- 4. Levin HS, Mattis S, Ruff RM, et al. Neurobehavioral
trolling for response bias. This is of significance outcome following minor head injury: A three center study.
sincesubjectivecognitiveimpairmentissofrequently JournalofNeurosurgery1987;66:234–243.
5. HugenholtzH,StussDT,StethamLL,etal.Howlongdoes reportedbythosewithmildTBIwhohaveprolonged
it take to recover from a mild concussion. Neurosurgery
or complicated recoveries. Emotional variables
1988;22:853–858.
appeared to have a strong relationship to outcome 6. Mooney G, Speed J. Differential diagnosis in mild brain
after mild TBI. Among the emotional variables, injury: Understanding the role of non-organic conditions.
level of depression appeared to be of the greatest NeuroRehabilitation1997;8:223–233.
7. Kant R, Smith-Seemiller L, Isaac G, et al. Tc-HMPAO
significance in terms of its relationship to outcome.
SPECT in persistent post-concussion syndrome after mild
A large number of the sample had headaches and
head injury: Comparison with MRI/CT. Brain Injury
non-cephalic pain. In addition to depression, these 1997;11:115–124.
physical symptoms also had significant independent 8. Ruff RM, Crouch JA, Troster AI, et al. Selected cases of
relationships to level of post-concussion syndrome, poor outcome following a minor brain trauma: Comparing
neuropsychological and positron emission tomography
even after controlling for response bias, while only
assessment.BrainInjury1999;8:297–308.
depression had an independent relationship to
9. Umile EM, Sandel ME, Alavi A, et al. Dynamic imaging
disability status after mild TBI. Indeed, when in mild traumatic brain injury: Support for the theory of
combined with cognitive symptom over-reporting, medialtemporalvulnerability.ArchivesofPhysicalMedicine
pain and depression accounted for most of the andRehabilitation2002;83:1506–1513.
10. Umile EM, Plotkin RC, Sandel ME. Functional
variance in cases of poor outcome after mild TBI.
assessmentofmildtraumaticbraininjuryusingSPECTand
The relationship of multiple variables to outcome
neuropsychologicaltesting.BrainInjury1998;12:577–594.
is also emphasized by the fact that the largest 11. McAllister TW, Sparling MB, Flashman LA, Saykin AJ.
single group of patients in this failure to recover Neuroimaging findings in mild traumatic brain injury.
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology as expected sample were those with mild TBI
2001;23:775–791.
plus post-injury depression plus pain occurring
12. Ruff RM, Camenzuli L, Mueller J. Miserable minority:
simultaneously. Emotional risk factors that influence the outcome of a mild
One strength of this study was the use of traumaticbraininjury.BrainInjury1996;10:551–565.
multiple credibility measures. Separate credibility 13. Cicerone KD, Kalmar K. Does premorbid depression
influence post-concussive symptoms and neuropsychological
measures were employed for physical, emotional
functioning?BrainInjury1997;11:643–648.
and cognitive symptoms. Within this sample, a
14. McCauley SR, Boake C, Levin HS, et al. Postconcussional
large number of the subjects had credibility disorder following mild to moderate traumatic brain injury:
scores outside of the cut-off for acceptable validity. Anxiety, depression, and social support as risk factors and
When such invalidity was controlled for, it some- comorbidities. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology2001;23:792–808.
times negated the significance of the symptom
15. Binder LM, Rohling ML. Money matters: A meta-analytic
associated with it. This finding seems to confirm
review of the effects of financial incentives on recovery after
the importance of validity assessment as an impor- closed-head injury. American Journal of Psychiatry
tant control measure that should be taken when 1996;153:7–10.
studying the mild TBI group, particularly in a 16. Paniak C, Reynolds S, Toller-Lobe G, et al. A longitudinal
study of the relationship between financial compensation
compensation or litigation context. Associated
and symptoms after treated mild traumatic brain injury.
with this was the intriguing finding of a relation-
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
ship between length of time since injury and level 2002;24:187–193.
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
986 G. Mooney et al.
17. Lees-Haley PR, Williams CW, Zasler ND, et al. 35. Fann JR, Uomoto JM, Katon WJ. Cognitive improvement
Response bias in plaintiffs’ histories. Brain Injury with treatment of depression following mild traumatic brain
1997;11:791–799. injury.Psychosomatics2001;42:48–54.
18. Devore JR. Psychological morbidity following motor 36. GrigsbyJ,KayeK.Incidenceandcorrelatesofdepersonaliza-
vehicle accidents. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation tionfollowingheadtrauma.BrainInjury1993;7:507–513.
StateoftheArtReviews1998;12:111–132. 37. ProhlJ,ReschF,ParzerP,BrunnerR.Relationshipbetween
19. Holbrook TL, Anderson JP, Sieber WJ, et al. Outcome dissociative symptomatology and declarative and procedural
aftermajortrauma:Dischargeandsixmonthfollow-upresults memoryinadolescentpsychiatricpatients.JournalofNervous
from the trauma recovery project. The Journal of Trauma: andMentalDisease2001;189:602–607.
Injury,Infection,andCriticalCare1998;45:315–324. 38. Williams D, Levin H, Eisenberg HM. Mild head injury
20. Parker RS. The spectrum of emotional distress and classification.Neurosurgery1990;27:422–428.
personality changes after minor head injury incurred in a 39. Goldstein FC, Levin HS. Cognitive outcome after mild
motorvehicleaccident.BrainInjury1996;10:287–302. and moderate traumatic brain injury in older adults.
21. KarzmarkP,HallK,EngalnderJ.Late-onsetpost-concussion Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
symptoms after mild brain injury: The role of premorbid, 2001;23:739–753.
injury-related, environmental, and personality factors. 40. Borgaro SR, Prigatano GP, Kwasnica C, et al. Cognitive
BrainInjury1995;9:21–26. and affective sequelae in complicated and uncomplicated
22. MooneyG,SpeedJ.Theassociationbetweenmildtraumatic mildtraumaticbraininjury.BrainInjury2003;17:189–198.
brain injury and psychiatric conditions. Brain Injury 41. Grigsby J, Rosenberg NL, Busenbark D. Chronic pain is
2001;10:865–877. associatedwithdeficitsininformationprocessing.Perceptual
23. KingNS.Emotional,neuropsychological,andorganicfactors: andMotorSkills1995;81:403–410.
Their use in the prediction of persisting postconcussion 42. Kuhajda MC, Thorn BE, Klinger MR, et al. The effect
symptoms after moderate and mild head injuries. Journal of of headache pain on attention (encoding) and memory
Neurology,Neurosurgery,andPsychiatry1996;61:75–81. (recognition).Pain2002;97:213–221.
24. King NS, Crawford S, Wenden FJ, et al. Early prediction 43. Taylor AE,Cox CA, Lailis A. Persistent neuropsychological
of persisting post-concussion symptoms following mild and deficits following whiplash: Evidence for chronic mild
moderateheadinjuries.BritishJournalofClinicalPsychology traumatic brain injury? Archives of Physical Medicine &
1999;38:15–25. Rehabilitation1996;77:529–535.
25. Harvey AG, Bryant RA. Predictors of acute stress 44. Cicerone K, Kalmer K. Neuropsychological deficits,
following mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury emotional symptoms and persistent subjective complaints
1998;12:147–154. aftermildtraumaticbraininjury.Paperpresentedatthe70th
26. Bryant RA, Harvey AG. Relationship between acute stress Annual Session of the American Congress of Rehabilitation
disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder following mild Medicine,25–27June1993,Denver,CO.
traumatic brain injury. American Journal of Psychiatry 45. SerlinRC,MendozaTR,NakamuraY,etal.Wheniscancer
1998;155:625–629. pain mild, moderate or severe? Grading pain severity by its
27. Bryant RA. Posttraumatic stress disorder and mild interferencewithfunction.Pain1995;61:277–284.
brain injury: Controversies, causes and consequences. 46. Uomoto JM, Esselman PC. Traumatic brain injury and
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology chronic pain: Differential types and rates by head injury
2001;23:718–728. severity. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
28. Friedland JF, Dawson DR. Function after motor vehicle 1993;74:61–64.
accidents: A prospective study of mild head injury and 47. Iverson GL, McCracken LM. ‘Postconcussive’ symptoms
posttraumaticstress.JournalofNervousandMentalDisease inpersonswithchronicpain.BrainInjury1997;11:783–790.
2001;189:426–434. 48. Smith-SeemillerL,FowNR,KantR,FranzenMD.Presence
29. HicklingEJ,GillenR,BlanchardEB,etal.Traumaticbrain of post-concussion syndrome symptoms in patients with
injury and posttraumatic stress disorder: A preliminary chronic pain vs mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury
investigation of neuropsychological test results in PTSD 2003;17:199–206.
secondary to motor vehicle accidents. Brain Injury 49. Kay T, Harrington DE, Adams R, et al. Definition of
1998;12:265–274. mild traumatic brain injury. Journal of Head Trauma
30. Bryant RA, Harvey AG. Postconcussive symptoms and Rehabilitation1993;8:86–87.
posttraumatic stress disorder after mild traumatic brain 50. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical
injury. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC:
1999;187:302–305. AmericanPsychiatricAssociation;1994.
31. Rapoport MJ, McCullagh S, Streiner D, Feinstein A. The 51. Hathaway SR, McKinley JC. Minnesota multiphasic per-
clinical significance of major depression following mild sonality inventory-2. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
traumaticbraininjury.Psychosomatics2003;44:31–37. Press;1989.
32. Levin HS, Brown SA, Song JX, et al. Depression and 52. BeckAT,SteerRA,BrownGK.Beckdepressioninventory.
posttraumatic stress disorder at three months after mild to 2nd ed. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation;
moderate traumatic brain injury. Journal of Clinical and 1996.
ExperimentalNeuropsychology2001;23:754–769. 53. Berstein EM, Putnam FW. Development, reliability, and
33. Trahan DE, Ross CE, Trahan SL. Relationships among validityofadissociationscale.JournalofNervousandMental
postconcussional-type symptoms, depression, and anxiety in Disease1986;174:727–735.
neurologically normal young adults and victims of mild 54. Horowitz MJ, Wilner N, Alvarez W. Impact of event scale:
brain injury. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology A measure of subjective stress. Psychological Medicine
2001;16:435–445. 1979;41:209–218.
34. Suhr JA, Gunstad J. Postconcussive symptom report: 55. Wechsler D. Wechsler adult intelligence scale. 3rd ed.
The relative influence of head injury and depression. SanAntonio,TX:ThePsychologicalCorporation;1997.
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 56. LezakM.Neuropsychologicalassessment.NewYork:Oxford
2002;24:981–993. UniversityPress;1976.
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
Factors related to recovery after mild TBI 987
57. ReitanRM,WolfsonD.TheHalstead-Reitanneuropsycholo- 63. Tombaugh TN. Test of memory malingering. North
gicaltestbattery.Tuscon,AZ:NeuropsychologyPress;1985. Tonawanda,NY:Multi-HealthSystems,Inc;1996.
58. Hooper HE. The Hooper visual organization test. 64. Greene RL. The MMPI-2/MMPI: An interpretive manual.
LosAngeles,CA:WesternPsychologicalServices;1958. NeedhamHeights,MA:AllynandBacon;1991.
59. Brandon AD, Bennett TL. Digital Finger tapping test. 65. Schofferman J, Anderson D, Hinds R, et al. Childhood
LosAngeles,CA:WesternPsychologicalServices;1985. psychological trauma correlates with unsuccessful lumbar
60. Kaplan E, Goodglass H, Weintraub S. Boston naming test. spinesurgery.Spine1992;17(Suppl6):S1380–S1384.
Philadelphia:Lea&Febiger;1983. 66. Bierley RA, Drake AI, Ahmed S, Date ES, Rosner M,
61. Allen LM, Conder RL, Green P, Cox DR. CARB’97: Warden D, Salazar AM. The Defense and Veterans Head
Computerized assessment of response bias. Durham, NC: Injury Program (DVHIP) Study Group. Biased responding:
CogniSyst,Inc;1997. A case series demonstrating a relationship between somatic
62. GreenWP,AllenLM,AstnerK. Thewordmemorytest:A symptomsandimpairedrecognitionmemoryperformancefor
user’s guide to the oral and computer-administered forms. traumatic brain injured individuals. Brain Injury 2001;
Durham,NC:CogniSyst,Inc;1996. 15:697–714.
41/82/01
no
tucitcennoC
fo
ytisrevinU
yb
moc.erachtlaehamrofni
morf
dedaolnwoD
jnI
niarB
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
