Arterial revascularization in primary coronary artery bypass
grafting: Direct comparison of 4 strategies—Results of the
Stand-in-Y Mammary Study
Giuseppe Nasso, MD,a Roberto Coppola, MD,b Raffaele Bonifazi, MD,a Felice Piancone, MD,a Giuseppe Bozzetti, MD,a and
Giuseppe Speziale, MDa
Objective: It is unclear (1) whether the use of 2 arterial conduits rather than a single conduit in multivessel cor-
onary artery bypass grafting signiﬁcantly improves results despite the concomitant use of saphenous vein grafts
and (2) whether any among different conﬁgurations of composite grafts (left/right thoracic arteries and radial ar-
tery) offers an advantage over the others.
Methods: Eight hundred ﬁfteen patients were randomized to one of 3 different strategies of revascularization by
using the left thoracic artery plus the right thoracic artery or using the left thoracic artery plus the radial artery.
Venous grafts were used for the remaining targets. Patients randomized to receive 1 arterial graft served as control
subjects. Operative mortality and morbidity were comparable among groups.
Results: The rate of cerebrovascular complications was not statistically lower among patients receiving 2 arterial
grafts. At 2 years, overall survival was not signiﬁcantly different among groups (P ¼ .59). Cardiac event–free
survival was signiﬁcantly better in patients receiving 2 arterial grafts versus control subjects (P<.0001), even
among elderly patients (P ¼ .022). The 3 investigated strategies using 2 arterial conduits were similar concerning
early and midterm results.
Conclusions: Revascularization with 2 arterial conduits offers better midterm event-free survival than a single
arterial graft, irrespective of which second-choice arterial conduit is used (radial artery or right thoracic artery),
the simultaneous use of saphenous vein grafts, and the patient’s age.
The proved superiority of internal thoracic arteries (ITAs)
over great saphenous vein (GSV) grafts in terms of long-
term outcome, which is particularly evident when the left an-
terior descending coronary artery (LAD) is involved,1-3 has
pushed surgeons to explore the potentials of total arterial
revascularization.
Even the use of 1 additional arterial graft has been indi-
cated to improve the results of coronary artery bypass graft-
ing (CABG). Bilateral ITA grafting in conjunction with
GSV grafts has ameliorated the survival and reduced the
risk of reoperation compared with single ITA grafting plus
GSV grafting to the remaining coronary targets.4-6 Such
beneﬁts might be evident, even with the use of composite
grafts7 and in elderly patients at midterm follow-up.8 None-
theless, recent data suggest that the gap between the results
of free arterial grafts and GSV grafts might be reducing in
the contemporary era.9
Composite grafts are among the technical improvements
proposed to allow arterial revascularization with reduced
conduit use and preserved left internal thoracic artery
(LITA)–LAD grafting. The Y-side conﬁguration of a free
right internal thoracic artery (RITA) anastomosed end-to-
side to a pedicled LITA is effective to obtain an adequate
revascularization of the whole left coronary system,10 but
there are no studies analyzing the results of such graft con-
ﬁguration versus other strategies of revascularization with
more than 1 arterial conduit, either free or in the Y conﬁg-
uration. Controversies exist about whether the use of more
than 1 arterial conduit signiﬁcantly ameliorates the pa-
tient’s outcome, even though GSV grafts are simulta-
neously used to complete the operation, in comparison
with the established strategy of using LITA–LAD grafts
plus GSV grafts. A speciﬁc subpopulation of patients (ie,
the elderly, who are increasingly frequent in practice) are
a major subject in these debates. The Stand-in-Y Mammary
Study has been designed with the purpose to contribute to
the knowledge base on these issues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Aim
We sought to compare in a prospective randomized investigation 3 dif-
ferent strategies of myocardial revascularization with the use of 2 arterial
conduits in a contemporary (2003–2006) cardiac surgical experience.
Inclusion of Patients
The present study was prospectively started in January 2003. Each
patient scheduled for coronary surgery was evaluated at the time of
From the Division of Cardiac Surgery,a Anthea Hospital, Bari, Italy; and the Division
of Cardiac Surgery,b Villa Azzurra Hospital, Rapallo, Italy.
Received for publication July 3, 2008; revisions received Sept 22, 2008; accepted for
publication Oct 16, 2008.
Address for reprints: Giuseppe Nasso, MD, Division of Cardiac Surgery, Anthea Hos-
pital, Via C. Rosalba, 35-37, 70124 Bari, Italy (E-mail: gnasso@libero.it).
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009;137:1093-100
0022-5223/$36.00
Copyright  2009 by The American Association for Thoracic Surgery
doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.10.029
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c Volume 137, Number 5
1093
ACD
Nasso et al
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease

Abbreviations and Acronyms
CABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting
CI
¼ conﬁdence interval
CPB
¼ cardiopulmonary bypass
GSV
¼ great saphenous vein
ITA
¼ internal thoracic artery
LAD
¼ left anterior descending coronary artery
LITA
¼ left internal thoracic artery
OR
¼ odds ratio
RA
¼ radial artery
RITA ¼ right internal thoracic artery
admission to the cardiac surgery unit. Patients were considered suitable to
enter the Stand-in-Y Mammary Study on the basis of the following criteria:
 primary elective isolated myocardial revascularization for multivessel
coronary disease with involvement of the LAD artery, according to the
current guidelines, scheduled11;
 use of full cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) planned; and
 availability of conduits (GSV; possibility to harvest the radial artery [RA]
from the nondominant arm and to harvest the RITA).
By using historical data, a sample size calculation was performed, with
a 0.8 statistical power, a 95% CI, and a .05 a level. The outcome end point
for sample size calculation was the expected rate of graft failure in the arte-
rial revascularization groups versus the traditional revascularization group.
Taking into calculation a 0.33 rate of control to case patients, a 0.14 ex-
pected event rate among case patients and a 0.07 expected event rate among
control subjects yielded a sample size of 636 cases. Sample size calculation
was performed with PS Software version 2.1.30 for Windows.
Before randomization and according to institutional policy, all patients
were subjected to echocardiographic Doppler evaluation of the ulnar com-
pensation during RA compression in the nondominant arm, according to
a previously described methodology.12 Evidence of adequate compensation
was required for eligibility of RA harvest and to enter the study. Similarly,
patients carrying more than 1 of the described risk factors for deep sternal
wound infection (diabetes and obesity [body mass index 30])13 were
not considered suitable for bilateral ITA harvest because of excessive risk
of sternal wound infection; hence these individuals were excluded from
the study before randomization. No modiﬁcations were included in the in-
stitutional protocols to comply with the study inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Additional exclusion criteria were as follows: redo procedure, planned
use of any arterial graft other than thoracic arteries and the RA, any associ-
ated cardiac surgical procedure other than coronary surgery, and history of
systemic inﬂammatory conditions, vasculitis, or thoracic/mediastinal radia-
tion therapy. Decreased ejection fraction and advanced age were not among
the exclusion criteria.
The local ethics committees provided formal approval to the protocol.
Patients were asked to provide informed consent to enter the investigation.
Enrolled patients were then randomized with the aid of a computerized al-
gorithm to one of 4 groups corresponding to 4 different strategies of revas-
cularization, as detailed below:
 Group 1. Y graft: in situ LITA graft to LAD artery and isolated RITA
graft to secondary target with or without GSV graft(s) to revascularize
the remaining target(s);
 Group 2. In situ RITA graft to the LAD plus in situ LITA graft with or
without GSV graft(s) to revascularize the remaining target(s);
 Group 3. In situ LITA graft to the LAD plus free aortocoronary RA graft
to the secondary target or Y graft: in situ LITA graft to the LAD and iso-
lated RA segment to the secondary target with or without GSV graft(s) to
revascularize the remaining target(s); and
 Group 4. In situ LITA graft to the LAD artery plus GSV graft(s) to revas-
cularize all non-LAD targets.
Study groups are outlined in Figure 1. The RITA and the RA were man-
aged as the second-choice conduit and were used to revascularize the sec-
ondary coronary target. The RA was always harvested from the
nondominant arm. The RA was used either as a free graft in the aortocoro-
nary conﬁguration or in the Y conﬁguration with the LITA; the latter was
performed when the secondary target presented subocclusive stenosis.
The RITA and RA grafts, irrespective to the conﬁguration, were anasto-
mosed to coronary targets with stenosis of 70% or greater.14,15 Because
our experience with the use of the gastroepiploic artery as a bypass conduit
is limited, the use of this conduit was excluded from the present study to
avoid bias. T grafts were never performed in the present series.
This trial was conducted under an intent-to-treat protocol. Reasons for
incomplete fulﬁllment of the treatment assigned by randomization were
as follows: intraoperative ﬁnding of coronary arteries unsuitable for grafting
with the second-choice arterial conduit and intraoperative ﬁnding of ﬁrst- or
second-choice arterial graft unsuitable to perform a coronary graft. In con-
sideration of the study inclusion criteria detailed above, 2 intraoperative
conditions were deﬁned to be determinants of exclusion from the study:
(1) intraoperative conversion to off-pump CABG and (2) intraoperative
ﬁnding of the LAD being unsuitable to receive grafts.
Study End Points
Study end points were in-hospital outcomes (mortality rate and morbid-
ity), 2-year freedom from all-cause death, and adverse cardiac event–free
survival (adverse cardiac events included cardiac death, acute myocardial
infarction, recurrent angina, graft occlusion at coronary angiography, redo
coronary surgery, or percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty).
Surgical Procedure
After a full median sternotomy and before opening the pericardium, the
LITA and RITA (when applicable) were harvested in standard fashion
before heparinization. Thoracic arteries were harvested skeletonized in all
cases. When applicable, the RA was harvested before heparinization with
a longitudinal forearm incision from the lateral edge of the biceps tendon
up to a point between the radial styloid and the tendon of the ﬂexor radialis
muscle up to the wrist crease. Y grafts were constructed before establish-
ment of CPB with end-to-side anastomosis of the RITA or RA segment
to the LITA. After harvesting the conduits and after ascending aortic and
right atrial cannulation, CPB was established, and the heart was arrested;
myocardial protection was accomplished with antegrade and/or retrograde
blood multidose cardioplegia according to the surgeon’s preference. Arterial
conduits were usually divided only after a clotting time of greater than 400
seconds to avoid intraluminal thrombosis. The conduits were then tested for
15 seconds to verify the adequacy of ﬂow and were then carefully inspected
to detect intraluminal thrombosis or luminal dissection. Manipulation was
done gently as well. Immediately before performance of anastomosis, a pa-
paverine solution was placed on arterial conduits to avoid vasospasm. For
free grafts, the distal anastomosis usually preceded the proximal anastomo-
sis. The latter was generally performed during aortic side clamping and with
the heart beating. The distal anastomosis of free grafts usually preceded
the distal anastomosis of in situ thoracic arteries. For sequential grafts,
side-to-side anastomosis to the target coronary artery (diamond shaped)
was performed. The order in which the anastomoses were performed re-
mained under the discretion of the operating surgeon. The non-LAD, non-
secondary coronary targets, if present, received a GSV bypass graft in the
aortocoronary conﬁguration in all cases. After weaning from CPB, the ad-
equacy of graft ﬂow was assessed by using a Doppler probe after a systolic
pressure of 80 mm Hg was obtained.
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
Nasso et al
1094
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c May 2009
ACD

Collection and Management of Data, Follow-up, and
Statistical Analysis
Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative data were obtained from
the patients’ charts during the hospitalization and were prospectively en-
tered by the surgical assistants in an electronic database. A minimum dataset
was established, including the details of coronary revascularization and
postoperative mortality/morbidity relative to the study end points. Preoper-
ative characteristics were deﬁned according to the EuroSCORE criteria, as
available online at www.euroscore.org. In particular, renal insufﬁciency
was deﬁned as a preoperative creatinine value of greater than 200 mmol/
L. Death was considered cardiac in origin when it was preceded by evident
signs of cardiac disease/failure and its cause–effect link with the decease
could be reasonably concluded.
Survivors were followed-up regularly 1 month after discharge, 6 months
after discharge, and every year thereafter. Clinical examination and electro-
cardiographic and transthoracic echocardiographic analyses were done at
every follow-up time point. In the case of recurrent ischemic symptoms,
patients underwent myocardial perfusion nuclear scanning and coronary
angiographic analysis if positive for ischemia. Mean follow-up time was
24.1  9.8 months.
The ﬁnal analysis of data was performed with SPSS software (version
11.0 for Windows; SPSS, Inc, Chicago, Ill). Discrete variables are ex-
pressed as percentages, and continuous variables are expressed as means
 standard deviation. Continuous data were compared by means of
1-way analysis of variance and subsequently by means of the multiple-
comparison procedure (the Bonferroni correction) for multiple-group
comparison. The Student t test was used for 2-group comparison. For
categorical data, between-groups comparison was done by using the non-
parametric Kruskal–Wallis test or by using the c2 test. Tests were 2-tailed
when appropriate. The Yates correction was applied when appropriate.
Time-to-event analysis was performed through Kaplan–Meier method,
and corresponding survival curves were built; survival curves were com-
pared by using the Wilcoxon test to detect differences in the early probabil-
ities of survival. The a level was set at .05.
RESULTS
From January 2003 to April 2006, a total of 1769 patients
scheduled for coronary surgery were screened. Eight hun-
dred ﬁfteen individuals met the criteria for inclusion in the
study; 1 patient refused surgical intervention, and 5 patients
refused to enter the investigation. Thus 803 patients were ﬁ-
nally enrolled in the study. A total of 46 (4.8%) patients
FIGURE 1. Schematic outline of the revascularization strategies in the study groups (the vessels of the lateral wall are depicted as the secondary coronary
target). A, Group 1. Y graft: in situ left internal thoracic artery (LITA)–left anterior descending coronary artery and isolated right internal thoracic artery (RITA)
to the secondary target with or without great saphenous vein (GSV) graft(s). B, Group 2. In situ right internal thoracic artery (RITA)–left anterior descending
coronary artery in situ left internal thoracic artery (LITA) to the secondary target with or without great saphenous vein (GSV) graft(s). C, Group 3. In situ left
internal thoracic artery (LITA)–left anterior descending coronary artery and free radial artery (RA) graft to the secondary target with or without great saphenous
vein (GSV) graft(s). Group 3 also includes a Y graft: in situ LITA–left anterior descending coronary artery and RA segment to the secondary target with or
without GSV grafts. D, Group 4, Control group: in situ left internal thoracic artery (LITA)–left anterior descending coronary artery plus great saphenous vein
(GSV) graft(s).
Nasso et al
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c Volume 137, Number 5
1095
ACD

were excluded because of inadequate ulnar compensation
during RA compression. Two hundred four patients were
randomized to treatment group 1, 202 to group 2, 204 to
group 3, and 205 to group 4. Twelve patients were excluded
intraoperatively, and thus the ﬁnal study population was
composed by 201 patients in group 1, 198 in group 2, 202
in group 3, and 202 in group 4.
The preoperative characteristics of the study individuals
in each group are compared in Table 1. Details of grafting
performed in groups 1, 2, and 3 are given in Table 2. A
LITA–LAD (groups 1, 3, and 4) or RITA–LAD (group 2)
graft was performed in all study individuals. The mean num-
ber of grafts per patient was 2.55  0.8 in group 1, 2.51 
0.9 in group 2, 2.58  0.7 in group 3, and 2.57  0.9 in
group 4 (P ¼ .41). The obtuse marginal branches of the cir-
cumﬂex artery were regarded most frequently as the second-
ary coronary target and received the second arterial conduit
in the majority of cases. The right coronary artery and its
branches and the diagonal or intermediate branches were
less frequently considered the secondary target. A total of
318 GSV grafts (13 sequential) were implanted.
Table 3 displays the perioperative results. There were no
statistically signiﬁcant differences in terms of operative mor-
tality rates (deﬁned as death within 30 days after surgical
intervention) among the 3 arterial revascularization groups
(P ¼ .78). The difference in operative mortality between
groups 1 to 3 versus group 4 was not signiﬁcant (P ¼ .80,
Table 3). Length of intensive care unit stay, mechanical ven-
tilation time, and incidence of acute renal failure were com-
parable among the 4 groups. Cerebrovascular complications
were more frequent in group 4, although not statistically sig-
niﬁcant (P ¼ .0645; odds ratio [OR], 0.63; 95% conﬁdence
interval [CI], 0.38–1.03). Such a difference is likely a conse-
quence of the more extensive manipulation of the ascending
aorta required for the performance of a higher number of
proximal anastomoses on the ascending aorta in group 4.
Higher mean CPB time was also observed in group 4 (P ¼
.033). No patient who had the RA harvested complained
of ischemic symptoms of the hand in either the early postop-
erative period or the follow-up period. There were 6 cases of
mediastinitis (3 in group 1, 2 in group 2, and 1 in group 4).
Three patients were lost at follow-up. The overall mortal-
ity rate in the global study population was 3.6%. The end of
follow-up mortality rate was 3.5% in group 1, 2.5% in
group 2, 3.5% in group 3, and 4.9% in group 4 (3.2% in
groups 1–3 and 4.9% in group 4). Both multiple-group
comparison and 2-group comparison (groups 1–3 vs group
4) reported that this difference was not statistically signiﬁ-
cant (P ¼ .62 and P ¼ .33, respectively; OR, 0.63; 95%
CI, 0.27–1.47). Death was cardiac in origin in 24 cases (12
acute myocardial infarctions, 7 arrhythmic sudden deaths,
and 5 cases of progressive heart failure). Cardiac death at
follow-up occurred more frequently in group 4 versus groups
1 to 3 (4.4% vs. 2.5%), but this difference failed to reach
a signiﬁcant probability value (P ¼ .23; OR, 0.55; 95%
CI, 0.22–1.38). Adverse cardiac events were signiﬁcantly
less frequent in groups 1 to 3 versus group 4 (P < .0001).
TABLE 1. Demographics and preoperative characteristics
Variable
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Male sex
56.2%
56.7%
56.9%
58.4%
Age, mean (y)
69.2  3.9 68.4  4.6 70.5  3.1 69.7  3.5
Diabetes
37.8%
37.9%
36.1%
38.1%
Obesity
13.9%
13.1%
14.3%
13.9%
Recent AMI (<90 d)
28.9%
28.3%
30.2%
29.7%
NYHA III–IV
68.7%
68.2%
69.3%
68.8%
Chronic renal
insufﬁciency
9.4%
9.1%
10.4%
10.9%
COPD
27.4%
25.7%
28.2%
27.7%
EF<30%
14.4%
12.6%
14.8%
13.9%
AMI, Acute myocardial infarction; NYHA, New York Heart Association; COPD,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; EF, ejection fraction.
TABLE 2. Details of grafts in the arterial revascularization groups
Variable
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3
Second arterial conduit to OM branch
105
109
119
Second arterial conduit to I or D branch
34
31
29
Second arterial conduit to right
coronary system
51
54
48
Sequential graft (second arterial conduit)
11
4
7
GSV graft
110
102
116
Complete revascularization (% of patients)
98.5%
99.5%
98.5%
Second arterial conduit: right internal thoracic artery in group 1 (Y graft), left internal
thoracic artery in group 2 (in situ graft), and radial artery in group 3 (either aortocoro-
nary or Y conﬁguration with the left internal thoracic artery). OM, Obtuse marginal;
I, intermediate branch; D, diagonal branch; GSV, great saphenous vein.
TABLE 3. Perioperative results
Variable
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
P value
Operative mortality rate
2.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
.78
CPB time (min)
66.4  10.5
68.9  9.5
67.9  10.4
81.5  12.4
.033
Crossclamp time (min)
34.5  10.3
33.7  9.1
35.6  9.8
36.5  11.2
NS
ICU stay (h)
38.8  10
39.2  8.9
38.9  9.1
40.7  11.4
NS
Ventilation time (h)
29.9  6
30.4  5.1
30.2  5.2
31.5  6.1
NS
Stroke/TIA
2.5%
2.0%
3.0%
4.9%
.0645
Acute renal failure
6.5%
5.6%
6.9%
7.9%
.99
CPB, Cardiopulmonary bypass; ICU, intensive care unit; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
Nasso et al
1096
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c May 2009
ACD

Details are reported in Table 4. In any case, the multiple-
group comparison excluded statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences in the rate of adverse cardiac events between groups
1, 2, and 3 (P ¼ .25). Control coronary angiographic analysis
was performed in a total of 59 patients.
Kaplan–Meier analysis showed no statistically signiﬁcant
overall survival advantage in any study group (Figure 2). In
any case, when the adverse cardiac event–free survival is
considered, groups 1, 2, and 3 had a signiﬁcant advantage
over group 4 (Wilcoxon test: overall, P<.0001 with 3 de-
grees of freedom; pairwise comparison of group 1 vs group
4, P ¼ .0004; group 2 vs group 4, P ¼ .0001; group 3 vs
group 4, P ¼ .0046; Figure 3). Conversely, cardiac event–
free survival was similar among groups 1, 2, and 3 (Wil-
coxon test: pairwise comparison of group 1 vs group 2,
P ¼ .744; group 1 vs group 3, P ¼ .387; group 2 vs group
3, P ¼ .233). Additional Kaplan–Meier curves were built
to investigate the effects of the strategy of revascularization
in younger versus elderly patients, dividing the population
into 4 strata: either younger than 75 years or older than 75
years and receiving 1 arterial conduit (LITA–LAD, group
4) and either younger than 75 years or older than 75 years
and receiving 2 arterial conduits (groups 1–3, Figure 4).
The elderly patients had a statistically signiﬁcant disadvan-
tage in terms of event-free survival if they had received
TABLE 4. Follow-up results: mortality rate and cases of adverse
cardiac
events
(arterial
revascularization
[groups
1–3]
versus
traditional revascularization [group 4])
Variable
Arterial
revascularization
(groups 1–3)
Traditional
revascularization
(group 4)
P value
End of follow-up
mortality rate
(all causes)
3.2%
4.9%
.33
Cardiac death
15 (2.5%)
9 (4.4%)
.239
Recurrent angina
18
22
<.001
AMI
8
8
.0018
PTCA
9
12
.001
Graft occlusion
21
26
<.001
Redo coronary surgery
1
2
.048
AMI, Acute myocardial infarction; PTCA, percutaneous transluminal coronary angio-
plasty.
FIGURE 2. Overall survival at the end of the follow-up period in the 4
study groups.
FIGURE 3. Freedom from adverse cardiac events at the end of the follow-
up period in the 4 study groups.
FIGURE 4. Freedom from adverse cardiac events in patients younger and
older than 75 years (arterial revascularization vs traditional revasculariza-
tion).
Nasso et al
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c Volume 137, Number 5
1097
ACD

only 1 arterial conduit rather than 2 arterial grafts (Wilcoxon
test: overall, P ¼ .0227 with 3 degrees of freedom; pairwise
comparison of patients younger than 75 years receiving arte-
rial revascularization vs patients older than 75 years receiv-
ing traditional revascularization, P ¼ .0015). Results
indicate that each of the revascularization strategies using
2 arterial conduits analyzed herein has optimal results in
terms of event-free survival at the 2-year follow-up at a com-
parable level in the younger and elderly patients (the pair-
wise comparisons yielding not statistically signiﬁcant P
values).
DISCUSSION
The superiority of the LITA over GSV grafts in revascu-
larization of the LAD has been clearly demonstrated1,2 and
was among the determinants of the improved results of
CABG surgery in the treatment of multivessel coronary dis-
ease. On this basis, total arterial revascularization has been
forwarded as an additional and powerful tool to ameliorate
the results of coronary surgery. However, its potential role
has been questioned by the ﬁnding that the outcomes of
the GSV grafts might be better than expected9 and by the in-
creasing age of the population submitted to CABG. The lat-
ter factor has induced some groups to avoid extra-arterial
conduits other than the LITA in the attempt to reduce the sur-
gical trauma mainly in elderly patients, who have shorter life
expectancies and hence less likelihood to beneﬁt from the
durability of the arterial conduits. Conversely, other ran-
domized trials have indicated that total arterial revasculariza-
tion signiﬁcantly ameliorates the patients’ outcome, even in
the contemporary patient populations, including elderly sur-
gical candidates.8 In this complex scenario it is unclear (1)
whether the use of 2 arterial conduits signiﬁcantly amelio-
rates the patients’ outcome, even though GSV grafts are
used to revascularize the remaining targets, and (2) whether
different strategies of revascularization with 2 arterial con-
duits under different conﬁgurations are equivalent with re-
spect to midterm results. The present study was started
with the aim to contribute to these issues and was designed
as a prospective randomized investigation to perform a direct
comparison of 4 different surgical strategies without selec-
tion bias.
The main ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. The 3
strategies of revascularization with 2 arterial conduits, as
presented herein, yielded comparable results at 2-year
follow-up. None of them appeared to confer signiﬁcant ad-
vantages in terms of overall survival and adverse cardiac
event–free survival over the remaining 2 strategies. This rea-
sonably implies that the results associated with the use of the
RITA, either as a Y graft or as a pedicled graft to the LAD,
are not signiﬁcantly different to those obtained with the RA,
either as a Y graft or as a free aortocoronary graft. As an ad-
ditional implication, surgeons might indifferently use either
the RA or the RITA as the secondary arterial conduit on the
basis of the characteristics of the individual patients (ie, co-
existence of risk factors for mediastinitis or impossibility to
harvest the RA safely), with reasonable expectations of good
results in either case. Our data are in line with previous ﬁnd-
ings, indicating the reliability and the excellent perfor-
mances of the RITA when used to revascularize the left
coronary system.16,17 Our data also strengthen the concept
of the equivalence of the clinical results associated with
the RA and the RITA used to revascularize the secondary
coronary target.18 In any case, in the previous studies no in-
sights were made available over the results of different con-
ﬁgurations of grafts, and no conclusive data were provided.
Essentially our data support the equivalence in clinical and
angiographic results of different conﬁgurations of LITA
and RITA grafts (either in situ or as a Y or T graft), which
has been previously underscored.19,20 Similar ﬁndings
were also obtained a propos of the RA used either as
a free aortocoronary graft or as a Y graft with the LITA.21
Previous studies have suggested that the midterm outcomes
might not be different in the current era if a GSV graft or
a free RA graft is used to revascularize the secondary tar-
get.22 In any case, in our analysis we have regarded as
adverse cardiac events not only myocardial infarction,
percutaneous intervention, and redo coronary surgery but
also recurrent angina. This has a major effect on patients;
the possibility to reduce its incidence by using a second
arterial conduit rather than a GSV should be strongly
addressed.
Despite overall survival at the 2-year follow-up being
comparable among the 4 study groups, the cardiac adverse
event–free survival was signiﬁcantly better in groups 1 to 3
versus that seen in the patients who had only 1 arterial graft.
Such a ﬁnding can be reasonably ascribed to the lower inci-
dence of graft failure within groups 1 to 3. A reduced inci-
dence of follow-up myocardial infarction and percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty/coronary reintervention
has been already observed after bilateral ITA grafting.5,6
The present study indicates that similar results can be ob-
tained, irrespective of which second arterial conduit among
the RITA and RA is used and irrespective of graft conﬁgura-
tion. Therefore provided that the second-choice arterial con-
duit is used to revascularize the secondary coronary target,
the use of at least 1 additional arterial graft offers better re-
sults, even though GSV grafts are used to revascularize the
remainingtargets. This implies that the use of 2 arterial grafts,
even though the revascularization is not entirely accom-
plished with arterial conduits, might be justiﬁed from the
point of view of the surgical risk/beneﬁt balance.The beneﬁts
of coronary revascularization with 2 arterial conduits might
be evident not only at the midterm follow-up under the fea-
tures of event-free survival but also in the early postoperative
period in terms of less incidence of perioperative cerebrovas-
cular complications. Our study cannot provide a deﬁnite an-
swer on this problem because the sample size is probably
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
Nasso et al
1098
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c May 2009
ACD

insufﬁcient and the real clinical difference among groups, if
present, might be little. In any case, we believe that further
insights are warranted because the prevalence of moderate-
to-severe ascending aortic atherosclerosisis likely to increase
with the aging of the CABG population.
At 2 years after the operation, the improvement in adverse
cardiac event–free survival associated with the use of 2 arte-
rial conduits (groups 1–3) versus that seen in patients who
had only 1 arterial graft (group 4) was also evident in the el-
derly patients (>75 years). The difference was statistically
signiﬁcant (Figure 4). Therefore the use of an additional ar-
terial conduit in the elderly, mainly in the presence of good
life expectancy, might be justiﬁed despite increased surgical
trauma and technical challenges.23 We acknowledge that the
present investigation is not focused on the elderly surgical
candidates and that they correspond to a minor proportion
of our sample; these represent the main limitation to our con-
clusions over this subgroup.
Previous studies have suggested that if both ITAs are used
to revascularize the left coronary system, the results at the
midterm are not affected by the type of graft used for the
right coronary target, either the GSV or another arterial
graft.24 It has been also suggested that the most important
coronary target for the RITA (as the second-choice arterial
conduit) is the lateral wall rather than the right coronary sys-
tem.25 In our investigation the branches of the circumﬂex ar-
tery were most frequently the secondary coronary target and
thus received most frequently the second-choice arterial con-
duit. The right coronary system was regarded as the second-
ary target only in a minority of cases. In this scenario our
data raise a major question: whether true total arterial revas-
cularization can be reasonably expected to yield signiﬁ-
cantly better results than revascularization with 2 arterial
conduits (used to revascularize the primary and the second-
ary coronary targets) plus GSV grafts to the remaining tar-
gets, as described in the present investigation. Probably
total arterial revascularization will not provide a signiﬁcant
advantage and will be unjustiﬁed in many cases, mainly if
revascularization is needed in the territory of the right coro-
nary system. A prospective direct comparison, including
stratiﬁcation on the basis of patients’ age, is therefore
needed. The results of the cohort of patients presented herein
at longer follow-up intervals will provide additional useful
information.
As the main study limitations, we acknowledge the rela-
tively short-term follow-up and the lack of routine angio-
graphic conﬁrmation of graft patency. Longer follow-up
periods will provide important data about the durability of
the beneﬁts associated with the use of 2 arterial grafts,
even in elderly patients, and will allow a more reliable com-
parison among alternative procedures.
In conclusion, myocardial revascularization with 2 arte-
rial conduits in multivessel coronary disease offers better
event-free survival compared with a single arterial graft
(LITA–LAD strategy), irrespective of which conduit is
used as the second-choice arterial grafts (RITA or RA) and
irrespective of the conﬁguration used (Y graft or in situ
RITA graft or aortocoronary RA graft). Such beneﬁts are ev-
ident, even in elderly patients. The advantage in terms of the
perioperative cerebrovascular event rate associated with the
use of 2 arterial conduits rather than a single conduit might
be little or absent. Finally, this study prompts ongoing re-
search on the comparison between total arterial revasculari-
zation and revascularization strategies with 2 arterial
conduits with or without GSV grafts.
References
1. Loop FD, Lytle BW, Cosgrove DM, Stewart RW, Goormastic M, Williams GW,
et al. Inﬂuence of the internal-mammary-artery graft on 10-year survival and other
cardiac events. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:1-6.
2. Cameron A, Davis KB, Green G, Schaff HV. Coronary bypass surgery with inter-
nal thoracic artery grafts—effects on survival over a 15-years period. N Engl J
Med. 1996;334:261-9.
3. Pick AW, Orszulak TA, Anderson BJ, Schaff HV. Single versus bilateral internal
thoracic artery grafts: 10-years outcome analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 1997;64:
599-605.
4. Stevens LM, Carrier M, Perrault LP, He´bert Y, Cartier R, Bouchard D, et al. In-
ﬂuence of diabetes and bilateral internal thoracic artery grafts on long-term out-
come for multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg.
2005;27:281-8.
5. Lytle BW, Blackstone EH, Loop FD, Houghtaling PL, Arnold JH, Akhrass R,
et al. Two internal thoracic artery grafts are better than one. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 1999;117:855-72.
6. Calaﬁore AM, Di Mauro M, Di Giammarco G, Teodori G, Iaco` L, Mazzei V, et al.
Single versus bilateral internal mammary artery for isolated ﬁrst myocardial re-
vascularization in multivessel disease: long-term clinical results in medically
treated diabetic patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80:888-95.
7. Muneretto C, Negri A, Manfredi J, Terrini A, Rodella G, Elgarra S, et al. Safety
and usefulness of composite grafts for total arterial myocardial revasculariza-
tion: a prospective randomized evaluation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;
125:826-35.
8. Muneretto C, Bisleri G, Negri A, Manfredi J, Metra M, Nodali S, et al. Total arterial
myocardial revascularization with composite grafts improves results of coronary
surgery in the elderly; a prospective randomized comparison with conventional
coronary artery bypass surgery. Circulation. 2003;108(suppl I):II29-33.
9. Hayward PA, Buxton BF. Contemporary coronary graft patency: 5-year observa-
tional data from a randomized trial of conduits. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:795-9.
10. Glineur D, Noirhomme P, Reisch J, El Khoury G, Astarci P, Hanet C. Resistance
to ﬂow of arterial Y-grafts 6 months after coronary artery bypass surgery. Circu-
lation. 2005;112(suppl):I281-5.
11. The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force for
Practice Guidelines. ACC/AHA 2004 guideline update for coronary artery bypass
graft surgery. Circulation. 2004;110:340-437.
12. Pola P, Serricchio M, Flore R, Manasse E, Favuzzi A, Possati GF. Safe removal
of the radial artery for myocardial revascularization: a Doppler study to prevent
ischemic complications of the hand. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112:
737-44.
13. The Parisian Mediastinitis Study Group. Risk factors for deep sternal wound in-
fection after sternotomy: a prospective, multicenter study. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 1996;111:1200-7.
14. Possati G, Gaudino M, Prati F, Alessandrini F, Trani C, Glieca F, et al. Long-term
results of the radial artery used for myocardial revascularization. Circulation.
2003;108:1350-4.
15. Gaudino M, Alessandrini F, Pragliola C, Cellini C, Glieca F, Luciani N, et al.
Effect of target artery location and severity of stenosis of mid-term aorta-
anastomosed vs. internal thoracic artery-anastomosed radial artery grafts. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg. 2004;25:424-8.
16. Pevni D, Mohr R, Uretzky G, Lev-Ran O, Paz J, Kramer A, et al. Free right inter-
nal thoracic artery composite graft: an option in left anterior descending artery
grafting? Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74:2208-9.
17. Buxton BF, Ruengsakulrach P, Fuller J, Rosalion A, Reid CM, Tatoulis J. The
right internal thoracic artery graft—beneﬁts of grafting the left coronary system
Nasso et al
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c Volume 137, Number 5
1099
ACD

and native vessels with a high grade stenosis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2000;18:
255-61.
18. Hayward P, Hare DL, Gordon I, Matalanis G, Buxton BF. Which arterial conduit?
Radial artery versus free right internal thoracic artery: six-year clinical results of
a randomized controlled trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:493-7.
19. Calaﬁore AM, Contini M, Vitolla G, Di Mauro M, Mazzei V, Teodori D, et al. Bi-
lateral internal thoracic artery grafting: long-term clinical and angiographic results
of in situ versus Y grafts. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000;120:990-6.
20. Lev-Ran O, Mohr M, Uretzky G, Pevni D, Locker C, Paz Y, et al. Graft of choice
to right coronary system in left-sided bilateral internal thoracic artery grafting. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2003;75:88-92.
21. Lemma M, Mangini A, Gelpi G, Innorta A, Spina A, Antona C. It is better to use
the radial artery as a composite graft? Clinical and angiographic results of aorto-
coronary versus Y graft. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004;26:110-7.
22. Hayward P, Hare DL, Gordon I, Buxton BF. Effect of radial artery or saphenous
vein conduit for the second graft on 6-year clinical outcome after coronary artery
bypass grafting. Results of a randomized trial. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008;34:
113-7.
23. Muneretto C, Bisleri G, Negri A, Manfredi J, Carone E, Morgan JA, et al. Left
internal thoracic artery-radial artery composite graft as the technique of choice
for myocardial revascularization in elderly patients: a prospective randomized
evaluation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:179-84.
24. Pevni D, Uretzky G, Yosef P, Yanay BG, Shapira I, Nesher N, et al. Revascular-
ization of the right coronary artery in bilateral internal thoracic artery grafting. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2005;79:564-9.
25. Schmidt SE, Jones JW, Thornby JI, Miller CC 3rd, Beall AC Jr. Improved survival
with multiple left-sided bilateral internal thoracic artery grafts. Ann Thorac Surg.
1997;64:9-14.
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease
Nasso et al
1100
The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery c May 2009
ACD

