
Lowering the hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in 
coronary artery bypass procedures: effect on patient outcome 
A.W. Bracey, R. Radovancevic, S.A. Riggs, S. Houston, H. Cozart, 
W.K. Vaughn, B. Radovancevic, H.A. McAllister, Jr., and D.A. Cooley 


for 50 percent of the blood transfused at our in- 
stitution. Studies of blood use in coronary artery 
bypass grafting (CABG) procedures indicate that 
as much as 10 percent of national red cell (RBC) resources 
may be used for support of these patients.1 The mean num- 
ber of units transfused in CABG surgery varies with the in- 
stitution, ranging from 0.4 to 6.3 units per patient in uncom- 
plicated CABG operations.1-4 
In a recent analysis, Surgenor et al.4 reported that in- 
stitutional transfusion practices contribute significantly to 
the variation in RBC transfusion decisions in CABG patients. 
Most transfusion guidelines are based on limited, if any, con- 
trolled data.5-9 The clinical decision for transfusion is often 
based on hemoglobin (Hb) or hematocrit levels.10-12 Patients 
undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) are adminis- 
tered intermittent volume expansion, which renders the 
measured Hb content a relatively inaccurate reflection of 
RBC mass. Other proposed methods for indicating Hb defi- 
cits include the use of an oxygen extraction ratio or blood 
levels of lactate or other chemical markers.13-16 However, 
these measures are invasive and costly, making widespread 
application unlikely. Thus, measurement of the Hb content 
ABBREVIATIONS: CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; CPB 
= cardiopulmonary bypass; FACT-An = FACT-Anemia; FACT-F = 














BACKGROUND: There is controversy regarding the ap- 
plication of transfusion triggers in cardiac surgery. The 
goal of this study was to determine if lowering the hemo- 
globin threshold for red cell (RBC) transfusion to 8 g per 
dL after coronary artery bypass graft surgery would re- 
duce blood use without adversely affecting patient out- 
come. 
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Consecutive patients 
(n = 428) undergoing elective primary coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery were randomly assigned to two 
groups: study patients (n = 212) received RBC transfu- 
sions in the postoperative period if the Hb level was <8 g 
per dL or if predetermined clinical conditions required 
RBC support, and control patients (n = 216) were 
treated according to individual physician’s orders (hemo- 
globin levels <9 g/dL as the institutional guideline). Mul- 
tiple demographic, procedure-related, transfusion, labo- 
ratory, and outcome data were analyzed. Questionnaires 
were administered for patient self-assessment of fatigue 
and anemia. 
RESULTS: Preoperative and operative clinical charac- 
teristics, as well as the intraoperative transfusion rate, 
were similar for both groups. There was a significant dif- 
ference between the postoperative RBC transfusion 
rates in study (0.9 ± 1.5 RBC units) and control (1.4 ± 
1.8 RBC units) groups (p = 0.005). There was no differ- 
ence in clinical outcome, including morbidity and mortal- 
ity rates, in the two groups; group scores for self-assess- 
ment of fatigue and anemia were also similar. 
CONCLUSIONS: A lower Hb threshold of 8 g per dL 
does not adversely affect patient outcome. Moreover, 
RBC resources can be saved without increased risk to 
the patient. 
of peripheral blood is the most commonly used determi- 
nant in evaluating CABG patients for RBC transfusions. 
The level of Hb that most accurately predicts the need 
for RBC transfusion has been debated. The National Insti- 
tutes of Health Consensus Conference on RBC transfusion 
requirements disputed the standard perioperative Hb 
threshold of 10 g per dL.7 Recent RBC transfusion guidelines 
from the American College of Anesthesiologists6 and the 
College of American Pathologists9 allow physicians to con- 
sider RBC transfusion over a broad range of Hb levels: 6 to 
10 g per dL. In a recent study, Weiskopf et al.17 reported that 
patients with normal coronary artery anatomy could toler- 
ate acute normovolemic anemia as low as 5 g per dL. 
Previous reports have primarily defined the incidence 
and factors that influence the RBC transfusion rate in CABG 
surgery.18,19 Few reports, however, have described the effect 
of interventions intended to reduce blood use.20-23 Further- 
more, few data are available on outcome when a lower Hb 
threshold is used for CABG patients. Therefore, the objec- 
tive of this study was to determine if the use of a lower Hb 
transfusion threshold could reduce blood use without ad- 
versely affecting patient outcome. 


We enrolled 428 consecutive patients who underwent first- 
time, elective CABG surgery at the Texas Heart Institute 
(THI) between February 4, 1997, and November 15, 1997. 
Patients were randomly assigned to study and control 
groups on the basis of the last digit of their medical record 
number. The study group comprised 212 patients who re- 
ceived an RBC transfusion in the postoperative period at a 
Hb level less than 8 g per dL, unless the patient experienced 
blood loss >750 mL since the last transfusion, hypovolemia 
with hemodynamic instability and excessive acute blood 
loss, acute respiratory failure or inadequate cardiac output 
and oxygenation, or hemodynamic instability requiring the 
use of vasopressors. The control group comprised 216 pa- 
tients who received transfusions on the instructions of their 
individual physicians, who considered the clinical assess- 
ment of the patient and the institutional guidelines, which 
propose a Hb level <9 g per dL as the postoperative thresh- 
old for RBC transfusion. 
Patient exclusion criteria included a preoperative Hb 
level <12 g per dL, history of bleeding diathesis, use of an 
intraaortic balloon pump, blood loss >2500 mL within 24 
hours of operation, and the patient’s refusal of blood trans- 
fusion for religious reasons. 
We analyzed the following patient variables: age; body 
weight; sex; preoperative exposure to sodium warfarin, 
heparin, aspirin, or ticlopidine; and preoperative, operative, 
and postoperative (Days 1-5 and last day before discharge) 
Hb levels. In addition, we monitored prothrombin time, 
activated partial thromboplastin time, platelet count, and 

creatinine levels. Procedure-related variables included the 
duration of CPB, the number and type of grafts, the lowest 
core temperature during CPB and the postoperative body 
temperature upon arrival in the intensive care unit (ICU), 
estimates of intraoperative blood loss, the volume of chest- 
tube blood shed after surgery, the volume of returned blood 
collected in the cell processor during surgery, and the vol- 
ume of mediastinal shed blood collected in the postopera- 
tive period. 

CABG was performed according to the standard THI tech- 
nique.24 Each patient was systemically cooled by means of 
CPB with moderate hypothermia (28°C), and the heart was 
arrested with cold blood or crystalloid cardioplegic solu- 
tion. A membrane oxygenator was used in the CPB circuit, 
and the heart-lung machine was primed with electrolyte 
solution. RBCs were added to the pump only if the patient’s 
Hb level was inadequate (<6 g/dL at 30°C). Anesthesia was 
maintained with thiopental and fentanyl, and pancuro- 
nium bromide was used for muscle relaxation and heparin 
(3 mg/kg) for anticoagulation. At the end of the procedure, 
protamine sulfate (1.5 mg/100 units of heparin) was admin- 
istered intravenously to neutralize the heparin. Blood from 
the bypass circuit was returned to all patients upon comple- 
tion of the operation. 

We collected data on the location, timing, and volume of 
blood transfusion; the incidence of RBC transfusions; the 
mean number of RBC units per patient; and the mean num- 
ber of RBC units per transfused patient. The outcome mea- 
sures we analyzed were transfusion incidence, duration of 
mechanical ventilation, length of stay in the ICU, length of 
postoperative hospital stay, THI morbidity and mortality 
data, and patient self-assessment of fatigue and anemia 
(administered on postoperative Days 3 and 5). 
Morbidity data. We analyzed morbidity data from the 
THI database. We included in our analysis the postopera- 
tive occurrence of atrial (supraventricular tachycardia, 
atrial tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation) or ventricular (pre- 
mature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, or 
ventricular fibrillation) arrhythmias; myocardial infarction; 
a neurologic event such as a cerebrovascular attack, tran- 
sient ischemic attack, or paralysis; pulmonary complica- 
tions, including pneumothorax, pneumonia or tracheo- 
bronchitis, pulmonary edema, purulent sputum, O2 
dependence after ICU discharge, and delayed chest tube 
removal (>48 hours after surgery); renal complications, in- 
cluding renal failure or a creatinine level >2.5 mg per dL 
(urine output <400 mL in a 24-hour period and/or institu- 
tion of renal dialysis or ultrafiltration); and serious infec- 
tions such as culture-proven pneumonia, mediastinitis, 
wound infection, or septicemia. 


Mortality data. Mortality was defined as death during 
the hospitalization for surgery. These patients were ex- 
cluded from transfusion analysis because early death pre- 
cludes observation of transfusion and morbidity rate. 
Postoperative health survey questionnaire. We used 
two instruments, the Functional Assessment of Cancer 
Therapy-Fatigue (FACT-F) and the Functional Assessment 
of Cancer Therapy-Anemia (FACT-An), for patient self-as- 
sessment of fatigue and anemia. The FACT-F comprises 13 
Likert-scaled fatigue items, and the FACT-An comprises 7 
nonfatigue items related to anemia. Combined, the ques- 
tionnaires yield a 20-item scale and a score range of 0 to 60. 
A high score indicates increased fatigue. Both scales were 
intended for use with the general version (FACT-G) of the 
questionnaire. In this study, the FACT-F and FACT-An scales 
were used without the 28-item general version of the ques- 
tionnaire (FACT-G). The FACT-F scale has shown strong in- 
ternal consistency (coefficient alpha range, 0.93-0.95) in 
cancer patients. The internal consistency of the FACT-An 
items is lower (alpha range, 0.59-0.70) but acceptable, con- 
sidering the strong relationship to patient-reported perfor- 
mance status and Hb level. Convergent and discriminate 
validity testing revealed a positive relationship with other 
known measures of fatigue. Total scores of both scales dif- 
ferentiated patients by Hb level (p<0.05) and patient-re- 
ported performance status (p<0.001).25 

Statistical evaluations were by protocol (i.e., considering all 
inclusion and exclusion criteria) and by the intention-to- 
treat principle, whereby all randomly assigned patients 
were used. 
We used a software system (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) for 
statistical analyses. A two-tailed, unpaired t test was used 
to compare the mean values of the two groups and a paired 
t test was used to compare repeated measurements in each 
group. We used chi-square analysis (with Yates’s correction 
for continuity) to compare the groups’ discontinued data. 
If the expected number in any given cell was less than 5, 
however, Fisher’s exact test was used. A comparison of Hb 
levels was done by using a repeated-measures ANOVA. Re- 
lationships between Hb levels and outcome measures were 
analyzed with a regression method. All tests were two- 
sided, and no adjustments for multiple comparisons were 
made. A p value <0.05 was considered significant. Values are 
presented as the mean ± SD. 


We found no significant differences between the demo- 
graphics, preoperative status, procedure-related variables, 
or blood loss in the study and control groups (Table 1). The 
mean preoperative Hb level in both groups did not differ 

from data collected from primary CABG patients at our 
center. Most patients in our study were on a preoperative 
drug regimen that included aspirin. 

The blood-conservation technique, including return of 
blood from the bypass circuit, was similarly applied to both 
groups. From only three patients in each group was blood 
collected in a semi-automated cell processor for RBC con- 
servation; a mean of 1000 ± 0 mL was returned in each case 
in the study group and a mean of 1133 ± 97 mL in the con- 
trol group (p = 0.774). Mediastinal shed blood collected in 
the postoperative period was returned to 21 (10%) study pa- 
tients (mean vol, 493 ± 235 mL) and 20 (9%) control patients 
(mean vol, 471 ± 279 mL). 

The mean number of RBC units transfused per patient dur- 
ing hospitalization was lower in study patients than in con- 
trol patients (Fig. 1). The transfusion rate in study patients 
was 2.0 ± 2.2 RBC units, and that in control patients was 2.5 
± 2.6 RBC units (p = 0.04); therefore, use of a Hb level of <8 
g per dL as an indication for transfusion yielded a 20-per- 
cent reduction in RBC use. The total number of RBCs trans- 
fused was 426 units in the study group and 538 units in the 
control group, for a difference of 112 units, or 500 RBC units 
per 1000 CABG patients. The overall incidence of RBC trans- 
fusion was 60 percent in study patients and 64 percent in 
control patients (p = 0.312). 
TABLE 1. Intergroup comparisons of patient- and 
procedure-related variables 

Age (years) 
Body weight (kg) 
Sex (male/female) (%) 
Preoperative drug exposure (%) 
Aspirin 
Sodium warfarin 
Heparin 
Ticlopidine 
Study group 
(n = 212) 
Control group 
(n = 216) 
61± 11 
86± 16 
82/18 
71 
2 
17 
5 
62± 11 
84± 16 
83/17 
68 
2 
16 
5 

Hb (g/dL) 
Hematocrit (%) 
Prothrombin time (sec) 
Platelet count (1000/mm3) 
Creatinine level (mg/dL) 
14.2 ± 1.2 
41.7 ± 3.7 
11.8 ± 0.7 
218 ± 59 
1.06 ± 0.24 
14.3 ± 1.2 
41.9 ± 3.6 
11.8 ± 0.7 
211 ± 53 
1.03 ± 0.26 

Number of grafts per patient 
Patients with IMA* grafts (%) 
Time on CPB (min) 
Crossclamp time (min) 
Estimated blood loss (mL) 
Postoperative blood loss† (mL) 
3.4 ± 0.9 
93 
59 ± 26 
35 ± 18 
1116 ± 571 
1098 ± 553 
3.4 ± 0.9 
96 
60 ± 26 
36 ± 17 
1123 ± 540 
1158 ± 563 

* 
† Chest-tube blood shed. 

operative Hb >10 g per dL, none received RBCs, whereas 6 
(14%) of 42 patients in the control group with Hb >10 g per 
dL received a transfusion. Furthermore, 46 percent of en- 
rolled patients never had a postoperative Hb <9 g per dL. 
In this subgroup, 5 percent (5/98) of patients in the study 
group received RBCs, whereas 18 percent (18/98) of control 
patients underwent RBC transfusion (p = 0.004) (Fig. 2). 
In the 71 study patients and the 78 control patients with 
a lowest postoperative Hb level between 8 and 9 g per dL, 
we found no significant differences in patient and proce- 
dure-related variables. However, the transfusion rates were 
significantly different: 38 percent of study patients received 
RBC transfusions versus 56 percent of control patients (p = 
0.025) (Fig. 2). In this subset of patients, the mean number 
of RBC units transfused in the postoperative period was 0.8 
± 1.2 in study patients and 1.4 ± 1.4 in control patients (p = 
0.01). 
Most patients with a lowest Hb less than 8 g per dL in 
the postoperative period received transfusions (Fig. 2). All 
patients in the study (n = 10) and control (n = 12) groups 
with a Hb level less than 7 g per dL received a transfusion. 

Despite using a lower Hb threshold for transfusion, we 
found no significant differences in the lowest Hb level in the 
study and control groups during the preoperative or opera- 
tive periods, upon ICU admission, on Days 1 to 5, or at dis- 
charge (Fig. 3). The mean net reduction in Hb from admis- 
sion to discharge was 4.2 ± 1.7 g per dL in study patients and 
4.2 ± 1.9 g per dL in control patients (p = 0.866). 
In the subset of patients with lowest Hb levels of 8 to 9 
g per dL during the entire postoperative period, patients in 
the study group (n = 71) had significantly lower Hb levels 
than control patients (n = 78) on postoperative Day 2 (9.4 ± 
n = 47 n = 46 
<8 d/L 
n = 71 n = 78 
8-9 g/dL 
Group 
n = 98 n = 98 
>9 g dL 





utilization was demonstrated during the postoperative period 
(p = 0.005) and affected the overall transfusion rate (p = 0.04). 
(cid:1) , Study patients; (cid:1) , Control patients. 
Analysis of RBC transfusion by hospital site showed 
that the mean number of RBC units transfused in the op- 
erating room was similar: 1.1 ± 1.5 units in the study group 
and 1.1 ± 1.7 units in the control group. However, in the 
study patients the number of RBC units transfused in the 
postoperative period was significantly reduced; the mean 
number of RBC units transfused postoperatively was 0.9 ± 
1.5 in the study group and 1.4 ± 1.8 in the control group (p 
= 0.005). Although the intraoperative transfusion incidence 
was similar (41% in study patients vs. 40% in control pa- 
tients), the postoperative transfusion incidence was signifi- 
cantly lower in study patients (35%) than in control patients 
(48%) (p = 0.005). The proportion of RBCs transfused intra- 
operatively in the study group was 55 percent (244/538), 
whereas control patients received intraoperatively 45 per- 
cent (233/426) of all RBCs used in the entire hospital stay 
(p = 0.004). 
We found no evidence to indicate that the study regi- 
men alone delayed the necessity of RBC transfusion. A mi- 
nority of patients in both groups received an RBC transfu- 
sion after the first 24 hours after surgery: 21 percent in the 
study group and 22 percent in the control group. The num- 
ber of RBC units transfused to the study patients after 24 
hours represents 22 percent of RBC units transfused in the 
entire hospital stay, while in control patients, the number 
represents 20 percent. The mean number of RBCs admin- 
istered after the first 24 hours was 0.44 ± 0.9 in the study 
group and 0.49 ± 1.1 in controls. 

We sorted patients by the lowest Hb levels. The postopera- 
tive Hb level never fell below 10 g per dL in 20 percent of all 
patients. Of the 38 patients in the study group with post- 

est Hb during the postoperative period. Significant differences 
between study ((cid:1) ) and control ((cid:1) ) patients were reached for 
subgroups with lowest Hb levels >8 g per dL. 

group of patients with a lowest Hb of 8 to 10 g per dL dur- 
ing the time from ICU admission to postoperative Day 1, 
which is the period when most patients were on mechani- 
cal ventilation; study patients (n = 65) were extubated more 
than 2 hours earlier than control patients (n = 62) (p = 0.006). 
Of the 65 study patients in this subgroup, 37 (57%) were 
extubated within 8 hours, as compared with 24 (39%) of the 
62 control patients (p = 0.04). Preoperative and operative 
characteristics were similar for these two subgroups, except 
for the lower incidence of transfusions in the study sub- 
group during that period (42% vs. 69% in the control sub- 
group, p = 0.002). 
Hospital stay. We found no significant differences be- 
tween the two groups in the length of stay in the ICU. More- 
over, the total number of days spent in the hospital after 
surgery was similar for the two groups: 7.5 ± 2.9 days for 
study patients and 7.9 ± 4.9 days for control patients. 
Morbidity and mortality. No significant differences 
were noted between the two groups in any complication 
monitored in the study (Table 2). Regression analysis of the 
relationship between the incidence of complications and 
lowest Hb levels in all 428 patients showed no significant 
correlation. On univariate regression analysis, neurologic 
complications (p = 0.018) and atrial (p<0.0001) and ven- 
tricular (p = 0.026) arrhythmias correlated with the patients’ 
age. On multivariate regression analysis, age was the only 
significant predictor of postoperative complications (p = 
0.014). 
Analysis of all the enrollees, including patients ex- 
cluded for transfusion assessment, showed that the mortal- 
ity rate was similar for study and control patients. Death 
occurred in 3 (1.4%) of 215 study patients and 6 (2.7%) of 
the 222 control patients (p = 0.321). Review of these deaths 
show that none could be attributed to a reduction in trans- 
fusion trigger or to low Hb levels. 
Postoperative health survey questionnaire. The FACT- 
F and FACT-An instruments were completed by 328 (90%) 
of 365 patients (155/175 study patients, 89%; and 173/190 
control patients, 91%). The use of these questionnaires was 
discontinued late in the study, after statistical analysis. We 
found no significant differences in patient-related data, 
procedure characteristics, or Hb levels in study and control 
patients who completed the questionnaire. Patient self-as- 

0.9 vs. 9.9 ± 1.0; p = 0.019), on postoperative Day 5 (9.1 ± 0.9 
vs. 9.7 ± 1.1; p = 0.022), and at the last Hb check before dis- 
charge (9.4 ± 0.9 vs. 9.7 ± 1.1; p = 0.033) (Fig. 4). Among these 
same patients, the mean net reduction in Hb from ICU 
admission to postoperative Day 5 was 1.8 ± 2.0 g per dL in 
study patients and 0.6 ± 2.2 g per dL in control patients (p = 
0.03). 

Mechanical ventilation. The duration of mechanical ven- 
tilation did not differ significantly in study and control pa- 
tients. However, in the subset of patients with lowest post- 
operative Hb levels of 8 to 9 g per dL, study patients spent 
significantly less time on mechanical ventilation than did 
control patients (8.6 ± 4.5 hours vs. 10.8 ± 5.1 hours, p = 
0.008). In addition, we analyzed ventilation time in the sub- 

Fig. 3. Postoperative Hb levels for study (—(cid:1) —) and control 
(—(cid:1) —) patients. No significant differences were found be- 
tween the two groups during the postoperative period. 




and 5 (p = 0.022) and for the last measured Hb level before dis- 
charge (p = 0.033). Study patients, —(cid:1) —; control patients, 
—(cid:1) —. 

TABLE 2. Outcome measures in 212 study patients 
and 216 control patients 

Atrial arrhythmia 
Ventricular arrhythmia 
Myocardial infarction 
Neurologic deficit 
Pulmonary complications 
Renal failure 
Infection 
Study group 
(%) 
Control group 
(%) 
30 
13 
1 
11 
57 
 8 
5 
(14) 
(6) 
(0.5) 
(5) 
(27) 
(4) 
(2) 
40 
9 
0 
9 
64 
5 
3 
(19) 
(4) 
(0) 
(4) 
(30) 
(2) 
(1) 
sessment scores were similar for both groups on postopera- 
tive Days 3 and 5. 
When analyzed by Hb content, FACT-F and FACT-An 
scores were significantly different on postoperative Day 5, 
when patients with a Hb <9 g per dL were compared with 
patients with a Hb level >10 g per dL (p = 0.004). However, 
the same groups had similar survey scores on postopera- 
tive Day 3. Because the goal of our study was to maintain 
Hb content at >8 g per dL, we reanalyzed the subgroup and 
excluded patients with lowest Hb <8 g per dL. Then, survey 
scores did not differ significantly between low and high Hb 
groups (33.7 ± 13.9 in study patients vs. 29.6 ± 13.3 in con- 
trol patients, p = 0.073). 

In this study, by lowering the postoperative Hb threshold 
for RBC transfusion to 8 g per dL, we reduced RBC require- 
ments by 20 percent. Moreover, lowering the threshold did 
not adversely affect patient outcome, as measured by tra- 
ditional variables or by patient self-assessment. Although 
the reduction in RBC use does not seem dramatic, the net 
RBC savings, when applied to the large number of CABG 
surgeries performed at our facility, are substantial. We per- 
form 1600 CABG procedures each year; therefore, the pro- 
jected annual savings are 800 RBC units, which would re- 
duce expenses by more than $150,000. 
The potential for undertransfusing patients because of 
stringent transfusion practices is a growing concern for 
physicians interested in transfusion medicine.26 In studies 
assessing new transfusion guidelines, showing only that 
surgical procedures can be done with fewer transfusions is 
not sufficient. Studies proposing reduced transfusion sup- 
port should provide data indicating that patient outcome 
is not adversely affected by such restrictions. In our study, 
traditional outcome measures such as length of stay, dura- 
tion of mechanical ventilation, and ICU stay were similar 
for patients receiving a restricted number of transfusions 
and for those receiving the standard number of transfu- 
sions. 
A previous study showed that increased rates of postop- 
erative transfusion may be correlated with late extubation.27 
We also noted a shorter duration of mechanical ventilation 
in a subset of study patients with the lowest postoperative Hb 
between 8 and 9 g per dL. Although this finding could relate 
to the fact that patients with a postoperative Hb between 8 
and 9 g per dL were sicker, our data on patient comparabil- 
ity suggest that transfusion can be a major determinant of 
late extubation. 
In our study, the mortality rate and the incidence of 
complications such as myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, 
and neurologic events were comparable to those reported 
in other studies.27,31-35 We found no statistical correlation 
with morbidity and postoperative Hb levels or decreased 

transfusion rates. However, because such morbidity occurs 
infrequently in CABG surgery, a larger study would be nec- 
essary to achieve the higher analytic power needed for de- 
finitive assessment of these risks. In a large retrospective 
study of Hb effect on clinical outcome, Carson et al.28 
showed that outcome was independent of Hb content for 
patients with moderate anemia (Hb >8 g/dL). Our results 
indicated that age was the main factor associated with com- 
plications, which supports findings from previous studies. 
Extreme anemia is a predictor of increased morbidity 
and mortality.29,30 Fang et al.29 reported that intraoperative 
Hct values less than 14 percent were associated with a 
threefold rise in mortality in CABG patients. Data obtained 
from patients who refused transfusions for religious reasons 
suggest that severe complications occur with an acute drop 
of Hb to less than 5 g per dL.30 However, the effect of coro- 
nary atherosclerosis on the ability of these patients to tol- 
erate anemia is unknown. Larger prospective studies are 
necessary to determine the degree of anemia that can be 
safely allowed in the postoperative period in patients at risk 
for coronary artery disease. 
Caution is urged in applying these results to all patients 
undergoing CABG surgery. Our study group was restricted 
to low-risk patients without excessive bleeding, and the 
protocol was not designed to prompt a rigid response based 
solely on Hb level. Clinical judgment rather than strict ad- 
herence to a given Hb threshold is required for managing 
bleeding or unstable CABG patients. Patients undergoing 
CABG surgery require special consideration regarding the 
degree of allowable anemia, because compensatory tachy- 
cardia in response to decreased oxygen-carrying capacity 
may cause a critical increase in myocardial oxygen de- 
mand.31 
In cardiac rehabilitation programs, surgical patients 
undergo rapid mobilization to reduce the risk of postopera- 
tive complications and to minimize the hospital stay. Many 
clinicians are concerned about the patient’s ability to meet 
the energy demands associated with aggressive rehabilita- 
tion activities after restricted Hb support. Johnson et al.20 
found no difference in exercise endurance in liberally trans- 
fused CABG patients and those who had been conserva- 
tively managed. We applied a self-assessment tool to deter- 
mine if patients on our restricted transfusion protocol 
(study patients) felt fatigued and therefore less willing to 
undergo rehabilitation. Our survey found no difference in 
vigor in the two groups. 
The similarity of FACT-F and FACT-An scores for the 
groups in our study may be attributed to similarity in one 
outcome measure, lowest Hb, when the groups were com- 
pared as a whole. When we compared the survey scores in 
subgroups with blood Hb content <9 g per dL to those with 
Hb content >10 g per dL, we found the expected difference 
in response. However, when patients with very low Hb lev- 
els (<8 g/dL) were eliminated from analysis, the differences 


in survey scores were eliminated. Patients with moderately 
low and average Hb levels appear unable to discern a dif- 
ference in energy level during postoperative recovery. In a 
study of a more heterogeneous group of ICU patients, 
Babineau et al.11 failed to find clinical differences between 
patients treated to maintain blood Hb at 10 g per dL and 
those treated to maintain Hb at 9 g per dL. 
Our finding that Hb levels were only modestly affected, 
despite a significant reduction in RBC support, shows the 
inaccuracy of Hb levels as an indicator for RBC transfusion. 
Shifts in blood volume that accompany CABG surgery and 
other factors such as RBC regeneration may play a role in 
minimizing the intergroup differences. RBC regeneration, 
which would probably not affect early postoperative Hb 
levels, could be expected to ameliorate any late complica- 
tions associated with restricted RBC transfusion. The pa- 
tients most affected by the study protocol were those with 
Hb levels between 8 and 9 g per dL; these patients had sig- 
nificant reductions in Hb on postoperative Days 2 and 5 and 
at the last Hb check before discharge. 
Despite its limitations in predicting blood need, the Hb 
level, when applied to appropriate groups of patients un- 
dergoing CABG surgery, could prevent unnecessary RBC 
transfusions. Our data indicate that transfusion require- 
ments for cardiovascular and other surgical patients should 
be more extensively evaluated. 














































Transfusion Medicine Academic Award Group. JAMA 
1991;265:86-90. 
17. Weiskopf RB, Viele MK, Feiner J, et al. Human cardiovascu- 
lar and metabolic response to acute, severe isovolemic ane- 
















































































tality, morbidity, and cost of care. Ann Thorac Surg 
1990;49:179-86; discussion 186-7. (cid:1)(cid:1) 

