

Liberal Versus Restrictive Transfusion Thresholds For Patients 
With Symptomatic Coronary Artery Disease 
Jeffrey L Carson, MD1, Maria Mori Brooks, PhD2, J Dawn Abbott, MD3, Bernard Chaitman, 
MD4, Sheryl F Kelsey, PhD2, Darrell J Triulzi, MD5, Vankeepuram Srinivas, MD6, Mark A 
Menegus, MD6, Oscar C Marroquin, MD7, Sunil V Rao, MD8, Helaine Noveck, MPH1, 
Elizabeth Passano, MS2, Regina M Hardison, MS2, Thomas Smitherman, MD7, Tudor 
Vagaonescu, MD9, Neil J Wimmer, MD10, and David O Williams, MD10 
1Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey 2Department of 
Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 3Division of Cardiology, Rhode 
Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 4Department 
of Medicine, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri 5Institute for Transfusion Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 6Division of Cardiology, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New York 7Division of Cardiology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 8Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke 
University, Durham, North Carolina 9Division of Cardiology, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey 
10Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 

Background—Prior trials suggest it is safe to defer transfusion at hemoglobin levels above 7–8 
g/dL in most patients. Patients with acute coronary syndrome may benefit from higher hemoglobin 
levels. 
Methods—We performed a pilot trial in 110 patients with acute coronary syndrome or stable 
angina undergoing cardiac catheterization and a hemoglobin < 10 g/dL. Patients in the liberal 
transfusion strategy received one or more units of blood to raise the hemoglobin level ≥ 10 g/dL. 
Patients in the restrictive transfusion strategy were permitted to receive blood for symptoms from 
anemia or for a hemoglobin < 8 g/dL. The predefined primary outcome was the composite of 
death, myocardial infarction, or unscheduled revascularization 30 days post randomization. 
Results—Baseline characteristics were similar between groups except age (liberal-67.3, 
restrictive-74.3). The mean number of units transfused was 1.6 in the liberal group and 0.6 in the 
restrictive group. The primary outcome occurred in 6 patients (10.9%) in the liberal group and 14 
(25.5%) in the restrictive group (risk difference= 15.0%; 95% confidence interval of difference 
0.7% to 29.3%; p=0.054 and adjusted for age p=0.076). Death at 30 days was less frequent in 
liberal group (n=1, 1.8%) compared to restrictive group (n=7, 13.0%; p=0.032). 

Corresponding Author: Jeffrey L Carson, MD Division of General Internal Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New 
Brunswick, New Jersey Telephone number 732-235-7122, carson@umdnj.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
NIH Public Access 
Author Manuscript 
Am Heart J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 01. 


Conclusions—The liberal transfusion strategy was associated with a trend for fewer major 
cardiac events and deaths than a more restrictive strategy. These results support the feasibility of 
and the need for a definitive trial. 

Recently, published guidelines recommended that clinicians adopt a restrictive transfusion 
strategy in most acutely ill patients.1, 2 Patients with coronary artery disease frequently 
become anemic and receive transfusion because they have pre-existing anemia, undergo 
invasive procedures, and receive multiple classes of anticoagulants.3 Moderate anemia may 
result in increased rates of myocardial ischemia and infarction in patients with pre-existing 
coronary lesions that limit myocardial oxygen delivery.4 Observational studies examining 
the association between transfusion and outcomes document an association between 
transfusion and increased.5 These studies are limited by confounding (more severely ill 
patients also get more transfusions), making causal inferences impossible.6, 7 However, 
there are no clinical trials to guide transfusion decisions in patients with acute coronary 
syndrome. The absence of high quality evidence contributes to the ongoing large variation in 
clinical practice8 
Given this uncertainty, we undertook a multicenter pilot trial to evaluate the feasibility and 
outcomes of a liberal transfusion strategy compared to a restrictive transfusion strategy in 
patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease including acute coronary syndromes. 


We enrolled patients from 8 US hospitals from March 15, 2010 to May 8, 2012 who were: 
1) greater than 18 years of age; 2) had either a) ST segment elevation myocardial infarction, 
b) Non ST segment elevation myocardial infarction, c) unstable angina, or d) stable coronary 
artery disease undergoing a cardiac catheterization; and 3) had a hemoglobin concentration 
less than 10 g/dL at the time of random allocation. We excluded patients who had active 
bleeding from cardiac catheterization puncture site, including retroperitoneal, judged to be 
uncontrolled or needing surgical repair or resulting in hemodynamic instability at any time 
during the index admission; symptoms of anemia at the time of randomization; or other 
health concerns (i.e., acute psychiatric illness) that would interfere with the reporting of 
symptoms and adherence to treatment protocols. The institutional review board at all 
participating hospitals approved the protocol. Written informed consent was obtained from 
all patients. An independent data and safety monitoring board also approved the protocol 
and monitored the trial. 
Definitions of diagnostic categories—We defined an ST elevation myocardial 
infarction as symptoms of cardiac ischemia at rest with at least one episode lasting 10 
minutes and who had ST-segment elevation of 1 mm or more in two or more contiguous 
leads, new left bundle-branch block, cardiac biomarkers (troponin or creatine kinase MB) 
above the upper limit of the normal range. We defined a Non ST elevation myocardial 
infarction as symptoms of cardiac ischemia at rest with at least one episode lasting 10 
minutes AND a level of troponin or creatine kinase MB above the upper limit of the normal 
range. The diagnosis of unstable angina required symptoms of cardiac ischemia at rest with 
at least one episode lasting 10 minutes AND ST-segment depression of 0.01 mV or more or 
transient [<30-minute] ST-segment elevation of 0.1 mV or more in two or more contiguous 
leads), OR prior documented coronary artery disease (myocardial infarction, percutaneous 
cardiac intervention, coronary artery bypass graft surgery), or age >55 with diabetes mellitus 
or peripheral arterial disease and no biomarker elevation. For stable coronary artery disease, 



we required the presence of coronary artery disease (one cardiac artery with at least 70% 
obstruction by visual inspection based on cardiac catheterization or undergoing a 
percutaneous cardiac intervention, during index admission). 

Using an automated telephone system, we implemented a permuted block randomization 
process stratified by clinical site and clinical diagnosis (acute coronary syndrome or stable 
coronary artery disease). 
Patients randomly allocated to the liberal transfusion strategy received one unit of packed 
red blood cells following randomization and then received enough blood to raise the 
hemoglobin concentration to 10 g/dL or above any time the hemoglobin concentration was 
detected to be below 10g/dL during the hospitalization for up to 30 days. Patients 
randomized to the restrictive transfusion strategy were permitted to receive a transfusion if 
they developed symptoms related to anemia. A blood transfusion was also permitted, but not 
required, in the absence of symptoms if the hemoglobin concentration fell below 8 g/dL. 
There was no lower threshold for which blood was required in the restrictive group. Blood 
was to be administered one unit at a time and the presence of symptoms reassessed. Only 
enough blood was given to relieve symptoms or to increase the hemoglobin concentration 
above 8 g/dL. Symptoms of anemia that were indications for transfusion included definite 
angina requiring treatment with sublingual nitroglycerin or equivalent therapy, and 
unexplained tachycardia or hypotension. Leukoreduction was not required. 

The primary clinical endpoint was the composite rate of all cause mortality, myocardial 
infarction or unscheduled coronary revascularization up to 30 days after randomization. 
Secondary outcomes were: i) composite 6 month rates of all cause mortality, recurrent 
myocardial infarction, or unscheduled coronary revascularization. ii) Rates of each of the 
individual components of the composite outcome at 30 days and 6 months. iii) Mortality 
from cardiac cause at 30 days and 6 months. iv) Unscheduled hospital admission at 30 days 
and 6 months for any reason, for cardiac reason, or infection. v) Stroke at 30 days and 6 
months. vi) Congestive heart failure at 30 days and 6 months. vii) Stent thrombosis at 30 
days and 6 months. viii) Deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism at 30 days and 6 
months. ix) Composite 30 day and 6 month infection outcome of pneumonia and blood 
stream infection. x) Each of the components of the composite infection outcome at 30 days 
and 6 months. xi) Composite 30 day rates of all cause mortality, myocardial infarction, 
unscheduled coronary revascularization, and pneumonia. xii) Composite 6 month rates of all 
cause mortality, recurrent myocardial infarction, unscheduled coronary revascularization 
and pneumonia. 
Outcome adjudications and event classifications were performed by a committee composed 
of two cardiologists or infectious disease specialist (for infections) masked to the assignment 
group. Disagreements were settled by consensus. 
Vital status was determined by telephone follow-up and a review of medical records. Deaths 
were classified as definite cardiac death (sudden cardiac death, definite myocardial 
infarction, congestive heart failure, cardiac procedure, cardiogenic shock, stent thrombosis, 
or other), probable cardiac death (probable myocardial infarction, unwitnessed death beyond 
one hour, other), cerebrovascular (stroke, other), noncardiac death (infection, cancer, 
pulmonary, renal, accident, trauma/suicide, other).9 
Myocardial infarction was defined using The Joint European Society of Cardiology/ 
American College of Cardiology Committee definitions.10 The diagnosis of myocardial 



infarction required rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarkers (preferably troponin) together with 
evidence of myocardial ischemia and either symptoms of ischemia or electrocardiogram 
changes indicative of new ischemia. Myocardial infarction was classified as ST-segment 
elevation or non-ST segment elevation. 
Unstable angina was defined as: 1) the absence of elevated cardiac biomarkers and 2) 
presence of ischemic symptoms or electrocardiogram changes indicative of ischemia or 3) 
chest pain or angina equivalent leading to a coronary artery intervention (e.g., coronary 
angioplasty) and 4) hospitalization. 
Re-admission to hospital was classified, overall, for primary cardiac diagnosis (acute 
coronary artery syndrome, congestive heart failure, or other), stroke, infection, or 
noncardiac. 
Congestive heart failure required at least one of the following symptoms or signs, new or 
worsening including: dyspnea at rest, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, AND 
radiological evidence of heart failure or worsening heart failure AND additional/increased 
therapy. Hospitalization for congestive heart failure required an admission to an inpatient 
unit for at least a 12-hour stay (or a date change if the time of admission/discharge is not 
available). Biomarker results (e.g., brain natriuretic peptide) consistent with congestive heart 
failure were considered supportive but not diagnostic of the diagnosis. 
Stent thrombosis11 and pneumonia12 were also adjudicated by committee. Based on medical 
record review, unscheduled coronary artery bypass surgery or percutaneous cardiac 
intervention, stroke, deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, laboratory confirmed 
blood stream infection were recorded. 
We documented the number of eligible study subjects and enrollment rate. We characterized 
the patients randomized in the trial, and assessed the adherence to the transfusion protocol 
including the mean hemoglobin concentrations and the median number of units of red blood 
cell transfusions in the two study arms. The observed frequencies of the proposed primary 
and secondary outcomes were documented for study planning purposes. 
We recorded daily hemoglobin concentrations for the first 3 days following randomization. 
We did not mandate daily measurements thereafter but recorded all other hemoglobin 
concentrations during the hospitalization (up to 30 days). We performed a baseline 
electrocardiogram and troponin concentration prior to randomization and collected all 
electrocardiograms, troponin and CK results obtained for clinical purposes. After 
randomization, troponin values were obtained every 12 hours for 1 day, and then daily for 2 
days or until discharge from the hospital. An electrocardiogram was performed daily up to 3 
days after randomization or discharge, or when clinically indicated. 
We contacted all surviving patients discharged from the hospital by telephone at 30 days and 
6 months after randomization to learn of their vital status and repeated hospital admissions. 
Follow-up telephone calls were performed centrally by the Clinical Coordinating Center. If a 
patient was admitted to the hospital, copies of medical records were obtained. 


We planned to enroll 200 patients. However, we terminated recruitment with the approval 
the Data Safety Monitoring Committee at the end of 18 months. 110 patients had been 
enrolled providing sufficient information about implementation and rates of clinical 
outcomes to plan a larger trial. 



We used the intention to treat principle for all randomized comparisons. Baseline 
characteristics of the patients in each of the two arms of the trial were described (e.g., 
means, standard deviations, medians, interquartile ranges, and proportions) and statistically 
compared using chi-square statistics for categorical variables and t-tests or Wilcoxon rank 
sum statistics for continuous variables. We compared the number of units transfused and the 
mean hemoglobin concentration each day between the randomized transfusion groups using 
a Spearman and Wilcoxon rank sum statistics. 
We used a stratified Mantel-Haenszel chi-square statistic to compare event rates for the 
primary composite clinical outcome between treatment groups; alpha level of 0.05 was used 
for the primary outcome. As a sensitivity analysis, a logistic regression model was created to 
estimate the assigned treatment effect on the primary composite outcome adjusting for 
measured baseline variables that were significantly different (p<0.05) between the two 
assigned groups. The other pre-specified 30-day clinical events were compared using 
standard chi-square statistics (since there were often too few events for stratification). 
Randomized comparisons of time to event outcomes at 6-months were analyzed with Kaplan 
Meier estimates and log rank statistics. An alpha level of 0.01 was used for all secondary 
outcomes to adjust for multiple comparisons. 
This trial was funded by National Heart Lung and Blood Institute Grant Number: 
1RC2HL101458-01. The authors are solely responsible for the design and conduct of this 
study, all study analyses, the drafting and editing of the paper and its final contents. 

A total of 1920 patients with a hemoglobin concentration less than 11 g/dL were screened. 
The most common reasons for exclusion (Figure 1) were the hemoglobin > 10 g/dL (n=644), 
patient declined (n=198), cardiac surgery was planned within 30 days (n=156), patient was 
unable to provide consent (n=144), or severe illness (n=139). The incidence of hemoglobin 
concentration < 10 g/dL was 24.2%. Among patients approached, consent was obtained in 
25% of patients. We randomly allocated 110 patients; Robert Wood Johnson University 
Hospital= 32, Montefiore-Weiler Division=24, Rhode Island Hospital=21, Montefiore- 
Moses Division=15, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center-Presbyterian Hospital=12, 
Duke University=2, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center-Passavant Hospital=2, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital=2. One patient was lost to follow-up (Figure 1). 

Clinical characteristics (table 1) were similar between the two transfusion groups with 
exception of age: 74.3 years in the restrictive group compared to 67.3 years in the liberal 
group; p=0.004. Pre-existing anemia was present in 41% of patients and active bleeding in 
only 14% of patients. 

The mean hemoglobin concentration was between 1.3 and 1.8 g/dL higher in the liberal 
transfusion group than restrictive transfusion group (all p-value < 0.001) (Table 2). On 
average, the patients in the liberal arm received about 3 times as many transfusions as those 
in the restrictive arm (total number of units 87 versus 27; p < 0.001). Of note, 72.7% of 
patients in the restrictive arm did not receive blood transfusion. Consistent with the protocol, 
the mean hemoglobin concentration at the time transfusion was implemented was 1.4 g/dL 
higher in the liberal group than in the restrictive group (P<0.001) (Table 2). 
Violations in the transfusion protocol occurred in five patients (9.1%) in the liberal group 
and one patient (1.8%) in the restrictive group. The most common reason for protocol 



violation was insufficient time to administer a transfusion prior to discharge in the liberal 
group. 

The pre-defined primary outcome of death, myocardial infarction, and unscheduled 
revascularization occurred within 30 days in six patients (10.9%) in the liberal-transfusion 
strategy and 14 (25.5%) in the restrictive-transfusion strategy (risk difference= 15.0%; 95% 
confidence interval of difference 0.7% to 29.3%; p=0.054). Death at 30 days was less 
frequent among liberal transfusion patients (n=1, 1.8%) compared to restrictive transfusion 
patients (n=7, 13.0%); risk difference=11.1%, 95% confidence interval of difference 1.5% to 
20.8%; p=0.032). All deaths were classified as cardiac. Most of the other adverse cardiac 
outcomes were more frequent in restrictive transfusion compared with the liberal transfusion 
group (Table 3). 
The trend favoring liberal transfusion persisted throughout follow-up although the risk of 
death, myocardial infarction, unscheduled revascularization was not statistically different in 
the two groups (27.3% Liberal versus 37.0% Restrictive; risk difference=9.7%, 95% 
confidence interval of difference -5.3% to 24.7%; p=0.26) (Figure 2). Similarly, the risk of 
death and of death or myocardial infarction did not differ significantly by transfusion 
strategy (death 12.7% Liberal versus 18.5% Restrictive, p=0.26; death/MI 23.6% Liberal 
versus 33.2% Restrictive p=0.28; Figure 3B and 3C). The curves suggest that the event rates 
separate by 30 days and remain parallel for 6 months. 
We performed a post-hoc analysis to adjust for age, the one variable that was significantly 
different between assigned groups. The unadjusted odds of death, myocardial infarction, or 
unscheduled revascularization within 30 days was higher in the restrictive group than the 
liberal group (odds ratio=2.86, 95% confidence interval, 1.01 to 8.12, p=0.049). Adjusting 
for age, the 30-day death, myocardial infarction, or unscheduled revascularization estimate 
for the restrictive versus liberal strategy was slightly attenuated and was not statistically 
significant (odds ratio=2.65; 95% confidence interval 0.90 to 7.78; p=0.076). 

In this multicenter pilot trial, patients transfused using a restrictive strategy had more than 2 
times the rate of death, myocardial infarction or unscheduled revascularization in the first 30 
days of care compared with those transfused using a liberal strategy. Although there was a 
trend strongly favoring the liberal arm, we believe these data should be interpreted 
cautiously. The study was small and the apparent impact of transfusion was much larger 
than expected. Furthermore, the restrictive group was 6 years older than the liberal group. 
We successfully implemented this pilot randomized trial in eight US centers. We noted that 
patients hemoglobin levels less than 10 g/dL were common, occurring in 24.2% of patients 
with acute coronary syndrome. In adopting our transfusion strategies hemoglobin levels 
averaged 1.5 g/dL higher in the liberal transfusion group as compared to the restrictive 
transfusion group. Also, the liberal transfusion group received 3 fold more blood 
transfusions. Adherence to the protocol exceeded 94% and follow-up at six months was 
achieved in 99.1% of patients. The observed rates for death and key cardiac outcomes were 
high. 
Prior to initiating the pilot, we anticipated enrolling a large number of patients with anemia 
that resulted from bleeding. Instead, we found bleeding to be infrequent (only 14%) and pre- 
existing anemia to be common (41%) resulting in fewer patients eligible for the trial. The 
low rate of bleeding may reflect the widespread use of lower risk anticoagulants. Thus, we 



tested the impact of transfusion in patients with chronic anemia or modest bleeding rather 
than the hemorrhaging patient. Importantly, these patients had extensive co-morbidity, and 
as we found in this trial, anemia is a marker for poor outcome in patients with acute 
coronary disease.3 
We were unable to blind the treating physician or patient to the transfusion strategy. 
However, we did classify outcomes blinded to treatment assignment. We do not know if 
process of care differed between the two groups of patients although adherence to the 
protocol was similar. 
We did learn several important lessons from the pilot that will inform the conduct of larger 
trial. We plan to reduce exclusions (patients who could not consent for themselves, patients 
with hemodynamic instability, and patients with life expectancy less than 6 months) to 
simplify the enrollment process, increase enrollment of patients at risk of adverse 
consequences of both anemia and transfusion, and enhance generalizability. We will also 
include patients with demand ischemia because they represent about 15% of patients with 
acute myocardial infarction and may benefit from a liberal approach to transfusion 
In the critically ill and in surgery patients with stable cardiovascular disease or cardiac risk 
factors, prior randomized trials support that a more restrictive approach to transfusion leads 
to similar clinical outcomes compared to a liberal approach.13–15 However, patients with 
acute coronary disease may require higher hemoglobin concentrations than patients without 
cardiovascular disease. Oxygen delivery to the myocardium is flow dependent since the 
heart extracts a high percentage of oxygen, and myocardial ischemia and ventricular 
arrhythmias may be precipitated by anemia.16–18 
In contrast to the findings of our trial, the only other randomized trial comparing transfusion 
triggers in 45 patients with acute coronary syndrome documented an increase in the 
combined rates of death, recurrent myocardial infarction, and new or worsening congestive 
heart failure in liberal transfusion group.19 The apparent difference seen in that study was 
explained by increase risk of congestive heart failure in the liberal group. Observational 
studies demonstrate conflicting results with one study finding benefit of liberal transfusion20 
but most studies suggesting harm of transfusion.5 The inconsistent results among these two 
small clinical trials and multiple observational studies further support equipoise on this issue 
and underscore the need for a definitive trial. 
This study was designed as a pilot trial, and thus, the primary goals were to assess feasibility 
of enrollment, characterize the patient population with coronary disease and anemia, identify 
protocol challenges, and estimate event rates. While our results are provocative, this pilot 
trial was not designed to enroll enough patients to answer the transfusion dilemma currently 
facing clinicians in practice. 
This pilot was successful in recruiting anemic ill patients predominately with acute coronary 
syndrome and implementing transfusion protocol and follow-up. The MINT pilot trial 
results suggest that liberal transfusion strategy might improve outcome, although there were 
few events, and large treatment differences that could be explained by chance. A large 
multicenter trial is feasible and essential to definitively establish whether patients with acute 
coronary syndrome benefit from liberal transfusion. 

1. Napolitano LM, Kurek S, Luchette FA, Corwin HL, Barie PS, Tisherman SA, et al. Clinical practice 
guideline: red blood cell transfusion in adult trauma and critical care. Crit Care Med. 2009; 37(12): 
3124–3157. [PubMed: 19773646] 




Cell Transfusion: A Clinical Practice Guideline From the AABB*. Ann Intern Med. 2012; 157(1): 
49–58. [PubMed: 22751760] 
3. Salisbury AC, Amin AP, Reid KJ, Wang TY, Masoudi FA, Chan PS, et al. Hospital-acquired 
anemia and in-hospital mortality in patients with acute myocardial infarction. American heart 
journal. 2011; 162(2):300–309. e3. [PubMed: 21835291] 

cardiovascular disease on surgical mortality and morbidity. Lancet. 1996; 348(9034):1055–1060. 
[PubMed: 8874456] 
5. Chatterjee S, Wetterslev J, Sharma A, Lichstein E, Mukherjee D. Association of Blood Transfusion 
With Increased Mortality in Myocardial Infarction: A Meta-analysis and Diversity-Adjusted Study 
Sequential Analysis. JAMA internal medicine. 2013; 173(2):132–139. [PubMed: 23266500] 

Confounding by indication, an underestimated problem in clinical transfusion research. Transfusion. 
2010; 50(6):1181–1183. [PubMed: 20456689] 

"Association of Blood Transfusion With Increased Mortality in Myocardial Infarction: A Meta- 
analysis and Diversity-Adjusted Study Sequential Analysis". JAMA internal medicine. 2013; 
173(2):139–141. [PubMed: 23266861] 
8. Alexander KP, Chen AY, Wang TY, Rao SV, Newby LK, LaPointe NM, et al. Transfusion practice 
and outcomes in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. Am Heart J. 2008; 155(6): 
1047–1053. [PubMed: 18513518] 

Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes randomized trial of different treatment 
strategies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable ischemic heart disease: impact of treatment strategy 
on cardiac mortality and myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2009; 120(25):2529–2540. [PubMed: 
19920001] 


11. Cutlip DE, Windecker S, Mehran R, Boam A, Cohen DJ, van Es GA, et al. Clinical end points in 
coronary stent trials: a case for standardized definitions. Circulation. 2007; 115(17):2344–2351. 
[PubMed: 17470709] 
12. Horan TC, Andrus M, Dudeck MA. CDC/NHSN surveillance definition of health care-associated 
infection and criteria for specific types of infections in the acute care setting. Am J Infect Control. 
2008; 36(5):309–332. [PubMed: 18538699] 
13. Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, Marshall J, Martin C, Pagliarello G, et al. A multicenter, 
randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. Transfusion 
Requirements in Critical Care Investigators, Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. New England 
Journal of Medicine. 1999; 340(6):409–417. [see comments]. [PubMed: 9971864] 

restrictive transfusion in high-risk patients after hip surgery. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365(26):2453– 
2462. [PubMed: 22168590] 
15. Carson JL, Carless PA, Hebert PC. Transfusion thresholds and other strategies for guiding 
allogeneic red blood cell transfusion. Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2012; 4 
CD002042. 
16. Anderson HT, Kessinger JM, McFarland WJ Jr, Laks H, Geha AS. Response of the hypertrophied 
heart to acute anemia and coronary stenosis. Surgery. 1978; 84(1):8–15. [PubMed: 149386] 
17. Hagl S, Heimisch W, Meisner H, Erben R, Baum M, Mendler N. The effect of hemodilution on 
regional myocardial function in the presence of coronary stenosis. Basic Research in Cardiology. 
1977; 72(4):344–364. [PubMed: 901378] 
18. Wilkerson DK, Rosen AL, Sehgal LR, Gould SA, Sehgal HL, Moss GS. Limits of cardiac 
compensation in anemic baboons. Surgery. 1988; 103(6):665–670. [PubMed: 3375993] 



19. Cooper HA, Rao SV, Greenberg MD, Rumsey MP, McKenzie M, Alcorn KW, et al. Conservative 
versus liberal red cell transfusion in acute myocardial infarction (the CRIT Randomized Pilot 
Study). The American journal of cardiology. 2011; 108(8):1108–1111. [PubMed: 21791325] 
20. Wu WC, Rathore SS, Wang Y, Radford MJ, Krumholz HM. Blood transfusion in elderly patients 
with acute myocardial infarction. New England Journal of Medicine. 2001; 345(17):1230–1236. 
[PubMed: 11680442] 







Figure 2. 
Outcomes at 6 months 



























All Patients 
N=110 
Liberal 
N=55 
Restrictive 
N=55 






















































































































All Patients 
N=110 
Liberal 
N=55 
Restrictive 
N=55 
























Liberal 
(N=55) 
Restrictive 
(N=55) 


















































































