Transfusion Strategies for Acute Upper Gastrointestinal 
Bleeding 
Càndid Villanueva, M.D., Alan Colomo, M.D., Alba Bosch, M.D., Mar Concepción, M.D., 
Virginia Hernandez-Gea, M.D., Carles Aracil, M.D., Isabel Graupera, M.D., María Poca, M.D., 
Cristina Alvarez-Urturi, M.D., Jordi Gordillo, M.D., Carlos Guarner-Argente, M.D., Miquel Santaló, M.D., 
Eduardo Muñiz, M.D., and Carlos Guarner, M.D. 
From the Gastrointestinal Bleeding Unit, 
Department of Gastroenterology (C.V., 
A.C., M.C., V.H.-G., C.A., I.G., M.P., 
C.A.-U., J.G., C.G.-A., C.G.), Blood and 
Tissue Bank (A.B., E.M.), and the Semi- 
Critical Unit (M.S.), Hospital de Sant 
Pau, Autonomous University, and Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas 
(C.V., A.C., I.G., C.G.) — all in Barcelona. 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Villa- 
nueva at Servei de Patologia Digestiva, 
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Mas 
Casanovas, 90. 08025 Barcelona, Spain, 
or at cvillanueva@santpau.cat. 
N Engl J Med 2013;368:11-21. 
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1211801 
Copyright © 2013 Massachusetts Medical Society. 

Background 
The hemoglobin threshold for transfusion of red cells in patients with acute gastro- 
intestinal bleeding is controversial. We compared the efficacy and safety of a re- 
strictive transfusion strategy with those of a liberal transfusion strategy. 
Methods 
We enrolled 921 patients with severe acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding and ran- 
domly assigned 461 of them to a restrictive strategy (transfusion when the hemo- 
globin level fell below 7 g per deciliter) and 460 to a liberal strategy (transfusion 
when the hemoglobin fell below 9 g per deciliter). Randomization was stratified 
according to the presence or absence of liver cirrhosis. 
Results 
A total of 225 patients assigned to the restrictive strategy (51%), as compared with 
65 assigned to the liberal strategy (15%), did not receive transfusions (P<0.001). The 
probability of survival at 6 weeks was higher in the restrictive-strategy group than 
in the liberal-strategy group (95% vs. 91%; hazard ratio for death with restrictive 
strategy, 0.55; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.33 to 0.92; P = 0.02). Further bleeding 
occurred in 10% of the patients in the restrictive-strategy group as compared with 
16% of the patients in the liberal-strategy group (P = 0.01), and adverse events oc- 
curred in 40% as compared with 48% (P = 0.02). The probability of survival was 
slightly higher with the restrictive strategy than with the liberal strategy in the 
subgroup of patients who had bleeding associated with a peptic ulcer (hazard ratio, 
0.70; 95% CI, 0.26 to 1.25) and was significantly higher in the subgroup of patients 
with cirrhosis and Child–Pugh class A or B disease (hazard ratio, 0.30; 95% CI, 0.11 to 
0.85), but not in those with cirrhosis and Child–Pugh class C disease (hazard ratio, 
1.04; 95% CI, 0.45 to 2.37). Within the first 5 days, the portal-pressure gradient 
increased significantly in patients assigned to the liberal strategy (P = 0.03) but not 
in those assigned to the restrictive strategy. 
Conclusions 
As compared with a liberal transfusion strategy, a restrictive strategy significantly 
improved outcomes in patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding. (Funded 
by Fundació Investigació Sant Pau; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00414713.) 






The new england 
journal of medicine 





ing is a common emergency condition as- 
sociated with high morbidity and mortal- 
ity.1 It is a frequent indication for red-cell 
transfusion, because acute blood loss can decrease 
tissue perfusion and the delivery of oxygen to tis- 
sues. Transfusion may be lifesaving in patients 
with massive exsanguinating bleeding. However, 
in most cases hemorrhage is not so severe, and in 
such circumstances the safest and most effective 
transfusion strategy is controversial.2,3 
Restricted transfusion strategies may be ap- 
propriate in some settings. Controlled trials have 
shown that for critically ill patients, a restrictive 
transfusion strategy is at least as effective as a 
liberal strategy, while substantially reducing the 
use of blood supplies.4,5 However, these studies 
excluded patients with gastrointestinal bleeding. 
Observational studies and small controlled trials 
have suggested that transfusion may be harmful 
in patients with hypovolemic anemia,6,7 even in 
those with gastrointestinal bleeding.8-12 Further- 
more, studies in animals suggest that transfu- 
sion can be particularly harmful in patients with 
bleeding from portal hypertensive sources, since 
restitution of blood volume after hemorrhage can 
lead to a rebound increase in portal pressure, 
which is associated with a risk of rebleeding.12-14 
We performed a randomized, controlled trial 
in which we assessed whether a restrictive thresh- 
old for red-cell transfusion in patients with acute 
gastrointestinal bleeding was safer and more ef- 
fective than a liberal transfusion strategy that was 
based on the threshold recommended in guide- 
lines at the time the study was designed.15,16 

Study Oversight 
From June 2003 through December 2009, we con- 
secutively enrolled patients with gastrointestinal 
bleeding who were admitted to Hospital de la 
Santa Creu i Sant Pau in Barcelona. Written in- 
formed consent was obtained from all the pa- 
tients or their next of kin, and the trial was ap- 
proved by the institutional ethics committee at 
the hospital. The protocol, including the statisti- 
cal analysis plan, is available with the full text of 
this article at NEJM.org. No commercial support 
was involved in the study. All the authors vouch 
for the integrity and the accuracy of the analysis 
and for the fidelity of the study to the protocol. 
No one who is not an author contributed to the 
manuscript. 
Selection of Patients 
Patients older than 18 years of age who had he- 
matemesis (or bloody nasogastric aspirate), me- 
lena, or both, as confirmed by the hospital staff, 
were considered for inclusion. Patients were ex- 
cluded if they declined to undergo a blood trans- 
fusion. Additional exclusion criteria were massive 
exsanguinating bleeding; an acute coronary syn- 
drome, symptomatic peripheral vasculopathy, 
stroke, transient ischemic attack, or transfusion 
within the previous 90 days; a recent history of 
trauma or surgery; lower gastrointestinal bleed- 
ing; a previous decision on the part of the attend- 
ing physician that the patient should avoid spe- 
cific medical therapy; and a clinical Rockall score 
of 0 with a hemoglobin level higher than 12 g per 
deciliter. The Rockall score is a system for as- 
sessing the risk of further bleeding or death 
among patients with gastrointestinal bleeding; 
scores range from 0 to 11, with a score of 2 or 
lower indicating low risk and scores of 3 to 11 
indicating increasingly greater risk. 
Study Design 
Immediately after admission, patients were ran- 
domly assigned to a restrictive transfusion strategy 
or a liberal transfusion strategy. Randomization 
was performed with the use of computer-generated 
random numbers, with the group assignments 
placed in sealed, consecutively numbered, opaque 
envelopes. Randomization was stratified accord- 
ing to the presence or absence of liver cirrhosis 
and was performed in blocks of four. Cirrhosis was 
diagnosed according to clinical, biochemical, and 
ultrasonographic findings. 
In the restrictive-strategy group, the hemo- 
globin threshold for transfusion was 7 g per 
deciliter, with a target range for the post-trans- 
fusion hemoglobin level of 7 to 9 g per deciliter. 
In the liberal-strategy group, the hemoglobin 
threshold for transfusion was 9 g per deciliter, 
with a target range for the post-transfusion he- 
moglobin level of 9 to 11 g per deciliter. In both 
groups, 1 unit of red cells was transfused ini- 
tially; the hemoglobin level was assessed after 
the transfusion, and an additional unit was 
transfused if the hemoglobin level was below the 







threshold value. The transfusion protocol was ap- 
plied until the patient’s discharge from the hos- 
pital or death. The protocol allowed for a trans- 
fusion to be administered any time symptoms or 
signs related to anemia developed, massive bleed- 
ing occurred during follow-up, or surgical inter- 
vention was required. Only prestorage leukocyte- 
reduced units of packed red cells were used for 
transfusion. The volume of a unit ranged from 
250 to 320 ml, with a hematocrit of approxi- 
mately 60%. 
Hemoglobin levels were measured after ad- 
mission and again every 8 hours during the first 
2 days and every day thereafter. Hemoglobin 
levels were also assessed when further bleeding 
was suspected. 
Treatments and Follow-up 
All the patients underwent emergency gastros- 
copy within the first 6 hours. When endoscopic 
examination disclosed a nonvariceal lesion with 
active arterial bleeding, a nonbleeding visible ves- 
sel, or an adherent clot, patients underwent endo- 
scopic therapy with injection of adrenaline plus 
multipolar electrocoagulation or application of en- 
doscopic clips. Patients with peptic ulcer received 
a continuous intravenous infusion of omeprazole 
(80 mg per 10-hour period after an initial bolus 
of 80 mg) for the first 72 hours, followed by oral 
administration of omeprazole. 
When portal hypertension was suspected, a 
continuous intravenous infusion of somatostatin 
(250 μg per hour) and prophylactic antibiotic 
therapy with norfloxacin or ceftriaxone were ad- 
ministered at the time of admission and contin- 
ued for 5 days. Bleeding esophageal varices were 
also treated with band ligation or with sclero- 
therapy, and gastric varices with injection of cya- 
noacrylate. In patients with variceal bleeding, 
portal pressure was measured within the first 
48 hours and again 2 to 3 days later to assess 
the effect of the transfusion strategy on portal 
hypertension. Portal pressure was estimated with 
the use of the hepatic venous pressure gradient 
(HVPG), as described elsewhere.17 
Outcome Measures and Definitions 
The primary outcome measure was the rate of 
death from any cause within the first 45 days. 
Secondary outcomes included the rate of further 
bleeding and the rate of in-hospital complications. 
Further bleeding was defined as hematemesis or 
fresh melena associated with hemodynamic in- 
stability (systolic blood pressure of <100 mm Hg; 
pulse rate of >100 beats per minute, or both) or a 
fall in hemoglobin level of 2 g per deciliter or more 
within a 6-hour period. Further bleeding was 
considered to indicate therapeutic failure; if the 
bleeding involved nonvariceal lesions, the patient 
underwent repeat endoscopic therapy or emer- 
gency surgery, whereas in the case of further 
variceal bleeding, transjugular intrahepatic por- 
tosystemic shunting (TIPS) was considered. 
Complications were defined as any untoward 
events that necessitated active therapy or pro- 
longed hospitalization. Side effects were consid- 
ered to be severe if the health or safety of the 
patient was endangered. 
Statistical Analysis 
We estimated that with 430 patients in each 
group, the study would have the power to detect 
a between-group difference in mortality of at 
least 5 percentage points, assuming 10% mortal- 
ity in the liberal-strategy group (on the basis of 
results of previous trials with standard care1,3,18), 
with the use of a two-tailed test and with alpha 
and beta values of 0.05 and 0.2, respectively. The 
statistical analysis was performed according to the 
intention-to-treat principle. Standard tests were 
used for comparisons of proportions and means. 
Continuous variables are expressed as means and 
standard deviations. Actuarial probabilities were 
calculated with the use of the Kaplan–Meier 
method and were compared with the use of the 
log-rank test. A Cox proportional-hazards re- 
gression model was used to compare the two 
transfusion-strategy groups with respect to the 
primary and secondary end points, with adjust- 
ment for baseline risk factors (see the Supple- 
mentary Appendix, available at NEJM.org). The 
hazard ratios and their 95% confidence intervals 
were calculated. Data were censored at the time 
an end-point event occurred, at the patient’s last 
visit, or at the end of the 45-day follow-up period, 
whichever occurred first. Prespecified subgroup 
analyses were performed to assess the efficacy of 
transfusion strategies according to the source of 
bleeding (lesions related to portal hypertension 
or peptic ulcer). All P values are two-tailed. Cal- 
culations were performed with the use of the 
SPSS statistical package, version 15.0 (SPSS). 








Study Patients 
During the study period, 2372 patients were ad- 
mitted to the hospital for gastrointestinal bleed- 
ing and 1610 were screened. Of these, 41 declined 
to participate and 648 were excluded; among the 
reasons for exclusion were exsanguinating bleed- 
ing requiring transfusion (in 39 patients) and a 
low risk of rebleeding (329 patients) (Fig. 1). A 
total of 921 patients underwent randomization and 
32 withdrew or were withdrawn by the investiga- 
tors after randomization (see Fig. 1 for details), 
leaving 444 patients in the restrictive-strategy 
group and 445 in the liberal-strategy group for the 
intention-to-treat analysis. The baseline charac- 
teristics were similar in the two groups (Table 1). 
A total of 277 patients (31%) had cirrhosis, and 
the baseline characteristics of the patients in this 
subgroup were similar in the two transfusion- 
strategy groups (Table 1). Bleeding was due to 
peptic ulcer in 437 patients (49%) and to esopha- 
geal varices in 190 (21%) (Table 1). 
Hemoglobin Levels and Transfusion 
The hemoglobin concentration at admission was 
similar in the two groups (Table 2). The lowest he- 
moglobin concentration within the first 24 hours 
was significantly lower in the restrictive-strategy 
group than in the liberal-strategy group, as was 
the daily hemoglobin concentration until discharge 
(P<0.001). The percentage of patients in whom 
the lowest hemoglobin level was less than 7 g per 
deciliter was higher in the restrictive-strategy 
group than in the liberal-strategy group. The he- 
moglobin concentration at 45 days was similar in 
the two groups. 
A total of 225 patients (51%) in the restrictive- 
strategy group, as compared with 61 patients 
(14%) in the liberal-strategy group, received no 
transfusion (P<0.001). The mean (±SD) number 
of units transfused was significantly lower in 
the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group (1.5±2.3 vs. 3.7±3.8, P<0.001), and 
a violation of the transfusion protocol occurred 
more frequently in the restrictive-strategy group (in 
39 patients [9%] vs. 15 patients [3%], P<0.001) 
(Table 2). The percentage of patients who re- 
ceived a transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma, the 
percentage of patients who received a transfu- 
sion of platelets, and the total amount of fluid 
administered were similar in the two groups. 

Mortality at 45 days was significantly lower in 
the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group: 5% (23 patients) as compared with 
9% (41 patients) (P = 0.02) (Fig. 2). The risk of 
death was virtually unchanged after adjustment 
for baseline risk factors for death (hazard ratio 
with restrictive strategy, 0.55; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.33 to 0.92) (Table S4 in the Sup- 
plementary Appendix). Among all patients with 
cirrhosis, the risk of death was slightly lower in 
the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group (Fig. 2). In the subgroup of pa- 
tients with cirrhosis and Child–Pugh class A or B 
disease, the risk of death was significantly lower 
among patients in the restrictive-strategy group 
than among those in the liberal-strategy group, 
whereas in the subgroup of patients with cirrho- 
sis and Child–Pugh class C disease, the risk was 
similar in the two groups. Among patients with 
bleeding from a peptic ulcer, the risk of death was 
slightly lower with the restrictive strategy than 
with the liberal strategy. 
Death was due to unsuccessfully controlled 
bleeding in 3 patients (0.7%) in the restrictive- 
strategy group and in 14 patients (3.1%) in the 
liberal-strategy group (P = 0.01). Death was caused 
by complications of treatment in 3 patients (2 in 
the liberal-strategy group and 1 in the restrictive- 
strategy group). In the remaining 44 patients (19 
in the restrictive-strategy group and 25 in the 
liberal-strategy group), hemorrhage was controlled 
and death was due to associated diseases. 
Further Bleeding 
The rate of further bleeding was significantly 
lower in the restrictive-strategy group than in the 
liberal-strategy group: 10% (45 patients), as com- 
pared with 16% (71 patients) (P = 0.01) (Table 3). 
The risk of further bleeding was significantly 
lower with the restrictive strategy after adjust- 
ment for baseline risk factors for further bleed- 
ing (hazard ratio, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.98) 
(Table S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). In ad- 
dition, the length of hospital stay was shorter in 
the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group. 
In the subgroup of patients with cirrhosis, the 
risk of further bleeding was lower with the re- 
strictive transfusion strategy than with the lib- 
eral transfusion strategy among patients with 
Child–Pugh class A or B disease and was similar 







in the two groups among patients with Child– 
Pugh class C disease (Table 3). Among patients 
with bleeding from esophageal varices, the rate 
of further bleeding was lower in the restrictive- 
strategy group than in the liberal-strategy group 
(11% vs. 22%, P = 0.05). Rescue therapy with bal- 
loon tamponade or with transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt was required less frequently 
in the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group. 
A baseline hepatic hemodynamic study was 
performed in 86 patients in the restrictive-strat- 
egy group and in 89 in the liberal-strategy 
group, and it was repeated 2 to 3 days later in 74 
and 77 patients, respectively, to assess changes. 
Patients in the liberal-strategy group had a sig- 
nificant increase in the mean hepatic venous 
pressure gradient between the first hemodynam- 
ic study and the second (from 20.5±3.1 mm Hg 
to 21.4±4.3 mm Hg, P = 0.03). There was no sig- 
nificant change in mean hepatic venous pressure 
gradient in the restrictive-strategy group during 
that interval. 
Among patients with bleeding from a peptic 
ulcer, there was a trend toward a lower risk of 
further bleeding in the restrictive-strategy group 
(Table 3). Emergency surgery to control further 
bleeding was required less frequently in the 
restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal- 
strategy group (2% vs. 6%, P = 0.04). 
Adverse Events 
The overall rate of complications was significantly 
lower in the restrictive-strategy group than in the 
liberal-strategy group (40% [179 patients] vs. 48% 
[214 patients], P = 0.02), as was the rate of serious 
adverse events (Table S5 in the Supplementary 
Appendix). Transfusion reactions and cardiac 
events, mainly pulmonary edema, occurred more 
frequently in the liberal-strategy group (Table 3). 
The rates of other adverse events, such as acute 
kidney injury or bacterial infections, did not dif- 
fer significantly between the groups (Table S5 in 
the Supplementary Appendix). 

We found that among patients with severe acute 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding, the outcomes 
were significantly improved with a restrictive 
transfusion strategy, in which the hemoglobin 
threshold was 7 g per deciliter, as compared with 
a liberal transfusion strategy, in which the hemo- 
globin threshold was 9 g per deciliter. The most 
relevant finding was the improvement in survival 
rates observed with the restrictive transfusion 
strategy. This advantage was probably related to 
a better control of factors contributing to death, 
such as further bleeding, the need for rescue 
therapy, and serious adverse events. All these fac- 
tors were significantly reduced with the restric- 



461 Were assigned to restrictive 
strategy 
460 Were assigned to liberal 
strategy 









Figure 1. Screening, Randomization, and Follow-up. 
During the study period, 1610 patients with gastrointestinal bleeding were 
screened, and 648 patients were excluded. The reasons for exclusion in- 
cluded massive exsanguinating bleeding requiring transfusion before ran- 
domization (39 patients) and a low risk of rebleeding (329 patients). A low 
risk of rebleeding was defined as a clinical Rockall score of 0 and hemoglobin 
levels higher than 12 g per deciliter. (The Rockall score is a system for as- 
sessing the risk of further bleeding or death among patients with gastroin- 
testinal bleeding; scores range from 0 to 11, with higher scores indicating 
greater risk.) Patients were also excluded if they declined blood transfusion 
(14 patients); other exclusion criteria were an acute coronary syndrome 
(58), symptomatic peripheral vasculopathy (12), stroke or transient ischemic 
attack (7), or transfusion (10) within the previous 90 days; lower gastroin- 
testinal bleeding (51); pregnancy (3); a recent history of trauma or surgery 
(41); a decision by the attending physician that the patient should avoid 
medical therapy (9); or inclusion in this study within the previous 90 days 
or inclusion more than twice (75). A total of 921 patients underwent random- 
ization, of whom 32 were withdrawn: 23 were found to be ineligible, 5 had 
major protocol violations, and 4 decided to withdraw from the study. 


















Restrictive Strategy 
(N = 444) 
Liberal Strategy 
(N = 445) 































* Plus–minus values are means ±SD. 
† Among patients with in-hospital bleeding, 16 (7 in the restrictive-strategy group and 9 in the liberal-strategy group) 



§ Child–Pugh class A denotes good hepatic function, class B intermediate function, and class C poor function. The mean 
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score among patients in all Child–Pugh classes (on a scale from 6 to 40, 
with higher values indicating more severe liver disease) was 11.9±7 in the restrictive-strategy group and 12.1±6 in the 
liberal-strategy group (P = 0.95). 
¶ Portal pressure was measured with the use of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG), which is the difference 
between the wedged and free hepatic venous pressures. Measurements were performed within the first 48 hours in 
175 patients with variceal bleeding (86 in the restrictive-strategy group and 89 in the liberal-strategy group). 
tive strategy. Our results are consistent with 
those from previous observational studies and 
randomized trials performed in other settings, 
which have shown that a restrictive transfusion 
strategy did not increase,5,19 and even de- 
creased,4,20 the mortality observed with a liberal 
transfusion strategy. 
Current international guidelines recommend 
decreasing the hemoglobin threshold level for 
transfusion in patients with gastrointestinal 

































































Restrictive Strategy 
(N = 444) 
Liberal Strategy 
(N = 445) 




























* Plus–minus values are means ±SD. 
† The average difference in the daily hemoglobin level between the restrictive-strategy group and the liberal-strategy group 
was 1.0±1.3 g per deciliter, from the time of admission to discharge. 
Included are all red-cell transfusions received from the time of admission to discharge. 
‡ 
§ This category refers to the units of red cells transfused before further bleeding. 
¶ Transfusions were administered in 31 patients (26 in the restrictive-strategy group and 5 in the liberal-strategy group) 
because of symptoms or signs (defined as tachycardia, chest pain, or signs of severe hypoxemia) in 14 patients (8 in the 
restrictive-strategy group and 6 in the liberal-strategy group) because of massive bleeding, and in 2 patients (1 in each 
group) because of surgery. 
In the restrictive-strategy group, 39 patients without signs or symptoms, massive bleeding, or surgery received a 
transfusion when the hemoglobin level was higher than 7 g per deciliter. In the liberal-strategy group, 15 patients with 
a hemoglobin level lower than 9 g per deciliter did not receive a transfusion. 

** Red cells were stored for up to 42 days. At least 1 unit stored for more than 14 days was administered in 141 of the 
219 patients in the restrictive-strategy group (64%) and 253 of the 384 patients in the liberal-strategy group (66%) 
who received a transfusion. 
†† Included are all patients who received a transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma from the time of admission to discharge. 
‡‡ Included are all patients who received a transfusion of platelets from the time of admission to discharge. 
bleeding, from 10 g per deciliter15,16 to 7 g per 
deciliter.3,21 A reduction in the number of trans- 
fusions performed may have accounted for the 
reduction in mortality from gastrointestinal bleed- 
ing that has been observed in recent years.22,23 
However, current guidelines are based on find- 
ings from trials of transfusion triggers involving 
critically ill patients with normovolemic anemia 




















































— trials from which patients with acute bleed- 
ing have been excluded.4,5 Transfusion require- 
ments may be different for patients with acute 
hemorrhage due to factors such as hemody- 
namic instability or rapid onset of anemia to 
extremely low hemoglobin levels. The current 
study addressed the effects of transfusion in this 
setting. Previous observational studies and small 
controlled trials have supported the use of a re- 
strictive transfusion strategy for patients with 
gastrointestinal bleeding.8-11 Our results, which 
are consistent with the results from those stud- 
ies, showed that a restrictive strategy significantly 
reduced the rates of factors related to therapeutic 
failure such as further bleeding and the need for 
rescue therapy, as well as reducing the length of 



















































No. at Risk 
Restrictive strategy 
Liberal strategy 
444 
445 
429 
428 
412 
407 
404 
397 
401 
393 
399 
386 
397 
383 
395 
378 
394 
375 
392 
372 


Liberal 
Restrictive 
Strategy 
Strategy 
no. of patients/total no. (%) 
Overall 
Patients with cirrhosis 
Child–Pugh class A or B 
Child–Pugh class C 
Bleeding from varices 
Bleeding from peptic ulcer 
23/444 (5) 
15/139 (11) 
 5/113 (4) 
10/26 (38) 
10/93 (11) 
 7/228 (3) 
41/445 (9) 
25/138 (18) 
13/109 (12) 
12/29 (41) 
17/97 (18) 
11/209 (5) 


0.55 (0.33–0.92) 
0.57 (0.30–1.08) 
0.30 (0.11–0.85) 
1.04 (0.45–2.37) 
0.58 (0.27–1.27) 
0.70 (0.26–1.25) 
0.02 
0.08 
0.02 
0.91 
0.18 
0.26 



Restrictive Strategy 
Better 
Liberal Strategy 
Better 
Figure 2. Rate of Survival, According to Subgroup. 
Panel A shows the Kaplan–Meier estimates of the 6-week survival rate in the two groups. The probability of survival 
was significantly higher in the restrictive-strategy group than in the liberal-strategy group. The gray arrows indicate 
the day on which data from a patient were censored. The inset shows the same data on an enlarged y axis. Panel B 
shows the hazard ratios, with 95% confidence intervals, for death by 6 weeks, according to prespecified subgroups. 
In the subgroup of patients with Child–Pugh class A or B disease, the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) 
score (on a scale from 6 to 40, with higher values indicating more severe liver disease) was 10.3±5 in the restrictive- 
strategy group and 10.9±5 in the liberal-strategy group (P = 0.41). In the subgroup of patients with Child–Pugh class C 
disease, the MELD score was 20.6±6 in the restrictive-strategy group and 18.1±5 in the liberal-strategy group (P = 0.11). 





Restrictive Strategy 
(N = 444) 
Liberal Strategy 
(N = 445) 
Hazard Ratio with 
Restrictive Strategy 
(95% CI) 





















































* Plus–minus values are means ±SD. TIPS denotes transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. 
† Patients may have had more than one type of adverse event. 
‡ Included are all patients who had at least one adverse event during the study period. 
§ This category includes patients with acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary edema, or arrhythmias. 
¶ Unstable angina developed in 13 patients (8 in the restrictive-strategy group and 5 in the liberal-strategy group), and myocardial infarction 

stay in the hospital. These harmful effects of trans- 
fusion may be related to an impairment of hemo- 
stasis. Transfusion may counteract the splanchnic 
vasoconstrictive response caused by hypovolemia, 
inducing an increase in splanchnic blood flow 
and pressure that may impair the formation of 
clots.24,25 Transfusion may also induce abnor- 
malities in coagulation properties.8,10 
Concerns about transfusion have been raised 
primarily with respect to patients who have cir- 
rhosis with portal hypertension. Experimental 
studies have shown that restitution of blood 
volume can induce rebound increases in portal 
pressure that may precipitate portal hypertensive- 
related bleeding.12-14 Clinical studies have also 
shown that transfusion increases portal pressure 











































































during acute variceal bleeding, an increase that 
may be prevented with somatostatin.17 In keep- 
ing with these observations, we found that the 
beneficial effect of a restrictive transfusion strat- 
egy with respect to further bleeding was ob- 
served mainly in patients with portal hyperten- 
sion. We also observed that despite treatment with 
somatostatin, patients in the liberal-strategy 
group had a significant increase in portal pres- 
sure during acute variceal bleeding that was not 
observed in patients in the restrictive-strategy 
group. This may have accounted for the higher 
rate of further bleeding with the liberal strategy. 
We found a reduction in the rate of complica- 
tions with the restrictive transfusion strategy. This 
finding is consistent with results from a previous 
trial involving critically ill adults.4 However, con- 
flicting results have been shown in other set- 
tings.5,19 Several factors, such as coexisting condi- 
tions or age, may account for this discrepancy. 
Cardiac complications, particularly pulmonary 
edema, occurred more frequently with the liberal 
transfusion strategy, both in the current study 
and in the trial that involved critically ill adults.4 
The higher level of cardiac complications may 
indicate a higher risk of circulatory overload as- 
sociated with a liberal transfusion strategy. Other 
effects of transfusion, such as transfusion-related 
immunomodulation,26 may increase the risk of 
complications or death. These are unlikely to have 
occurred in the current study given the similar 
incidence of bacterial infections in the two groups 
and the universal use of prestorage leukocyte- 
reduced red cells. Adverse outcomes have also 
been associated with long storage time of trans- 
fused blood.27 In our study, the storage time was 
similar in the two groups. However, the median 
duration of storage was 15 days, and storage le- 
sions become apparent after about 14 days.28 
Therefore, the fact that there were more transfu- 
sions of blood with these long storage times in 
the liberal-strategy group may have contributed 
to the worse outcome. Further research is need- 
ed to determine whether the use of newer blood 
may influence the results with respect to the trans- 
fusion strategy. We found that a restrictive trans- 
fusion strategy significantly decreased the num- 
ber of units transfused and the percentage of 
patients who received no transfusions — find- 
ings that were also seen in previous trials.4,5,19 

the delivery of oxygen to tissues. The safest and 
most effective transfusion strategy depends not 
only on the hemoglobin trigger level but also on 
factors such as coexisting conditions, age, and 
hemodynamic status.1,3 Consequently, we allowed 
transfusions to be performed at the discretion of 
attending physicians when symptoms related to 
anemia developed, when massive bleeding oc- 
curred, or when surgical intervention was re- 
quired. Transfusions that were not adjusted to the 
hemoglobin level and violations of the transfusion 
protocol occurred more often in the restrictive- 
strategy group than in the liberal-strategy group. 
However, both these deviations from the proto- 
col occurred in less than 10% of cases. 
Our trial has several limitations. First, the re- 
sults cannot be generalized to all patients with 
acute gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients with a low 
risk of rebleeding were not included in this study. 
However, these patients are less likely to require 
a transfusion. Patients with massive exsangui- 
nating hemorrhage were also excluded from this 
trial because red-cell transfusion may be lifesav- 
ing for them. However, only a minority of eligible 
patients were excluded for this reason. Second, 
because we compared two transfusion strategies, 
the study was not blinded, and this may have 
introduced a bias. It is unlikely that bias was in- 
troduced, however, owing to the objective defini- 
tion of the primary outcome and the use of a 
randomized design with concealed assignments. 
In summary, we found that a restrictive trans- 
fusion strategy, as compared with a liberal trans- 
fusion strategy, improved the outcomes among 
patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleed- 
ing. The risk of further bleeding, the need for 
rescue therapy, and the rate of complications 
were all significantly reduced, and the rate of 
survival was increased, with the restrictive trans- 
fusion strategy. Our results suggest that in pa- 
tients with acute gastrointestinal bleeding, a 
strategy of not performing transfusion until the 
hemoglobin concentration falls below 7 g per 
deciliter is a safe and effective approach. 
Supported in part by the Fundació Investigació Sant Pau. 
Dr. Guarner reports receiving consulting fees from Sequana 
Medical. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this 
article was reported. 


We thank the nursing and medical staffs from the Semi-Crit- 
ical Unit at the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau for their 
cooperation in this study. 








1. Gralnek IM, Barkun AN, Bardou M. 
Management of acute bleeding from a pep- 
tic ulcer. N Engl J Med 2008;359:928-37. 
2. Barkun A, Bardou M, Marshall JK. 
Consensus recommendations for manag- 
ing patients with nonvariceal upper gas- 
trointestinal bleeding. Ann Intern Med 
2003;139:843-57. 
3. Barkun AN, Bardou M, Kuipers EJ, et 
al. International consensus recommenda- 
tions on the management of patients with 
nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal bleed- 
ing. Ann Intern Med 2010;152:101-13. 
4. Hébert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et 
al. A multicenter, randomized, controlled 
clinical trial of transfusion requirements 
in critical care. N Engl J Med 1999;340:409- 
17. [Erratum, N Engl J Med 1999;340:1056.] 
5. Lacroix J, Hébert PC, Hutchison JS, et 
al. Transfusion strategies for patients in 
pediatric intensive care units. N Engl J 
Med 2007;356:1609-19. 
6. Malone DL, Dunne J, Tracy JK, Put- 
nam AT, Scalea TM, Napolitano LM. 
Blood transfusion, independent of shock 
severity, is associated with worse outcome 
in trauma. J Trauma 2003;54:898-905. 
7. Robinson WP III, Ahn J, Stiffler A, et 
al. Blood transfusion is an independent 
predictor of increased mortality in non- 
operatively managed blunt hepatic and 
splenic injuries. J Trauma 2005;58:437-44. 
8. Blair SD, Janvrin SB, McCollum CN, 
Greenhalgh RM. Effect of early blood 
transfusion on gastrointestinal haemor- 
rhage. Br J Surg 1986;73:783-5. 
9. Villarejo F, Rizzolo M, Lopéz E, Do- 
meniconi G, Arto G, Apezteguia C. Acute 
anemia in high digestive hemorrhage: 
margins of security for their handling 
without transfusion of red globules. Acta 
Gastroenterol Latinoam 1999;29:261-70. 
(In Spanish.) 
10. Hearnshaw SA, Logan A, Palmer KR, 
Card TR, Travis SPL, Murphy MF. Out- 
comes following early red blood cell trans- 
fusion in acute upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2010; 
32:215-24. 
11. Halland M, Young M, Fitzgerald MN, 
Inder K, Duggan JM, Duggan A. Charac- 
teristics and outcomes of upper gastroin- 
testinal hemorrhage in a tertiary referral 
hospital. Dig Dis Sci 2010;55:3430-5. 
12. Kravetz D, Sikuler E, Groszmann RJ. 
Splanchnic and systemic hemodynamics 
in portal hypertensive rats during hemor- 
rhage and blood volume restitution. Gas- 
troenterology 1986;90:1232-40. 
13. McCormick PA, Jenkins SA, McIntyre 
N, Burroughs AK. Why portal hyperten- 
sive varices bleed and bleed: a hypothesis. 
Gut 1995;36:100-3. 
14. Castañeda B, Morales J, Lionetti R, et 
al. Effects of blood volume restitution fol- 
lowing a portal hypertensive–related 
bleeding in anesthetized cirrhotic rats. 
Hepatology 2001;33:821-5. 
15. British Society of Gastroenterology 
Endoscopy Committee. Non-variceal up- 
per gastrointestinal haemorrhage: guide- 
lines. Gut 2002;51:Suppl 4:iv1-iv6. 
16. de Franchis R. Updating consensus in 
portal hypertension: report of the Baveno 
III consensus workshop on definitions, 
methodology and therapeutic strategies 
in portal hypertension. J Hepatol 2000;33: 
846-52. 
17. Villanueva C, Ortiz J, Miñana J, et al. 
Somatostatin treatment and risk stratifi- 
cation by continuous portal pressure 
monitoring during acute variceal bleed- 
ing. Gastroenterology 2001;121:110-7. 
18. Jairath V, Hearnshaw S, Brunskill SJ, 
et al. Red cell transfusion for the manage- 
ment of upper gastrointestinal haemor- 
rhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 
9:CD006613. 
19. Carson JL, Terrin ML, Noveck H, et al. 
Liberal or restrictive transfusion in high- 
risk patients after hip surgery. N Engl J 
Med 2011;365:2453-62. 
20. Marik PE, Corwin HL. Efficacy of red 
cell transfusion in the critically ill: a sys- 
tematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 2008;36:2667-74. 
21. de Franchis R. Revising consensus in 
portal hypertension: report of the Baveno 
V consensus workshop on methodology 
of diagnosis and therapy in portal hyper- 
tension. J Hepatol 2010;53:762-8. 
22. Crooks C, Card TIM, West J. Reduc- 
tions in 28-day mortality following hospi- 
tal admission for upper gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage. Gastroenterology 2011;141: 
62-70. 
23. British Society of Gastroenterology. 
UK upper GI bleeding audit (http://www 
.bsg.org.uk/clinical/general/uk-upper-gi- 
bleeding-audit.html). 
24. Roberts I, Evans P, Bunn F, Kwan I, 
Crowhurst E. Is the normalisation of 
blood pressure in bleeding trauma pa- 
tients harmful? Lancet 2001;357:385-7. 
25. Duggan JM. Transfusion in gastroin- 
testinal haemorrhage — if, when and how 
much? Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2001;15: 
1109-13. 
26. Vamvakas EC, Blajchman MA. 
Transfusion-related immunomodulation 
(TRIM): an update. Blood Rev 2007;21: 
327-48. 
27. Koch CG, Li L, Sessler DI, et al. Dura- 
tion of red-cell storage and complications 
after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2008; 
358:1229-39. 
28. Kanias T, Gladwin MT. Nitric oxide, 
hemolysis, and the red blood cell storage 
lesion: interactions between transfusion, 
donor, and recipient. Transfusion 2012; 
52:1388-92. 
Copyright © 2013 Massachusetts Medical Society. 



nejm clinical practice center 
Explore a new page designed specifically for practicing clinicians, 
the NEJM Clinical Practice Center, at www.NEJM.org/clinical-practice-center. 
Find practice-changing research, reviews from our Clinical Practice series, 
a curated collection of clinical cases, and interactive features 
designed to hone your diagnostic skills. 



