The New England 
of 








CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION BY CHEST COMPRESSION ALONE 
OR WITH MOUTH-TO-MOUTH VENTILATION 





















A 
BSTRACT 
Background 
Despite extensive training of citizens 
of Seattle in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 
bystanders do not perform CPR in almost half of wit- 
nessed cardiac arrests. Instructions in chest compres- 
sion plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation given by dis- 
patchers over the telephone can require 2.4 minutes. 
In experimental studies, chest compression alone is 
associated with survival rates similar to those with 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation. 
We conducted a randomized study to compare CPR 
by chest compression alone with CPR by chest com- 
pression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation. 
Methods 
The setting of the trial was an urban, fire- 
department–based, emergency-medical-care system 
with central dispatching. In a randomized manner, 
telephone dispatchers gave bystanders at the scene 
of apparent cardiac arrest instructions in either chest 
compression alone or chest compression plus mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation. The primary end point was sur- 
vival to hospital discharge. 

Data were analyzed for 241 patients ran- 
domly assigned to receive chest compression alone 
and 279 assigned to chest compression plus mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation. Complete instructions were 
delivered in 62 percent of episodes for the group re- 
ceiving chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation and 81 percent of episodes for the group 
receiving chest compression alone (P=0.005). In- 
structions for compression required 1.4 minutes less 
to complete than instructions for compression plus 
mouth-to-mouth ventilation. Survival to hospital dis- 
charge was better among patients assigned to chest 
compression alone than among those assigned to 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
(14.6 percent vs. 10.4 percent), but the difference 
was not statistically significant (P=0.18). 

The outcome after CPR with chest 
compression alone is similar to that after chest com- 
pression with mouth-to-mouth ventilation, and chest 
compression alone may be the preferred approach 
for bystanders inexperienced in CPR. (N Engl J Med 
2000;342:1546-53.) 
©2000, Massachusetts Medical Society. 





LTHOUGH bystander-initiated cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation (CPR) has been asso- 
ciated with an increase of 50 percent or 
more in survival after out-of-hospital cardi- 
ac arrest, and despite extensive training of citizens in 
CPR techniques, 
 approximately half of the victims of 
witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac arrests in the Seat- 
tle–King County, Washington, area during the past 
few decades did not receive bystander-initiated CPR. 
To address this problem, investigators in King Coun- 
ty initiated a program in which dispatchers were 
 The 
taught to instruct callers in how to initiate CPR. 
instructions included airway management, mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation, and chest compression. The in- 
vestigators reported that dispatcher-instructed CPR 
by bystanders was associated with a rate of survival 
to hospital discharge that was similar to the historical 
experience with bystander-initiated CPR, that the 
time required to provide the instructions averaged 2.4 
minutes, and that the most common reason for not 
completing the instructions was the arrival of emer- 
gency-medical-services personnel. 

Since the average interval to a response in Seattle 
was 3.1 minutes, as compared with 4.5 minutes in 
the suburban communities where the King County 
study was conducted, it was unclear whether imple- 
menting such a program in Seattle might simply be a 
drain on dispatch-center resources. In addition, stud- 
ies in animals, particularly those by Meursing et al., 
5 
demonstrated that central arterial oxygenation re- 
mains relatively high for a substantial time after the 
onset of ventricular fibrillation. 
In 1989 we therefore began a preliminary trial of 
dispatcher-instructed bystander CPR that compared 
the value of instructions for chest compression only 
with that of standard instructions for chest compres- 
sion plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation. After approx- 
From the Department of Biostatistics (A.H., E.J.) and the Department 
of Medicine (L.C., M.C.), University of Washington, and Medic I, Seattle. 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Hallstrom at 1107 NE 45th St., Suite 505, 
Seattle, WA 98105-4689. 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

imately 200 victims had been enrolled, the study was 
terminated because the conditional power of reject- 
ing the null hypothesis (i.e., that chest compression 
and chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventila- 
tion result in similar rates of survival to hospital dis- 
charge) in favor of superiority of chest compression 
plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation was low. Moreover, 
since the trial began, a preliminary study using a swine 
model of ventricular fibrillation was published and 
suggested that chest compression alone might be as 
effective as chest compression plus ventilation, even 
 In addi- 
after 10 minutes of ventricular fibrillation. 
6 
tion, questions were being raised about the safety of 
mouth-to-mouth ventilation, because of the epidem- 
ics of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and 
hepatitis C. 
7 
Accordingly, we initiated a new trial to test the one- 
sided alternative hypothesis that dispatcher-instruct- 
ed bystander CPR by chest compression alone would 
yield an absolute increase of at least 3.5 percent (the 
observed difference when the first trial was stopped) 
in survival to hospital discharge over dispatcher- 
instructed chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation by bystanders. 

Fire-department dispatchers followed a structured interroga- 
tion protocol with two basic questions: “Is the patient conscious 
or awake?” and “Is the patient breathing normally?” If the an- 
swers to both of these questions were “no” or equivocal, an emer- 
gency-medical-services team was immediately dispatched and the 
caller was assured that help was on the way; in addition, if there 
was no one on the scene who was already performing (or intending 
to perform) CPR, and if the caller was willing to be instructed, 
the caller was given instructions for performing either chest com- 
pression alone or chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth venti- 
lation (Fig. 1), as randomly assigned by a microcomputer located 
at the dispatcher’s console. 
Data from 776 cases randomly assigned to treatment were ex- 
cluded from the analysis for the a priori reasons shown in Table 
1. For all episodes, including those which met the a priori exclusion 
criteria, data were collected from the microcomputers (responses 
to the interrogation and randomization assignments), the para- 
medics’ field report, the recorded dispatch call, and the hospital 
record (for patients who were admitted). At hospital discharge, a 
simple assessment of neurologic morbidity was obtained (with the 
patient assigned to one of the following categories: no apparent 
morbidity; some impairment, but able to carry out activities of dai- 
ly living; morbidity sufficient to require some, but not complete, 
assistance; or morbidity requiring complete care). Information on 
survival status was obtained yearly. 
At the end of the study (in August 1998), all patients who had 
survived to discharge from the hospital or their families were con- 
tacted, and their vital status and degree of residual morbidity were 
assessed. All callers who were given instructions were telephoned 
approximately one to two months after the episode and, if they con- 
sented, underwent a structured interview, including questions 
about the episode, the victim, the caller, the dispatcher’s instruc- 
tions, and the implementation of those instructions. In addition, 
the callers were asked whether they had any physical or emotional 
problems related to their participation. 
As far as possible, the study was blinded. Emergency-medical- 
services personnel other than those in the dispatch office were gen- 
erally unaware that an episode might be part of a trial. Moreover, 
the paramedics who completed the field reports typically arrived 
after the first responding personnel and thus had limited knowl- 
edge of the type or quality of bystander CPR that may have been 
performed. Exclusions were based on information taken directly 
from the paramedics’ field reports (including cases in which there 
was no cardiac arrest; cases of drug overdose, alcohol intoxication, 
or carbon monoxide poisoning; cases in which advanced cardiac 
life support was not carried out; and cases due to trauma) and on 
information from the dispatch recording (the caller was not at the 
scene, or cardiac arrest occurred after the call). Hospitalization data 
and functional status after discharge from the hospital were ob- 
tained through an existing follow-up program whose personnel 
were unaware of the treatment assignments. 
The primary end point was survival to hospital discharge. Sec- 
ondary end points included admission to the hospital and estimat- 
ed neurologic status in the survivors. 
The trial was designed to test the alternative one-sided hypoth- 
esis that dispatcher-instructed chest-compression CPR was asso- 
ciated with at least a 3.5 percent improvement in the absolute rate 
of survival to hospital discharge over the rate with chest compres- 
sion plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation. However, only two-sided 
P values are reported. Enrollment in the trial began on January 
15, 1992, and continued through August 30, 1998. The projected 
number of episodes of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest during this 
period was 700. However, because of limited funding, the study 
was planned for a fixed period. Monitoring of results (following 
Fleming et al. 
) was conducted three times, after approximately 
150, 300, and 450 episodes had occurred. The emphasis was on 
compliance and safety, and the reviewers were blinded only to the 
primary outcome. The protocol was approved by the investiga- 
tional review board of the University of Washington, the Seattle 
Fire Department, and the legal authorities of the city of Seattle. 
The primary analysis consisted of a simple comparison of pro- 
portions by Fisher’s exact test. We conducted secondary analyses 
using logistic-regression analysis to adjust for characteristics of the 
patients and the episodes. 


Enrollment in the trial was terminated according 
to the schedule on August 30, 1998, at which time 
there had been 1296 randomized episodes of cardiac 
arrest. Of these, 776 were excluded from the analysis 
on the basis of a priori criteria, which fell mainly into 
three categories: absence of cardiac arrest; cardiac ar- 
rest due to drug overdose, alcohol intoxication, or 
carbon monoxide poisoning; or no provision of ad- 
vanced cardiac life support (Table 1). The true cause 
was determined for 249 of the 260 episodes initially 
misdiagnosed as cardiac arrests; most of these were 
attributed to stroke or transient ischemic attack (24.1 
percent), seizure (20.9 percent), or syncope (20.5 
percent) (Table 2). Of the 520 cases randomly as- 
signed to treatment and included in the analysis, 279 
were assigned to chest compression plus mouth-to- 
mouth ventilation and 241 to chest compression alone 
(P=0.10). The characteristics of the episodes and 
the patients were similar in the two treatment groups 
(Table 3), with the exception of race or ethnic group. 
The victims averaged 68 years of age, 64 percent were 
male, 58 percent of the episodes were witnessed (i.e., 
the collapse was seen or heard) and 88 percent oc- 
curred in a home. The time to response by the first 
emergency vehicle averaged 4.0 minutes; all of these 
units were equipped with automated defibrillators. 
Data on discharge were not available for two pa- 
tients who were admitted to the hospital, one in each 






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Figure 1. 
Ventilation. 
The instructions for CPR by chest compression alone do not include the shaded sections. In this example 
it is assumed that the victim is male. 












I can tell you how to help until theA 
medics arrive. Do you want to help? 
Help is onA 
the way. 
Is there someone elseA 
there who can help? 
Tell that personA 
exactly what I say. 


Get him flat on his back on the floor.A 
Strip his chest. Kneel by his side.A 
Pinch the nose. With the other hand,A 
lift the chin so the head bends back.A 
Completely cover his mouth with yours.A 
Force 2 deep breaths of air into the lungs.A 


Flat on his back. Strip the chest.A 
Pinch the nose. With the other hand,A 

Force 2 breaths.A 
Then come back to the phone! 


Put your other hand on top of that hand.A 
Push down firmly only on the heels of your hands,A 
1 or 2 in. (2.5 or 5 cm). Do it 15 times.A 
Just as if you were pumping the chest.A 


Pump the chest 15 times. Then 2 breaths.A 
Keep pumping on the chest until help can take over!A 
I’ll be hanging up now. Help is on the way. 
Pump 15 times. Then pinch the nose and lift the chinA 
so the head bends back. Two more breathsA 
and pump the chest 15 times. Keep doing it!A 







 
 
 
 
 
 





















No cardiac arrest* 
Apparent drug overdose, alcohol 
intoxication, or carbon monoxide 
poisoning 
Caller not at the scene† 
Advanced cardiac life support not 

Trauma 
Cardiac arrest occurred after re- 

C 
PLUS 
V 
 C 
OUTH 
HEST 
 M 
OMPRESSION 
- 
-M 
OUTH 
TO 
 (N=403) 
ENTILATION 

HEST 
A 
 C 
LONE 
OMPRESSION 
 (N=373) 

151 (37.5) 
117 (29.0) 
119 (31.9) 
110 (29.5) 
1 (0.2) 
128 (31.8) 
5 (1.2) 
1 (0.2) 


2 (0.5) 
4 (1.1) 





34.8 
29.3 
0.1 
34.3 
0.9 
0.6 
0.12 
0.94 
1.00 
0.13 
0.45 
0.21 
*Of the 270 cases not due to cardiac arrest, 260 were assigned to treatment because the dispatcher 
mistakenly diagnosed them as due to cardiac arrest; the other 10 cases were not diagnosed as due to 
cardiac arrest, but were still assigned to treatment for unknown reasons. 


ABLE 
I 

C 
 2. 
DENTIFIED 


 260 R 
 D 
THE 








 E 
 C 
 I 
 A 
C 
PLUS 
V 
 C 
OUTH 
HEST 
 M 
OMPRESSION 
- 
-M 
OUTH 
TO 
 (N=145) 
ENTILATION 

HEST 
A 
 C 
LONE 
OMPRESSION 
 (N=115) 







28 (20.4) 
26 (19.0) 
27 (19.7) 
14 (10.2) 
4 (2.9) 
2 (1.5) 
2 (1.5) 
24 (21.4) 
25 (22.3) 
18 (16.1) 
9 (8.0) 
5 (4.5) 
1 (0.9) 
1 (0.9) 


20.9 
20.5 
18.1 
9.2 
3.6 
1.2 
1.2 



Stroke or transient 
ischemic attack 
Seizure 
Syncope 
Other 
Drug overdose 
Alcohol intoxication 
Trauma 
Possible respiratory 

Congestive heart fail- 
ure or pulmonary 
edema 
*Ten of the 270 cases not due to cardiac arrest were not diagnosed as 
due to cardiac arrest, but were still assigned to treatment for unknown rea- 
sons; these 10 cases are not included here. 
†The percentages are based on the 249 cases with known causes, 137 in 
the group assigned to chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
and 112 in the group assigned to chest compression alone. 
treatment group. A total of 64 patients survived to 
discharge from the hospital: 29 (10.4 percent) in the 
group receiving chest compression plus mouth-to- 
mouth ventilation, and 35 (14.6 percent) in the group 
receiving chest compression only (Table 4) (P=0.18). 
The secondary end point of admission to the hospi- 
tal showed a similar pattern favoring chest compres- 
sion alone (P=0.15). 


Adjustment for characteristics of the episode (age, 
; location 
sex, and race or ethnic group of the victim 
9 
of the episode 
; whether the episode was witnessed; 
; and the pres- 
response time; coexisting conditions 
ence or absence of symptoms before the episode) by 
logistic regression did not substantially change either 
the estimates of effect or the significance levels for 
the end points of survival to hospital discharge and 
admission to the hospital. For survival to hospital dis- 
charge, the unadjusted odds ratio for the compres- 
sion-plus-ventilation group as compared with the 
compression-only group was 0.68 (P=0.15), and the 
adjusted odds ratio was 0.75 (P=0.31), with loca- 
tion (odds ratio, 0.59; P<0.001), whether the arrest 
was witnessed (odds ratio, 2.32; P=0.0025), and age 
(odds ratio, 1.0213; P=0.02) as significant predic- 
tors. For admission to the hospital, the unadjusted 
odds ratio was 0.77 (P=0.14), and the adjusted odds 
ratio was 0.80 (P=0.26), with location (odds ratio, 
0.69; P=0.01) and whether witnessed (odds ratio, 
3.34; P<0.001) significant predictors. 
During the trial, the paramedics responded to 4189 
cardiac arrests, 253 respiratory arrests, and 38 possi- 
ble respiratory arrests. Of these, 520 occurred after 
the call for help. In 630 cases, the dispatchers did not 
attempt a diagnosis, usually because it was a relayed 
call or the patient was in an inaccessible location; in 
another 155, it was not possible to determine the 
dispatcher’s diagnosis. Of the remaining 3175 cardi- 
ac arrests, the dispatchers correctly identified 2749 
and failed to recognize 426 (13.4 percent), typically 
because of insufficient information. 
Data from 227 patients who were randomly as- 
signed to treatment for possible cardiac arrest were 






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

excluded from the primary analysis because the pa- 
tients apparently had drug overdoses, alcohol intox- 
ication, or carbon monoxide poisoning. Among these 
patients, 80.7 percent (88 of 109) of those receiving 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
and 75.7 percent (78 of 103) of those receiving chest 
compression alone survived to hospital discharge (P= 
0.39). The survival status of 15 patients was unknown. 
When included episodes and episodes that were ex- 
cluded because of apparent drug overdose, alcohol 
intoxication, or carbon monoxide poisoning are com- 
bined, survival to hospital discharge was 30.2 per- 
cent (117 of 387) in the group receiving chest com- 
pression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation and 32.9 
percent (113 of 343) in the group receiving chest 
compression alone, a nonsignificant difference of 2.7 
percentage points (95 percent confidence interval, 
¡4.1 to 9.5 percentage points). 
The dispatchers mistakenly diagnosed a total of 
260 cases not due to cardiac arrest as being due to 
cardiac arrest and randomly assigned them to treat- 
ment groups. Another 10 cases that were not due to 
cardiac arrest were not diagnosed as due to cardiac 
arrest, but were still assigned to treatment for un- 
known reasons. Among these 270 episodes, instruc- 
tions were started in only 14 and completed in 7, pri- 
marily because the process of getting the patient to 
the floor resulted in additional information that al- 
lowed the dispatcher to realize the mistake. Data from 
the dispatch tapes, paramedics’ reports, and telephone 
interviews showed no serious adverse effects on ei- 
ther the patient or the caller in any of these 270 ep- 
isodes, and in particular in any of the 14 episodes in 
which CPR was started after instruction from the 
dispatcher. 
Only 20 dispatcher-instructed bystanders (14 given 
instructions for chest compression plus mouth-to- 
mouth ventilation, 4 given instructions for chest com- 












C 
PLUS 
V 
 C 
OUTH 
HEST 
M 
 
OMPRESSION 
-M 
- 
OUTH 
TO 
 (N=279) 
ENTILATION 
68.5 
64.9 
81.0 
8.1 
0.0 
8.9 
1.6 
0.4 
33.7 
35.5 
30.8 
89.2 
4.3 
2.5 
3.9 
43.2 
4.0 
41.6 
40.9 
16.1 
0.4 
1.1 
25.8 
49.1 
21.1 
3.9 
76.3 
3.9 
19.7 
61.6 
1.8 





LONE 
(N=241) 
67.9 
62.2 
72.2 
16.1 
0.9 
9.1 
0.9 
0.9 
32.8 
39.0 
28.2 
87.1 
5.4 
5.0 
2.5 
41.4 
4.1 
44.4 
37.8 
17.0 
0.8 
0.0 
27.0 
49.0 
20.7 
3.3 
78.4 
6.6 
14.9 
80.5 
3.7 


Mean age (yr) 
Male sex (%) 
Race or ethnic group (%) 
White 
Black 
Native American 
Asian 
Hispanic 
Other 
Season (%) 
Winter (Nov.–Feb.) 
Spring (March–June) 
Summer or fall (July–Oct.) 
Location (%) 
Home 
Other residence 
Public, indoors 
Public, outdoors 
Episode unwitnessed (%) 
Mean first-unit response interval (min) 
First cardiac rhythm or state (%) 
Ventricular fibrillation 
Asystole 
Pulseless electrical activity 
Ventricular tachycardia 
Unknown 


None 
«1 hr before episode 
>1 hr before episode 
CPR instructions completed (%) 
Possible adverse effects on patient (%) 






















C 
PLUS 
HEST 
 M 
V 
 C 
OUTH 
OMPRESSION 
- 
-M 
TO 
ENTILATION 








WO 
P V 

-S 
ALUE 

D 
IFFERENCE 
(95% CI)* 



















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

pression only, and 2 given instructions only to move 
the patient to the floor) reported adverse effects on 
themselves. These were not serious, ranging from “out 
of breath” to “vomit from patient.” Similarly, few of 
the bystanders reported adverse effects of dispatch- 
er-instructed CPR on the patients (7 of those given 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
and 10 of those given chest compression only). These 
included “patient vomited after breaths” to “sound 
of rib crack as chest compressions done.” 
The compliance of the dispatchers — that is, strict 
adherence to the written dispatch protocol — was 
generally above 90 percent for each step of the pro- 
tocol, except for stating that help was on the way be- 
fore pursuing the question of CPR, which had a com- 
pliance rate of only 75 percent. Ninety percent of 
callers, when asked, accepted the offer of CPR in- 
struction. In 1 percent of the cases assigned to chest 
compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation, the 
dispatcher mistakenly gave instructions for chest com- 
pression alone; in 2 percent of the cases assigned to 
chest compression alone, the dispatcher mistakenly 
gave instructions for chest compression plus mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation. 
The instructions were completely delivered in only 
62 percent of the episodes assigned to chest com- 
pression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation, as com- 
pared with 81 percent of the episodes assigned to 
chest compression alone (P=0.005). The arrival of 
emergency-medical-services personnel was the pri- 
mary reason instruction was not completed, account- 
ing for 58 instances of incomplete instructions among 
the 279 cases (20.8 percent) in the group assigned 
to chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventila- 
tion and 19 among the 241 cases (7.9 percent) in the 
group assigned to chest compression. In 5 percent 
of the episodes in both groups, the arrival of a by- 
stander trained in CPR terminated the instructions. 
Callers receiving instructions in chest compression 
plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation were more likely to 
terminate them by hanging up or declaring them too 
difficult than were callers receiving instructions in 
chest compression alone (7.2 percent vs. 2.9 percent). 
The inadequacy of the protocol was responsible for 
91 percent of the nonarrests diagnosed as arrests, 
and dispatcher error for only 9 percent; however, dis- 
patcher error was responsible for 70 percent of the 
cardiac arrests that were diagnosed as nonarrests, and 
protocol inadequacy for only 4 percent. 

These data demonstrate that a strategy of dispatch- 
er-instructed chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation was no better than a strategy of dispatcher- 
instructed chest compression alone in Seattle, where 
there is a two-tier system with relatively short response 
times and a tightly structured dispatch protocol. Al- 
though the differences were not statistically signifi- 
cant, the rates of survival to hospital discharge were 
higher with chest compression alone than with chest 
compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation (29 
percent higher) as was the rate of admission to the 
hospital (15 percent higher). The estimated effect of 
the type of instruction was not changed by adjust- 
ment for base-line characteristics of patients and emer- 
gency medical services. 
Since this trial was operationally identical to the 
preliminary trial described in the Introduction, it is 
appropriate to examine the combined data from the 
two studies. Of 400 patients randomly assigned to 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation, 
134 (33.5 percent) were admitted to the hospital, as 
compared with 141 of 352 (40.1 percent) randomly 
assigned to chest compression alone (P=0.07). Over 
the course of both trials, 91 patients are known to 
have survived to discharge from the hospital — 44 of 
399 (11.0 percent) assigned to chest compression plus 
mouth-to-mouth ventilation and 47 of 351 (13.4 per- 
cent) assigned to chest compression alone (P=0.37). 
Their vital status and degree of residual morbidity at 
the end of the study (after an average of 2.4 years of 
follow-up) are summarized in Table 5. 
A limitation of this study is that we did not follow 
a strict intention-to-treat analysis. This was the case 
because data from many patients who were randomly 
assigned to treatment were excluded from the analy- 
sis for a priori reasons. With out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest, it would not be appropriate to have dispatchers 
take the time to ask for information about all exclu- 
sion criteria before implementing the protocol. The 
exclusions are critical for two reasons. First, includ- 
ing data in the analysis on patients who did not have 
cardiac arrest would artifactually increase the survival 
rate, since most of these patients survived. Similarly, 
most patients with drug overdoses, alcohol intoxica- 
tion, or carbon monoxide poisoning were resuscitat- 
ed after respiratory arrest and hence were also survi- 
vors. Second, if patients who received no advanced 
cardiac life support (from whom CPR was withheld 
because it was considered futile or for some other 
reason) were included, the effect would be to reduce 
the survival rate, since all such patients died. The rea- 
sons for exclusion did not differ significantly between 
the treatment groups (Table 1). 
An additional limitation of this study is that the 
true worth of providing CPR instructions before the 
arrival of emergency medical services has not been es- 
tablished. However, the prevailing opinion at this time 
is that bystander-initiated CPR is a highly effective aid 
to resuscitation from cardiac arrest.2 Moreover, a dif- 
ference in survival rates for episodes of ventricular fi- 
brillation that were entered in the study as compared 
with those not entered (24 percent vs. 29 percent) was 
explained by differences in the characteristics of the 
episodes (84 percent vs. 47 percent occurred at home, 
and the victims averaged 69 vs. 66 years of age). The 





 

TABLE 5. NEUROLOGIC MORBIDITY AMONG SURVIVORS TO HOSPITAL DISCHARGE, 
BASED ON COMBINED TRIAL DATA. 


CHEST COMPRESSION 
PLUS MOUTH-TO-MOUTH 
VENTILATION 
CHEST COMPRESSION 
ALONE 







No morbidity 
Some morbidity 
No morbidity 
Some morbidity 

Alive 
Alive, morbidity resolved 
Alive, morbidity unresolved 
Dead 
Dead, morbidity had resolved 
Dead, morbidity was unresolved 

risks and costs of providing CPR instructions before 
the arrival of emergency medical services are mini- 
mal, and the benefits are at least probable. 
In considering the relative advantages of provid- 
ing instructions for chest compression plus mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation or for chest compression alone 
before the arrival of emergency medical services, sev- 
eral features of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest warrant 
consideration. First, the instructions are provided pri- 
marily to bystanders who have had little or no CPR 
training. Instructions for performing ventilation are 
time-consuming and difficult to carry out, whereas 
instructions for performing chest compression are 
relatively simple. Second, it is assumed that experi- 
enced personnel will soon be on the scene. In addi- 
tion, cardiac arrest due to primary ventilatory failure is 
much less common than arrest due to cardiac causes, 
except in children and in cases of drug overdose, al- 
cohol intoxication, or carbon monoxide poisoning. 
Thus, if the latter conditions are excluded, giving in- 
structions for chest compression would appear to be 
more useful than attempting to deliver the more com- 
plex and perhaps unnecessary additional instructions 
for ventilation. It is possible, however, that simple in- 
structions for opening the upper airway could be add- 
ed to the chest-compression message. It is relevant to 
note that in this study, the survival of patients with ap- 
parent drug overdoses, alcohol intoxication, or carbon 
monoxide poisoning was similar in the two treatment 
groups (80.7 percent of those receiving chest com- 
pression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation and 75.7 
percent of those receiving chest compression alone). 
The question of whether dispatchers might be able 
to distinguish which cases should receive instructions 
for chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventila- 
tion rather than chest compression alone is interest- 
ing. In our study, patients with drug overdoses, al- 
cohol intoxication, or carbon monoxide poisoning 

were much younger than other patients (37±10 vs. 
68±15 years), were less likely to have collapsed at 
home (58 percent vs. 88 percent), and were much 
more likely to have collapsed at another residence (38 
percent vs. 5 percent). 
CPR instruction of some type was given in 550 
episodes of cardiac arrest, thus providing an addition- 
al 12.3 percent of all 4480 victims of cardiac arrest 
with some treatment before the arrival of emergency 
medical services. A somewhat unexpected benefit was 
that, in an additional 207 episodes, bystanders who 
had previously been trained in CPR indicated they had 
performed CPR because the dispatcher had prompt- 
ed them and given them a quick review. 
Are the results of this study applicable to other 
settings? During the almost seven years of the trial, 
substantial laboratory work has been done on the is- 
sue of ventilation during CPR. This is well summa- 
rized in a special report from the Ventilation Work- 
ing Group of the Basic Life Support and Pediatric Life 
Support subcommittees of the American Heart As- 
sociation.12 The committee concluded that “it seems 
possible that mouth-to-mouth ventilation is not need- 
ed during the first few minutes of sudden witnessed 
circulatory arrest . . . and may, in fact, have . . . 
potential disadvantages, including gastric insufflation 
and less cycle time spent on effective chest compres- 
sions.” The committee did not recommend that the 
guidelines be changed, largely out of concern for the 
usefulness of ventilation for arrests due to primary 
respiratory causes. Given the committee’s appraisal 
and the results of this trial, we believe chest-com- 
pression CPR may be applicable to the more general 
setting of bystander-initiated CPR. 
Supported by the Washington State Affiliate of the American Heart As- 
sociation and Medic I Foundation and by a grant (5 R01 HS08197-04) 
from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 




We are indebted to the Seattle Fire Department dispatchers for 
their indispensable contribution and their goodwill throughout the 
course of this long study, and to W. Douglas Weaver, M.D., and Paul 
Pepe, M.D., for valuable advice and encouragement. 

1. Thompson RG, Hallstrom AP, Cobb LA. Bystander-initiated cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation in the management of ventricular fibrillation. Ann In- 
tern Med 1979;90:737-40. 
2. Cummins RO, Eisenberg MS. Prehospital cardiopulmonary resuscita- 
tion: is it effective? JAMA 1985;253:2408-12. 
3. Carter WB, Eisenberg MS, Hallstrom AP, Schaeffer S. Development 
and implementation of emergency CPR instruction via telephone. Ann 
Emerg Med 1984;13:695-700. 
4. Eisenberg MS, Hallstrom AP, Carter WB, Cummins RO, Bergner L, 
Pierce J. Emergency CPR instruction via telephone. Am J Public Health 
1985;75:47-50. 
5. Meursing BTJ, Zimmerman ANE, van Heyst ANP. Experimental evi- 
dence in favor of a reversed sequence in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 1983;1:610. abstract. 
6. Berg RA, Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Ewy GA. Assisted ventilation during 
“bystander” CPR in a swine acute myocardial infarction model does not 
improve outcome. Circulation 1997;96:4364-71. 
7. The Emergency Cardiac Care Committee of the American Heart Asso- 
ciation. Risk of infection during CPR training and rescue: supplemental 
guidelines. JAMA 1989;262:2714-5. 
8. Fleming TR, Harrington DP, O’Brien PC. Designs for group sequential 
tests. Control Clin Trials 1984;5:348-61. 
9. Cowie MR, Fahrenbruch CE, Cobb LA, Hallstrom AP. Out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest: racial differences in outcome in Seattle. Am J Public Health 
1993;83:955-9. 
10. Litwin P, Eisenberg MS, Hallstrom AP, Cummins RO. The location 
of collapse and its effect on survival from cardiac arrest. Ann Emerg Med 
1987;16:787-91. 
11. Hallstrom AP, Cobb LA, Yu BH. Influence of comorbidity on the out- 
come of patients treated for out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. Circu- 
lation 1996;93:2019-22. 
12. Becker LB, Berg RA, Pepe PE, et al. A reappraisal of mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation during bystander-initiated cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a 
statement for healthcare professionals from the Ventilation Working Group 
of the Basic Life Support and Pediatric Life Support Subcommittees, 
American Heart Association. Circulation 1997;96:2102-12. 





