



Correspondence to: 
Dr Ken Nagao, The SOS-KANTO 
Committee, Department of 
Emergency and Critical Care 
Medicine, Surugadai Nihon 
University Hospital, 1-8-13 
Kanda Surugadai, Chiyoda-Ku, 
Tokyo, 101-8309, Japan 
Kennagao@med.nihon-u.ac.jp 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation by bystanders with chest 
compression only (SOS-KANTO): an observational study 

Summary 
Background Mouth-to-mouth ventilation is a barrier to bystanders doing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), but 
few clinical studies have investigated the eﬃ cacy of bystander resuscitation by chest compressions without 
mouth-to-mouth ventilation (cardiac-only resuscitation). 
Methods We did a prospective, multicentre, observational study of patients who had out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. On 
arrival at the scene, paramedics assessed the technique of bystander resuscitation. The primary endpoint was 
favourable neurological outcome 30 days after cardiac arrest. 
Findings 4068 adult patients who had out-of-hospital cardiac arrest witnessed by bystanders were included; 439 (11%) 
received cardiac-only resuscitation from bystanders, 712 (18%) conventional CPR, and 2917 (72%) received no 
bystander CPR. Any resuscitation attempt was associated with a higher proportion having favourable neurological 
outcomes than no resuscitation (5·0% vs 2·2%, p<0·0001). Cardiac-only resuscitation resulted in a higher proportion 
of patients with favourable neurological outcomes than conventional CPR in patients with apnoea (6·2% vs 3·1%; 
p=0·0195), with shockable rhythm (19·4% vs 11·2%, p=0·041), and with resuscitation that started within 4 min of 
arrest (10·1% vs 5·1%, p=0·0221). However, there was no evidence for any beneﬁ t from the addition of 
mouth-to-mouth ventilation in any subgroup. The adjusted odds ratio for a favourable neurological outcome after 
cardiac-only resuscitation was 2·2 (95% CI 1·2–4·2) in patients who received any resuscitation from bystanders. 
Interpretation Cardiac-only resuscitation by bystanders is the preferable approach to resuscitation for adult patients 
with witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, especially those with apnoea, shockable rhythm, or short periods of 
untreated arrest. 
Introduction 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) consisting of 
chest compression plus mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
done by bystanders is a major element in the so-called 
chain of survival for people with cardiac arrest.1–4 




Although bystander CPR 
likelihood of 
survival,1–8 reports9–14 have shown that bystander CPR was 
attempted for less than a-third of patients who had 
collapsed. Surveys have 
reluctance of 
bystanders to undertake mouth-to-mouth ventilation as 
a substantial barrier to CPR attempts.10,15–17 This reluctance 
is partly caused by fear of transmission of infectious 
diseases. Despite the remote chance of such infection, 
fears about disease transmission are common in the 
present era of universal precautions.10,15 Another barrier 
to bystanders attempting CPR is the complexity of the 
technique as presently taught.18–20 In CPR guidelines, 
cardiac-only resuscitation by bystanders is recom mended 
in dispatcher-assisted resuscitation or if a rescuer is 
unwilling or unable to do mouth-to-mouth ventilation.2–4 
However, this technique 
is not generally known, 
recommended, or taught to the public. Since few clinical 
studies have focused on the eﬃ cacy of cardiac-only 
resucitation,8,21,22 we sought to compare the outcomes for 
patients who underwent cardiac-only resuscitation or 
conventional CPR by bystanders. If cardiac-only 
resuscitation is as eﬀ ective as conventional CPR by 
bystanders, rescuers might be more willing and able to 
provide this simple intervention than they are at present. 
Furthermore, clinical studies have established that 
interruptions 
during 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest are common, even by 
trained emergency medical staﬀ .3,23,24 Studies suggest 









 
 1151 chest compression with or 
 without ventilation 
 




 4581 cardiac arrest not witnessed 
 410 cardiac arrest witnessed by 

 
 360 excluded (age <18 years) 
75 unidentiﬁed technique 
 





by a non-cardiac cause including trauma, drowning, 
and asphyxia.1 
Resuscitation attempts were documented by both 
paramedics and attending physicians according to 
Utstein style reporting guidelines.1 Data for individual 
patients were entered into a database by SOS-KANTO 
members at each hospital and were independently 
cross-checked twice by diﬀ erent investigators. Original 
data were made available to the data and safety 
monitoring committee for independent scrutiny. 
Study endpoints 
The primary endpoint was favourable neurological 
outcome 30 days after cardiac arrest, deﬁ ned as a 
Glasgow-Pittsburgh cerebral-performance category of 
that such interruptions can have lethal consequences.25–27 
Kern and colleagues26 showed 
that cardiac-only 
resuscitation results in sub stantially better survival 
without neurological impairment 24 h after cardiac 
arrest than conventional CPR. 
We therefore assessed the eﬀ ect of cardiac-only 
resuscitation by bystanders on adults who had out-of- 
hospital cardiac arrest. We expected that cardiac-only 
resuscitation or conventional CPR would be better than 
no bystander 
that cardiac-only 
resuscitation would show similar neurological outcome 
to conventional CPR. 

Methods 
Participants 
A survey of survivors of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in 
the Kanto region of Japan (SOS-KANTO) was done by the 
Association for Acute Medicine of Kanto and included 
58 emergency hospitals and emergency medical service 
units. Between Sept 1, 2002, and Dec 31, 2003, patients 
who had out-of-hospital cardiac arrest witnessed by 
bystanders and who were subsequently transported by 
paramedics to emergency hospitals participating in 
SOS-KANTO were included in the study. Exclusion 
criteria were: patients younger than 18 years of age; 
further cardiac arrest after the arrival of paramedics; 
documented terminal illness; presence of a do-not- 
resuscitate order; and bystander resuscitation without 
documented chest compressions. 

Procedures 
The study was a prospective, multicentre, observational 
trial that followed Utstein style reporting guidelines.1 
The study was approved by the SOS-KANTO Research 
Ethics Board, and the requirement for informed consent 
was waived according 
Japanese government 
to 
guidelines.28 Paramedics observed the technique of 
bystander resuscitation and asked additional questions 
of bystanders 
the characteristics of 
resuscitation.1,2 The 
technique during bystander 
resuscitation was identiﬁ ed as cardiac-only resuscitation, 
conventional CPR, pulmonary-only 
resuscitation, 
unidentiﬁ ed resuscitation technique (including change 
of technique), or chest compression not documented. 
Chest compression rate and depth were not assessed. 
The person attempting bystander resuscitation was 
classiﬁ ed as a lay person with basic CPR training, a lay 
person assisted by a dispatcher, a lay person without 
either training or dispatcher assistance, or an oﬀ -duty 
health worker. All event times were measured by the 
dispatch centre clock, and times of collapse and ﬁ rst 
bystander resuscitation attempts were obtained from 
the bystanders. Cardiac arrest was deﬁ ned as the 
cessation of cardiac mechanical activity, manifesting as 
unresponsiveness, apnoea (or gasping breathing), and 
absence of pulse. The arrest was presumed to be from a 
cardiac cause, unless it was known to have been caused 













Any bystander 
resuscitation 
No bystander 
resuscitation 









































Data are median (IQR) or numerator/total number (%). Calculations based on available data. AED=automated external 
deﬁ brillator. CPR=cardiopulmonary resuscitation. EMS=emergency medical services. PEA=pulseless electrical activity. 
VF=ventricular ﬁ brillation. VT=ventricular tachycardia. *The pupil was measured by EMS workers using one patient’s 
checklist card with pupillometer rulers, and was recorded for 1080 patients in the any resuscitation group and for 
2764 in the no bystander resuscitation group. †Time recorded for 850 patients in the any resuscitation group and for 
2046 in the no bystander resuscitation group. ‡Time recorded for 1125 in the any resuscitation group and for 2861 in 
the no bystander resuscitation group. §Time recorded for 1073 in the any resuscitation group and for 2716 in the no 
bystander resuscitation group. 













































1 (good performance) or 2 (moderate disability) on a 
ﬁ 
 ve-category scale.1,2 The other categories of 3 (severe 
disability), 4 (vegetative state), and 5 (death) were regarded 
as unfavourable neurological outcome.1,2 The secondary 
endpoint was survival 30 days after cardiac arrest, deﬁ ned 
as a Glasgow-Pittsburgh cerebral-performance category 
of 1, 2, 3, or 4. The neurological outcome was deﬁ ned by 
physicians who were unaware of the patient’s bystander 
resuscitation group. 
Statistical analysis 
An estimate of the number of patients needed to test our 
hypothesis was derived from analyses of three previous 
large-scale studies in Japan.12–14 The calculation was based 
on a two-fold improvement in favourable neurological 
outcomes from a baseline outcome of 1·6, and a 1:1:6 ratio 
of patients who had bystander-witnessed cardiac arrest 
and received cardiac-only resuscitation versus con- 
ventional CPR versus no resuscitation. The minimum 
sample size for comparison of favourable neurological 
outcome at 30 days was estimated to be 400 patients for 
each bystander resuscitation group, and 1120 patients for 
the no bystander resuscitation group on the basis of a 
two-sided α value of 0·05 and a β error of 0·10. Baseline 
characteristics were compared by use of the χ² test for 
categorical variables and the Mann-Whitney U test for 
continuous variables, as appropriate. Odds ratios and their 
95% CI were calculated for the study endpoints. A multiple 
logistic-regression analysis was done for independent 
predictors of resuscitation, including age, cause of cardiac 
arrest, technique of bystander resuscitation, resuscitation- 
related time intervals, and initial recorded cardiac 
rhythm.1,2 The non-linear regression analysis with 
logarithm was used to illustrate the relation between 
favourable neurological outcome 30 days after cardiac 
arrest and the time between ﬁ rst bystander resuscitation 
attempts and ﬁ rst use of automated external deﬁ brillator 
(AED) in patients receiving bystander CPR with ventricular 
ﬁ 
 brillation or ventricular tachycardia as an initial cardiac 
rhythm. 
Role of the funding source 
The sponsors had no role in study design, data collection, 
data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. 
The corresponding author had full access to all the data 
and had ﬁ nal responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication. 
Results 
life support by 
9592 patients received advanced 
paramedics and were transported to emergency hospitals 
during the study. Of those, 5464 patients were not eligible. 
The SOS-KANTO study therefore included 4068 adult 
patients who had bystander-witnessed cardiac arrest out 
of hospital; 1151 (28%) received bystander resuscitation, 
including 
cardiac-only 
resuscitation and 712 (18%) who received conventional 
CPR, and 2917 (72%) did not receive any bystander 
resuscitation. No patient was lost to follow-up for study 
endpoints at 30 days after cardiac arrest (ﬁ gure 1). 



At baseline, signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences (table 1) were seen 
between the any resuscitation group and the no bystander 
resuscitation group for cause of cardiac arrest, location 
where the cardiac arrest happened, proportion with 
gasping breathing and pupillometer reading at arrival of 
emergency medical services, initial recorded cardiac 
rhythm, and the need for deﬁ brillation by emergency 















Cardiac-only 
resuscitation 
Conventional 
CPR 




































Data are median (IQR) or numerator/total number (%). Calculations based on available data. 
AED=automated external deﬁ brillator. CPR=cardiopulmonary resuscitation. EMS=emergency medical services. 
PEA=pulseless electrical activity. VF=ventricular ﬁ brillation. VT=ventricular tachycardia. *The pupil was measured by 
EMS workers using one patient’s checklist card with pupillometer rulers, and was recorded for 421 patients in the 
cardiac-only resuscitation group, and for 659 in the conventional CPR group. †The time was recorded for 323 patients 
in the cardiac-only resuscitation group, and for 527 in the conventional CPR group. ‡The time was recorded for 436 in 
the cardiac-only resuscitation group, and for 689 in the conventional CPR group. §The time was recorded for 414 in 
the cardiac-only resuscitation group, and for 659 in the conventional CPR group. 

















































From ﬁ rst bystander resuscitation attempt to ﬁ rst AED 
analysis 

















medical workers. Generally, the two groups that received 
bystander 
baseline 
characteristics (table 2). However, higher proportions in 
the cardiac-only resuscitation group 
the 
conventional group were male, more patients had cardiac 
arrest at home, and more were treated by lay people. The 
group who had any resuscitation attempt had signiﬁ cantly 
higher frequencies of favourable neurological outcome 
at 30 days than the no bystander resuscitation group in 
the whole cohort (5% [57/1151 vs 2% [63/2917]; p<0·0001) 
and in the subgroups of patients with cardiac causes 
(7% [53/806] vs 3% [54/1836]; p<0·0001), with apnoea 
(4% [44/1028] vs 2% [55/2751]; p<0·0001], with ventricular 
ﬁ 
 brillation or tachycardia as initial cardiac rhythm 
(14% [47/329] vs 8% [45/549]; p=0·0044), and with both of 
the times between call to emergency medical services 
and ﬁ rst AED analysis (for interval ≤10 min; 6% [44/689] 
vs 3% 
[52/1801]; p<0·0001: for interval >10 min; 
3% [13/462] vs 1% [11/1116]; p=0·0069). The cardiac-only 
resuscitation group also had signiﬁ cantly higher 
frequencies of favourable neurological outcome at 
30 days than the no bystander resuscitation group in 
those categories. Although the frequency of favourable 
neurological outcome at 30 days did not diﬀ er between 
the cardiac-only resuscitation group and the conventional 
Figure 2: Adjusted odds ratios for primary endpoint associated with selected factors in patients receiving 
bystander resuscitation whose bystander resuscitation-related time intervals were known 
CPR group for the whole cohort (p=0·1459, table 3), 
cardiac-only resuscitation resulted in a higher proportion 
of patients with favourable neurological outcomes than 
conventional CPR in the subgroups of patients with 
apnoea (p=0·0195), with ventricular ﬁ brillation or 
tachycardia as initial cardiac rhythm (p=0·041), and with 




No bystander 
resuscitation 
Any resuscitation 
versus no bystander 
resuscitation 
Cardiac-only resuscitation 
versus no bystander 
resuscitation 
Cardiac-only resuscitation 
versus conventional CPR 













Time from collapse to ﬁ rst bystander 
resuscitation attempt 
















































Data are numerator/total number or odds ration (95% CI). AED=automated external deﬁ brillator. CPR=cardiopulmonary resuscitation. EMS=emergency medical services. PEA= pulseless electrical activity. 
VF=ventricular ﬁ brillation. VT=ventricular tachycardia. 





























Time from ﬁ rst bystander resuscitation 
attempt to ﬁ rst AED analysis 












Time from collapse to ﬁrst 
bystander resuscitation attempt (min) 


Time from ﬁrst bystander resuscitation 
attempt to ﬁrst AED analysis (min) 
Ventricular ﬁbrillation or pulseless ventricular 
tachycardia as initial cardiac rhythm 










Favourable neurological outcome 
 
conventional CPR (p=0·0144), and other independent 
predictors of favourable outcome were age, time between 
ﬁ 
resuscitation attempt and ﬁ rst 
 rst bystander 
AED analysis, and ventricular ﬁ brillation or tachycardia 
as initial cardiac rhythm. When sex and gasping 
breathing were included in the analysis, the results did 
not change. 


Figure 3 shows the relation between favourable 
neurological outcome at 30 days and the time between 
ﬁ 
and ﬁ rst 
 rst bystander 
AED analysis (ie, the duration of bystander resuscitation) 
in patients with ventricular ﬁ brillation or tachycardia. 
Cardiac-only resuscitation resulted in higher proportions 
of favourable neurological outcome than conventional 
CPR (22% [22/100] vs 10% [17/166], the odds ratio, 2·5; 
95% CI, 1·2–4·9; p=0·0086], and 
likelihood of a 
favourable neurological outcome decreased in both 
bystander resuscitation groups for every 1 min increment 
in 
to ﬁ rst 
AED analysis (p=0·0105 for the cardiac-only rescuscitation 
and p=0·0003 for conventional CPR). When the time 
from collapse to ﬁ rst AED analysis was used instead, the 
results were unchanged. 

The proportions of people who were alive at 30 days 
diﬀ ered from those who had favourable neurological 
outcome at 30 days (ﬁ gure 4). In all subgroups of patients, 
the proportions surviving at 30 days showed no 
diﬀ erences between the two bystander resuscitation 
groups, and these two groups also had similar frequencies 
of survival until hospital admission. 
Discussion 
This report shows that bystander cardiac-only resuscitation 
is equivalent or superior to conventional bystander CPR 
in adult patients with witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest, in terms of neurological beneﬁ t. Not only the any 
resuscitation group, but also the cardiac-only resuscitation 
group had higher proportions of favourable neurological 
outcome than the no bystander resuscitation group for 
the whole cohort, and cardiac-only resuscitation resulted 
in better outcome than conventional CPR in some 
important subgroups of patients. These subgroups 
included patients with apnoea (about 90% of patients in 
this study), and those with shockable cardiac rhythm or 
short periods of untreated arrest (CPR that started within 
4 min of arrest). These patients had the greatest chance of 
survival (table 3, ﬁ gures 3 and 4). After adjustment for 
resuscitation, cardiac-only resuscitation was an 
in- 
dependent predictor of favourable neurological outcome 
in patients who received bystander resuscitation (ﬁ gure 2). 
Furthermore, there was no evidence for any beneﬁ t from 
the addition of mouth-to-mouth ventilation in any 
subgroup of patients (table 3, ﬁ gures 2, 3, and 4). 
Some experts have expressed concern that the absence of 
assisted ventilation with chest compressions might result 
in lower survival and worse neurological outcomes in 
survivors of cardiac arrest.3,4 Several clinical studies have 
Figure 3: Relation between primary endpoint and time from ﬁ rst bystander resuscitation attempts to ﬁ rst 
AED analysis in patients who received bystander resuscitation with ventricular ﬁ brillation or pulseless 
ventricular tachycardia 
Each curve shows predicted frequency of favourable neurological outcome at 30 days by the non-linear regression 
analysis with logarithm (vertical axis shows predicted frequency of favourable neurological outcome, and 
predicted frequency of 1 is equivalent to 100%). Each box represents the actual frequencies of favourable 
neurological outcome at 30 days for each bystander resuscitation group every 2 min. p=0·0086 for comparison of 
cardiac-only resuscitation group with conventional CPR group. 
Figure 4: Frequencies of study endpoints between the cardiac-only resuscitation group and the conventional 
CPR group in all patients and in subgroups of patients 
resuscitation starting within 4 min of collapse (p=0·0221). 
However, the bystander resuscitation groups had similar 
frequencies of favourable neurological outcome at 30 days 
in the subgroups of patients who received bystander 
resuscitation from a lay person or from a medically 
trained person. Additionally, there was no evidence for 
any beneﬁ t from the addition of mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation in any subgroup of patients who received 
bystander resuscitation. 
Multiple logistic-regression analysis (ﬁ gure 2) showed 
that cardiac-only resuscitation resulted 
in higher 
proportions of favourable neurological outcome than 



Cardiac-only resusciation (n=100) 
Conventional CPR (n=166) 






















Survival at 30 days (cardiac-only resuscitation) 
Favourable neurological outcome at 30 days 
(cardiac-only resuscitation) 
Survival at 30 days (conventional CPR) 
Favourable neurological outcome at 30 days 
(conventional CPR) 











Apnoea at arrival of 
e m ergency m edical 

Ventricularﬁbrillation or 
l 
a 
i 
t 
i 
 
ventricular tachycardia as 
n 
i 
cardiac ryth m 
Resuscitation starting 
within 4 min 

shown that cardiac-only resuscitation is at least as eﬀ ective 
as chest compression with mouth-to-mouth ventilation.8,21,22 
In this study, however, cardiac-only resuscitation resulted 
in better or similar neurological outcome than conventional 
CPR. Moreover, the pro portion of patients surviving, 
including those surviving until hospital admission, showed 
no diﬀ erences between the cardiac-only resuscitation 
group and the conventional CPR group in any subgroup of 
patients. The number of patients who received bystander 
cardiac-only resuscitation was higher in this study (n=439) 
than in previous ones (n=273,21 241,22 and 418). We suggest 
that the large number of patients provided adequate power 
to attribute better neurological outcome to cardiac-only 
resuscitation, and there was no evidence of increased 
numbers of survivors with neurologically unfavourable 
outcomes in the group who had cardiac-only resuscitation 
compared with conventional CPR. 
Several mechanisms might account for the eﬃ cacy of 
cardiac-only resuscitation. If the airway is open, gasping 
breathing and passive chest recoil provide some air 
exchange.15,29–33 Measured minute ventilation and arterial 
oxygenation decrease after 4–10 min of resuscitation 
irrespective of attempts at ventilation.15,26,30 Several studies 
suggest that ventilation is not essential during the initial 
12 min of resuscitation with untreated arrest intervals of 
less than 6 min,15,25,30,31 and that gasping breathing is 
associated with a better outcome.15,29,31,33 In this study, most 
patients who had bystander resuscitation had an untreated 
arrest interval of less than 6 min and a duration of 
bystander resuscitation of less than 12 min, and the two 
bystander resuscitation groups had similar time intervals 
and had similar proportions of patients with gasping 
breath. 

the eﬃ cacy of cardiac-only 
resuscitation could be that mouth-to-mouth ventilation 
has several potential disadvantages. These disadvantages 
include gastric insuﬄ ations and importantly, less cycle 
time spent on eﬀ ective compressions.2–4,15,19,23–28,34 Time 
spent on mouth-to-mouth ventilation takes precious time 
away from chest compressions that support cerebral and 
coronary perfusion.3,4,15,19,23–28 Intrathoracic pressure drops 
after each pause for mouth-to-mouth ventilation, and 
several chest compressions have to be done before 
previous rates of cerebral and coronary perfusion are 
re-established.3,4,26 In this study, the quality of chest 
compressions might not have been as good in the 
cardiac-only resuscitation group as in the conventional 
resuscitation group, because the proportion of patients 
treated by people with no ﬁ rst-aid training, with or without 
dispatcher-assistance, was higher in the cardiac-only 
group (272/439, 62% vs 234/712, 33%). Also, the proportion 
treated by medically trained individuals was lower in the 
cardiac-only group than in the conventional CPR group 
(97/439, 22% vs 350/712, 49%) However, there would be 
less interruption of chest compressions in the cardiac-only 
resuscitation group. We suggest that interruption of chest 
compressions was the main reason why conventional 
CPR did not result in better neurological outcome than 
cardiac-only resuscitation. 
There are several limitations to our study. It was neither 
a randomised controlled trial nor a population-based 
study. However, the overall survival and patients’ 
characteristics in this study were similar to those of 
population-based studies from similar large metropolitan 
areas—Osaka, Japan,13 and New York, USA35 Although 
the total number of patients was large, there were few 
patients with arrest caused by asphyxia, drowning, or 
traumatic brain 
injury. The quality of bystander 
resuscitation was not assessed, and resuscitation-related 
event times were known for only 70% of the study 
population. Additionally, post-resuscitation care could 
not be standardised. Recent studies3,4,36–38 have shown that 
therapeutic hypothermia can result in better outcomes 
for patients with out-of-hospital ventricular ﬁ brillation. 
In this study, few patients were treated by induction of 
hypothermia, and the proportions given this treatment 
were similar in the two bystander resuscitation groups. 
On the basis of these ﬁ ndings, we conclude that 
bystander cardiac-only resuscitation is the preferred 
approach 
to resuscitation for adult patients with 
witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac arrest especially those 
with apnoea, shockable cardiac rhythm, or short periods 
of untreated arrest. 
SOS-KANTO study group 
Nihon University Surugadai Hospital, Tokyo, Japan (Ken Nagao MD, 
Kimio Kikushima MD); Teikyo University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan 
(Tetsuya Sakamoto MD); Kawaguchi Municipal Medical Center, Saitama, 
Japan (Kazuhide Koseki MD); Toho University Oomori Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan (Masaki Igarashi MD); St Luke’s International Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan (Shinichi Ishimatsu MD); Saitama Medical School Hospital, 
Saitama, Japan (Akira Sato MD); Keio University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan 
(Shingo Hori MD); Showa University Fugigaoka Hospital, Tokyo, Japan 
(Shigeru Kanesaka MD); Tokyo Metropolitan Bokutoh Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan (Yuichi Hamabe MD); National Defense Medical College, Saitama, 
Japan Daizo Saito MD); and Kimitsu Chuo Hospital, Chiba, Japan 
(Shinya Kitamura MD). 
Contributors 
K Nagao and T Sakamoto as principal investigators, participated in idea 
formation, study design and completion, data collection, data 
management, data analyses, interpretation of results and revision of the 
report, and contributed to the ﬁ nal report. K Nagao obtained funding. 
K Kikushima, K Koseki, M Igarashi, S Ishimatsu, A Sato, S Hori, 
S Kanesaka, Y Hamabe, D Saito, and S Kitamura participated in study 
idea formation, study designand completion, data collection, data 
management, and interpretation of the results. K Nagao, T Sakamoto, 
K Kikushima, and D Saito did the statistical analysis. All authors 
approved the ﬁ nal version. 
Participating investigators and co-ordinators—Akiko Nonaka, 
Atsushi Katsumi, Atsushi Sakurai, Hiroaki Suzuki, Hiroshi Imai, 
Hiroshi Miyauchi, Hiroyasu Suga, Jozi Tomioka, Kazutaka Imai, 
Kazuya Kiyota, Ken Arima, Kitoji Takuhiro, Kiyoshi Matsuda, 
Kohei Takahashi, Masafumi Naito, Masaharu Yagi, Masato Honma, 
Masaru Sasaki, Masaru Suzuki, Minoru Nakano, Naohiko Fugiyoshi, 
Naoki Kozima, Naoshige Harada, Noriyoshi Ohashi, Noriyuki Suzuki, 
Ryutaro Moriwaki, Ryoji Takahashi, Satoru Kikuchi, Seichi Noda, 
Shigeto Oda, Shohei Imaki, Tadashi Fugikawa, Takaaki Kikuno, 
Takashi Kamohara, Takayuki Suda, Tatsuo Ishii, Tokuzi Irabu, 
Tomohito Sadahiro, Toshiaki Ikeda, Toshiharu Tanaka, 
Toshihiko Obayashi, Toshiro Ogawa, Yasuyuki Miyahara, 
Yoshihide Nakagawa, Yoshiki Tokuyasu, Yoshio Tawara, Yoshiyuki Haga, 
Yoshiyuki Minowa, Yukio Tanaka, Zyunichi Sasaki, and Zyunmei Fudouzi. 



Conﬂ ict of interest statement 
We declare that we have no conﬂ ict of interest. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank all the bystanders who undertook basic resuscitation and the 
paramedics, emergency medical technicians, nurses, and physicians 
who participated in the SOS-KANTO study. This study was supported by 
a grant from the Laerdal Foundation of Acute Medicine, Norway and a 
research grant for Cardiovascular Disease (14c-7) from the Ministry from 
Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan 
References 
1 
Cummins RO, Chamberlain DA, Abramson NS, et al. 
Recommended guidelines for uniform reporting of data from 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: the Utstein Style: a statement for 
health professionals from a task force of the American Heart 
Association, the European Resuscitation Council, the Heart and 
Stroke Foundation of Canada, and the Australian Resuscitation 
Council. Circulation 1991; 84: 960–75. 
2 American Heart Association in collaboration with International 
Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. Guidelines 2000 for 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care: 
international consensus on science. Circulation 2000; 102 (suppl I): 
I1–384. 
International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. 2005 
international consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care science with treatment 
recommendations. Circulation 2005; 112: 1–136. 


guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation 2005; 102: IV1–205. 
5 Herlitz J, Ekstrom L, Wennerblom B, Axelsson A, Bang A, 
Holmberg S. Eﬀ ect of bystander initiated cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation on ventricular ﬁ brillation and witnessed cardiac arrest 
outside hospital. Br Heart J 1994; 72: 408–12. 

cardiopulmonary resuscitation and survival following 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. JAMA 1995; 274: 1922–25. 
7 Holmberg M, Holmberg S, Herlitz J; Swedish Cardiac Arrest 
Registry. Factors modifying the eﬀ ect of bystander cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation on survival in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patients 
in Sweden. Eur Heart J 2001; 22: 511–19. 
8 Waalewijn RA, Tijssen JGP, Koster RW. Bystander initiated actions 
in out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation: results from the 
Amsterdam Resuscitation Study (ARREST). Resuscitation 2001; 50: 
273–79. 
Stiell IG, Wells GA, Field B, et al. Advanced cardiac life support in 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 647–56. 
10 Ewy GA. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation-strengthening the links in 

the chain of survival. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 1599–61. 
11 Wenzel V, Krismer AC, Arntz HR, et al. A comparison of 
vasopression and epinephrine for out-of-hospital cardiac 
resuscitation. N Engl J Med 2004; 305: 105–13. 
12 Mashiko K, Otsuka T, Shimazaki S, et al. An outcome study of 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest using the Utstein template—a 
Japanese experience. Resuscitation 2002; 55: 241–6. 
Iwami T, Hiraide A, Nakanishi N, et al. Age and sex analysis of 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, Japan. Resuscitation 2003; 57: 
145–52. 


the kanto area: SOS-KANTO, the result of initial totaling. 
KANTO J Jpn Assoc Acute Med 2003; 24: 10–16 (in Japanese). 

mouth-to-mouth ventilation during bystander-initiated 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the ventilation working group of the basic life 
support and pediatric life support subcommittees, American Heart 
Association. Circulation 1997; 96: 2102–12. 
16 Ornato JP, Hallagan LF, McMahan SB, Peeples EH, 
Rostaﬁ nski AG. Attitudes of BCLS instructors about 
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation during the AIDS epidemic. 
Ann Emerg Med 1990; 19: 151–56. 

nurses to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Arch Intern Med 
1993; 153: 1763–69. 
18 Braslow A, Brennan RT, Newman MM, Bircher NG, Batcheller AM, 
Kaye W. CPR training without an instructor: development and 
evaluation of a video self-instructional system for eﬀ ective 
performance of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation 1997; 
34: 207–20. 

controlled trials of staged teaching for basic life support, 1: Skill 
acquisition at bronze stage. Resuscitation 2000; 45: 7–15. 
20 Chamberlain D, Smith A, Colquhoun M, Handley AJ, Kern KB, 
Wodllard M. Randomized controlled trials of staged teaching for 
basic life support 2. Comparison of CPR performance and skill 
retention using either staged instruction or conventional training. 
Resuscitation 2001; 50: 27–37. 
21 Van Hoeyweghen RJ, Bossaert LL, Mullie A, et al; Belgian Cerebral 
Resuscitation Study Group. Quality and eﬃ ciency of bystander 
CPR. Resuscitation 1993; 26: 47–52. 

resuscitation by chest compression alone or with mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 1546–53. 

cardiopulmonary resuscitation during out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. 
JAMA 2005; 293: 299–304. 

compressions during emergency medical systems resuscitation. 
Circulation 2005; 112: 1259–65. 

Bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation: is ventilation necessary? 
Circulation 1993; 88: 1907–15. 

continuous chest compression during cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, Improved outcome during a simulated single 
lay-rescuer scenario. Circulation 2002; 105: 645–49. 

precordial compression during automated deﬁ brillation. Circulation 
2002; 106: 368–72. 

of Health, Labor and Welfare in Japan Web site. Available at: 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/general/seido/kousei/i-kenkyu/index. 
html#2 (accessed Mar 6, 2007). 

ventilation during resuscitation in a canine model. Circulation 1994; 
90: 3070–75. 

ventilation may not be essential for initial cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. Chest 1995; 108: 821–27. 
31 Berg RA, Kern KB, Hilwig RW, et al. Assisted ventilation does not 
improve outcome in a porcine model of single-rescuer bystander 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Circulation 1997; 95: 1635–41. 
Idris AH, Banner MJ, Wenzel V, Fuerst RS, Becker LB, Melker RJ. 
Ventilation caused by external chest compression is unable to 
sustain eﬀ ective gas exchange during CPR: a comparison with 
mechanical ventilation. Resuscitation 1994; 28: 143–50. 

33 Clark JJ, Larsen MP, Culley LL, Graves JR, Eisenberg MS. Incidence 
of agonal respirations in sudden cardiac arrest. Ann Emerg Med 
1992; 21: 1464–67. 

world: when will the guidelines get the message? JAMA 2005; 293: 
363–65. 
35 Richmond N, Silverman R, Kusick M, Foltin G, Vlahov D. Survival 
from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in New York City: 10 years later. 
Circulation 2004; 110: III–455 (abstract). 

cerebral resuscitation using emergency cardiopulmonary bypass, 
coronary reperfusion therapy and mild hypothermia in patients 
with cardiac arrest outside the hospital. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 36: 
776–83. 

therapeutic hypothermia to improve the neurologic outcomes after 
cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 549–56. (Erratum, 
N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 1756). 
38 Berrard SA, Gray TW, Buist MD, et al. Treatment of comatose 
survivors of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest with induced 
hypothermia. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 557–63. 


