From the Department of Clinical Science 
and Education (L.S., H.P.), Section of Pre- 
hospital Medicine (L.S.), Section of Car- 
diology (K.B., M.R.), and Section of 
Emergency Medicine (M.C.), Karolinska 
Institutet at Södersjukhuset; and SOS 
Alarm, Swedish Emergency Medical Com- 
munication Center (L.E.) — both in 
Stockholm; and the Section of Cardiolo- 
gy, University of Göteborg, Sahlgrenska 
Hospital, Göteborg (J.H.) — all in Sweden. 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Svensson 
at the Stockholm Prehospital Center, Sod- 
ersjukhuset S-118 83, Stockholm, Sweden, 
or at leif.svensson@sodersjukhuset.se. 
N Engl J Med 2010;363:434-42. 
Copyright © 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society. 

Compression-Only CPR or Standard CPR 
in Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest 
Leif Svensson, M.D., Ph.D., Katarina Bohm, R.N., Ph.D., 
Maaret Castrèn, M.D., Ph.D., Hans Pettersson, Ph.D., Lars Engerström, M.D., 
Johan Herlitz, M.D., Ph.D., and Mårten Rosenqvist, M.D., Ph.D. 

BACKGROUND 
Emergency medical dispatchers give instructions on how to perform cardiopulmo- 
nary resuscitation (CPR) over the telephone to callers requesting help for a patient 
with suspected cardiac arrest, before the arrival of emergency medical services (EMS) 
personnel. A previous study indicated that instructions to perform CPR consisting 
of only chest compression result in a treatment efficacy that is similar or even su- 
perior to that associated with instructions given to perform standard CPR, which 
consists of both compression and ventilation. That study, however, was not pow- 
ered to assess a possible difference in survival. The aim of this prospective, random- 
ized study was to evaluate the possible superiority of compression-only CPR over 
standard CPR with respect to survival. 
METHODS 
Patients with suspected, witnessed, out-of-hospital cardiac arrest were randomly as- 
signed to undergo either compression-only CPR or standard CPR. The primary end 
point was 30-day survival. 
RESULTS 
Data for the primary analysis were collected from February 2005 through January 
2009 for a total of 1276 patients. Of these, 620 patients had been assigned to receive 
compression-only CPR and 656 patients had been assigned to receive standard CPR. 
The rate of 30-day survival was similar in the two groups: 8.7% (54 of 620 patients) 
in the group receiving compression-only CPR and 7.0% (46 of 656 patients) in the 
group receiving standard CPR (absolute difference for compression-only vs. stan- 
dard CPR, 1.7 percentage points; 95% confidence interval, −1.2 to 4.6; P = 0.29). 
CONCLUSIONS 
This prospective, randomized study showed no significant difference with respect 
to survival at 30 days between instructions given by an emergency medical dispatch- 
er, before the arrival of EMS personnel, for compression-only CPR and instructions 
for standard CPR in patients with suspected, witnessed, out-of-hospital cardiac ar- 
rest. (Funded by the Swedish Heart–Lung Foundation and others; Karolinska Clini- 
cal Trial Registration number, CT20080012.) 









are crucial in supporting and giving in- 
structions to witnesses or bystanders who 
call for help for patients with cardiac arrest be- 
fore the arrival of emergency medical services 
(EMS) personnel.1 Telephone instructions given for 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) seem to be 
given predominantly for CPR involving chest com- 
pression.2 
Using an animal model, Berg and colleagues3 
found that compression-only CPR and standard 
CPR (i.e., CPR involving both compression and 
ventilation) have similar efficacy. In a clinical study 
in which dispatchers gave randomly assigned in- 
structions to callers for aid to patients with car- 
diac arrest — to attempt resuscitation with the use 
of either compression-only CPR or standard CPR 
— survival rates were similar with the two CPR 
methods.2 However, this lack of difference may 
have been due to an undersized study population. 
In a subgroup analysis, the rate of survival was 
significantly higher among patients with wit- 
nessed cardiac arrest receiving compression-only 
CPR than among those receiving standard CPR. 
Two retrospective registry studies have shown 
similar survival rates with compression-only CPR 
and standard CPR.4,5 
We designed this prospective, randomized study 
to compare the efficacy (measured as the 30-day 
survival rate) of compression-only CPR and stan- 
dard CPR, as performed on the basis of instruc- 
tions from an emergency medical dispatcher, be- 
fore the arrival of EMS personnel, in witnessed 
cases of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. 

Study Protocol and Data Collection 
The study protocol was approved by the Regional 
Ethics Committee at Karolinska Institutet, Stock- 
holm. The requirement for written informed con- 
sent was waived. The study was conducted in ac- 
cordance with the protocol (available with the full 
text of this article at NEJM.org), which contains 
details about the methods and statistical analyses 
beyond those presented here. 
Sweden has 9 million inhabitants, and its 18 
Emergency Medical Dispatch Centers respond to 
about 10,000 calls daily. The Swedish Emergency 
Medical Dispatch Center system and strategies 
have been described elsewhere.6 
In this study, dispatchers who received calls 
about suspected out-of-hospital cardiac arrest first 
determined whether randomization was warrant- 
ed, by asking the caller whether the collapse had 
been witnessed (seen or heard), which was an 
inclusion criterion, as well as whether the patient 
was unconscious and was not breathing or not 
breathing normally. The dispatcher also ascer- 
tained that none of the following exclusion cri- 
teria were met: cardiac arrest caused by trauma, 
airway obstruction, drowning, or intoxication; pa- 
tient’s age under 8 years; and difficulty of the 
dispatcher in communicating with the caller. Fur- 
thermore, the dispatcher ascertained that no one 
at the scene had started CPR and that the caller 
did not already know how to perform CPR and 
was willing to be instructed to perform it. 
If these conditions were met, the dispatcher 
gave the caller instructions for either compres- 
sion-only CPR or standard CPR (mouth-to-mouth 
ventilation plus chest compression, consisting of 
2 ventilations alternating with 15 compressions). 
The type of CPR on which the caller was instruct- 
ed was determined on the basis of the next avail- 
able data-collection sheet for each dispatcher, who 
removed a paper strip covering the treatment as- 
signment on the sheet after determining that the 
inclusion criteria had been met. Data-collection 
sheets were distributed in blocks of 100 sheets, 
50 for each treatment assignment. The order of 
sheets within each block was unique and was 
based on the random-number generator in SPSS 
software (version 18). 
The dispatcher entered information about in- 
clusion and exclusion criteria on the data-collec- 
tion sheet and, after the call, noted whether CPR 
instructions had been given, and if so, instructions 
for which type of CPR. The dispatcher also re- 
corded whether EMS personnel arrived at any 
point during the call and whether the arrival 
interrupted the giving of instructions. Dispatch- 
ers were given detailed written instructions to use 
for compression-only CPR and standard CPR, but 
they were permitted to diverge from the written 
instructions if they found it necessary. Our study 
started before the guidelines for CPR changed the 
recommendation from 2 ventilations alternating 
with 15 compressions to 30 compressions alter- 
nating with 2 ventilations. Our instructions of 
2 ventilations alternating with 15 compressions 
were maintained throughout the study, since the 







new guidelines did not address dispatcher-assist- 
ed CPR. 
Data were collected from EMS records, and in- 
formation about survival status was collected from 
national registers. No interrater reliability assess- 
ment was performed. However, 50% of the data- 
collection forms were double-checked and no rel- 
evant deviations were observed. In addition, we 
evaluated 100 recorded calls and reviewed the 
corresponding data-collection forms, finding no 
deviation of the information in each. 

The primary end point was 30-day survival. The 
secondary end points were 1-day survival, defined 
as survival until midnight of the day of admis- 
sion to the hospital, as well as the first detected 
cardiac rhythm and survival to discharge from 
the hospital. 
Statistical Analysis 
We estimated that a sample of 2213 patients in 
each treatment group would be needed to provide 







478 Met exclusion criteria 
73 Had missing inclusion 
or exclusion criteria 
60 Were lost to follow-up 



442 Met exclusion criteria 
72 Had missing inclusion 
or exclusion criteria 
72 Were lost to follow-up 
281 Had data excluded from 
analysis because attempts at 
resuscitation by EMS unsuc- 
cessful or unknown reason 
263 Had data excluded from 
analysis because attempts at 
resuscitation by EMS unsuc- 
cessful or unknown reason 


113 Did not receive the 
assigned treatment 
46 Had assigned treatment 
started but then stopped 
before EMS arrival 
because CPR was per- 
formed without instruc- 
tions or because of com- 
munication problems, 
inability to perform CPR, 
signs of life, EMS arrival, 
or unwillingness to per- 
form CPR 


45 Had assigned treatment 
started but then stopped 
before EMS arrival 
because CPR was per- 
formed without instruc- 
tions or because of com- 
munication problems, 
inability to perform CPR, 
signs of life, EMS arrival, 
or unwillingness to per- 
form CPR 
575 Had data included in the per-protocol 
analysis 
461 Had data included in the per-protocol 
analysis 
901 Were assigned to receive compression- 
only CPR 

Figure 1. Randomization and Inclusion in Primary and Per-Protocol Analyses, According to Treatment Group. 
The treatment assignment was unknown for 1 of the 3809 patients who underwent randomization. CPR denotes 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 






Compression- 
Only CPR 
(N = 977) 
Standard 
CPR 
(N = 1011) 





































a statistical power of 80% to detect an absolute 
difference of 2 percentage points in the 30-day 
survival rate between the two groups, assuming 
a rate of 5% with standard CPR and 7% with com- 
pression-only CPR, with a two-sided alpha value 
of 0.05. 
Because CPR guidelines were altered during 
the study, giving compression-only CPR a more 
prominent role,7 and because of the practical dif- 
ficulties of running a study for more than 4 years, 
we decided that 1000 patients in each group was 
the largest number that would be realistic to in- 
clude in our study. This revised sample size was 
estimated to provide a statistical power of 78% 
to detect an absolute difference of 3 percentage 
points in the 30-day survival rate between the two 
groups, assuming a rate of 5% with standard CPR 
and 8% with compression-only CPR, which was 
considered sufficient to detect any clinically im- 
portant difference in the survival rate. The calcu- 
lations were performed in SamplePower 2.0 (SPSS). 
Data were analyzed according to the random- 
ized treatment assignments, for patients who ful- 
filled the inclusion and exclusion criteria (the 
intention-to-treat population in the primary analy- 
sis), as well as according to the treatment actually 
received (the per-protocol analysis). The chi-square 
test was used to compare compression-only CPR 
with standard CPR with regard to 30-day and 
1-day survival rates (i.e., the primary and second- 
ary end points). A two-tailed P value of less than 
0.05 was considered to indicate statistical signifi- 
cance. We used logistic regression to adjust for 
possible confounders due to imbalances in the 
baseline characteristics between the two groups 
and to perform subgroup analyses to determine 



Table 1. Reasons for the Exclusion of 1988 Patients with Data Included in the Primary Analysis, According to Treatment 
Group.* 












































Compression-Only CPR 
(N = 620) 
Standard CPR 
(N = 656) 



















whether the survival end points in each treatment 
group varied according to the baseline and end- 
point characteristics. 

Enrollment and Characteristics 
of the Patients 
Enrollment began in February 2005 and ended in 
January 2009, at which time there had been 3809 
randomized cases of suspected out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest. After exclusions, 1276 patients re- 
mained in the study (Fig. 1). Reasons for exclusion 
are listed in Table 1. Of the 1276 patients, 620 
(48.6%) were randomly assigned to receive com- 
pression-only CPR, and 656 patients (51.4%) to 
receive standard CPR; 1036 patients (81.2%) were 
treated per protocol, and 149 (11.7%) did not re- 
ceive the assigned treatment. A total of 113 of the 
901 patients (12.5%) assigned to receive compres- 
sion-only CPR were instead given standard CPR 
because the dispatchers incorrectly gave standard- 
CPR instructions. The two treatment groups were 
similar with respect to the baseline characteris- 
tics of the patients and the episodes of cardiac 
arrest (Table 2). 
Primary and Secondary Outcomes 
The primary analysis showed a 30-day survival 
rate of 8.7% in the group receiving compression- 
only CPR and 7.0% in the group receiving standard 
CPR (absolute difference for compression-only vs. 
standard CPR, 1.7 percentage points; 95% confi- 
dence interval, −1.2 to 4.6; P = 0.29) (Table 3). A to- 
tal of 24.0% of the patients receiving compression- 
only CPR survived for 1 day, as did 20.9% of those 



Table 2. Baseline Characteristics of the Study Patients with Data Included in the Primary Analysis, According to 
Treatment Group.* 







































Compression- 
Only CPR 
Standard 
CPR 
Two-Sided 
P Value 
Difference 
(95% CI) 













analysis. Data for survival to discharge were missing for many patients who died before day 30. CI denotes confidence 
interval, and CPR cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
receiving standard CPR. There were no signifi- 
cant differences between the two groups with 
respect to the other secondary end points. 
Subgroup Analyses 
The rates of the primary outcome of 30-day sur- 
vival and the secondary outcome of 1-day survival 
did not differ significantly among the subgroups 
studied (Fig. 2A and 2B). Specifically, the rate of 
the primary end point did not vary significantly 
with age (P = 0.50), interval between call and first 
EMS response (P = 0.95), or first cardiac rhythm 
(P = 0.99). Adjustment for the baseline character- 
istics did not change the results. 
There was no significant difference in the rates 
of survival between the two groups after data 
from patients under 18 years of age were exclud- 
ed. Nor did the rates of survival differ signifi- 
cantly between the groups for patients who re- 
ceived treatment other than the treatment they had 
been randomly assigned to receive. Details of these 
subgroup comparisons, with respect to the pri- 
mary and secondary end points, and compari- 
sons of patients whose cardiac arrest was classi- 
fied as uncertain and those with “true” cardiac 
arrest are provided in the Supplementary Appen- 
dix, available at NEJM.org. 
Loss to Follow-up 
Information on follow-up was unavailable for 132 
of 1952 patients (6.8%), the main reason being 
loss of the corresponding EMS field reports, oc- 
curring primarily in a small number of EMS dis- 
tricts. We therefore performed a subgroup analy- 
sis excluding districts where more than 18% of 
patients were lost to follow-up. No difference 
from the main results was found. 

Our nationwide, randomized study of witnessed 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest shows that giving 
instructions for compression-only CPR before the 
arrival of EMS personnel does not significantly 
improve the outcome of patients as compared 
with standard CPR. Neither the 1-day nor 30-day 
rates of survival differed significantly between the 
two groups. Furthermore, there was no signifi- 
cant difference in the rates of survival among 
various subgroups. The findings were similar ir- 
respective of whether the data were analyzed ac- 
cording to the assigned treatment (the primary 
analysis) or the treatment received. Our results are 
in agreement with those from previously pub- 
lished retrospective registry studies.4,5,8 
Previous studies in animals have shown no dif- 
ferences in survival or neurologic outcomes with 
standard CPR and compression-only CPR.3,9 One 
investigation even showed adverse outcomes re- 
lated to the interruption of chest compression in 
order to perform mouth-to-mouth ventilation.10 
Complete occlusion of the airways does not re- 
duce the chances of survival if reasonable circu- 
lation is provided by chest compression.11 


































≤50 yr 
>50–75 yr 
>75 yr 
Male 
Female 
Home 
Public place 
Other 
≤5 min 
6–8 min 
9–15 min 
>15 min 
Ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia 
Asystole 
Pulseless electrical activity 



≤50 yr 
>50–75 yr 
>75 yr 
Male 
Female 
Home 
Public place 
Other 
≤5 min 
6–8 min 
9–15 min 
>15 min 
Ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia 
Asystole 
Pulseless electrical activity 







Compression-Only CPR 
Better 
Standard CPR 
Better 

P Value for 
Interaction 
P Value for 
Interaction 






Compression-Only CPR 
Better 
Standard CPR 
Better 




















Figure 2. Odds Ratios for 30-Day Survival and 1-Day Survival among the Study Patients. 
Panel A shows the data for 30-day survival. Panel B shows the data for 1-day survival. The P values are for the inter- 
action between treatment group and subgroup variables. CPR denotes cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and EMS 
emergency medical services. 




Compression-only CPR results in more com- 
pressions per minute than standard CPR and can 
be started more rapidly, but the quality of the 
compressions may be inferior, as reported in a 
study involving mannequins.12 
According to American Heart Association 
(AHA) Guidelines for Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care, the 2 breaths after each set of 15 chest 
compression should have a duration of only 1.5 to 
2 seconds per breath.13 However, in a prospective, 
randomized study involving persons not trained 
in CPR, the total duration of the two ventilations 
was 16 seconds on average.14 It is very difficult 
for a layperson to provide adequate ventilation.15 
Studies have shown that both laypersons and 
health workers hesitate to initiate CPR that in- 
cludes mouth-to-mouth ventilation, for reasons of 
health and safety.16,17 According to a recent ob- 
servational cohort study, the more time the res- 
cuers spend on chest compressions, the better the 
chances of survival.18 
Our study population was similar to others 
with respect to age, sex, location of cardiac arrest, 
and findings on electrocardiography.19 The aver- 
age EMS response time in this study was longer 
than that in previous studies.2 This may be ex- 
plained by the inclusion of large rural areas in our 
study, which can increase the response time. 
Like Hallstrom and colleagues,2 we found that 
patients with witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest who received compression-only CPR, as 
compared with standard CPR, performed by call- 
ers who received instructions from dispatchers had 
similar rates of survival. This result is further sup- 
ported by the finding that the number of patients 
who were admitted to the hospital alive did not 
differ significantly between the two groups. 
Our study has several limitations. First, 3809 
patients were enrolled, but the final analysis in- 
cluded data from only one third of these patients 
(approximately 600 patients in each of the two 
groups). Thus, one limitation of the study is that 
many patients who underwent randomization were 
subsequently excluded from the analysis, accord- 
ing to the predefined inclusion and exclusion cri- 
teria. Because the analysis was based on fewer 
patients than the number originally planned, there 
was a high risk of a type II error. We initially cal- 
culated that 2213 patients were needed in each 
group to detect a small absolute improvement (by 
2 percentage points) in the 30-day survival rate 
with 80% power (with a 20% risk of type II er- 
ror), and a sample of 1000 patients seemed real- 
istic to detect an absolute difference of 3 percent- 
age points with 78% power. Thus, although our 
study did not show a significant difference in the 
30-day survival rate (estimated absolute difference, 
1.7 percentage points), our results are in agree- 
ment with the findings of Hallstrom and col- 
leagues2 and Berg and colleagues,3 who reported 
that there might be a small benefit of compres- 
sion-only CPR. 
Second, the dispatchers did not follow the ran- 
domization instructions in a small proportion of 
cases. The reason for this protocol violation is 
probably that some dispatchers had a prejudice 
against compression-only CPR and a preference 
for standard CPR. Also, some callers showed a 
preference for a CPR technique other than that 
specified by randomization. 
Third, during the course of the study, the AHA 
and the European Resuscitation Council changed 
their CPR guidelines, giving greater emphasis to 
the quality and quantity of chest compressions. 
We did not implement these guidelines, because 
they were not reflected in the Swedish national 
guidelines until January 2007, 2 years after our 
study was initiated. Furthermore, these new 
guidelines did not include dispatcher-instructed 
CPR.20,21 
Finally, our finding that compression-only CPR 
is not significantly better than standard CPR does 
not apply to cardiac arrest caused by trauma, re- 
spiratory failure, or intoxication or to children 
under the age of 8 years or patients in whom by- 
standers perform CPR without instructions from 
dispatchers. 
In conclusion, our prospective, randomized 
study, which focused on patients with witnessed, 
out-of-hospital, primary cardiac arrest, showed no 
significant difference in survival when dispatch- 
ers gave instructions to callers to perform com- 
pression-only CPR, as compared with standard 
CPR, before the arrival of EMS personnel. Over- 
all, this study lends further support to the hy- 
pothesis that compression-only CPR, which is 
easier to learn and to perform, should be consid- 
ered the preferred method for CPR performed by 
bystanders in patients with cardiac arrest. 














Rea TD, Eisenberg MS, Culley LL, 
1. 
Becker L. Dispatcher-assisted cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation and survival in out- 
of-hospital cardiac arrest. Circulation 2001; 
104:2513-6. 
Hallstrom A, Cobb L, Johnson E, Co- 
2. 
pass M. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
by chest compression alone or with mouth- 
to-mouth ventilation. N Engl J Med 2000; 
342:1546-53. 
Berg RA, Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Ewy 
3. 
GA. Assisted ventilation during ‘bystand- 
er’ CPR in a swine acute myocardial in- 
farction model does not improve outcome. 
Circulation 1997;96:4364-71. 
Nagao K, Kikushima K, Sakamoto T, 
4. 
et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation by 
bystanders with chest compression only 
(SOS-KANTO): an observational study. 
Lancet 2007;369:920-6. 
Bohm K, Rosenqvist M, Herlitz J, Hol- 
5. 
lenberg J, Svensson L. Survival is similar 
after standard treatment and chest com- 
pression only in out-of-hospital bystander 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Circulation 
2007;116:2908-12. 
Bohm K, Stålhandske B, Rosenqvist 
6. 
M, Ulfvarson J, Hollenberg J, Svensson L. 
Tuition of emergency medical dispatchers 
in recognition of agonal respiration in- 
creases the use of telephone assisted CPR. 
Resuscitation 2009;80:1025-8. 
Handley AJ, Koster R, Monsieurs K, 
7. 
Perkins GD, Davies S, Bossaert L. Euro- 
pean Resuscitation Council guidelines for 
resuscitation 2005: Section 2: adult basic 
life support and use of automated exter- 
nal defibrillators. Resuscitation 2005;67: 
Suppl 1:S7-S23. 
Iwami T, Kawamura T, Hiraide A, et 
8. 
al. Effectiveness of bystander-initiated 
cardiac-only resuscitation for patients 
with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Circu- 
lation 2007;116:2900-7. 
Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Sand- 
9. 
ers AB, Ewy GA. Importance of continu- 
ous chest compressions during cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation: improved outcome 
during a simulated single lay-rescuer sce- 
nario. Circulation 2002;105:645-9. 
Berg RA, Sanders AB, Kern KB, et al. 
10. 
Adverse hemodynamic effects of inter- 
rupting chest compressions for rescue 
breathing during cardiopulmonary resus- 
citation for ventricular fibrillation cardiac 
arrest. Circulation 2001;104:2465-70. 
Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Ewy 
11. 
GA. Efficacy of chest compression-only 
BLS CPR in the presence of an occluded 
airway. Resuscitation 1998;39:179-88. 
Odegaard S, Saether E, Steen PA, Wik 
12. 
L. Quality of lay person CPR performance 
with compression: ventilation ratios 15:2, 
30:2 or continuous chest compressions 
without ventilations on manikins. Resus- 
citation 2006;71:335-40. 
Part 1: introduction to the Interna- 
13. 
tional Guidelines 2000 for CPR and ECC: 
a consensus on science. Circulation 2000; 
102:Suppl:I-1–I-11. 
Assar D, Chamberlain D, Colquhoun 
14. 
M, et al. Randomised controlled trials of 
staged teaching for basic life support. 
Skill acquisition at bronze stage. Resusci- 
tation 2000;45:7-15. 
Paal P, Falk M, Sumann G, et al. Com- 
15. 
parison of mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to- 
mask and mouth-to-face-shield ventila- 
tion by lay persons. Resuscitation 2006; 
70:117-23. 
Jelinek GA, Gennat H, Celenza T, 
16. 
O’Brien D, Jacobs I, Lynch D. Community 
attitudes towards performing cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation in Western Austra- 
lia. Resuscitation 2001;51:239-46. 
Shibata K, Taniguchi T, Yoshida M, 
17. 
Yamamoto K. Obstacles to bystander car- 
diopulmonary resuscitation in Japan. Re- 
suscitation 2000;44:187-93. 
Christenson J, Andrusiek D, Everson- 
18. 
Stewart S, et al. Chest compression frac- 
tion determines survival in patients with 
out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. 
Circulation 2009;120:1241-7. 
Hollenberg J, Lindqvist J, Ringh M, et 
19. 
al. An evaluation of post-resuscitation 
care as a possible explanation of a differ- 
ence in survival after out-of-hospital car- 
diac arrest. Resuscitation 2007;74:242-52. 
Proceedings of the 2005 International 
20. 
Consensus on Cardiopulmonary Resusci- 
tation and Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care Science with Treatment Recommen- 
dations. Resuscitation 2005;67:157-341. 
International Liaison Committee on 
21. 
Resuscitation. 2005 International Consen- 
sus on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Sci- 
ence with Treatment Recommendations. 
Circulation 2005;112:Suppl:III-1–III-136. 
Copyright © 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society. 



powerpoint slides of journal figures and tables 
At the Journal’s Web site, subscribers can automatically create PowerPoint slides. 
In a figure or table in the full-text version of any article at NEJM.org, click 
on Get PowerPoint Slide. A PowerPoint slide containing the image, with its title 
and reference citation, can then be downloaded and saved. 



