

The association of pre-kidney transplant dialysis modality with 
de novo post-transplant heart failure 
Colin R. Lenihan1, Sai Liu1, Medha Airy2, Carl Walther2, Maria E. Montez-Rath1, Wolfgang 
C. Winkelmayer2 
1Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California 
2Selzman Institute for Kidney Health, Section of Nephrology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 

Background: Heart failure (HF) after kidney transplantation is a significant but understudied 
problem. Pre-transplant dialysis modality could influence incident HF risk through differing 
cardiac stressors. However, whether pre-transplant dialysis modality is associated with the 
development of post-transplant HF is unknown. 
Methods: We used the US Renal Data System to assemble a cohort of 27,701 patients who 
underwent their first kidney transplant in the United States between the years 2005 and 2012 and 
who had Medicare fee-for-service coverage for >6 months preceding their transplant date. Patients 
with any HF diagnosis prior to transplant were excluded. Detailed baseline patient characteristics 
and comorbidities were abstracted. The outcome of interest was de novo post-transplant HF. 
Pre-transplant dialysis modality was defined as the dialysis modality used at the time of transplant. 
We conducted time-to-event analyses using Cox regression. Death was treated as a competing risk 
in the study’s primary analysis. Graft failure was included as a time-varying covariate. 
Results: Among eligible patients, 81% were treated with hemodialysis prior to transplant, and 
hemodialysis patients were more likely to be male, had a shorter dialysis vintage, and had more 
Corresponding Author: Colin R. Lenihan, MB BCh BAO, PhD, Stanford University School of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, 777 
Welch Road Suite DE, Palo Alto, CA 94304, clenihan@stanford.edu. 
Author Contributions 
CL: Conception of the work; analysis and interpretation of data, drafting the work, final approval of the version to be published and 
agreeing to be accountable for all aspects of the work 
SL: Analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically, final approval of the version to be published and agreeing to be 
accountable for all aspects of the work 
MA: Analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically, final approval of the version to be published and agreeing to be 
accountable for all aspects of the work 
CW: Analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically, final approval of the version to be published and agreeing to be 
accountable for all aspects of the work 
MMR: Analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically, final approval of the version to be published and agreeing to be 
accountable for all aspects of the work 
WW: Conception of the work; acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically, final approval of the version to be 
published and agreeing to be accountable for all aspects of the work 
Statement of Ethics 
This is a retrospective cohort study and the Internal Review Boards at the Stanford University School of Medicine and Baylor College 
of Medicine approved the study. 
Conflict of Interest Statement 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The results presented in this paper have not been published previously in whole or part, except in abstract format 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Cardiorenal Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 02. 


diabetes and vascular disease diagnoses. When adjusted for all available demographic and clinical 
data, pre-transplant treatment with hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) was associated with a 
19% increased risk in de novo post-transplant HF, with sub-distribution HR 1.19 (CI 1.09-1.29). 
Conclusions: Our results suggest that choice of pre-transplant dialysis modality may impact the 
development of post-transplant HF. 

heart failure; end-stage renal disease; hemodialysis; peritoneal dialysis; kidney transplantation; 
outcomes; cohort study; USRDS 

For many patients with end stage kidney disease (ESKD), kidney transplantation offers the 
best outcome in terms of survival and quality of life [1,2]. However, survival of patients 
with a kidney transplant is still reduced compared to that of the general population, an 
effect attributable, at least in part, to an excess risk of cardiovascular disease in the kidney 
transplant population [3]. Heart failure (HF) following kidney transplant is a particularly 
important problem. Post-transplant HF is the most frequent cardiovascular cause for hospital 
admission in the two years following transplant and is associated with reduced patient and 
graft survival [4,5]. 
Patients with ESKD are exposed to a myriad of both traditional and non-traditional risk 
factors for HF [6-12]. Chronic intermittent hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) exposes 
patients to a number of unique cardiac stressors including 1) frequent and rapid intravascular 
volume shifts, 2) myocardial stunning, and 3) the presence of AV shunts that usually remain 
i 
n 
undergoing hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) would be at higher risk for post-transplant 
heart failure. Herein, we formally examine the association between pre-transplant dialysis 
modality and the incidence of de novo post-transplant HF using a large, population-based 
U.S. ESKD registry. 

u 
t 
i 
s 
 


We used the United States Renal Data System (USRDS) dataset to identify adult patients 
who underwent their first kidney transplant in the United States between January 1 2005 
and September 30 2012. We required that patients have at least 6 months of Medicare Parts 
A and B coverage prior to their kidney transplant. Prior diagnoses of HF were identified 
using International Classification of Diseases, 9th revision (ICD-9), codes of 428.xx, 402.01, 
402.11, 402.91, 404.01, 404.03, 404.11, 404.13, 404.91 and 404.93. We excluded patients 
with any inpatient or outpatient HF claims in up to 2 years prior to kidney transplant. We 
additionally excluded 1) patients for whom data on pre-transplant dialysis modality was 
missing, 2) patients that received a simultaneous kidney-pancreas transplant, and 3) patients 
for whom there were no Medicare claims visible in the 2 years prior to transplant. 





The exposure of interest was last pre-transplant dialysis modality (hemodialysis vs. 
peritoneal dialysis) as reported in the USRDS treatment history files. 
The outcome was de novo post-transplant HF. HF was identified using ICD-9 claims. To 
ascertain de novo HF we required either one post-transplant inpatient HF claim or one 
outpatient HF claim followed by another either inpatient or outpatient HF claim within 30 
days of the first. For outpatient HF diagnosis the date of the first outpatient claim was the 
date used for de novo HF. Patients were censored at the end of the study (September 30 
2015), loss of Medicare Parts A and B coverage or at 3 years post-transplant (as many 
patients lose Medicare coverage at this point). 

For each patient we abstracted demographic (age at time of transplant, sex, race [white, 
black or other]), dialysis (cause of ESKD [diabetes, hypertension, glomerulonephritis or 
other], total dialysis vintage, duration of last pre-transplant dialysis modality and body 
mass index) and transplant variables (blood type, calculated panel reactive antibody, donor- 
recipient human leukocyte antigen match, cold ischemia time, donor age, donor sex, donor 
type and any history of prior non-kidney solid organ transplant). 
We also identified a wide-array of pre-transplant comorbidities using ICD-9 codes in claims- 
based algorithm which required the presence of either 1 inpatient or two outpatient claims 
(not on the same day). The pre-transplant comorbidities abstracted were alcohol dependence, 
arrhythmia, cancer, cerebrovascular disease, chronic pulmonary disease, coronary artery 
disease, diabetes, hypertension, liver disease, peripheral arterial disease, tobacco use, and 
valvular heart disease (see Supplemental Table 1). 
We also abstracted information regarding pre-transplant skilled nursing facility admissions, 
inpatient hospital days, and non-nephrology outpatient visits in the 6 months prior to 
transplant. Graft failure, defined as the need for dialysis or re-transplant, was identified 
from the USRDS patient file and was treated as a time-varying covariate. 

Baseline characteristics were tabulated for all patients as well as separately for the pre- 
transplant hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis groups. Continuous variables were presented 
as either means with standard deviations or medians with interquartile ranges where 
appropriate. Categorical variables were expressed as percentages. We presented cumulative 
incidence function (CIF) plots to compare 3-year cumulative incidence of heart failure and 
death by pre-transplant modality type. 
We estimated unadjusted and incrementally adjusted sub-distribution or cause-specific 
hazard ratios for de novo post-transplant heart failure by pre-transplant dialysis modality 
(with peritoneal dialysis being the referent). All models were stratified by era of transplant; 
2005-06, 2007-08, 2009-10 and 2011-12. Models 1-4 were incrementally adjusted as 



follows; model 1 - time-varying graft failure; model 2 – model 1 plus age at time of 
transplant, sex, race, body mass index, cause of ESRD, dialysis vintage, and duration of 
last pre-transplant dialysis modality; model 3 – model 2 plus comorbidities, health care 
utilization metrics (nursing home stay, number of hospital days, number of non-nephrology 
clinic visits) and prior solid organ transplant status and; model 4 – model 3 plus transplant 
characteristics. The primary analysis treated death as a competing risk and generated 
sub-distribution hazard ratios using the Kaplan-Meier multiple imputation (KMI) method 
[13,14]. A secondary analysis treated death as a censoring event. Both analyses used 
extended Cox models. We tested for proportional hazards by looking at the correlation 
of the scaled Schoenfeld residuals with time and found no evidence that the log-hazard ratio 
changed with follow-up time for any of the covariates that were included in the model. 
The p-value for the global test was 0.49. We additionally tested a number of pre-transplant 
patient characteristics as effect modifiers of pre-transplant dialysis modality (hemodialysis 
vs. peritoneal dialysis) on de novo post-transplant heart failure in the primary analysis. The 
pre-transplant characteristics that were tested were 1) age at time of transplant, 2) race, 3) 
dialysis vintage, 4) dialysis modality vintage, 5) body mass index (BMI), 6) the presence of 
coronary artery disease and 7) the presence of diabetes mellitus. 
In our cohort of 27,701 patients, 6,842 (24.7%) had at least one variable missing. The 
variables most frequently missing were calculated panel reactive antibody (15%) and cold 
ischemia time (8%). Data were assumed to be missing at random. Missing data were 
handled using multiple imputation by fully conditional specification (FCS) as implemented 
in SAS, and 25 imputed datasets were obtained for the primary outcome. In addition to 
the exposure and all covariates included in the analysis model, the imputation model also 
included the event indicator and the Nelson–Aalen estimator of the cumulative marginal 
hazard. Imputation models were run separately for the main analysis (to calculate sub- 
distribution HR). Imputation models were stratified by treatment modality. 
Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., 
Cary, NC, USA), R version 3.1.2, and Stata MP, version 13.1 (StataCorp, College Station, 
TX). 
A total of 27,701 adults who underwent their first kidney transplant satisfied all inclusion 
criteria and were included in the study (Figure 1). Of these, 81% of patients were treated 
with hemodialysis prior to transplant while the remaining 19% were treated with peritoneal 
dialysis for a median 3.2 and 3.7 years, respectively. The baseline characteristics of the study 
cohort stratified by pre-transplant dialysis modality are shown in Table 1. Patients treated 
with hemodialysis prior to transplant were more likely to be male, African American, had a 
shorter dialysis vintage, and had a greater burden of diabetes and vascular disease. 
Over a mean follow-up of 2.33 years 3,283 patients, (11.9%) were diagnosed with de novo 
HF, with a median time from transplant surgery to a de novo HF diagnosis of 9.7months 
(interquartile range, 2.13-22.03); among those previously treated with hemodialysis, 2809 
(12.6%) developed de novo HF compared with 8.8% of those previously treated with PD. 




Pre-transplant hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) treatment was associated with an 
increased risk of post-transplant HF (Figure 2, Table 2). The unadjusted and model 4- 
adjusted sub-distribution HRs for de novo HF for hemodialysis vs. peritoneal dialysis were 
1.36 (CI 1.27, 1.46) and 1.19 (CI 1.09 to 1.28), respectively. Results were similar when 
death was treated as a censoring event. Complete results for both models that use death as 
a competing risk and death-censoring models are shown in Table 2. There was a significant 
interaction identified for BMI (p-value for interaction = 0.03) and diabetes mellitus (p-value 
for interaction = 0.008), where higher BMI and the presence of pre-transplant diabetes 
mellitus were synergistically associated with an increased risk of de novo post-transplant 
HF in those patients treated pre-transplant with hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis). More 
specifically, in patients with a pre-transplant BMI of ≥30 kg/m2, hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal 
dialysis) treatment was associated with a 36% (95% CI, 13%-64%) increase in the sub- 
distribution hazard of de novo HF in those who were event free or died. However, there was 
no difference in the sub-distribution hazard between patients treated with hemodialysis vs. 
peritoneal dialysis in other strata of pre-transplant BMI below 30 kg/m2. We also found that 
among patients with pre-transplant diabetes mellitus, hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) 
treatment was associated with a 38% (95% CI, 16%-65%) increase in the sub-distribution 
hazard of de novo HF in those who were event free or died. However, there was no 
significant difference observed in the sub-distribution hazard of de novo HF in patients 
without diabetes mellitus treated with hemodialysis vs. peritoneal dialysis. Full results for 
the interaction analysis are shown in Figure 3. 

In this study of US patients with ESKD on dialysis who received a first kidney-only 
transplant we found that pre-transplant treatment with hemodialysis (vs. peritoneal dialysis) 
was associated with de novo post-transplant HF. After adjustment for numerous potential 
confounders those patients treated with hemodialysis before undergoing transplant had 
an almost 20% higher risk of being diagnosed with HF in the 3 years after transplant 
compared to those patients who were treated with peritoneal dialysis. The increased risk 
of post-transplant HF associated with receipt of pre-transplant hemodialysis therapy was 
greater in those patients with a high body mass index and in those with pre-existing diabetes 
mellitus. Chronic cardiac volume and pressure overload may complicate both peritoneal 
dialysis and hemodialysis therapies and can result in the development of left ventricular 
hypertrophy, which is a precursor of both diastolic and systolic cardiac dysfunction. Both 
modalities also have distinct (modality-specific) features that are relevant to the development 
of structural cardiac disease and warrant discussion. 
Hemodialysis is associated with large, intermittent, and ‘unphysiological’ volume shifts. 
Large interdialytic weight gains have been shown to be associated with the development 
of left ventricular hypertrophy while more frequent hemodialysis (compared to standard 
frequency) appears to protect against the development of left ventricular hypertrophy 
[15-17]. Hemodialysis-induced myocardial stunning/ischemia is a now well-described 
phenomenon which also likely results in incremental myocardial injury [18]. The use 
of arteriovenous shunts for hemodialysis access result in an obligate increase in cardiac 
output and the development of left ventricular hypertrophy. In patients with high-flow 



arteriovenous fistulas, high output cardiac failure may sometimes ensue. Some (although 
not all) observational studies show that arteriovenous fistula ligation is associated with 
favorable left ventricular structural and functional changes [12,19-21]; a randomized trial 
in 64 patients found that arteriovenous fistula ligation caused significant reductions in left 
ventricular mass and size [22]. 
Peritoneal dialysis which offers smooth and continuous volume removal should better 
mimic normal physiology. However, volume control with peritoneal dialysis may be 
imperfect [23,24]. Peritoneal dialysis may also predispose to an unfavorable metabolic 
and inflammatory milieu which may contribute adversely to cardiac pathophysiology [25]. 
Sparse data comparing left ventricular hypertrophy prevalence in peritoneal dialysis versus 
hemodialysis patients yield conflicting results [26,27]. In patients with existing heart failure 
and ESKD, peritoneal dialysis is often favored over hemodialysis as being potentially better 
hemodynamically tolerated; however, this is practice is not supported by the results of a 
large (albeit retrospective and potentially confounded) study [28]. 
Our study has several strengths. Our cohort is large and from a relatively recent era. 
By using the USRDS and linked Medicare fee-for-service claims data, we are able to 
ascertain richly detailed patient demographic and clinical characteristics. However, as with 
all retrospective claims-based studies residual confounding through either incorrectly or 
uncollected covariates is a possibility. We do not have access to cardiac investigations, 
dialysis prescriptions, medication history, or laboratory results including post-transplant 
glomerular filtration rate. We also do not have information regarding the type of pre- 
transplant hemodialysis access. 
Post-transplant heart failure is an important problem and is associated with reduced graft and 
patient survival [5]. Minimizing cardiac stress and injury should be an important focus of 
pre-transplant management in patients with chronic kidney disease. Ideally, all patients with 
ESKD should undergo pre-emptive kidney transplant, which is associated with the best post- 
transplant outcomes [29,30]. However, long deceased donor waiting times and insufficient 
numbers of living donors mean that pre-emptive kidney transplant is not an option for the 
majority of Americans with ESKD. Therefore, identifying modifiable dialysis-related risk 
factors for the development of post-transplant heart disease that may help to extend the 
lives of kidney transplant recipients is imperative. Our findings suggest that further study 
regarding the impact of pre-transplant dialysis modality on post-transplant cardiac function 
is warranted. 



The data reported here have been supplied by the USRDS. The interpretation and reporting of these data are 
the responsibility of the authors and in no way should be seen as an official policy or interpretation of the U.S. 
government. None of the authors report a significant financial interest regarding the topic of this study. 




This work was supported a Mentored Clinical and Population Research Program Grant from the American Heart 
Association Western States Affiliate (to Dr. Lenihan) and grant R01DK095024 from the National Institute of 
Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases 

1. Wolfe RA, Ashby VB, Milford EL, et al. Comparison of mortality in all patients on dialysis, patients 
on dialysis awaiting transplantation, and recipients of a first cadaveric transplant. N Engl J Med 
1999;341:1725–30. [PubMed: 10580071] 






5. Lentine KL, Schnitzler MA, Abbott KC, et al. De novo congestive heart failure after kidney 
transplantation: a common condition with poor prognostic implications. Am J Kidney Dis 
2005;46:720–33. [PubMed: 16183428] 




8. Gupta J, Dominic EA, Fink JC, et al. Association between Inflammation and Cardiac Geometry in 
Chronic Kidney Disease: Findings from the CRIC Study. PLoS One 2015;10:e0124772. [PubMed: 
25909952] 

hemodialysis patients assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 
2009;4:1477–83. [PubMed: 19713289] 


11. Foley RN, Parfrey PS, Harnett JD, Kent GM, Murray DC, Barré PE. The prognostic importance 
of left ventricular geometry in uremic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc Nephrol 1995;5:2024–31. 
[PubMed: 7579050] 

echocardiographic functional and structural findings in hemodialysis patients: a prospective study. 
Am J Kidney Dis 2010;55:682–9. [PubMed: 20089339] 




15. Paglialonga F, Consolo S, Galli MA, Testa S, Edefonti A. Interdialytic weight gain in oligoanuric 
children and adolescents on chronic hemodialysis. Pediatr Nephrol 2015;30:999–1005. [PubMed: 
25395362] 

versus conventional hemodialysis on left ventricular hypertrophy and inflammatory markers: a 
prospective, controlled study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005;16:2778–88. [PubMed: 16033855] 
17. Chan CT, Greene T, Chertow GM, et al. Determinants of left ventricular mass in patients 
on hemodialysis: Frequent Hemodialysis Network (FHN) Trials. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 
2012;5:251–61. [PubMed: 22360996] 

determinants and associated outcomes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;4:914–20. [PubMed: 
19357245] 




hypertrophy after arteriovenous fistula closure in renal transplant recipients: a long-term follow- 
up. Am J Transplant 2004;4:2038–44. [PubMed: 15575907] 


21. De Lima JJ, Vieira ML, Molnar LJ, Medeiros CJ, Ianhez LE, Krieger EM. Cardiac effects 
of persistent hemodialysis arteriovenous access in recipients of renal allograft. Cardiology 
1999;92:236–9. [PubMed: 10844383] 

Structure and Function in Kidney Transplant Recipients. Circulation 2019;139:2809–18. [PubMed: 
31045455] 
23. Koc M, Toprak A, Tezcan H, Bihorac A, Akoglu E, Ozener IC. Uncontrolled hypertension due to 
volume overload contributes to higher left ventricular mass index in CAPD patients. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 2002;17:1661–6. [PubMed: 12198220] 

in patients on different peritoneal dialysis regimens. Perit Dial Int 2001;21:36–42. [PubMed: 
11280494] 

dysfunction and inflammation in peritoneal dialysis patients. PLoS One 2013;8:e62722. [PubMed: 
23675418] 



hemodialysis patients is higher than that in peritoneal dialysis patients. Ren Fail 2008;30:391–400. 
[PubMed: 18569912] 
28. Stack AG, Molony DA, Rahman NS, Dosekun A, Murthy B. Impact of dialysis modality on 
survival of new ESRD patients with congestive heart failure in the United States. Kidney Int 
2003;64:1071–9. [PubMed: 12911559] 

subsequent survival of renal transplants from living donors. N Engl J Med 2001;344:726–31. 
[PubMed: 11236776] 





Figure 1. 
Cohort Flow Chart 



Figure 2. 
3-year cumulative incidence of post-transplant heart failure and death in patients treated 
pre-transplant with peritoneal dialysis (PD) and hemodialysis (HD) 



Figure 3. 
Test for interactions between selected patient characteristics, pre-transplant dialysis modality 
and the risk of de novo post-transplant heart failure 



Baseline characteristics of US patients who underwent their first kidney transplant between 2005 and 2012, 
altogether and stratified by pre-transplant dialysis modality. 

























































































































































































































































































































IQR, interquartile range; SD, standard deviation; ESKD, end-stage kidney disease; CVD, cerebrovascular disease; CAD, coronary artery disease; 
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; PAD, peripheral arterial disease; VHD, valvular heart disease; HLA, human leukocyte antigen. 
Several variables had incomplete data, specifically the proportion of observations missing the following variables were: sex (<0.1%); race (0.1); 
cause of ESKD (0.4); body mass index (1.7%); blood type (0.8%); donor type (0.6%); donor age (0.8%); donor sex (0.8%); HLA mismatch (1.9%); 
calculated panel-reactive antibody titer (15.5%); cold ischemia time (8.5%). 



Risk of de novo post-transplant heart failure in patients treated pre-transplant with hemodialysis versus 
peritoneal dialysis 




















Graft failure was treated as a time-varying covariate. All models stratified by incidence year categories (2005-2006, 2007-2008, 2009-2010, and 
2011-2012) 



