Chapter 4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
as Cognitive Stimulation Method
for Patients with MCI
Ioannis Tarnanas, Apostolos Tsolakis and Magda Tsolaki
Abstract Advancesintechnologyinthelastdecadehavecreatedadiversefieldof
applications for the care of persons with cognitive impairment. This chapter is an
attempttointroduceavirtualrealitycomputer-basedintervention,whichcanused
for cognitive stimulating and disease progression evaluation of a wide range of
cognitivedisordersrangingfrommildcognitiveimpairment(MCI)toAlzheimer’s
diseaseandvariousdementias.Virtualreality(VR)environmentshavealreadybeen
successfullyusedincognitiverehabilitationandshowincreasedpotentialforusein
neuropsychologicalevaluationallowingforgreaterecologicalvaliditywhilebeing
more engaging and user friendly. Nevertheless a holistic approach has been
attempted,inordertoviewtheresearchthemesandapplicationsthatcurrentlyexist
around the ‘‘intelligent systems’’ healthcare given to the cognitively impaired
persons,andthuslookingatresearchdirections,systems,technologicalframeworks
andperhapstrends.
Keywords Computerized cognitive training (cid:2) Computerized testing (cid:2) Cognitive
reserve (cid:2) Dementia (cid:2) Psychometrics
I.Tarnanas(&)(cid:2)M.Tsolaki
SchoolofMedicine,AristotleUniversityofThessaloniki,3rdNeurologicalClinic,
PapanikolaouAvenue57010Exohi,Thessaloniki,Greece
e-mail:i.tarnanas@alzheimer-hellas.gr
M.Tsolaki
e-mail:tsolakim1@gmail.com
A.Tsolakis
SchoolofElectricalandComputerEngineering,AristotleUniversityofThessaloniki,
EgnatiaStreet54124Thessaloniki,Greece
e-mail:aptsolak@gmail.com
A.L.Brooksetal.(eds.),TechnologiesofInclusiveWell-Being, 39
StudiesinComputationalIntelligence536,DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-45432-5_4,
(cid:2)Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2014
40 I.Tarnanasetal.
4.1 Introduction
VirtualReality(VR)andAugmentedReality(AR)aresomeofthemostpromising
and at the same time challenging applications of computer graphics. Virtual
Reality (VR) is stimulating the user’s senses in such a way that a computer
generatedworldisexperiencedasreal.Inordertogetatrueillusionofreality,itis
essentialfortheusertohaveinfluenceonthisvirtualenvironment.Allthathasto
be done in order to raise the illusion of being in or acting upon a virtual worldor
virtual environment, is providing a simulation of the interaction between human
beingandthisenvironment.Thissimulationis—atleast—partlyattainedbymeans
of Virtual Reality interfaces connected to a computer. When considering VEs for
context-sensitive rehabilitation, it is important to first evaluatethe limitations and
potential of the underlying VR technology.
OverthepastdecadesVRtechnologyhasbeenusedinmanydifferentdomains
such as education [1], simulation for expert training [2] and therapy. Looking at
medical uses in particular, Rizzo and Kim [3] and Rizzo et al. [4] discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of VR systems in a therapeutic context. Even
thoughbothreviewshavebeenconducted6and7 yearsagorespectively,mostof
what the authors discuss still appears to be of relevance. In Rizzo and Kim’s
overviewthefollowingaspectswereamongthekeycharacteristicsforVRsystems
and therefore should be taken into account when developing VEs for individual-
ized rehabilitation. In this chapter we are going to present the benefits of using a
particular type of virtual reality interface, named the virtual reality museum. The
VRMuseumwasusedasaninterventiontoolforpatientswithAmnestic-typeMild
CognitiveImpairment(aMCI)inordertoseeifitcanimprovethetaskdomainsof
navigation, spatial orientation and spatial memory. Those tasks were chosen for
their relevance for patient with aMCI for whom it is essential to be spatially
oriented in order to live independently [5].
Firstly we are going to focus on MCI and the basic characteristics of aMCI
patients. It is essential to define the exact cognitive profile of those patients in
order tounderstandthe difficultiesthatnon-invasive methods of interventionmay
encounter.Wearealsogoingtodescriberelatedattemptstoaddressthosepatients
with virtual reality.
OnthesecondpartwewilldescribetheVRMuseum,theclinical protocol,the
research methodology and the final results.
Attheendofthechapter,wewillsumupourfindingswithgeneralconclusions
and implications on the use of VR Museum as an intervention tool.
4.1.1 Individuals with Mild Cognitive Impairment
The conceptof Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)was derived from milder cases
of dementia and not Alzheimer’s disease (AD). MCI encompasses patients with
andwithoutmemoryimpairment.Ofthosewithmemoryloss,somehavememory
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 41
Fig.4.1 ThetypicalprogressivecourseofDementia[10]
impairment as their only deficit [amnestic MCI single domain (aMCIs)], whereas
others have impairmentsofmemorylossplus changesinothercognitive domains
[amnestic MCI multiple domain (aMCImd) [6]. Multiple-domain MCI is more
commonthanpureamnestictypeMCIandischaracterizedbyslightimpairmentin
morethanonecognitivedomainbutofinsufficientseveritytoconstitutedementia
[7].Ofthosewithoutanymemoryloss,somepatientshavedeficitsinonedomain
only,suchasexecutivefunctions,apraxiaoraphasia.Ortheymayhavedeficitsin
several domains, excluding memory [8]. These prodromal states may progress to
non-ADdementias,suchasvasculardementia,frontotemporaldementia,Lewybody
dementia,primaryprogressiveaphasia,orcorticobasaldegeneration[9](Fig. 4.1).
4.1.2 MCI Subtypes
Recently research by Winblad et al. [9], revealed the heterogeneity in the clinical
description of MCI leading to the classification of four subtypes. Based on the
number: single or multiple and type: memory, non-memory or both, of impaired
cognitive domains we have:
1. Amnestic MCI—memory impairment only.
2. Multi-domainMCI-Amnestic(memoryplusoneormorenon-memorydomain).
42 I.Tarnanasetal.
1.Complaint of cognitive deterioration from patient and/or
informant
2.Objective deficit on neurocognitive testing
YES NO
3. Persistent new disfunction in basic or instrumental Probable Normal
ADL
NO YES
MCI Probable
Dementia
Memory Affectd Memory Non-Affected
Amnestic MCI Non-Amnestic
MCI
Single Multi-
Domain Domain Single Domain Multi-Domain
Fig.4.2 MCIsubtypes
3. Multi-domain MCI-Non-Amnestic (more than one non-memory domain).
4. Single Non-Memory MCI (one non-memory domain).
Building on this classification Hanfelt et al. [11] posited cognitive, functional
andneuropsychiatrictraits thatcan distinguish individualswith MCI.This set the
basis for improved diagnosis because it provided a common ‘‘language’’ among
research centers for future research (Fig. 4.2).
Recently, the criteria for the presence of MCI have been defined as [6, 12]:
• Subjective memory complaints, preferably validated by a third person.
• Memory impairment, non-characteristic for given age and education level.
• Preserved general cognitive function.
• Intact activities of daily living.
• Absence of dementia.
More importantly, impairment of Activities of Daily Living (ADL) has been
observed in some MCI subtypes and therefore Instrumental ADL (IADL) ques-
tionnaires [13] or recent video assisted observation tools [14] have been used for
their ability to act as a diagnostic marker for the MCI subtypes.
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 43
Insummary,inordertohaveaMCIsubtypediagnosisavarietyofmedicaland
neuropsychological examinations is required. A thorough physical examination,
bloodsamplestudies,imaging(MRI,RiB-PET),genetictests(APOE,TREM2)as
well as biomarkers in CSF (beta-amyloid, tau and phospho-tau protein) [15].
Occasionally, a condition, such as vitamin B12 deficiency or thyroid disease, can
be identified as a cause for MCI [16]. However, one general conclusion to be
drawn is that none of the above mentioned tools should be used alone, on the
contrary the combination of different tools results in a more precise diagnosis.
Lastly,themostrecentresearchfindingsshowedthatthepathophysiologicfindings
in MCI may predict Alzheimer’s Disease (and perhaps other diseases) and
therefore the sooner the diagnosis the more effective the intervention [17].
4.1.3 Amnestic-Type Mild Cognitive Impairment
DeclineinepisodicmemoryisoneofthehallmarkfeaturesofAlzheimer’sdisease
(AD) and is also a defining feature of amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment
(aMCI),whichispositedasapotentialprodromeofAD.Whiledeficitsinepisodic
memory are well documented in MCI, the nature of this impairment remains
relatively under-researched, particularly for those domains with direct relevance
and meaning for the patient’s daily life. Recently in order to fully explore the
impactofdisruptiontotheepisodicmemorysystemoneverydaymemoryinMCI,
clinicians examine participants’ episodic memory capacity using a battery of
experimental tasks with real-world relevance [18]. They investigated episodic
acquisition and delayed recall (story-memory), associative memory (face-name
pairings), spatial memory (route learning and recall), and memory for everyday
mundane events in 16 amnestic MCI and 18 control participants. Furthermore,
they followed MCI participants longitudinally to gain preliminary evidence
regarding the possible predictive efficacy of these real-world episodic memory
tasks for subsequent conversion to AD.
It has been reported for patients with aMCI and more frequently for patients
with AD that they have difficulties with spatial orientation in everyday activities
[19]. Patients often fail to find their way in unfamiliar environments when facing
entirely newspatialsettings duringurbantransportation,travelingorshopping.In
mild to more severe stages of the disease, they may be disoriented even within
their familiar neighborhood or inside their own flat. The standard way to study
disorientation and spatial memory is with tests consisting of navigation inside a
hospital [20], sometimes as orientation in a circular arena [21] and remembering
object position [22]. To this day there are only two studies, to our knowledge,
which addressed spatial orientation in MCI [23, 24]. The Mapstone et al. [23]
study correlated motion flow perception with results in a table-top Money Road
Map (MWM) test and the Hort et al. [24] study investigated allocentric and
egocentric navigation in an analogue of the MWM.
44 I.Tarnanasetal.
Itisgenerallyacceptedthatspatialnavigationdeficitisparticularlypronounced
in individuals with hippocampus-related memory impairment, such as aMCI and
maysignalpreclinicalAD[5,24].Laczoetal.[5]analyzedseveraltypesoferrors
made by the subjects’ during the task to investigate which of them contributed to
their impairment. They used the Hidden Goal Task, a human analogue of the
MorrisWaterMaze,toexaminespatialnavigationeitherdependent(egocentric)or
independent of individual’s position (allocentric). Overall, the aMCI group per-
formed poorer on spatial navigation than the non-aMCI group, especially in the
latter trials whentheaMCI group exhibited limitedcapacitytolearnandthenon-
aMCIgroupexhibitedalearningeffect.Finally,theaMCIgroupperformedalmost
identically as the AD group. Hort et al. [24] examined aMCI, AD and healthy
controls using a four-subtests task that required them to locate an invisible goal
inside a circular arena, analogues to the MWM test. Each subtest began with an
overheadviewofthearenashowedonacomputermonitorandthenenteredareal
navigation inside of the actual space, an enclosed arena 2.9 m in diameter. They
foundthattheADgroupandamnesticMCImultiple-domaingroupwereimpaired
inallsubtests.TheamnesticMCIsingle-domaingroupwasimpairedsignificantly
insubtestsfocusedonallocentricorientationandatthebeginningoftherealspace
egocentric subtest, suggesting impaired memory for allocentric and real space
configurations. These results suggest that spatial navigation impairment occurs
early in the development of AD and can be used for monitoring of the disease
progression or for evaluation of presymptomiatic AD.
4.2 Virtual Environments and aMCI
Virtual Reality is a relatively new technology regarding its use for neuropsycho-
logical research. Publications to date provide evidence of some cases where a
virtual environment creates the desired conditions and the necessary triggers for
amnestic MCI patients to be classified and assessed. To be more precise, appli-
cations of virtual reality in neuroscience can provide experiments in a controlled
environment where normal and impaired patient behavior, perception, control of
movement, learning, memory and emotional aspects can be observed [25]. VR
creates interactive, multimodal sensory stimuli that offer unique advantages over
other approaches to neuroscientific research and applications. VR compatibility
with imaging technologies such as functional MRI allows researchers to present
multimodal stimuli with a high degree of ecological validity and control while
recordingchangesinbrainactivity.Therapists,too,standtogainfromprogressin
VR technology, which provides a high degree of control over the therapeutic
experience.
Normally, a real-time interaction is required in order to observe and analyze
human reactions of any kind, event or task. Otherwise, computer generated
experimental tasks designed for specific variables and aspects of human response
are required. During the last decade and a half, research towards that direction
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 45
Fig.4.3 Theneuralnetworkinvolvedinspatialnavigation[32]
provided information about the use of VR in Neuroscience [26–30]. For the
purposes of this chapter we are going to analyze the way VR can be used for
evaluating spatial perception and memory aspects in individuals with MCI.
4.2.1 Spatial and Visual Memory
Visual Memory is responsible for retaining visual shapes and colors whereas
spatial memory is responsible for information about locations and movement. It
couldbedescribedascognitiveimagingandcognitivemapping.Thisdistinctionis
notalwaysclearsincepartofvisualmemoryinvolvesspatialinformationandvice
versa[31].WhenitcomestoMCI,impairmenttobothvisualandspatialmemory
could indicate memory deficits [23] (Fig. 4.3).
Navigation combinesthe two types of memory. Successful navigation requires
avarietyofthoughtsandactions;planning,selectionofanappropriatestrategyand
possible alterations, prospective memory and remembering previously visited
locations. In particular, navigation is connected with the hippocampal function, a
brain area already impaired in individuals with MCI [32]. Thus, deficits on
navigational skills and spatial memory could be a solid cognitive indicator for
MCI or early forms of Dementia.
46 I.Tarnanasetal.
The discovery of place-specific firing in the hippocampus [33] and spatial
navigationimpairmentafterhippocampallesioninthewatermaze[34]gavestrong
support to the theory of a cognitive map. This theory dissociates hippocampal
navigation, based on a configuration of distal landmarks, from navigation to and
fromlandmarks.Thisconcepthasevolvedintothedissociationbetweenallocentric
navigation, using flexible representation of an ensemble of distal landmarks and
independentofactualsubjectpositions,andegocentricnavigation,usingdistances
and angles to or from individual landmarks. In humans, the allocentric mode of
navigationwasshowntobeconnectedwiththehippocampalfunctioninanalogues
oftheMorriswatermaze(MWM)[35,36],inplacenavigationinsideavirtualtown
[37],and inremembering the location ofobjects ona table [38].
4.2.2 Virtual Reality, Spatial Memory and aMCI
Immersive virtual reality environments can provide information and some times
rehabilitatespatialworkingmemory[39].Ensuringthatthedesiredconditionsare
ecologicallyvalid,itispossibletouseVRasatooltoevaluatespatialmemoryin
individuals with MCI by tracking their behavior inside the virtual environment in
real-time [40]. As described above spatial memory can be impaired in aMCI. In
one study, aMCI participants encountered two virtual environments; the first, as
the driver of a virtual car (active exploration) and the second, as the passenger of
that car (passive exploration). Subjects were instructed to encode all elements of
theenvironmentaswellastheassociatedspatiotemporalcontexts.Followingeach
immersion,weassessedthepatient’srecallandrecognitionofcentralinformation
(i.e., the elements of the environment), contextual information (i.e., temporal,
egocentric and allocentric spatial information) and lastly, the quality of binding.
The researchers found that the AD patients’ performances were inferior to that of
theaMCIandincreasinglysowhencomparedtothatofthehealthyagedgroups,in
line with the progression of hippocampal atrophy reported in the literature [28].
Spatial allocentric memory assessments were found to be particularly useful for
distinguishingaMCIpatientsfromhealthyolderadults.Activeexplorationyielded
enhancedrecallofcentralandallocentricspatialinformation,aswellasbindingin
all groups. This led aMCI patients to achieve better performance scores on
immediatetemporalmemorytasks.Finally,thepatients’dailymemorycomplaints
were more highly correlated with the performances on the virtual test than with
their performances on the classical memory test.
Taken together, these results highlight specific cognitive differences found
betweenthese three populations that may provide additional insight intothe early
diagnosis and rehabilitation of pathological aging. In particular, neuropsycholog-
ical studies benefit when using virtual tests and a multi-component approach to
assessepisodicmemory,andencourageactiveencodingofinformationinpatients
suffering from mild or severe age-related memory impairment. The beneficial
effect ofactive encoding onepisodicmemoryinaMCI andearly tomoderate AD
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 47
isdiscussedinthecontextofrelativelypreservedfrontalandmotorbrainfunctions
implicated in self-referential effects and procedural abilities.
In another study, a virtual navigation based reorientation task (VReoT) was
used[41]andagainhealthysubjectswerecomparedwithaMCIsubjectsregarding
their performance on the reorientation test. The performance of the aMCI was
significantly worse than the controls suggesting that VReoT detects spatial
memory deficits. A subsequent receiver-operating characteristics analysis showed
a sensitivity of 80.4 % and a specificity of 94.3 %.
4.3 The Virtual Reality Museum
Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Web3D technologies in con-
junction with database technology may facilitate the preservation, dissemination
andpresentationofculturalartifactsinmuseum’scollectionsandalsoeducatethe
public in an innovative and attractive way. Virtual Reality signifies a synthetic
world, whereas Augmented Reality refers to computer generated 2D or 3D virtual
worldssuperimposedontherealworld.Web3Disusedtorepresenttheapplication
of XML (eXtended Markup Language) and VRML (Virtual Reality Markup
Language) technologies to deliver interactive 3D virtual objects in 3D virtual
museums. Precedents made use of 3D multimedia tools in order to record,
reconstruct and visualize archaeological ruins using computer graphics and also
provide interactive AR guides for the visualization of cultural heritage sites [42].
These new emerging technologies are used not only because of their popularity,
but also because they provide an enhanced experience to the virtual visitors.
Additionally, these technologies offer an innovative, appealing and cost effective
way of presenting cultural information. Virtual museum exhibitions can present
the digitized information, either in a museum environment (e.g., in interactive
kiosks), or through the World Wide Web.
Our Virtual Museum system has been developed in XML and VRML and is
describedindetail[43,44].Thesystemallowsmuseumcuratorstobuild,manage,
archiveandpresentvirtualexhibitionsbasedon3Dmodelsofartifacts.Theinno-
vation of our system is that it allows end-users to explore virtual exhibitions
implementedusingverysimpleeverydayinterfaces(e.g.joystick,mouse)(Fig. 4.4).
The cultural artifacts are digitized by means of a custom built stereo photo-
grammetrysystem(ObjectModeler),mainlyfordigitizingsmallandmedium-size
objects and a custom modeling framework (Interactive Model Refinement and
Rendering tool) in order to refine the digitized artifact. The 3D models are
accompanied by images, texts, metadata information, sounds and movies
(Fig. 4.5). These virtual reconstructions (3D models and accompanying data sets)
are represented as eXtensible Markup Language (XML) based data to allow
interoperable exchange between the museum and external heritage systems.
These virtual reconstructions are stored in a MySQL database system and
managedthroughtheuseofaspeciallydesignedContentManagementApplication,
48 I.Tarnanasetal.
Fig.4.4 Userscan‘walk’freelyinthevirtualmuseumandinteractwiththeartifacts.Oncethey
selectanartifacttheycanchoosetozoomin,rotateitattheX-,Y-,Z-axisandreaddetailsintags
ontheartifactitself
whichalsoallowsbuildingandpublishingvirtualexhibitionsontheInternetorina
museumkiosksystem.Thesystemisacompletetoolthatenablesarchivingofboth
content and context of museum objects. The described interactive techniques can
transformthemuseumvisitors‘frompassiveviewersandreadersintoactiveactors
and players’[44].
4.3.1 The Virtual Reality Museum Technical Components
Twomaincomponentsofthesystemareofinterestfortheevaluation:theContent
ManagementApplication(CMA)andAugmentedRealityInterface(ARIF).CMA
allows publishing of virtual museums to both Web and a specially designed
application (ARIF) for switching between the Web and an AR system. The CMA
application is implemented in Java, trademark of Oracle Corporation and it
includesthedatabaseoftherepresentationsofculturalobjectsandtheirassociated
media objects, such as images, 3D models, texts, movies, sounds and relevant
metadata. It enables user-friendly management of different types of data stored in
the Virtual Museum database, through various managers, such as the Cultural
Object Manager (deals with virtual representations of cultural artifacts), the
Presentation Manager (manages virtual exhibitions with the help of templates)
and the Template Manager (stores these visualization templates).
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 49
Fig.4.5 Theinterfaceisergonomicallymadesothatitcantolerateerrors.Allicons,fontsand
interactiveobjectsarelargeandunderstandable
TheARIFcomponentisapresentationorvisualizationframeworkthatconsists
of three main sub-components:
• The ARIF Exhibition Server. Data stored in the Database is visualized on user
interfaces via the ARIF Exhibition Server.
• The ARIF Presentation Domains with implemented web browser functionality,
suited for web-based presentations.
• The ARIF AR—Augmented reality functionality. This sub-component provides
an AR based virtual museum exhibition experience on a touch screen in the
museumenvironmentusingtable-topARlearningexperiences,e.g.,ARquizzes
and on-line museum exhibitions.
4.3.2 The Virtual Reality Museum Cognitive Theory
It is difficult to reconcile inconsistent findings pertaining to the effect of playing
cognitive training games on cognition [45–47], because the methodological dif-
ferences between these studies are substantial. More research is required to
50 I.Tarnanasetal.
elucidate what aspects of brain training games facilitate transfer to untrained
cognitive abilities. Hence, the aim of our virtual museum was to test whether
playing some simple memory exercises inside an ecologically valid 3D environ-
ment does transfer to different measures of executive functions in amnestic-type
mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) older adults. Executive functions are a cog-
nitive system that controls and manages other cognitive processes. For example,
Updating is the ability to respond in a flexible and adaptive manner in order to
keepupwiththechangesintheenvironment,e.g.duringtheperiodofroadrepairs
you need to change your permanent route and use the new route until the repairs
are finished.
According to the cognitive-enrichment hypothesis developed by Hertzog et al.
[48], the trajectory of cognitive development across the life span is not fixed.
Although the trajectory of cognitive development at normal seniors is largely
determined by a lifetime of experiences and environmental influences, there is
potential for discontinuity in the trajectory given a change in cognition-enriching
behaviors. The cognitive-enrichment hypothesis is corroborated by ample evi-
denceforplasticity,i.e.,thepotentialforimprovementofabilityasaconsequence
of training [49] of everyday cognitive task-switching in the elderly population.
Therearesomereportsprovidingevidenceofimprovementsin‘‘Updating’’aspart
of the bigger structure called ‘‘executive functions’’ [50–52]. There are also
promisingreportsshowcasingseniors‘‘Shifting’’abilityimprovement,asamental
process during which seniors redirect their focused attention from one channel of
informationtoanotherasquicklyaspossibleorchangethecourseoftheiractions
while maintaining accurate performance [53, 54]. Shifting can be initiated con-
sciously or unconsciously by a stimulus in our surroundings or by habit. For
example,whiletalkingonthephone,wemayhavetoswitchtopreventingasmall
grandchild from touching a sharp object. Many older people encounter shifting
problems; they may find it difficult and frustrating to try to change their thinking,
routines or actions. Those who do not train their shifting ability may have prob-
lems changing undesirable habits. Finally, Davidson et al. [55] and Karbach and
Kray [56] reported improvement at ‘‘Inhibition’’, the ability to ignore irrelevant
stimuliorsuppressirrelevantreactionswhileperformingatask.Inhibitionincludes
the deliberateprevention ofanact,behaviororresponse, when it is notdesirable.
At work, for example, we must sometimes ignore our co-workers’ conversations
andfocusourattentiononourowntasks.Trainingthisabilityhelpsusconcentrate
on relevant activities while ignoring disturbing stimuli. It will enable you, for
example, to write a letter while the television is on. In addition, domains such as
selective attention [57] and inductive reasoning [58] can be improved in older
adults.
We now know that the virtue of a cognitive-training technique depends on the
generalization or transfer of training to untrained tasks [59]. Different degrees of
transferhavetobedistinguished.Theminimaldegreeoftransferthatcanoccuris
improvement within the same cognitive domain as subjected to training, assessed
using different stimuli, and requiring a different response than the training task.
This type of transfer is referred to as near transfer. Improvement of abilities in
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 51
othercognitivedomainsthanthecognitivedomainsubjectedtotrainingisreferred
to as far transfer.
VirtualRealityMuseumexplorationandinteractionactivitiesareconsideredto
provide an ideal context for cognitive enrichment [60, 61]. The unique charac-
teristics of virtual museums presumed to facilitate transfer are their motivating
nature, frequent presentation of feedback, precise reinforcement schedules, and
stimulus variability, analogues to the basic characteristics of good video games,
which are designed to enhance learning through effective learning principles
supported by research in the Learning Sciences [62]. As a result of their enter-
tainmentvalue,virtualmuseumsmaintainthemotivationtoengageinpracticefor
much longer than monotonous laboratory tasks or traditional training programs.
Frequent feedback supports motivation and is also important for conditioning the
desiredlevelofperformance.Whenthedifficultylevelofthetaskiscontinuously
adapted to the performance, players will constantly be challenged at the limits of
theirability.Itisinparticularthephaseofskill-acquisitionthatcallsforcognitive
control (CC), whereas continued performance at a mastered level is associated
withcognitiveloadautomationandreleaseofCCresources[63,64].Furthermore,
small increments of difficulty level maximize the proportion of successful expe-
riences with the task. The stimulus variability also plays an important role in
training CC, because it helps to generalize learnt cognitive skills to multiple
stimulus contexts.
Transfer of virtual reality museum interventions to CC has, however, not been
demonstrated consistently. Owen et al. [46], for instance, demonstrated that
playingcomputerizedcognitivetraininggameslikeNintendo’s(cid:3)Dr.Kawashima’s
BrainTrainingTMwasnotmorebeneficialforCCfunctionsthanansweringgeneral
knowledge questions online. It is being assumed that because the sample of par-
ticipants in Owen et al.’s study was very heterogeneous and included both young
andoldadults,itispossiblethatimprovementsofcognitivetestperformancewere
attenuated in young adults due to ceiling performance at pretest. This could have
obscuredpossibletransferoftraininginthesub-sampleofolderadults.Thenotion
that sample heterogeneity can confound the observed effect of virtual reality
training substantially is corroborated by Feng et al. [65]. They found no effect of
playing action virtual reality games on spatial attention in a sample of young
adults.However,separateanalysisoftheeffectinmalesandfemalesrevealedthat
femalesdidactuallybenefitfromplaying.Inaddition,intheOwenetal.studythe
participant sample was heterogeneous with respect to training adherence, so par-
ticipants who completed only two training sessions could have had a negative
impact on aggregated training outcomes. Another aspect of Owen et al.’s study
thatmakestheobservedabsenceoftransferdifficulttointerpretisthattransferwas
assessed using a test battery comprising only four cognitive tests, three of which
were measures of working memory capacity.
Ackerman et al. [45] demonstrated that sample heterogeneity cannot account
for Owen et al.’s [46] findings. They found that playing cognitive training games
(Nintendo(cid:3) WiiTMBigBrainAcademyTM)doesnotbenefitcognitiveabilitiestoa
greater extent than reading assignments do, in a homogeneous sample of healthy
52 I.Tarnanasetal.
seniors on a relativelyfixed and extensive training schedule. Moreover, a broader
assessmentofcognitiveabilitiesofinterestwasmadethaninOwenetal.’sstudy.
Still, Ackerman et al. focused predominantly on reasoning ability and perceptual
processing speed, while a large share of the cognitive games under study taxed
working memory updating and the large variety of the tasks probably stimulated
participants’ attention and task set shifting. Inclusion of transfer tasks, gauging
workingmemory,updatingandsetshifting,inAckermanetal.’sstudycouldhave
ledtodifferentconclusionsregardingtransferofplayingcognitivetraininggames.
Conversely, there is also some evidence against Owen et al.’s [46] and
Ackerman et al.’s [45] pessimistic conclusions regarding the beneficial effects of
playing virtual reality educational games on CC functions. Namely, Peretz et al.
[47] found a larger improvement of visuospatial working memory, visuospatial
learning, and focused attention after playing Cognifit Personal Coach(cid:3) cognitive
traininggamesthanafterplayingconventional3Dvideogamesthatwerematched
for intensity, in a sample of older adults. Even though there is some theoretical
overlap in the cognitive functions assessed by Peretz et al. and Owen et al. and
Ackermanetal.,thespecificcognitivetestsusedtoassesstransferinthesestudies
was different. It is conceivable that some cognitive tests are more sensitive to
transfer effects than others, which might explain the discrepant results of these
studies.
Furthermore, playing 3D videogames not specifically designed for cognitive
training can also improve CC functions in older adults. Basak et al. [66] dem-
onstrated that playing a particular complex 3-D real-time strategy game (Rise of
Nations) was associated with greater improvements of shifting, updating, and
inductive reasoning than observed in the control condition. It must be noted that
thecontrolgroupinthisstudywasano-contactcontrolgroup,soitisnotcertainto
whatextenttheobservedimprovementsinthevideogamegroupareattributableto
placebo-effects. Nevertheless, the improvements of CC in this study were larger
than practice effects due to repeated exposure to the same cognitive test.
Ithasbeenarguedthatfailurestodemonstratefartransferofplayingcognitive
training games in the population of older adults may be due to a general age-
relateddecreaseoftheextenttowhichlearningtransferstountrainedabilities[45].
This assertion is supported by Ball et al.’s [57] finding that cognitive strategy
training programs for improving memory, processing speed and reasoning,
respectively, were associated with improvements within the trained cognitive
domain butnotwith fartransfer tountrainedcognitiveabilitiesofolderadults.In
contrast,however,fartransferofpracticingbasiccognitivetestshasbeenreported
repeatedly inthe cognitive aging literature [56, 67–69]. Brain training games like
Nintendo’s(cid:3) Dr. Kawashima’s Brain TrainingTM share many task components of
basic cognitive laboratory tasks and videogames have several additional charac-
teristicsfacilitatingtransfer[61].Therefore,itisreasonabletoexpectthattransfer
of computerized cognitive training games in the population of older adults is
replicable.
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 53
4.3.3 The Virtual Reality Museum Cognitive Exercises
In general three tasks have been identified and developed within the scope of this
study.Whilethecompletecognitivestimulationisexpectedtoencompassseveral
tasks from each cognitive domain (memory, attention, executive functions), this
studyisaimingtoevaluatethetaskdomainsofnavigation,spatialorientationand
spatialmemory.TaskswerechosenspecificallyforpatientwithaMCIforwhomit
is essential to be spatially oriented in order to live independently.
Generalizationofskillsduringcognitive stimulation towards daily-life settings
has only received little support in the literature [70]. More specifically, task-
focused training appears to show no transfer to situations outside of the training
situationandtheeffectivenessofstrategytrainingrequiresfurtherevidence.While
the external validity of training applications seems to be of central importance to
thepatients’successintheirdailylife,mosttraditionalrehabilitationstudieshave
notsuccessfullydemonstratedsuchtransferyet.Eventhoughprinciplesofcontext-
sensitive rehabilitation have been mentioned in several literature reviews [71],
context-sensitivity is often not associated with transfer to activities of daily life.
This is because context-sensitive tasks are essentially based on the unique expe-
riencesthatapatienthasinhisdailylife.Hence,atransferisoftennotnecessaryas
training tasks are either identical to common daily chores or replicate them as
closely as possible. Nonetheless, when traditional process-specific tasks are
combined with individualized context, task generalization across similar daily
activities seems to be of relevance.
The Virtual Reality Museum is designed to speed up auditory processing,
improve working memory, improve the accuracy and the speed with which the
brain processes speech information and reengage the neuromodulatory systems
that gate learning and memory. To reverse cognitive disuse and drive brain
plasticity, the program strongly engages the brain with demanding exercises and
an adaptive and reward-based daily training schedule, consistent with the rec-
ommendations of Tucker-Drob [72]. This procedure is based on practices of
context-sensitive rehabilitation suggested by Ylvisaker [73]. Cognitive exercises
providedbyitaredividedintothreeinterrelatedcategories,that,inaggregate,span
the cognitive functions of seniors:
• ListenandPlan:Seniorsfollowinstructionstolocateandfinditemsinanorder.
Instructionsbecomemoredifficult(phoneticallyandsyntactically)progressively
(purpose: training on spatial navigation abilities and planning following com-
plex instructions with continuous processed speech).
• Storyteller: Seniors hear segments of museum items stories and are asked to
answer a set of questions concerning the details of the respective segment
(purpose: training on story comprehension and memory).
• Exer-gaming:Seniorsareaskedtoactuallyrepresentthe‘‘scene’’depictedatthe
archeological artifacts or multimedia description, e.g. movement, dance,
wedding (purpose: training on executive function and orientation/praxis).
54 I.Tarnanasetal.
This type of intervention was used in the recent study by Smith et al. [69],
whichwasthefirstdouble-blindlarge-scaleclinicaltrialthatdemonstratedmarked
improvementnotonlyinthetrainedtask,butalsoinseveralgeneralizedmeasures
ofmemoryandperceptionofcognitiveperformanceineverydaylife,relativetoan
active control group that received a frequency and intensity-matched cognitive
stimulation program.
The modularity of the cognitive tasks above also reflects the standards of
currentprocess-specificassessments[74].TheVirtualRealityMuseumListenand
Planexerciseisaspatialnavigationtaskthatisimplementedascloseaspossibleto
theactualArcheologicalMuseumofAiani,atKozani,Greecefromwherewetook
thelayoutandarcheologicalartifacts.Consequently,thisvirtualnavigationtaskis
also meaningful for clinical decision-making about real-world behavior as well.
Transferwasassessedbycomparingperformanceonabatteryofcognitivetests
before and after the intervention. Taking into account that some cognitive tests
maybemoresensitivetotransfereffectsthanothers,severalmeasuresofupdating,
shifting, and inhibition were included in the test battery. Although it is assumed
that training interventions boost functional or even plastic changes to the brain,
neuronal correlates of the training induced changes in intervention studies were
only examined in the last decade [75]. Knowledge about the intervention related
neuronal and functional changes is additionally useful in order to understand
the efficiency of the training and transfer effects to other tasks [76]. Therefore, in
the present study we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) derived from the
electroencephalogram(EEG)inordertostudymorecloselytheneuronalprocesses
which are affected by the training intervention.
4.4 Research Methodology
4.4.1 Design
Single-site randomized controlled double-blind trial.
4.4.2 Participants
One hundred and fourteen patients with MCI according to the revised Petersen
criteria [77], aged between 65 and 88 years, were recruited to participate in the
experimental study, which was conducted in Alzheimer Hellas day clinic Agios
Ioannis at Thessaloniki, Greece between May 2011 and October 2012. The par-
ticipantswererandomlyassignedtothetraininggroups.Weexcludedsubjectswho
metcriteriafordementia(DSM-IV),AD(NINCDS-ADRDA),depressiveepisode
(IDC-10), subjects with cerebrovascular disease (Hachinski scale score C4), and
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 55
thosewithanyothermedicalorpsychiatricidentifiablecauseaccountingfortheir
complaints.
Theneuropsychologicalbatteryusedforthepre-andpost-testingincludedtests
for the assessment of memory (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test—RAVLT),
language and semantic memory (15-itemsshort-form of the Boston Naming Test,
category fluency), praxis and visuospatial skills (Rey complex figure copy),
attentionandexecutivefunction(SymbolDigitModalitiesTest,TrailMakingpart
AandB,StroopinterferenceTest[78]andletterfluency).Acognitivedomainwas
judgedasimpairedwhensubjectsscored1.5SDbelowvaluesforageandeducation
matched controls in at least one test. According to the results of the neuropsy-
chological exploration, subjects were classified as pure amnestic MCI (a-MCI),
patientsfulfillingPetersen’scriteriaforamnesticMCI,withmemorybeingtheonly
affected domain(see Table 4.1 for details).
ParticipantsalsoreceivedanAuditoryERP-recordingcompletedusingaNihon
Kohden–Neuropack M1 MEB-9200 evoked potential/EMG measuring system.
Event-related-potentials(ERPs)areusedasanoninvasiveclinicalmarkerforbrain
functioninhumanpatients(Fig. 4.6).AuditoryERPsarevoltagechangesspecified
to a physical or mental occurrence that can be recorded by EEG [79]. Different
ERPs were used in order to pinpoint the functional processes which would be
improvedbythecognitiveprocesstrainingandwhichmaybeaffectedbyretesting.
TheprincipalERPcomponentselicitedaftertask-relevantvisualstimuliareamong
others the N1, the anterior N2, the P2, and the P3b. In Fig. 4.7, an example of an
AuditoryERPsignalcanbeseen.Thesignalcanbedividedintotwoparts, apre-
stimuli section consisting of a baseline withno clear potentials and a post-stimuli
section consisting of various potentials. The first positive potential is called P1,
followedbyanegativepotentialN1,thenP2,N2,andsoforth.Thelatencyofthese
potentialsismeasuredfromonsetofstimulitothepeakofthepotential.Sometimes
the peaks are namedusing the latency, e.g.if N1 occur at a latency of40 ms it is
named N40 or if P3 occur at a latency of 300 ms it is named P300. The baseline
amplitude is the difference between the peak of a potential and the mean of the
pre-stimulus baseline. The baseline measurement used to discriminate between
theMCIamnesticpatients andthecontrolsinourstudyisshowninFig. 4.6[80].
4.4.3 Procedures
Thirty-nine of the participants represented a virtual reality museum cognitive
training group—experimental group (remaining N = 32; 12 men, mean age:
70.5 years; range 65–82; seven drop-outs because of technical problems, illness,
and tenancy changeover). The other participants formed an active control group
(N = 39; 16 men, mean age: 69.7 years; range: 65–88; no drop-outs) and a non-
contact control group (remaining N = 34; 13 men, mean age: 70.9 years; range:
65–87; two dropouts because of illness). The virtual reality museum cognitive
training group was exposed to a multilayered cognitive training over a period of
spuorgtnapicitrapehtfosutatsevitingocdnascitsiretcarahccihpargomeD
1.4elbaT
ecnacfiingislacitsitatS
lortnoctcatnoc-noN
lortnocevitcA
gniniartevitingoC
puorG
63.0=P,1=)201,2(F
)4.4(9.07
)5.4(sraey7.96
)3.4(sraey5.07
eganaeM
42.0=P,4.1=)201,2(F
)1.3(2.62
)6.3(2.62
)6.3(8.62
erocsESMM
)04.32(6.07
)2.23(4.47
)42.43(4.37
)noititeperroloc(tset-poortS
)1.3(0.51
)6.4(5.51
)3.4(4.51
llaceretaidemmi-TLVAR
)5.1(2.2
)5.1(7.1
)5.1(6.1
llacerdeyaled-TLVAR
)9.1(4.7
)2.2(5.5
)2.2(6.5
noitingocer-TLVAR
)09.1(22.11
)19.1(06.01
)64.2(24.01
TNB
)3.4(2.11
)1.3(3.11
)89.3(6.01
ycneuflyrogetaC
)4.3(0.6
)6.2(1.7
)45.3(4.7
ycneuflretteL
)5.8(9.82
)9.1(7.23
)3.1(6.43
ypocerugfiyaR
)7.4(0.7
)2.9(4.11
)2.9(9.11
llaceretaidemmierugfiyaR
)6.4(2.7
)1.9(6.01
)4.9(6.11
llacer-deyalederugfiyaR
)4.1(0.6
)5.2(3.6
)9.2(6.6
noitingocererugfiyaR
)1.1(8.5
)1.1(1.6
)1.1(2.6
noititepertigiddrawroF
)3.1(2.2
)7.0(9.3
)8.0(8.3
noititepertigiddrawkcaB
)1.55(sm8.881
)7.38(0.971
)5.89(sm9.391
Btsetgnikam-liarT
5.2±3.31
1.3±3.11
5.2±3.01
SDG
sisylanalacitsitatsehtybdetacidnisisasecnereffidpuorgtnacfiingisonerewerehT.seulavnaemehtdnihebsesehtnerapninevigerasnoitaiveddradnatS
)nmuloctsal(
56 I.Tarnanasetal.
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 57
Fig.4.6 IllustrationofapossibleAuditoryERPsignal.OntheX-axisthetimeisshownwith0at
the stimuli. The Y-axis is the amplitude with 0 at the baseline. In the pre-stimuli window a
baselineisvisiblefromwhichahorizontalaveragecanbecalculated
Fig.4.7 GrandaveragebaselineAERPwaveformsforMCIamnesticpatientsatourstudyand
comparisontobaselineforcontrols
5 month. At the same time, the active control group is a sample of the MCI
amnestic population from the Agios Ioannis day clinic in Thessaloniki that
received a learning-based memory training approach in which participants used
computerstomakecognitive exercises, viewedDVD-based educational programs
onhistory,artandliteratureorparticipatedatpuzzlesolvingexercises.Theactive
control group wasrequiredtohave high face validity andmatch the experimental
group for daily and total training time, interesting audiovisual content, and com-
puter use. Thus the AC cognitive training program employed a learning-based
memory training approach in which participants used computers to view DVD-
based educational programs on history, art and literature.
Theparticipantsinthevirtual realitymuseumcognitive training andtheactive
controlgrouptrainedtwiceaweekfor90 minacross5 months.Thevirtualreality
58 I.Tarnanasetal.
museum cognitive training was conducted on a one-to-one basis while the active
controltrainingswereconductedinsmallgroupswithnotmorethan12participants
by professional psychologists. Two extra sessions were offered at the end of the
program for those participants who missed the regular sessions. The participants
were notencouraged totrain outside the trainingsessions.
4.4.4 Data Recordings and Analysis
4.4.4.1 Electrophysiological Recording
The Electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 32 active electrodes posi-
tionedaccordingtotheextended10–20system(theelectrodesmounteddirectlyon
thescalpincludedthefollowingpositions:C3,C4,CP3,CP4,CPz,Cz,F3,F4,F7,
F8, FC3, FC4, FCz, Fp1, Fp2, Fpz, Fz, O1, O2, Oz, P3, P4, P7, P8, PO3, PO4,
POz, Pz, T7, and T8). Electrodes A1 and A2 were placed at the left and right
earlobes. The horizontal and vertical EOG was measured by electrodes placed at
theoutercanthi(LO1,LO2)andaboveandbelowbotheyes(SO1,SO2,IO1,IO2).
Electrode impedance was kept below 10 kX. The amplifier band pass was
0.01–140 Hz. EEG andEOG weresampledcontinuously witharate of2,048 Hz.
Data was archived on a hard disk with triggers using post-session annotation.
Offline, the EEG was downscaled to a sampling rate of 500 Hz by using the
software Neuroworkbench (Nihon-Kohden, Japan). The epochs were 1,200 ms
long ranging from 100 ms before and 1,000 ms after stimulus onset. All epochs
with EEG amplitudes of more than ±120 lV or with drifts of more than 150 lV
within 300 ms were discarded. For all participants and conditions at mean 48
epochs (Min = 17; Max = 53; SD = 7.3) of the epochs remained for averaging
afterartefactrejectionandcorrection.Theepochswereaveragedaccordingtothe
stimulus conditions (target trials versusnon-target trials) and referenced to linked
earlobes (excluding the EOG electrodes). For stimulus locked averages only
correct epochs were used, excluding trials with false alarms or misses. A digital
low-pass filter was set at 17 Hz in order to reduce oversampling.
4.4.4.2 Analysis
StatisticalanalyseswereperformedbymeansofrepeatedmeasuresANOVAswith
Greenhouse-Geisser corrected degrees of freedom. In case of significant main
effects (if the factor included more than two levels) or interactions, additional
ANOVAs were applied for post hoc testing of contrasts and simple effects. For
response times (RTs; correct commission trials) the ANOVA included the within
factor time (session one, session n) and the between factor group (virtual reality
museumcognitivetraininggroup,activecontrolgroup,no-contactcontrolgroup).
Separate ANOVAs were carried outfor false alarms andfor misses,because they
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 59
are different types of errors either demanding a response or not. Both analysis
included the factors time and group.
The peak amplitude and latency of the N1 potential was measured at the two
occipital electrodes O1 and O2 were the potential showed its maximum. The N2
wasquantifiedasthemeanamplitudeinthetimeintervalbetween240and300 ms
attheelectrodesFCz,CzandCPzwheremaximumamplituderesulted.Areliable
measurement of the peak was not possible due to the overlapping P2, and P3b
potentials. The P2 potential was quantified in amplitude and latency as the local
maximum at the electrodes FCz, Cz and CPz in the search interval between 200
and400 mswhereitshowedthehighestpeaks.Thepeakamplitudeandlatencyof
the P3b potential was measured as the local maximum at the electrodes Cz, CPz
andPzinthesearchintervalbetween400and700 mswhereitshowedthehighest
amplitudes.
SixseparateANOVAswerecarriedoutforthepeakamplitudesandlatenciesof
the N1, P2 and the P3b, respectively, including the between subject factor group
and the within subject factors session (session one, session two), stimulus type
(target, non-target) and electrodes (O1 and O2 for the N1; FCz, Cz, and CPz for
the P2 potential; Cz, CPz, and Pz for the P3b potential, resp.). An additional
ANOVA was carried out for the N2 mean amplitudes including the between
subject factor group and the within subject factors session, stimulus type, and
electrodes (FCz, Cz, and CPz).
We also used sLORETA [81] in order to closer examine the underlying neu-
ronal changes of the expected training effect of stimulus feature processing as
reflected by the P2. We examined only the target condition because the training
gains may especially help to improve target detection. The program sLORETA
estimates the sources of activation on the basis of standardized current density at
each of 6,239 voxels in the grey matter of the MNI-reference brain with a spatial
resolution of 5 mm. The calculation is based upon a linear weighted sum of the
scalp electric potentials with the assumption that neighboring voxels have a
maximal similar electrical activity. The voxel-based sLORETA images were first
computedforeach individualaveraged ERP inthe targetconditionintheinterval
from 170 to 190 ms surrounding the P2 peak. Then, the differences of the sLO-
RETA images between test sessions were statistically compared between groups
using the sLORETA voxelwise randomization test (5,000 permutations) which is
based on statistical nonparametric mapping (SnPM) and implemented in sLO-
RETA. Two independentgroup testswere carried outforcomparison ofthe three
groups (cognitive training group versus no-contact control groups, and versus
socialcontrolgroup).Thetestswereperformedforanaverageofalltimeframesin
the interval with the null hypothesis that (T1 group A–T2 group A) = (T1 group
B–T2 group B). The tests were corrected for multiple comparisons [82].
60 I.Tarnanasetal.
4.5 Results
4.5.1 Neuropsychological Variables Outcome
InthevirtualrealitymuseumandactivecontrolaMCIgroup,thereweresignificant
differencesbetweenthedelayed-recallscoresontheRAVLTatbaselineandthose
at both the 5-month follow-up (1.6 ± 1.5 vs. 4.4 ± 1.5, p = 0.04; 1.6 ± 1.5 vs.
4.6 ± 2.3, p = 0.04) (Table 4.2). The immediate recall scores on the Rey Ost-
erriethComplexFigure(11.9 ± 9.2vs.15.8 ± 9.4;p = 0.04),theTrail-MakingB
(193.9 ± 98.5 vs 104.1 ± 28.7; p = 0.04) and the MMSE (26.8 ± 3.6 vs.
28.2 ± 2.5;p = 0.04)were significantlyimprovedonly atthe5-monthfollow-up
in the virtual reality museum aMCI group. There was a tendency toward
improvementofthedigitspanforwardscores(6.2 ± 1.1vs.7.8 ± 1.3;p = 0.07)
atthefollow-upofthevirtualrealitymuseumaMCIgroupandageneraltraining-
induced BNT scores improvement (10.6 ± 1.9 vs. 12.0 ± 2.0; p = 0.07) com-
paredtothebaselinescoresinthevirtualrealityandtheactivecontrolaMCIgroup
(Table 4.2). The GDS score was also improved after cognitive training, but the
difference did not reach statistical significance (10.3 ± 2.5 vs. 8.9 ± 1.7;
p = 0.23).Therewerenosignificantdifferencesbetweenthebaselineandfollow-
up scores in other outcome measures in the MCI wait-list control group.
4.5.2 Electrophysiological Measures Outcome
The P300 component latency and amplitude among the experimental groups (as
detectedonthePzelectrode)forthetwoconditions (targetandno-targetauditory
stimuli) before and after training are summarized in Table 4.3. When the non-
target stimulus was presented, the P300 latency following training was signifi-
cantly shorter in both memory training groups (Table 4.3). The P300 amplitude
was significantly higher after training on both groups. However, when the target
stimuli was presented, the P300 latency following training was significantly
shorter in both research groups; the Virtual Reality Museum latencies were sig-
nificantly longer than those of the Active Control; and the amplitude was
significantly lower for the Active Control than for the Virtual Reality Museum.
Ourresultsareinlinewithprevioustrainingstudieswhichalsofoundevidence
for improvements of specific cognitive functions after cognitive training in older
participants(e.g.forworkingmemory:[83],e.g.,fordualtaskperformance:[54]).
Performance improvements of older participants were also found for cognitive
training of visual conjunction search in other training studies [84, 85]. These
studies found evidence that seniors has learning skills just as good as the young
onestoefficientlyusefeatureinformationandselectivelyattendtothoseobjectsin
thesearcharraythatsharecommonfeatureswiththetarget.Ourfindingshowever
gofurther,becauseweusedforafirsttimea3DVirtualMuseumenvironmentand
ICMahtiwstnapicitrapehtniselbairavemoctuonisegnahC
2.4elbaT
puorgICMalortnoclamroN
puorgICMalortnocevitcA
puorgICMamuesumlautriV
skeew02retfA
enilesaB
pu-wolloF
enilesaB
pu-wolloF
enilesaB
9.5±8.21
1.3±0.51
1.4±6.51
6.4±5.51
1.5±6.61
3.4±4.51
llaceretaidemmi,TLVAR
6.2±4.2
5.1±2.2
*3.2±6.4
5.1±7.1
*5.1±4.4
5.1±6.1
llacerdeyaled,TLVAR
9.0±4.7
9.1±4.7
3.2±4.6
2.2±5.5
9.1±0.7
2.2±6.5
noitingocer,TLVAR
8.8±2.62
5.8±9.82
6.1±2.43
9.1±7.23
0.0±0.63
3.1±6.43
ypocFCOR
4.5±3.9
7.4±0.7
4.3±0.11
2.9±4.11
*4.9±8.61
2.9±9.11
llaceretaidemmi,FCOR
6.5±6.9
6.4±2.7
1.8±4.51
1.9±6.01
9.8±3.61
4.9±6.11
llacerdeyaled,FCOR
7.0±0.5
4.1±0.6
5.2±4.7
5.2±3.6
8.2±0.7
9.2±6.6
noitingocer,FCOR
5.1±4.6
1.1±8.5
1.1±2.7
1.1±1.6
(cid:2)3.1±8.7
1.1±2.6
drawrofnapstigiD
5.0±6.2
3.1±2.2
9.0±6.3
7.0±9.3
6.1±0.4
8.0±8.3
drawkcabnapstigiD
9.93±8.95
4.32±6.07
3.32±2.08
2.23±4.47
8.62±6.68
2.53±4.37
gnidaerroloc,poortS
8.4±6.11
3.4±2.11
4.4±2.31
1.3±3.11
7.5±4.31
2.2±6.01
ycneuflyrogetaC
0.5±0.6
4.3±0.6
9.2±6.7
6.2±1.7
(cid:2)8.4±6.8
6.3±4.7
ycneuflretteL
0.57±8.822
1.55±8.881
6.26±0.012
7.38±0.971
*7.82±01.401
5.89±9.391
B-LIART
2.2±0.01
9.1±2.11
(cid:2)0.2±0.21
9.1±6.01
(cid:2)4.2±4.51
9.1±4.01
erocsTNB
6.4±6.42
1.3±2.62
6.2±0.72
6.3±2.62
*5.2±2.82
6.3±8.62
erocsESMM
2.2±9.41
5.2±3.31
7.2±9.9
1.3±3.11
7.1±9.8
5.2±3.01
erocsSDG
70.0=p
(cid:2),50.0\p
*
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 61
)noitaiveddradnats(naem:)edortcelezP(edutilpmadnaycnetal003PnogniniartevitingocfotceffE
3.4elbaT
F
lortnocevitcA
muesumlautriV
serusaeM
:noitcaretnI
:tceffeniaM
:tceffeniaM
T
retfA
erofeB
T
retfA
erofeB
gniniart
puorg
gniniart
gniniart
gniniart
gniniart
gniniart
puorghtiw )95.1(98.1
)95.1(*19.3
***03.41
**46.6
)41.56(14.563
)08.28(74.993
***11.9
)35.06(94.493
)0.48(25.744
ilumitstegratycnetaL
)95.1(
)95.1(98.0
)95.1(*23.4
)95.1(*64.4
*21.4
)18.1(11.5
)07.2(37.4
*76.3
)17.1(93.4
)56.2(70.4
ilumitstegratedutilpmA
)95.1(32.0
)95.1(*4.3
**65.9
*12.4
)66.88(43.593
)01.931(93.734
**78.6
)22.97(74.814
)04.801(57.864
ilumitstegat-nonycnetaL
)95.1(
)95.1(54.0
)95.1(60.1
)95.1(81.3
49.1
)39.1(85.4
)67.2(03.4
12.2
)21.2(24.4
)05.2(81.4
ilumitstegrat-nonedutilpmA
100.0\p
***;10.0\p
**;50.0\p
*
62 I.Tarnanasetal.
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 63
Fig.4.8 Stimulus-locked event-related potentials at the occipital electrodes O1 and O2
separately fortarget and non-target trials, for the first (T1) and the second test session (T2) as
wellasfortheVirtualMuseumcognitivetraininggroup,theActiveControlgroupandthenormal
controlgroup
showed the neuronal correlates of the functional processes suggesting improve-
ments via the VR training as follows:
• In the Virtual Museum cognitive training occipotal N1 enhancement was evi-
dentpost-trainingcomparedtopre-trainingfornon-targetstimuli.Thissuggests
that the participants developed mechanisms for enhanced attention of arrays,
which were not immediately recognized as targets, that is, the non-targets
(Fig. 4.8).
• The frontal N2 enhancement was also evident post-training compared to pre-
training for non-target stimuli. However, as this effect failed to reach signifi-
cance, it can only be speculated that also the subsequent processing or even
inhibition of the non-target stimuli improved after cognitive training. Based on
the enhanced attention in non-target trials in the Virtual Museum cognitive
training group as was reflected in the N1 amplitude, one may expect also a
decrease in the false alarm rate (Fig. 4.8).
The N2 (see Fig. 4.8) showed a maximum at the electrodes FCz (1.2 lV) and
Cz (1.4 lV) and was less negative at CPz (2.1 lV; main effect of f electrodes:
64 I.Tarnanasetal.
Fig.4.9 ChangesinP300amplitudesintheMuseumGroup(Pzaverage)comparedtotheother
groupspre-(T1)andpost-(T2)training
F(2,204) = 30.7, P\0.001). The tree-way-interaction of the factors session x
stimulus type x group reached also a significance (F(2,102) = 3.01; P\0.003).
The increased amplitude of the P300 in target trials may suggest that feature
based stimulus processing was significantly improved in our older participants
afteronlytheVirtualRealityMuseumcognitivetraining(Fig. 4.9).Consequently,
the improved discrimination of stimulus features in target-present trials should
decrease the likelihood of missed targets and increase the likelihood of target
detection. This effect on performance data was evident in our cognitive training
group post-trainingcompared tothe pre-training sessionandalso when compared
to the control groups.
ThesLORETAanalysisoftheP300amplitudedifferencesbetweentestsessions
elucidates the neuronal basis of the training gain. Specifically, activation in the
lingual and parahippocampalgyri was increased only in the cognitive training
group and not in the two control groups. Most importantly, the increased P300
amplitude together with the significant changes in brain activation show that the
cognitive training caused a change in brain processes on a functional level in a
neartransfertaskofvisualsearch.Bothregionsareanatomicallyandfunctionally
connected [86] and are discussed as being sensitive for global visual feature
processing[87],aswellastheglobalprocessingofspatiallayout[88]andsurface
propertieslikecolorandtextureofscenesandobjectsinvisualarrays[86].Forour
training group we found that the cognitive process training improved the textual
and spatial processing of visual arrays in general. The use various kinds of visual
materiallikepictures,objects,andtextpagesthatwereusedinvarioustasksinthe
training sessions did improve one basic cognitive process of global processing of
visual arrays. The present results also suggest the P300 potential of the ERP as a
possible marker for the improvement of this cognitive process (Fig. 4.10).
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 65
Fig.4.10 Graphical representation of the sLORETA results comparing the differences of the
target-P300.Thebluecolourindicateslocalmaximaofloweractivationinthefirstcomparedto
thesecondtestsessionforthecognitivetraininggroupintherightlingualandparahippocampal
gyri, which may explain the amplitude difference of the P300 between sessions in the tested
intervalsurroundingtheP300peak
4.6 Discussion
In the present study we were able to distinguish the functional processes which
were sensitive to the training intervention from retest effects. The effect of test
sessions on the topography of the P300 applies to all groups. We assume that the
P300 may reflect memory-based stimulus processing. Thus, whereas attentional
processing of target-absent trials (N1 results) and feature-based stimulus pro-
cessing of target-present trials (P3 results) were only modulated by the cognitive
training intervention, the improvement of stimulus categorization, which is based
on memory representations (P300), was sensitive to retesting. In our study, the
amplitude of the P300 component increased and latency shortened significantly
followingtraininginbothexperimentalgroups.Thisaddstotheevidencethatthe
P3bcontainsacomponentrelatedtoresponseselectionorexecution[89,90].The
idea of a functional compromise associated with MCI is not new, and previous
studies have reported a higher degree of functional impairment in MCI subjects
when compared with matched healthy subjects [91–99].
Toalimitedextent,thepresentfindingssupportBasaketal.’s[66]findingthat
inhibition can be improved by playing videogames and Schmiedek [100]
demonstration that functional impairment can be improved by practicing basic
cognitive tasks. The results from the present study suggest that modest improve-
mentsofthefunctionalability,processingspeedandmemorycanalsobeachieved
by means of playing virtual reality cognitive training games. A similar partially
positive result of 3D games for cognition-enriching everyday activities and pro-
cessing speed was reported by Nouchi et al. [101].
66 I.Tarnanasetal.
Not all 3D virtual reality environments however are created equal [60] and
given an individual’s stage of cognitive development, one environment can be
more beneficial for cognitive functions than the other. For example, the cognitive
traininggamesusedintheVirtualRealityMuseumwereverysimilartothoseused
inanactualeducationalmuseumvisit[57].Preliminaryevidenceforfartransferof
the cognitive training was found in the present study using the neural correlates.
The different extent of transfer in our study may be explained by the additional
focus of the aMCI group to use specific strategies to perform the training tasks.
Allourdatasupporttheaprioriintuitivenotionthathighlycognitive-dependent
skillsaremorelikelytobeaffectedasaconsequenceoftheVirtualRealityMuseum
cognitive training, and that aMCI subjects show significant improvement in these
functional domains. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that differences between
groups were not restricted to the neuropsychological variables or the neural cor-
relates, but also to behavioral areas as well, such as depression and motivation,
althoughthischangewasnotsignificant.AssuggestedbyGreenandBavelier[61],
motivation is a key condition for transfer to occur. The engaging nature of the
virtualrealitymuseumusedinthepresentstudycouldthushavefacilitatedtransfer
oftraining.Itisclearthatmoreresearchinthisdirectionisrequired.Nevertheless,it
can be concluded that our findings support the notion of plasticity in the neural
system underlying virtual reality cognitive training and point to a relationship
betweenthemoreecologicalvalidityofVirtualRealityMuseumandenhancement
ofspecificcognitive skills.
4.7 Conclusion
The results from our study suggest that older adults do not need to be techno-
logically savvy to benefit from virtual reality training. Almost none of the aMCI
participants in the reviewed studies had prior experience with the technologies
(i.e.,videogames,computers)usedintheinterventionstudyandyettheywerestill
able to benefit from these novel approaches. Previous research has shown par-
ticipants’ prior use of computers was not significantly associated with acquisition
of computer skills during training sessions, suggesting older adults can benefit
from novel technologies [102].
Despite common misconceptions older adults do enjoy learning to use new
technology, perceptions of the computerized training programs were positive for
the older adults who completed computerized training [103]. In spite of many
older adults reporting anxiety about using unfamiliar technology at the beginning
oftraining, mostreportedhighlevelsofsatisfactionafter training wascompleted.
Some patients also stated they could use their new video game skills to connect
more with their grandchildren, like we have seen many times in the literature
[104]; whereas others were very willing to learn touse video games and believed
they could be a positive form of mental exercise [105].
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 67
Inconclusion,thepresentstudylendsmodestsupporttothenotionthatplaying
virtual reality cognitive training games improves untrained cognitive functions in
aMCI. Since these functions facilitate adaptive behavior in various contexts,
improved cognitive processing can be expected to help older adults to overcome
cognitivechallengesintheirdailyroutines.VirtualRealityprovidesanentertaining
and thus motivating tool for improving cognitive and executive functions. The
Virtual Reality Museum doesn’t require physical well-being and mobility of
theparticipantasmuchasphysicalexerciseinterventions;although these seemto
bemoreeffectiveinbufferingdeclineofexecutivefunction[106].Additionally,the
virtualrealitymuseumisnotexpensivetoadministerascomparedtointerventions
supervised by a therapist. Virtual Reality cognitive rehabilitation, such as the
process-specific RehaCom tasks used by Weiand [107] appear to be successful at
keeping patients motivated for continuous training even after the supervised ses-
sionsattheclinichavefinished.Assuch,theprocess-specifictrainingseemstobea
goodchoiceforlong-termself-guidedexercises.Thepresentstudysuggeststhatthe
Virtual Reality Museumshould notbe dismissed asa cognitive training tool.
Even within the homogeneous sample of older adults that participated in the
present study, some participants benefited more from playing the virtual reality
museum than others. A variety of factors may be responsible for individual dif-
ferencesinsensitivitytocognitivetraining. Forinstance,recentfindingsfromour
lab indicate that inter-individual genetic variability modulates transfer of training
to untrained tasks [108]. Therefore, caution concerning the interpolation of
aggregate data to individuals is advised, and individual differences in cognitive
training outcomes are an important topic to be addressed in future studies.
Geusgens et al. [109] reviewed 41 studies specifically looking for transfer effects
during cognitive rehabilitation. They only included studies that trained compen-
sation strategies as opposed to cognitive skills training. Out of the 41 reviewed
studies, 36 were able to demonstrate some form of transfer. However, only
22studiesactuallyevaluatedtransfertodaily-lifeactivitieswhiletheotherslooked
at either simulated lab-based activities or activities that were very similar to the
previously trained ones. Out of these 22 studies, 18 were able to show transfer of
learned abilities, but only six included statistical evidence for their results. Fur-
thermore,thesamplesizesofmoststudieswereverysmallorbasedonsingle-case
designs. Consequently, no clear-cut conclusions for or against strategy training
transfer to daily activities can be drawn.
The artwork of the virtual reality museum we presented here was maybe not
nearlyasadvancedandcapturingascommercialoff-the-shelfgames,whichcould
create even higher levels of realism. Modern game engines already provide the
technology to develop environments that can be easily recognized by users and
allow for high visual quality. Transparency and ‘‘realism’’ in a broader sense can
relate to plausibility and place illusions which are described by Slater [110].
Plausibility illusion refers to the fact that the user believes the virtual scenario is
actually occurring. It is caused by events and the scenario relating directly to the
user (e.g. virtual character talking to user). For example, a cognitive task that is
embedded in a user-relevant scenario directly relates to the therapy goal of the
68 I.Tarnanasetal.
patientandrepresentsadesiredoutcomeofthepatient’srehabilitation(e.g.virtual
kitchenwithcookingtasksrelatestothescenariothatthepatientaimstoengagein
independentlyathome).Thisstandsincontrasttotheabstractnatureoftraditional
neuropsychological tests which may have little in common with real-world sce-
narios (e.g. using abstract objects for mental rotation). Scenarios of high realism
are believed to be of advantage when patients deny their cognitive deficits. The
realism of a task can potentially lead patients to compare their performance with
commonstandardsandpastexperiencesandmakethemrealizethattheircognitive
abilities may not match their subjective perception. This is the basis for patients
actively engaging in cognitive training and making progress throughout their
cognitive rehabilitation. As the growing number of serious games suggests,
engaging game-like training content appears to be a method of choice to prevent
frustration and boredom of users.
It is important to note that inconsistencies may be due to several factors not
relatedtotheactualtrainingprogramitself,including differentcognitiveoutcome
measuresandmodificationsofthetrainingprogram.Theelectrophysiologicaldata
helped to elucidate the functional processes which were sensitive to the training
intervention and, on the other hand, to retest effects due to task repetition. Addi-
tionally, the mediating neuronal basis of the training gain was identified, thus,
underliningtheefficiencyofthetrainingtoinducefunctionalchangesinthebrain.
More specifically, the cognitive training especially improved the global feature
processingofvisualarrayswhichmayexplaintheimprovementintargetdetection
withinagiventimewindowintheneartransfertaskofvisualconjunctionsearch.
These results cannot be explained by test repetition or by the mere social inter-
actionofthetrainingintervention,suggestingthatamultilayeredformalcognitive
training is sufficient to facilitate neuronal plasticity in older age.
Our study bears several shortcomings which may give directions for further
studies.Firstofall,thecognitivetrainingwasmultidimensionalandaimedmainly
atenhancingbasicandexecutivefunctionstestedbyanumberofourtasksinorder
to improve daily life activities. As the training was domain unspecific, it is not
possibletoshowdivergentresultsintwoormoretasksintheeffectsofthetraining
procedure.Further studieswhich aimtoevaluatebroadcognitivetrainings should
bearinmind(1)tousemorethanonetransfertaskwhichassessthesamecognitive
function in order to show convergent effects of the training and/or, (2) to use
transfer tasks assessing cognitive functions which were not intended to be
improved by the training in order to show divergent effects. An additional short-
coming of the present study is the fact that the virtual museum interface system
was outdated compared to the more intuitive solution provided recently by
Microsoft Kinect1 for full-body tracking [111]. The virtual reality museum group
received basic PC-practice which may have made them more experienced with
computertechnologythantheothergroups.However,althoughmoderninteraction
devicessuchastheMicrosoftKINECT3Dsensorfornaturalgestureinteractionis
1 MicrosoftKinect—www.kinectforwindows.org/www.xbox.com/kinect.
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 69
more senior-friendly [112], our study interaction with the PC was reduced to a
minimum and the manual responses were collected with special response buttons
andnotwithacomputerkeyboardoramouse.Therefore,wedothinkthatamore
advancedinteractionforthecognitivetraininggroupmayelicitevenmoretransfer
effects.Furthertrainingstudiesshouldtrytoexcludeanyconfoundingeffectofthe
training procedure on the evaluation of the training effects.
Older adults are the now fastest growing segment of Internet users [113].
Accordingtoa2010PewInternetandAmericanLifesurvey,78 %ofadultsaged
50–64 yearsand42 %ofadultsolderthan65 yearsofageusetheInternet.Thisis
a sharp increase from 2000 when only 50 % of adults 50–64 years and 15 % of
adultsolderthan65 yearsofageusedtheInternet[114].Asownershipofpersonal
computers continues to grow and older adults have access to the Internet [115],
cognitive training programs need to take fuller advantage of these outlets to
improve cognitive function and delay cognitive decline in later life.
References
1. Virvou, M., Katsionis, G.: On the usability and likeability of virtual reality games for
education:thecaseofVR-ENGAGE.Comput.Educ.50,154–178(2008)
2. Lewis, T.M., Aggarwal, R., Rajaretnam, N., Grantcharov, T.P., Darzi, A.: Training in
surgicaloncology:theroleofvirtualrealitysimulation.Surg.Oncol.20,134–139(2011)
3. Rizzo, A., Kim, G.J.: A SWOT analysis of the field of virtual reality rehabilitation and
therapy.Presence14(2),119–146(2005)
4. Rizzo, A., Schultheis, M., Kerns, K.A., Mateer, C.: Analysis of assets for virtual reality
applicationsinneuropsychology.Neuropsychol.Rehabil.14(1/2),207–239(2004)
5. Laczo,J.,Vlcek,K.,Vyhnalek,M.,Vajnerova,O.,Ort,M.,Holmerova,I.,Tolar,M.,Andel,
R.,Bojar,M.,Hort,J.:Spatialnavigationtestingdiscriminatestwotypesofamnesticmild
cognitiveimpairment.Behav.BrainRes.202,252–259(2009)
6. Petersen, R.C., Smith, G.E., Waring, S.C., Ivnik, R.J., Tangalos, E.G., Kokmen, E.: Mild
cognitiveimpairment:clinicalcharacterizationandoutcome.Arch.Neurol.56(3),303–308
(1999)
7. Gauthier,S.,Reisberg,B.,Zaudig,M.,Petersen,R.C.,Ritchie,K.,Broich,K.,Belleville,S.,
etal.:Mildcognitiveimpairment.Lancet367(9518),1262–1270(2006)
8. Petersen, R.C.: Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. J. Intern. Med. 256(3),
183–194(2004)
9. Winblad,B.,Palmer,K.,Kivipelto,M.,Jelic,V.,Fratiglioni,L.,Wahlund,L.-O.,Nordberg,
A.,etal.:Mildcognitiveimpairment–beyondcontroversies,towardsaconsensus:reportof
the International Working Group on Mild Cognitive Impairment. J. Intern. Med. 256(3),
240–246(2004)
10. Eschweiler,G.W.,Leyhe,T.,Klöppel,S.,Hüll,M.:Newdevelopmentsinthediagnosisof
dementia.Dtsch.ÄrzteblattInt.107(39),677–683(2010)
11. Hanfelt,J.J.,Wuu,J.,Sollinger,A.B.,Greenaway,M.C.,Lah,J.J.,Levey,A.I.,Goldstein,
F.C.: An exploration of subgroups of mild cognitive impairment based on cognitive,
neuropsychiatric and functional features: analysis of data from the National Alzheimer’s
CoordinatingCenter.Am.J.Geriatr.Psychiatry:OfficialJ.Am.Assoc.Geriatr.Psychiatry
19(11),940–950(2011)
70 I.Tarnanasetal.
12. Petersen,R.C.,Roberts,R.O.,Knopman,D.S.,Boeve,B.F.,Geda,Y.E.,Ivnik,R.J.,Smith,
G.E., etal.: Mild cognitiveimpairment: tenyears later.Arch. Neurol.66(12),1447–1455
(2009)
13. Gold, D.A.: An examination of instrumental activities of daily living assessment in older
adultsandmildcognitiveimpairment.J.Clin.Exp.Neuropsychol.37–41(2012)
14. Perneczky,R.,Pohl,C.,Sorg,C.,Hartmann,J.,Komossa,K.,Alexopoulos,P.,Wagenpfeil,
S.,etal.:Complexactivitiesofdailylivinginmildcognitiveimpairment:conceptualand
diagnosticissues.AgeAgeing35(3),240–245(2006)
15. Guerreiro,R.,Wojtas,A.,Bras,J.,Carrasquillo,M.,Rogaeva,E.,Majounie,E.,Cruchaga,
C., et al.: TREM2 Variants in Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. (2012)
(121114171407007)
16. Patel, B.B., Holland, N.W.: Mild cognitive impairment: hope for stability, plan for
progression.Clevel.Clin.J.Med.79(12),857–864(2012)
17. Albert,M.S.,DeKosky,S.T.,Dickson,D.,Dubois,B.,Feldman,H.H.,Fox,N.C.,Gamst,
A., et al.: The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease:
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association
workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dement.
J.Alzheimer’sAssoc.7(3),270–279(2011)
18. Wang, H.-M., Yang, C.-M., Kuo, W.-C., Huang, C.-C., Kuo, H.-C.: Use of a modified
spatial-contextmemorytesttodetectamnesticmildcognitiveimpairment.PLoSONE8(2),
e57030(2013)
19. Pai,M.C.,Jacobs,W.J.:Int.J.Geriatr.Psychiatry19,250–255(2004)
20. Cherrier,M.M.,Mendez,M.,Perryman,K.:NeuropsychiatryNeuropsychol.Behav.Neurol.
14,159–168(2001)
21. Kalova,E.,Vlcek,K.,Jarolimova,E.,Bures,J.:Behav.BrainRes.159,175–186(2005)
22. Kessels,R.P.,Feijen,J.,Postma,A.:Dement.Geriatr.Cogn.Disord.20,184–191(2005)
23. Mapstone, M., Steffenella, T.M., Duffy, C.J.: A visuospatial variant of mild cognitive
impairment:gettinglostbetweenagingandAD.Neurology60(5),802–808(2003)
24. Hort,J.,Laczó,M.,Vyhnálek,M.,Bojar,J.,Bureš,J.,Vlcˇek,K.:Spatialnavigationdeficit
inamnesticmildcognitiveimpairment.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.104(10),4042–4047(2007)
25. Rey,B.,Alcañiz,M.:ResearchinNeuroscienceandVirtualReality.InTech(2010)
26. Cornwell,B.R.,Johnson,L.L.,Holroyd,T.,Carver,F.W.,Grillon,C.:Humanhippocampal
andparahippocampalthetaduringgoal-directedspatialnavigationpredictsperformanceon
a virtual Morris water maze. J. Neurosci.: Official J. Soc. Neurosci. 28(23), 5983–5990
(2008)
27. Harvey, C.D., Collman, F., Dombeck, D.A., Tank, D.W.: Intracellular dynamics of
hippocampalplacecellsduringvirtualnavigation.Nature461(7266),941–946(2009)
28. Plancher, G., Tirard, A., Gyselinck, V., Nicolas, S., Piolino, P.: Using virtual reality to
characterize episodic memory profiles in amnestic mild cognitive impairment and
Alzheimer’s disease: influence of active and passive encoding. Neuropsychologia 50(5),
592–602(2012)
29. Slater,M.,Antley,A.,Davison,A.,Swapp,D.,Guger,C.,Barker,C.,Pistrang,N.,etal.:A
virtualrepriseoftheStanleyMilgramobedienceexperiments.PLoSONE1,e39(2006)
30. Waller,D.,Richardson,A.R.:Correctingdistanceestimatesbyinteractingwithimmersive
virtual environments: effects of task and available sensory information. J. Exp. Psychol.
Appl.14(1),61–72(2008).doi:10.1037/1076-898X.14.1.61
31. Klauer, K.C., Zhao, Z.: Double dissociations in visual and spatial short-term memory.
J.Exp.Psychol.Gen.133(3),355–381(2004)
32. Lithfous,S.,Dufour,A.,Després,O.:Spatialnavigationinnormalagingandtheprodromal
stage of Alzheimer’s disease: insights from imaging and behavioral studies. Ageing Res.
Rev.12(1),201–213(2012)
33. O’Keefe,J.,Dostrovsky,J.:BrainRes.34,171–175(1971)
34. Morris,R.G.,Garrud,P.,Rawlins,J.N.,O’Keefe,J.:Nature297,681–683(1982)
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 71
35. Astur,R.S.,Taylor,L.B.,Mamelak,A.N.,Philpott,L.,Sutherland,R.J.:Behav.BrainRes.
132,77–84(2002)
36. Feigenbaum,J.D.,Morris,R.G.:Neuropsychology18,462–472(2004)
37. Maguire, E.A., Burgess, N., Donnett, J.G., Frackowiak, R.S., Frith, C.D., O’Keefe, J.:
Science280,921–924(1998)
38. Abrahams, S., Pickering, A., Polkey, C.E., Morris, R.G.: Neuropsychologia 35, 11–24
(1997)
39. DeLillo,C.,James,F.C.:Spatialworkingmemoryforclusteredandlinearconfigurationsof
sitesinavirtualrealityforagingtask.Cogn.Process.13(Suppl1),S243–S246(2012)
40. Koenig,S.,Crucian,S.,Dalrymple-Alford,J.,Dünser,A.:Assessingnavigationinrealand
virtualenvironments:avalidationstudy.Int.J.Disabil.Hum.Dev.10(4),325–330(2010)
41. Caffo,A.,DeCaro,M.,Picucci,L.,Notarnicola,A.,Settanni,A.,Livrea,P.,Lancioni,G.,
Bosco,A.:Reorientationdeficitsareassociatedwithamnesticmildcognitiveimpairment.
Am.J.Alzheimer’sDis.Dement.27(5),SAGEAug1(2012)
42. Liarokapis, F., Anderson, E.: Using augmented reality as a medium to assist teaching in
higher education. To appear in Eurographics 2010, Education Program, Norrkfping,
Sweden,4–7May2010
43. Tsolaki, M., Kounti, F., Agogiatou, C., Poptsi, E., Bakoglidou, E., Zafeiropoulou, M.,
Soumbourou, A., et al.: Effectiveness of nonpharmacological approaches in patients with
mildcognitiveimpairment.Neuro-degenerativeDis.8(3),138–145(2011)
44. Tsatali, M.,Tarnanas, I., Malegiannaki, A., Tsolaki, M.:Does cognitivetraining with the
use of a virtual museum improve neuropsychological performance in aMCI? In: 22nd
AlzheimerEuropeConferenceinVienna,AssistiveTechnologiesP3,121–134(2012)
45. Ackerman,P.L.,Kanfer,R.,Calderwood,C.:Useitorloseit?WIIbrainexercisepractice
andreadingfordomainknowledge.Psychol.Aging25,753–766(2010)
46. Owen,A.M.,Hampshire,A.,Grahn,J.A.,Stenton,R.,Dajani,S.,Burns,A.S.,Howard,R.J.,
Ballard,C.G.:Puttingbraintrainingtothetest.Nature465,775–778(2010)
47. Peretz,C.,Korczyn,A.D.,Shatil,E.,Aharonson,V.,Birnboim,S.,Giladi,N.:Computer-
based, personalized cognitive training versus classical computer games: a randomized
double-blind prospective trial of cognitive stimulation. Neuroepidemiology 36, 91–99
(2011)
48. Hertzog, C., Kramer, A.F., Wilson, R.S., Lindenberger, U.: Enrichment effects on adult
cognitive development: can the functional capacity of older adults be preserved and
enhanced?Psychol.Sci.PublicInterest9,1–65(2009)
49. Denney, N.W.: A model of cognitive-development across the life-span. Dev. Rev. 4,
171–191(1984)
50. Baron, A., Mattila, W.R.: Response slowing of older adults: effects of time-limit
contingenciesonsingle-anddual-taskperformances.Psychol.Aging4,66–72(1989)
51. Buschkuehl,M.,Jaeggi,S.M.,Hutchison,S.,Perrig-Chiello,P.,Dapp,C.,Muller,M.,Breil,
F.,Hoppeler,H.,Perrig,W.J.:Impactofworkingmemorytrainingonmemoryperformance
inold–oldadults.Psychol.Aging23,743–753(2008)
52. Dahlin, E., Neely, A.S., Larsson, A., Backman, L., Nyberg, L.: Transfer of learning after
updatingtrainingmediatedbythestriatum.Science320,1510–1512(2008)
53. Sammer,G.,Reuter,I.,Hullmann,K.,Kaps,M.,Vaitl,D.:Trainingofexecutivefunctions
inParkinson’sdisease.J.Neurol.Sci.248,115–119(2006)
54. Bherer,L.,Kramer,A.F.,Peterson,M.S.,Colcombe,S.,Erickson,K.,Becic,E.:Transfer
effectsintask-setcostanddual-taskcostafterdual-tasktraininginolderandyoungeradults:
furtherevidenceforcognitiveplasticityinattentionalcontrolinlateadulthood.Exp.Aging
Res.34,188–219(2008)
55. Davidson, D.J., Zacks, R.T., Williams, C.C.: Stroop interference, practice, and aging.
Neuropsychol.Dev.Cogn.BAgingNeuropsychol.Cogn.10,85–98(2003)
56. Karbach,J.,Kray,J.:Howusefulisexecutivecontroltraining?Agedifferencesinnearand
fartransferoftask-switchingtraining.Dev.Sci.12,978–990(2009)
72 I.Tarnanasetal.
57. Ball,K.,Berch,D.B.,Helmers,K.F.,Jobe,J.B.,Leveck,M.D.,Marsiske,M.,Morris,J.N.,
Rebok, G.W., Smith, D.M., Tennstedt, S.L., Unverzagt, F.W., Willis, S.L.: Effects of
cognitivetraininginterventionswitholderadults:arandomizedcontrolledtrial.JAMA288,
2271–2281(2002)
58. Schmiedek,F.,Lovden,M.,Lindenberger,U.:Hundreddaysofcognitivetrainingenhance
broad cognitive abilities in adulthood: findings from the COGITO study. Front. Aging
Neurosci.2,27(2010)
59. Klingberg,T.:Trainingandplasticityofworkingmemory.TrendsCogn.Sci.14,317–324
(2010)
60. Achtman, R.L., Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.: Video games as a tool to train visual skills.
Restor.Neurol.Neurosci.26,435–446(2008)
61. Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.: Exercising your brain: a review of human brain plasticity and
training-inducedlearning.Psychol.Aging23,692–701(2008)
62. Gee, J.P.: What Video Games Have to Teach Us about Learning and Literacy. Palgrave
Macmillan,NewYork,NY(2007)
63. Shiffrin,R.M.,Schneider,W.:Controlledandautomatichumaninformationprocessing:II.
Perceptuallearning,automaticattendingandageneraltheory.Psychol.Rev.84,127–190
(1977)
64. Logan,G.D.:Automaticity,resources,andmemory:theoreticalcontroversiesandpractical
implications.Hum.Factors30,583–598(1988)
65. Feng, J.,Spence, I., Pratt,J.: Playing anaction video game reduces gender differences in
spatialcognition.Psychol.Sci.18,850–855(2007)
66. Basak,C.,Boot,W.R.,Voss,M.W.,Kramer,A.F.:Cantraininginareal-timestrategyvideo
gameattenuatecognitivedeclineinolderadults?Psychol.Aging23(4),756–777(2008)
67. Mahncke,H.W.,Connor,B.B.,Appelman,J.,Ahsanuddin,O.N.,Hardy,J.L.,Wood,R.A.,
Joyce,N.M.,Boniske,T.,Atkins,S.M.,Merzenich,M.M.:Memoryenhancementinhealthy
olderadultsusingabrainplasticity-basedtrainingprogram:arandomized,controlledstudy.
Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.103,12523–12528(2006)
68. Uchida, S.,Kawashima, R.: Reading and solving arithmetic problems improves cognitive
functions of normal aged people: a randomized controlled study. Age (Dordr.) 30, 21–29
(2008)
69. Smith, G.E., Housen, P., Yaffe, K., Ruff, R., Kennison, R.F., Mahncke, H.W., Zelinski,
E.M.:Acognitivetrainingprogrambasedonprinciplesofbrainplasticity:resultsfromthe
improvement in Memory with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT)
study.J.Am.Geriatr.Soc.57,594–603(2009)
70. Cicerone,K.D.,Dahlberg,C.,Kalmar,K.,Langenbahn,D.M.,Malec,J.F.,Bergquist,T.F.,
Felicetti,T.,Giacino,J.T.,Harley,P.J.,Harrington,D.E.,Herzog,J.,Kneipp,S.,Laatsch,
L., Morse, P.A.: Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: recommendations for clinical
practice.Arch.Phys.Med.Rehabil.81,1596–1615(2000)
71. Cicerone, K.D., Dahlberg, C., Malec, J.F., Langenbahn, D.M., Felicetti, T., Kneipp, S.,
Ellmo, W., Kalmar, K., Giacino, J.T., Harlez, P., Laatsch, L., Morse, P., Catanese, J.:
Evidence-basedcognitiverehabilitation:updatedreviewoftheliteraturefrom1998through
2002.Arch.Phys.Med.Rehabil.86,1596–1615(2005)
72. Tucker-Drob, E.M.: Neurocognitive functions and everyday functions change together in
oldage.Neuropsychology25,368–377(2011)
73. Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L.S., Coelho, C.: Behavioral and social interventions for
individuals with traumatic brain injury: a summary of the research with clinical
implications.Semin.SpeechLang.26(4),256–257(2005)
74. Sohlberg, M.M., Mateer, C.A. (eds.): Cognitive rehabilitation: an integrative
neuropsychologicalapproach.GuilfordPress,NewYork(2001)
75. Mozolic, J.L., Hayasaka, S., Laurienti, P.J.: A cognitive training intervention increases
restingcerebralbloodflowinhealthyolderadults.Front.Hum.Neurosci.4(2010)
76. Lustig, C., Shah, P., Seidler, R., Reuter-Lorenz, P.A.: Aging, training, and the brain: a
reviewandfuturedirections.Neuropsychol.Rev.19(4),504–522(2009)
4 AssessingVirtualRealityEnvironments 73
77. Petersen,R.C.,Parisi,J.E.,Dickson,D.W.,etal.:Neuropathologicfeaturesofamnesticmild
cognitiveimpairment.Arch.Neurol.63(5),665–672(2006)
78. Stroop,J.R.:Studiesofinterferenceinserialverbalreactions.J.Exp.Psychol.18,643–662
(1935)
79. Papaliagkas,V.,Kimiskidis,V.,Tsolaki,M.,Anogianakis,G.:Usefulnessofevent-related
potentialsintheassessmentofmildcognitiveimpairment.BMCNeurosci.9,107(2008)
80. Kimiskidis,V.,Papaliagkas,V.:Event-relatedpotentialsforthediagnosisofmildcognitive
impairmentandAlzheimer’sdisease.ExpertOpin.Med.Diagn.6(1),15–26(2012)
81. Pascual-Marqui, D.: Standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography
(sLORETA):technicaldetails.MethodsFind.Exp.Clin.Pharmacol.D24,5–12(2002)
82. Holmes, A.P., Blair, R.C., Watson, J.D.G., Ford, I.: Nonparametric analysis of statistic
images from functional mapping experiments. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 16(1), 7–22
(1996)
83. Li, S.C., Schmiedek, F., Huxhold, O., Röcke, C., Smith, J., Lindenberger, U.: Working
memory plasticity in old age: practice gain, transfer, and maintenance. Psychol. Aging
23(4),731–742(2008)
84. Dennis,W.,Scialfa,C.T.,Ho,G.:Agedifferencesinfeatureselectionintripleconjunction
search.J.Gerontol.B59(4),P191–P198(2004)
85. Ho, G., Scialfa, C.T.: Age, skill transfer, and conjunction search. J. Gerontol. B 57(3),
P277–P287(2002)
86. Cant, J.S., Goodale, M.A.: Attention to form or surface properties modulates different
regionsofhumanoccipitotemporalcortex.Cereb.Cortex17(3),713–731(2007)
87. Mechelh, A., Humphreys, G.W., Mayall, K., Olson, A., Price, C.J.: Differential effects of
wordlengthandvisualcontrastinthefusiformandlingualgyriduringreading.Proc.Royal
Soc.B267(1455),1909–1913(2000)
88. Epstein., R.A.: Parahippocampal and retrosplenial contributions to human spatial
navigation.TrendsCogn.Sci.12(10),88–396(2008)
89. Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J.: Effects of choice complexity on different
subcomponents of the late positive complex of the event-related potential.
Electroencephalogr.Clin.Neurophysiol.92(2),148–160(1994a)
90. Falkenstein,M.,Hohnsbein,J.,Hoormann,J.:Timepressureeffectsonlatecomponentsof
theevent-relatedpotential(ERP).J.Psychophysiol.8(1),22–30(1994b)
91. Tam, C.W., Lam, L.C., Chiu, H.F., Lui, V.W.: Characteristic profiles of instrumental
activities of daily living in Chinese older persons with mild cognitive impairment. Am.
J.AlzheimersDis.Dement.22,211–217(2007)
92. Pereira, F.S., Yassuda, M.S., Oliveira, A.M., Forlenza, O.V.: Executive dysfunction
correlateswithimpairedfunctionalstatusinolderadultswithvaryingdegreesofcognitive
impairment.Int.Psychogeriatr.20,1104–1115(2008)
93. Ahn,I.S.,etal.:Impairmentofinstrumentalactivitiesofdailylivinginpatientswithmild
cognitiveimpairment.PsychiatryInv.6,180–184(2009)
94. Burton, C.L., Strauss, E., Bunce, D., Hunter, M.A., Hultsch, D.F.: Functional abilities in
olderadultswithmildcognitiveimpairment.Gerontology55,570–581(2009)
95. Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., Woo, E., Greeley, D.R.: Characterizing multiple memory
deficits and their relation to everyday functioning in individuals with mild cognitive
impairment.Neuropsychology23,168–177(2009)
96. Aretouli, E., Brandt, J.: Everyday functioning in mild cognitive impairment and its
relationshipwithexecutivecognition.Int.J.Geriatr.Psychiatry25,224–233(2010)
97. Bangen,K.J.,etal.:Complexactivitiesofdailylivingvarybymildcognitiveimpairment
subtype.J.Int.Neuropsychol.Soc.16,630–639(2010)
98. Teng,E.,Becker,B.W.,Woo,E.,Cummings,J.L.,Lu,P.H.:Subtledeficitsininstrumental
activitiesofdailylivinginsubtypesofmildcognitiveimpairment.Dement.Geriatr.Cogn.
Disord.30,189–197(2010)
74 I.Tarnanasetal.
99. Teng,E.,Becker,B.W.,Woo,E.,Knopman,D.S.,Cummings,J.L.,Lu,P.H.:Utilityofthe
functionalactivitiesquestionnairefordistinguishingmildcognitiveimpairmentfromvery
mildAlzheimerdisease.AlzheimerDis.Assoc.Disord.24,348–353(2010)
100. Schmiedek,F.,Bauer,C.,Lovden,M.,Brose,A.,Lindenberger,U.:Cognitiveenrichment
inoldage:web-basedtrainingprograms.GeroPsych23(2),59–67(2010)
101. Nouchi,R.,Taki,Y.,Takeuchi,H.,Hashizume,H.,Akitsuki,Y.,Shigemune,Y.,Sekiguchi,
A., Kotozaki, Y., Tsukiura, T., Yomogida, Y., Kawashima, R.: Brain training game
improves executive functions and processing speed in the elderly. PLoS ONE 7, e29676
(2012)
102. Saczynski, J.S., Rebok, G.W., Whitfield, K.E., Plude, D.J.: Effectiveness of CD-ROM
memory training as a function of within-session autonomy. Int. J. Cogn. Technol. 9(1),
25–33(2004)
103. Lee,B.,Chen,Y.,Hewitt,L.:Agedifferencesinconstraintsencounteredbyseniorsintheir
useofcomputersandtheinternet.Comput.Hum.Behav.27(3),1231–1237(2011)
104. Torres, A.: Cognitive effects of video games on older people. ICDVRAT 19, 191–198
(2008)
105. Belchior,P.D.C.Cognitivetrainingwithvideogamestoimprovedrivingskillsanddriving
safetyamongolderadults[dissertation].ProQuestInformationandLearning(2008)
106. Colcombe, S., Kramer, A.F.: Fitness effects on the cognitive function of older adults: a
meta-analyticstudy.Psychol.Sci.14,125–130(2003)
107. Weiand, C.: Neuropsychologische Behandlungsmethoden im Vergleich—Eine
randomisierte klinische Studie [Comparing neuropsychological treatment methods—A
randomizedclinicaltrial].PhDdissertation,UniversityofKonstanz,Konstanz(2006)
108. Colzato,L.S.,VanMuijden,J.,Band,G.P.H.,Hommel,B.:Geneticmodulationoftraining
andtransferinolderadults:BDNFVal66Metpolymorphismisassociatedwithwideruseful
fieldofview.Front.Psychol.2,199(2011)
109. Geusgens,C.,Winkens,I.,vanHeugten,C.,Jolles,J.,vandenHeuvel,W.:Theoccurence
andmeasurementoftransferincognitiverehabilitation:acriticalreview.J.Rehabil.Med.
39(6),425–439(2007)
110. Slater,M.:Placeillusionandplausibilitycanleadtorealisticbehaviourinimmersivevirtual
environments.Philos.Trans.R.Soc.B:Biol.Sci.364,3549–3557(2009)
111. Lange,B.,Rizzo,A.,Chang,C.-Y.,Suma,E.,Bolas,M.:MarkerlessFullBodyTracking:
Depth-SensingTechnologywithinvirtualenvironments.PaperpresentedattheInterservice/
IndustryTraining,Simulation,andEducationConference(I/ITSEC),Orlando(2011)
112. Nebelrath,R.,Lu,C.,Schulz,C.H.,Frey,J.,Alexandersson,J.:Agesturebasedsystemfor
context-sensitive interaction with smart homes. In: Wichert, R., Eberhardt, B. (eds.), 4.
AALKongress,pp.209–222(2011)
113. Hart,T.A.,Chaparro,B.S.,Halcomb,C.G.:Evaluatingwebsitesforolderadults:adherence
to ‘senior-friendly’ guidelines and end-user performance. Behav. Info. Technol. 27(3),
191–199(2008)
114. Pew Internet and American Life Project: Changes in internet use by age, 2000–2010.
Accessed24Jul2011(2010)
115. Gamberini, L., Alcaniz, M., Barresi, G., Fabregat, M., Ibanez, F., et al.: Cognition,
technology and games for the elderly: an introduction to ELDERGAMES project.
PsychNologyJ4(3),285–308(2006)
