

The Influence of Paternal and Maternal Major Depressive 
Disorder on Offspring Psychiatric Disorders 
Rachel H. Jacobs, 
Department of Psychiatry and Institute of Juvenile Research, University of Illinois at Chicago 
Ardesheer Talati, 
Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University and Division 
of Epidemiology, New York State Psychiatric Institute 
Priya Wickramaratne, and 
Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University and Division 
of Epidemiology, New York State Psychiatric Institute 
Virginia Warner 
Division of Epidemiology, New York State Psychiatric Institute 1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 24, New 
York, NY 10032 


One of the largest known risk factors for the development of depression among youth is a 
family history (for a review see Beardslee, Gladstone, & O’Connor, 2011). At least 15 
million children live with a depressed parent (England & Sim, 2009) and the number of 
children exposed to parental depression is likely larger when considering the developmental 
span of childhood through adolescence. Adverse family environments are one of the most 
consistent identified risk factors for adolescent depression (Evans et al., 2005) and the 
importance of familial factors may contribute to depression among youth even more than the 
influence of peers (Sheeber, Hops, & Davis, 2001). 
High rates of depression among offspring of depressed mothers have been well documented 
(Goodman & Gotlib, 1999; Halligan, Murray, Martins, & Cooper, 2007; Hammen & 
Brennan, 2003) with some studies suggesting depression in offspring is more closely related 
to depression in mothers than to depression in fathers (Connell & Goodman, 2002). In 
contrast, ecological models of developmental psychopathology suggest that parental 
influence on the child is not limited to mothers (e.g., Cicchetti & Toth, 1997). Yet, few 
studies examine the influence of paternal depression on offspring outcomes (Kane & Garber, 
2004, 2009). A review published in 2005 found that only 25% of developmental 
psychopathology research examined data from mothers and fathers in predicting offspring 
outcomes (Phares, Fields, Kamboukos, & Lopez, 2005). 
Correspondence to: Virginia Warner, warnerv@nyspi.columbia.edu. 
Financial Disclosure: The authors have no financial disclosures to report. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
J Child Fam Stud. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01. 


The few studies that have examined the role of a father’s mental health on their offspring 
have documented small effect sizes. A recent meta-analysis documented an effect size of .24 
for paternal depression on offspring mental health (Kane & Garber, 2004). This effect is 
considered small according to guidelines (Cohen, 1988; .2 = small, .5 = medium, .8 = large), 
but was larger than a previously documented effect size of .14 (compared to .18 for maternal 
depression; Connell & Goodman, 2002). 
A recent study documented the influence of paternal depression on the mental health of 
offspring in a dataset of 22,000 children (Weitzman, Rosenthal, & Liu, 2011). Parental 
mental health problems and offspring emotional and behavioral problems were measured via 
parent self-report of their own mental health as well as their child’s. Paternal mental health 
problems were associated with a 33 – 70% increased risk of emotional or behavioral 
problems among offspring, whereas maternal mental health problems were associated with a 
50 – 350% increased risk when compared to offspring of parents without mental health 
problems. This recent and large study in particular suggests that the effect of paternal 
depression may be larger than expected, particularly when adequate samples can be 
captured. 
Exploration of the differential influence of paternal and maternal depression is warranted for 
theoretical reasons as well. For example, known mechanisms influencing the 
intergenerational transmission of depression such as genetic, environmental, and gene-by- 
environment pathways may differ based on whether the affected parent is the father or 
mother of the child. Parent-child interactions are one hypothesized mechanism in the 
intergenerational transmission of depression and mothers with a history of depression 
demonstrate high levels of criticism and emotional enmeshment with their offspring 
(Tompson et al., 2011). Fathers’ parenting abilities are also influenced by depression, but 
less research has explored these mechanisms. Father-child conflict has been found to 
mediate the contribution of paternal depression on offspring’s internalizing and 
externalizing symptoms (Kane & Garber, 2009). Depressed fathers’ expressions of positive 
affect and verbal interactions with offspring have been found to be negatively related to 
offspring internalizing symptoms (Jacob & Johnson, 1997). In this same study, paternal 
expressions of approval were inversely related to offspring depressive symptoms. Thus, 
what is clear is that both paternal and maternal depression influence one’s ability to 
effectively parent. However, the difference in roles of mothers and fathers may lead to a 
differential effect in the development of psychopathology among offspring. Differences in 
parent-child interactions between fathers and mothers offer just one theoretical rationale for 
including both parents when examining the intergenerational transmission of depression. 
These theoretical arguments for a differential role of fathers and mothers in offspring 
psychopathology provides a foundation for the current exploration. 
In addition, paternal depression and maternal depression may differentially influence the 
timing of psychopathology onset among offspring. Longitudinal twin data from 670 twin 
pairs ages 5–17 found that shared environmental effects more significantly influenced levels 
of depression among younger children (Scourfield et al., 2003), whereas heritability 
estimates rose during adolescence. Thus, the mechanisms of transmission may differ 



between fathers and mothers and these mechanisms may differentially influence the timing 
of disorder onset among offspring. 
We sought to contribute to the growing literature by examining the effect of paternal and 
maternal depression on offspring using a large sample of offspring carefully assessed with a 
clinical diagnostic interview conducted by a clinician blind to parental depression status 
within a longitudinal high risk study. Given the burden of the evidence, we hypothesized 
that maternal depression would more greatly influence offspring mental health (MDD, 
anxiety, and substance use disorders). We also examined level of offspring functioning as 
one way of measuring the influence of paternal and maternal depression. In addition, we 
conducted exploratory analyses of the effect of paternal and maternal depression on age of 
disorder onset. Our hypothesis was that maternal depression would influence young children 
more given the significance of the mother in the early rearing environment. 


The study design is a retrospective, longitudinal, and multigenerational cohort. Hypotheses 
were tested in a sample followed clinically over 25 years that included five waves of 
assessments between 1982 (Wave 1) and 2010 (Wave 5). The sample now includes three 
generations: (grandparents (G1), parents (G2), and grandchildren (G3)). The design includes 
families at high and low risk for depression based on the depression status of the original 
sample (G1). The focus of the current investigation was G2 who participated in Wave 1 and 
includes clinical follow-up data collected in Waves 2 through 5 to examine the influence of 
paternal and maternal MDD on lifetime diagnoses as offspring age. The focus was on G2, 
instead of G3, to include some representation of adult onset diagnoses. Two hundred and 
twenty biological offspring (ages 6 – 23, mean age = 17.0 at the time of the Wave 1 
assessment) from the G2 cohort participated. Fifty-two percent were female, all participants 
were white and families were on average working/middle class. 
The G1 sample derives from the Yale Family Study of Depression (Weissman, Leckman, 
Merikangas, Gammon, & Prusoff, 1984). Of the eligible families (n=105) with children 
between 6 and 23 years of age at the time of the Wave 1 assessment, 87.5 % agreed to 
participate and those who refused were divided equally between depressed and non- 
depressed families, suggesting recruitment was not biased toward one of the risk groups. 
One or more of the parents from the depressed families had received treatment for 
depression. The low risk, non-depressed families derived from a community study in New 
Haven, Connecticut (Weissman & Myers, 1978) and reported no history of treatment or 
psychiatric illness. The overall sample has been described in detail elsewhere (Weissman, 
Fendrich, Warner, & Wickramaratne, 1992; Weissman et al., 1987; Weissman, Warner, 
Wickramaratne, Moreau, & Olfson, 1997; Weissman et al., 2005). 

Mothers completed information about prenatal, birth, and postnatal events for each of their 
children. Children were not directly interviewed about their mental health until the age of 6. 




Diagnostic assessments of G2 offspring were reviewed by a psychiatrist or psychologist who 
was blind to G1 diagnosis and previous G2 diagnostic assessments using best estimate 
procedures (Leckman, Sholomskas, Thompson, Belanger, & Weissman, 1982; Weissman et 
al., 2005). Each case was reviewed independently by a second blind rater. In the case of a 
disagreement, a consensus diagnosis was made again, always blind to the initial diagnosis. 
For additional details on the sample, assessments, training, inter-rater reliability, and 
monitoring for quality control see previous publications (Leckman, Sholomskas, Thompson, 
Belanger, & Weissman, 1982; Weissman et al., 2005). 
The Kiddie-Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia Epidemiologic or Present 
and Lifetime version (KSADS-PL; Kaufman, Birmaher, Brent, Ryan & Rao, 2000) was used 
for subjects under the age of 18. The Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia 
Lifetime version (SADS-LA; Mannuzza, Fyer, Klein, & Endicott, 1986) was used for all 
subjects 18 years of age and older. The Global Assessment Scale (GAS; Endicott, Spitzer, 
Fleiss & Cohen, 1976) and the child version (C-GAS; Shaffer et al., 1983) were also 
completed. GAS and C-GAS ratings are based on a 0–100 point scale providing an overall 
estimate of a person’s current functional adjustment based on all available information. 
Lower scores indicate more overall impairment in functioning. 
G1 depression was defined according to Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC; Weissman, 
Fendrich, Warner, & Wickramaratne, 1992; Weissman, Gammon, John, Merikangas, 
Warner, & Prusoff, 1987; Weissman, Warner, Wickramaratne, Moreau, & Olfson, 1997; 
Weissman, Wickramaratne, Nomura, Warner, Verdeli, & Pilowsky, 2005) modified to 
require 4 weeks duration and impairment. Lifetime DSM-IV MDD was used as the main 
outcome for G2. G2 any anxiety disorder included all childhood and adult lifetime DSM-IV 
anxiety disorders, such as Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Social Phobia, Specific Phobia, 
Agoraphobia, and Panic Disorder. G2 substance use included lifetime DSM-IV Alcohol 
Abuse and Dependence, as well as Substance Abuse and Dependence. 

Group differences in demographic variables were tested using t-tests for continuous data and 
chi-square tests for categorical data. Relative risk of offspring diagnoses were calculated in 
SAS (version 9.0, SAS institute Inc., USA) controlling for offspring age and correlation 
within the family as well as the presence of disorder in the alternate parent. Cox proportional 
hazards models were used instead of logistic regression to adjust for differential length of 
follow-up (Cox, 1972). Correlated outcomes within family were adjusted using the approach 
of Lin & Wei (Lin & Wei, 1989). To specifically compare the effects of maternal MDD and 
paternal MDD on rates of offspring MDD, a separate model was run including both of these 
terms and their interaction. 
To assess variation in the effect of paternal and maternal depression on age of onset, three 
separate Cox proportional hazard models (Cox, 1972; Cox & Oakes, 1984) were fitted, 
wherein the incidence of risk for MDD, any anxiety, and substance use were calculated on 
the following age groups: < 13 years old, 13–18 years old, and greater than 18 years old. We 




chose this specific method as it takes into account differential length of follow-up. We used 
these categories to correspond with pre-adolescent onset, adolescent onset, and adult onset 
of disorder. Mixed models were used to examine global functioning outcomes in which 
family was treated as a random variable. The interaction of maternal and paternal MDD was 
included to measure the interactive effect of having two parents with MDD on offspring 
mental health outcomes. Last, to rule out the possibility that findings derived from 
confounders such as parental comorbidities including substance use, anxiety disorders, and 
parental living arrangement (i.e., presence in the home), we re-ran models including these 
terms. 
Thirty seven offspring had both a mother and father with a history of depression, whereas 
one hundred seventeen had a mother with depression and seventy three had a father with 
depression. Sixty seven offspring did not have a parent with depression. Demographics of 
the groups (Father MDD, Mother MDD, and both MDD) were similar. There were no 
demographic differences in offspring gender, age, or socio-economic status by parental 
MDD status. G2 offspring of mothers with MDD as compared to mothers without MDD 
were slightly younger at the Wave 1 assessment; in 9th as compared to 10th grade (t = 2.2, 
p=.03). No statistically significant demographic differences were detected by paternal MDD. 
One hundred and twenty seven offspring (58%) were living with both biological parents at 
Wave 1, an additional 45 (20%) lived with their biological mother, but not father, and six 
(<1%) lived with their biological father and stepmother. Forty two (19%) lived with neither 
biological parent due to living at college or moving away from home during early adulthood. 
There were no group differences in number of marriages or current marital status. At Wave 
1–22% (n = 18) of parents had divorced. Five mothers and three fathers remarried. 
Rates of MDD and anxiety were significantly higher among offspring of depressed fathers 
and mothers respectively, when compared to non-depressed fathers and mothers (Table 1). 
Both paternal (RR = 3.1, 95% CI = 1.6, 6.1, p < .01) and maternal (RR = 2.7, 95% CI = 1.5, 
5.0, p < .01) depression significantly increased the prevalence of MDD among offspring. 
The interaction in this model was also significant (RR = .33, 95% CI = .12, .89, p = .03). 
Maternal depression led to significantly lower overall functioning, whereas paternal 
depression did not. In contrast, offspring of two depressed parents had slightly higher 
functioning than offspring in the other groups. In terms of potential confounds, comorbid 
substance use and parental presence in the home did not significantly contribute to statistical 
models. The inclusion of comorbid maternal anxiety reduced the influence of maternal 
MDD on offspring anxiety resulting in a non-significant influence of maternal MDD on 
offspring global functioning. 
In terms of age of onset, paternal MDD (RR = 14.8, 95%, CI = 1.8, 21.8, p < .01), but not 
maternal MDD (RR = 4.1, 95% CI = .77, 21.9, p = .09) was associated with anxiety disorder 
onset occurring during adulthood (after age 18; β = 17.4, p < .01). In contrast, maternal 
MDD (RR = 2.8, 95% CI = 1.2, 56.4, p= .02), but not paternal MDD (RR = 1.2, 95%, CI = . 
55, 2.7, p> .05), was associated with MDD onset among offspring in childhood (prior to age 
13; β = −2.0, p = .03). 




Our findings indicate that when offspring outcomes are assessed via diagnostic interview 
depression in fathers is associated with increased rates of depression and anxiety when 
compared to non-depressed fathers. This parallels the increased rates of depression and 
anxiety observed among offspring of depressed mothers compared to non-depressed 
mothers. In other words, both fathers and mothers matter in the intergenerational 
transmission of depression. This was in contrast to our specific hypothesis that maternal 
depression would more greatly influence offspring, but in line with more recent studies that 
have included measures of paternal depression. 
Maternal depression resulted in lower levels of global functioning among offspring, which 
was in line with our hypothesis. Specifically, offspring of depressed mothers compared to 
non-depressed mothers were more likely to fall into a slightly lower functioning category. 
For example, global functioning in the 61–70 range indicates “some difficulty” in one 
domain of life (i.e., school, family, relationships with peers). This finding is consistent with 
the previous literature (e.g., Rohde, Lewinsohn, Klein, & Seeley, 2005) and may be related 
to the association of maternal MDD in depression onset earlier in life. 
In fact, maternal MDD resulted in offspring disorder onset prior to age 13 which may place 
children on a negative trajectory resulting in poorer levels of functioning as they age. 
Another possibility is that mothers have a larger, or more frequently observed and measured, 
role in their offspring’s early rearing. Indeed, much of the extant research has focused on the 
influence of maternal stress during pregnancy or in early childhood on offspring outcomes 
(Ho, Burggren, 2010; Oberlander et al., 2008). A promising future research direction 
involves the examination of whether fathers exacerbate the effects of maternal depression on 
offspring psychopathology through genetic or environmental mechanisms (Goodman & 
Gotlib, 1999). 
Surprisingly, there was an interaction of maternal and paternal depression on offspring 
functioning such that these offspring were functioning slightly higher than offspring of one 
depressed parent (in the 71–80 range reflecting “no more than slight” impairment). This may 
be due to low power to detect an interaction within this smaller group. It is also possible that 
families in which two parents had MDD may have been more likely to rely on their 
extended family, friends, and their communities to effectively raise their child. 
Comorbid maternal anxiety decreased the influence of maternal MDD on offspring MDD. 
Specifically, inclusion of comorbid anxiety rendered the relation between maternal 
depression and offspring global functioning non-significant. It is possible that comorbid 
anxiety partially dilutes the influence of maternal MDD on offspring functioning or that this 
comorbid phenotype influences offspring in domains other than global functioning as 
measured by an independent evaluator. Future research on the effects of maternal 
comorbidity on child developmental outcomes is certainly warranted. 
Last, paternal MDD resulted in anxiety onset among offspring after age 18. We are not 
aware of previous findings indicating that paternal depression influences the onset of anxiety 
disorders in offspring older than 18 and believe this is an important future direction for 



future research. It is critical to include fathers in research of these mechanisms to better 
understand these nuanced results. The relative dearth in studies examining the effect of 
paternal depression on offspring may stem from several factors. Possibilities include the 
lower prevalence of depression among males and their lower rates of treatment seeking 
behavior (Wang et al., 2005). 
As noted, the current study has limitations including the modest sample size. This limitation 
is contrasted with the strength of highly detailed and reliable diagnostic information. We 
framed our analyses of developmental phase during age of disorder onset as exploratory in 
light of the sample size. In addition, findings may not generalize to a more mildly ill 
population or other ethnic groups as we examined a White cohort deriving from moderate to 
severe depression in the G1 proband. Of note, a meta-analysis found a greater association of 
paternal depression with internalizing psychopathology in children in community samples, 
compared to clinical samples (Kane & Garber, 2004). These authors discuss possibilities for 
the smaller effects of paternal depression on offspring in clinical (as opposed to community) 
samples as possibly stemming from restriction of range or a threshold effect. Thus, the 
current results may be due, in part, to the clinical nature of the high risk group. Last, future 
research should more closely examine the exact timing of parental MDD onset and duration 
on child development outcomes. More detailed research examining the timing and duration 
of exposure to parental depression during early development is critically important to 
understanding the mechanisms of risk. 
In sum, our finding indicating that paternal depression influences offspring just as much as 
maternal depression is in line with meta-analytic results (Wilson & Durbin, 2010) and 
suggests that the influence of paternal depression warrants at least as much attention as that 
of maternal depression. This is particularly important for research on prevention and 
intervention. Familial interventions that include both parents may offer the best mechanism 
for the prevention of mental health disorders among offspring. Indeed, a randomized trial of 
two public health prevention interventions for parental depression demonstrated that both 
interventions produced sustained effects through 4–5 years post-intervention (Beardslee et 
al., 2007). Families randomized to the clinician-based intervention had significantly more 
gains in parent-child behaviors and attitudes and in child-reported understanding of their 
parent’s disorder. Continued research on how to engage fathers in treatment of their own 
depression and in prevention of transmission to their offspring is warranted and this may be 
best accomplished by focusing on the family as a whole. Moreover, in light of our finding 
that maternal depression resulted in depression onset among offspring during childhood we 
recommend prevention efforts be delivered no later than middle childhood. Evidence 
suggests that treatment of maternal depression ameliorates some of the burden of 
psychopathology experienced by offspring (Weissman et al., 2006; Weissman et al., in 
press). 

Funded by NIMH 5R01MH036197 (PI Weissman) and 5T32MH016434 (PI Peterson). These findings were 
presented previously in a poster at the 2012 American Psychopathological Association. The authors would like to 
thank Alyssa Barba for her assistance in preparing this manuscript. 





Children of Affectively Ill Parents: A Review. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 2011; 50:1098–1109. [PubMed: 22023998] 
Beardslee WR, Gladstone TRG, Forbes P. Long-term effects from a randomized trial of two public 
health preventive interventions for parental depression. Journal of Family Psychology. 2007; 
21:703–713. [PubMed: 18179342] 





children’s internalizing and externalizing behavior problems: a meta analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin. 2002; 128:746–770. [PubMed: 12206193] 


Cox, DR.; Oakes, D. Analysis of survival data. New York, New York: Chapman and Hall; 1984. 
Dietz DM, Laplant Q, Watts EL, Hodes GE, Russo SJ, Feng, et al. Paternal transmission of stress- 

Endicott J, Spitzer RL, Fleiss JL, Cohen J. The global assessment scale. A procedure for measuring 
overall severity of psychiatric disturbance. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1976; 33:766–771. 
[PubMed: 938196] 

identification, treatment, and prevention. Washington DC: The National Academies Press; 2009. 
Evans, DL.; Foa, EB.; Gur, RE.; Hendin, H.; O’Brien, CP.; Seligman, MEP.; Walsh, T. Treating and 
preventing adolescent mental health disorders: What we know and what we don’t know: A 
research agenda for improving the mental health of our youth. New York: Oxford University 
Press; 2005. 

developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychological Review. 
1999; 106:458–490. [PubMed: 10467895] 

adolescent offspring: A 13-year longitudinal study. Journal of Affective Disorders. 2007; 97:145– 
154. [PubMed: 16863660] 

adolescent offspring diagnoses in a community sample. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2003; 
60:253–258. [PubMed: 12622658] 




Kane P, Garber J. The relations among depression in fathers, children’s psychopathology, and father- 
child conflict: a meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review. 2004; 24:339–360. [PubMed: 
15245835] 
Kane P, Garber J. Parental Depression and Child Externalizing and Internalizing Symptoms: Unique 
Effects of Fathers’ Symptoms and Perceived Conflict as a Mediator. Journal of Child and Family 
Studies. 2009; 18:465–472. 







Mannuzza S. Schedule for affective disorders and Schizophrenia--Lifetime version modified for the 
study of anxiety disorders (SADS-LA): Rationale and conceptual development. Journal of 
Psychiatric Research. 1986; 20:317–325. [PubMed: 3806426] 

maternal depression, neonatal methylation of human glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) and 
infant cortisol stress responses. Epigenetics. 2008; 3:97–106. [PubMed: 18536531] 


Rohde P, Lewinsohn PM, Klein DN, Seeley JR. Association of Parental Depression with Psychiatric 
Course From Adolescence to Young Adulthood Among Formerly Depressed Individuals. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology. 2005; 11:409–420. [PubMed: 16117578] 
Scourfield J, Rice F, Thapar A, Harold GT, Martin N, McGuffin P. Depressive symptoms in children 
and adolescents: changing aetiological influences with development. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines. 2003; 44:968–976. 
Shaffer D, Gould MS, Brasic J, Ambrosini P, Fisher P, Bird H, et al. A children’s global assessment 
scale (CGAS). Archives of General Psychiatry. 1983; 40:1228–1231. [PubMed: 6639293] 
Tompson MC, Pierre CB, Boger KD, McKowen JW, Chan PT, Freed RD. Maternal Depression, 
maternal expressed emotion, and youth psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal and Child 
Psychology. 2010; 38:105–117. 
Wang PS, Lane M, Olfson M, Pincus HA, Wells KB, Kessler RC. Twelve month use of mental health 
services in the United States: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives 
of General Psychiatry. 2005; 62:629–640. [PubMed: 15939840] 



offspring at high and low risk for depression. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 1992; 31:640–648. [PubMed: 1644726] 

depressed parents. Increased psychopathology and early onset of major depression. Archives of 
General Psychiatry. 1987; 44:847–853. [PubMed: 3662741] 
Weissman MM, Leckman JF, Merikangas KR, Gammon GD, Prusoff BA. Depression and anxiety 
disorders in parents and children. Results from the Yale family study. Archives of General 
Psychiatry. 1984; 41:845–852. [PubMed: 6466043] 

diagnostic criteria in an epidemiological survey. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1978; 35:1304– 
1311. [PubMed: 708194] 

in maternal depression and child psychopathology: A STAR*D child report. Journal of the 
American Medical Association. 2006; 295:1389–1398. [PubMed: 16551710] 


Weissman MM, Wickramaratne P, Nomura Y, Warner V, Verdeli H, Pilowsky DJ, et al. Families at 
high and low risk for depression: a 3-generation study. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2005; 
62:29–36. [PubMed: 15630070] 

children of depressed mothers’ remission and relapse over 9 months. Psychological Medicine. (in 
press). 




Yehuda R. Are different biological mechanisms involved in the transmission of maternal versus 
paternal stress-induced vulnerability to offspring? Biological Psychiatry. 2011; 70:402–403. 
[PubMed: 21820529] 




