



Ben T. Reeb, Katherine J. Conger, and Ed Y. Wu 
University of California, Davis 

This study examined the longitudinal relationship between paternal depressive symptoms, paternal 
hostility, and adolescent functioning in a community sample of 451 families. Paternal depressive 
symptoms were a strong predictor of adolescent outcome, even after controlling for family 
demographic variables, maternal depressive symptoms, and previous adolescent symptoms. 
Adolescent gender and perception of paternal hostility moderated this association such that 
females reporting high paternal hostility were particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of 
paternal depressive symptoms. Maternal and paternal depressive symptoms had an additive, rather 
than interactive, effect on adolescent functioning. These results contribute to our knowledge of the 
interpersonal processes by which depression runs in families and highlight the importance of 
including fathers in developmental research on adolescent internalizing problems. 


A considerable amount of research has documented the adverse effects of parental 
depression (for review, see Goodman & Gotlib, 2002) and critical family interactions (e.g., 
Sheeber, Hops, & Davis, 2001) on the social and psychological development of adolescents. 
These literatures have been limited by several factors. First, fathers have been dramatically 
underrepresented in developmental research (for review, see Phares, 1992). Second, most 
studies of paternal depression and offspring development have failed to control for the 
effects of maternal depression (see Kane & Garber, 2004). Third, little is known about 
gender differences in adolescent vulnerability to depressive family environments (Hammen, 
1991). Finally, research on intergenerational psychopathology has predominately used 
clinical samples and cross-sectional design. Controlling for maternal depressive symptoms 
and previous adolescent symptoms, the present study used longitudinal data from a large 
community sample to examine adolescent gender and perceptions of father hostility as 
moderators of the association between paternal and adolescent functioning. 

Depression is a prevalent and serious problem during adolescence. By age nineteen, 35% of 
adolescent females and 19% of adolescent males will experience at least one episode of 
clinical depression (Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley, 1998), which has been associated with 
serious risks including substance abuse, suicide, and impaired academic achievement (Field, 
Diego, & Sanders, 2001). Despite these risks and the fact that the onset of adult depression 
Correspondence regarding this manuscript should be addressed to Ben T. Reeb, Human and Community Development, University of 
California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, 95616. btreeb@ucdavis.edu; fax: (530) 757-8463; phone: (530) 757-8450. 
NIH Public Access 
Author Manuscript 
Fathering. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 July 28. 


often occurs in adolescence (Rao, Hammen, & Daley, 1999), data on the psychosocial 
characteristics of depression during the teenage years are limited (see Essau & Petermann, 
1999). For example, the majority of research on adolescent depression has relied on clinical 
samples which are not representative of the general population of adolescents (Costello, 
1993). Although diagnostic criteria and categorical approaches can be informative about 
depression, power to detect effects may be compromised with dichotomous data. Research 
has typically supported continuous approaches, indicating that there is no clear, discrete cut- 
off point separating seriously depressed individuals from those experiencing subclinical 
depression with fewer than the required levels of symptoms for a clinical diagnosis (see 
Hankin, 2006). A substantial proportion of adolescents experience subdiagnostic depressive 
symptoms, which have a high recurrence rate and have been linked to a wide range of 
psychopathology including major depression, anxiety disorders, substance use, and suicidal 
behavior (Fergusson, Horwood, Ridder, & Beautrais, 2005; Lewinsohn, Solomon, Seeley, & 
Zeiss, 2000). 
The epidemiology of adolescent depression has consistently demonstrated that adolescent 
girls experience significantly more depression than boys in both severity and frequency 
(Hankin, Mermelstein, & Roesch, 2007); this gender difference persists across the lifespan 
(Eaton et al., 1997). Considering the vast amount of work which has identified gender 
differences in depression, surprisingly little research has examined the developmental 
mechanisms through which adolescent girls come to be at greater risk than boys (Peterson, 
Sargiani, & Kennedy, 1991). For example, few studies have examined whether risk for 
intergenerational psychopathology in offspring of depressed parents varies as a function of 
child gender (Goodman & Gotlib, 2002). Within this limited research, findings have been 
equivocal. Davies & Windle (1997) found that boys were more susceptible than girls to 
affectively ill family environments through middle childhood, with this pattern tending to 
reverse during adolescence. In another study, the likelihood of adolescent girls being 
currently depressed was unrelated to paternal depression, whereas adolescent boys were 
more likely to be currently depressed if their father had a history of depression (Eberhart, 
Shih, Hammen, & Brennan, 2006). Other work has failed to find gender differences in 
offspring risk for intergenerational depression (e.g., Currier, Mann, Oquendo, Galfalvy, & 
Mann, 2006). 

Research on child and adolescent psychopathology has historically focused on attributes of 
the mother, limiting the understanding of fathers’ role in offspring development. However, a 
growing body of work has associated paternal depression with adolescent risk for 
psychological problems (for recent meta-analyses, see Connell & Goodman, 2002; Kane & 
Garber, 2004). It appears that the degree of offspring risk associated with paternal 
psychopathology is comparable to that associated with maternal psychopathology (Jacob & 
Johnson, 1997; Phares, 1992). One limitation in this area of research is the dearth of studies 
examining paternal depression and adolescent outcome after controlling for maternal 
depression (Kane & Garber, 2004). Some data suggest that paternal mental health may 
moderate the effects of maternal depression on child adjustment (for review, see Goodman 
& Gotlib, 1999), although little is known about whether the reverse is true; that is, whether 
the effects of paternal depression on offspring outcome vary as a function of maternal 
depression. 
The impact of parenting on adolescent adjustment is influenced by how adolescents perceive 
their parents (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Powers, Welsh, & Wright, 1994). Adolescent report of 
fathers’ behavior, for example, is strongly related to adolescent depression (Forehand & 
Nousiainen, 1993; Plunkett, Henry, Robinson, Behnke, & Falcon, 2007; Sheeber, Davis, 



Leve, Hops, & Tildesley, 2007). Some cross-sectional evidence indicates that father- 
adolescent relations may moderate the impact of paternal psychopathology on adolescent 
adjustment (e.g., Bosco, Renk, Dinger, Epstein, & Phares, 2003). In one longitudinal study, 
adolescent perceptions of low closeness in the father-adolescent relationship elevated 
adolescent risk in relation to fathers’ depressive symptoms (Reeb & Conger, 2009), although 
specific mechanisms underlying this process (e.g., fathers’ expression of negative affect and 
behaviors toward offspring) were not examined. 
One process by which parental hostility may influence intergenerational risk for depression 
is that depressed mood increases parents’ irritability, resulting in more hostility towards their 
children and, in consequence, increased child adjustment problems. Parental depression has 
been shown to increase the risk of parental hostility towards children (Conger et al., 1992), 
and adolescents who experience less supportive and more conflictual relationships with their 
fathers are at increased risk for clinical and sub-clinical depression (e.g., Sheeber et al., 
2007; Smetana, 1996). This process may be especially true for fathers. Low and Stocker 
(2005) found that although both mother-child and father-child hostility were linked to 
offspring maladjustment, only the fathers’ depressed mood was linked to children’s 
internalizing problems indirectly through father-child hostility. Similarly, Parke and 
colleagues (2004) found parent depression to be associated with hostile parenting for 
mothers and fathers, but only paternal hostility was associated with higher levels of child 
internalizing symptoms. 

The purpose of the present study is to evaluate the prospective effects of paternal depressive 
symptoms, paternal hostility, and adolescent gender on adolescent functioning while 
controlling for other factors commonly associated with adolescent depression including 
family demographic variables, prior adolescent depressive symptoms, and maternal 
depressive symptoms. The first objective was to examine whether the impact of paternal 
depressive symptoms on adolescent functioning is moderated by adolescent gender, 
adolescent perception of father hostility, and/or maternal depressive symptoms. We 
expected increased risk in females, adolescents reporting high paternal hostility, and 
adolescents with mothers experiencing high levels of depressive symptoms (H1). The second 
goal was to examine the three-way interaction of gender by paternal depressive symptoms 
by paternal hostility. We hypothesized that adolescent girls would be more depressed than 
boys at higher levels of paternal depressive symptoms when paternal hostility was high (H2). 


The sample includes 451 adolescents (236 female, 215 male) from two-parent intact families 
in rural Iowa. The study began in 1989 when the 7th grade adolescents averaged 13.2 years 
of age. Participants were from predominately middle- and lower-middle-class families who 
resided on farms (34%), in non-farm rural areas (12%), or in small towns (54%). Due to the 
ethnic composition of the area, all families were European-American. Of the original 451 
families, approximately 95% of the sample remained in the study at Year 2. No significant 
differences in parents’ age, family income, or mothers’ level of education were found 
between participants remaining in the study compared to those who dropped out. Fathers not 
in the analyses averaged 12.74 years of education compared to 13.57 for those who 
remained in the study, a statistically significant difference (p < .05). 





Depressed mood—Parent and adolescent depressive symptoms were assessed using the 
self-reported 13-item SCL-90-R Depression Subscale (Derogatis, 1983). The SCL-90-R has 
demonstrated reliability and validity as a measure of psychological distress and has been 
used successfully in many studies of adults and adolescents (e.g., Essau, 2004). In our 
sample, internal consistencies for SCL-90-R depression were satisfactory at Year 1 (fathers α 
= .81; mothers α = .87; adolescents α = .79) and Year 2 (adolescents α = .89). Raw score 
means for fathers (M = .45, SD = .42) and mothers (M = .60, SD = .50) were somewhat 
higher than the mean for the normative non-patient sample (M = .36, SD = .44) reported by 
Derogatis (1983). Adolescent depressive symptoms at Year 1 for boys (M = .57, SD = .54) 
were not statistically different from those of girls (M = .67, SD = .63). At Year 2, girls’ 
symptoms (M = .56, SD = .48) were significantly higher than those of boys (M = .42, SD = . 
45); t (1) = 3.05 (p < .001). At Years 1 and 2, both genders reported fewer symptoms than 
the reported mean for the adolescent normative sample (M = .80, SD = .69). 
Paternal hostility—Adolescent perceptions of father hostility were assessed using the 
Father Hostility subscale of Conger’s (1989) Behavioral Affect Rating Scale (BARS), which 
consists of twelve items on the problematic aspects of within-family social interaction. On a 
7- point scale, responses range from 1 (never) to 7 (always) on items such as “how often 
does he ignore you when you tried to talk to him”, “how often does he try to make you feel 
guilty”, and “how often does he criticize you or your ideas”. Because our goal was to assess 
paternal hostility and not physical abuse, one item was excluded (How often does your dad 
hit, push, grab or shove you). The 11 items were averaged and scored so a high score 
represented high hostility (α = 0.86). 
Multiple regression analyses were performed to address the study objectives. In all analyses, 
maternal depressive symptoms and prior adolescent symptoms were entered first to establish 
temporal precedence and remove spurious sources of association between paternal and 
adolescent functioning. All continuous independent variables were centered. Statistical 
controls, including per capita family income, parental age, and parental education, did not 
produce significant effects in any equation and, for the sake of brevity, are excluded from 
the analyses reported here. 
Consistent with the finding that depression during early adolescence can place individuals at 
risk for increased subsequent depressive symptoms (Nolen-Hoeksema, Girgus, & Seligman, 
1992), prior depressive symptomatology was a strong predictor of subsequent functioning (β 
= .457; p < .001; see Model 1, Table 1). Maternal symptoms were also significantly 
associated with subsequent adolescent symptoms (β = .114; p < .01), which was consistent 
with a large body of research documenting psychological problems in offspring of depressed 
mothers (for review, see Goodman & Gotlib, 2002). Finally, Year 2 adolescent depressive 
symptoms were predicted by gender (b =−.099; p < .05), indicating significantly more 
symptoms in girls. This finding was consistent with the existing literature on gender 
differences in adolescent internalizing problems (e.g., Allgood-Merten, Lewinsohn, & Hops, 
1990). 
In Model 2, paternal characteristics and interaction effects were entered, accounting for a 
significant proportion of the remaining variance (ΔR2= .030, p < .05). Our first hypothesis 
(H1) was partially supported. As predicted, female offspring experienced more depressive 
symptoms than did boys as a function of paternal symptoms (b=−.249; p < .05). Also 
consistent with H1, the effect of paternal symptoms on adolescent symptoms changed 
dramatically with degree of hostility (β = .159; p < .01); paternal depressive symptoms 



posed significantly more risk when adolescents perceived higher hostility. Contrary to our 
prediction, maternal depressive symptoms did not moderate the association between paternal 
and adolescent functioning (β =−.051). The correlation between maternal and paternal 
symptoms did not reach statistical significance (r = .073). Our findings suggest that maternal 
and paternal depressive symptoms may have an additive, rather than interactive, effect on 
adolescent functioning. 
Controlling for all main effects and two-way interactions, the three-way interaction between 
paternal depressive symptoms, father hostility, and adolescent gender was statistically 
significant (b = −.278; p < .05). As suggested in Holmbeck (2002), post-hoc probing of this 
moderational effect was conducted in which simple regression equations were generated, 
one at each of the four combinations of gender and hostility at one standard deviation above 
and below the mean (see Figure 1). Significance tests for each simple slope indicated that 
only the slope for girls experiencing high paternal hostility was significantly different from 
zero (b= .391; p < .001). Adolescent girls’ depressive symptoms tended to be highest when 
levels of paternal depressive symptoms and father hostility were high (H2). The independent 
variables in the full model collectively explained 30% of the variation in Year 2 adolescent 
depressive symptoms. 

This study adds to the literature by demonstrating a prospective association between paternal 
depressive symptoms, adolescent perception of paternal hostility, and adolescent functioning 
in a large community sample. Consistent with Phares (1997), our analyses indicate a 
complex connection between paternal depression, father-child relations, and adolescent 
adjustment. Paternal depressive symptoms were a strong predictor of adolescent outcome, 
even after controlling for family demographic variables, maternal depressive symptoms, and 
previous adolescent symptoms. Adolescent gender and perception of paternal hostility 
moderated intergenerational risk for depression such that females reporting high paternal 
hostility were particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of paternal depressive symptoms. 

Relatively few studies have examined whether risk for psychopathology in offspring of 
depressed parents varies as a function of child gender (Goodman & Gotlib, 1999). Of the 
studies which have included offspring gender, most examined only maternal characteristics. 
There is modest support that adolescent daughters of depressed mothers are at particular risk 
for depression (e.g., Fergusson, Horwood, & Lynskey, 1995). Cross-sectional research 
examining offspring of depressed fathers indicate comparable risk for sons and daughters 
(Currier et al., 2006; Lieb, Isensee, Hofler, Phister, & Wittchen, 2002). Longitudinal 
findings from the present study, however, suggest that adolescent gender may play an 
important role in determining whether paternal depressive symptoms are related to 
adolescent functioning. Consistent with the proposal that girls’ differential vulnerability may 
derive from socialization experiences that emphasize relationship-focused orientation (Hops, 
1996), our data indicate that experiences within the father-adolescent relationship may 
moderate daughters’ risk related to paternal depression. Future investigations should explore 
the association between paternal characteristics and other psychosocial variables which may 
contribute to increased risk for depression in girls including rumination (Nolen-Hoeksema, 
2000), and the development of gender-related role expectations during early adolescence 
(Hill & Lynch, 1983). 
Paternal psychopathology is likely to influence offspring by altering patterns of parent- 
adolescent interactions (see Cummings & Davies, 1994). Between age 11 and age 14, 
adolescents’ positive perceptions of parent-child interactions often decline (McGue, Elkins, 



Walden, & Iacono, 2005), and some cross-sectional findings suggest that these perceptions 
may moderate the effects of paternal psychopathology on adolescent outcome (Bosco et al., 
2003). Our data were consistent with these findings, indicating that adolescent girls’ 
vulnerability to paternal depression was heightened when paternal hostility was high, or at 
least when they perceived it to be. Women tend to be more interpersonally oriented than 
men (Feingold, 1994), which may, in part, explain the significant gender-specific interaction 
between paternal depressive symptoms and hostility. The greater tendency of girls to 
emphasize or value relationships may translate into risk for depressed mood in the context of 
paternal depression and hostility. Results from the current analyses were also consistent with 
evidence that perceptions of negative relationships with the opposite-gender parent may be 
more strongly associated with adolescent maladjustment (Osborne & Fincham, 1996). 
Integrating intrafamily stress exposure and perceptions of family conflict with gender- 
specific risk for adolescent depression will be an important area for future research. 

Despite its strengths, there were several limitations to this study that should be considered in 
future research. First, extending this type of research to more diverse samples, including 
single-parent as well as urban and minority families, will increase generalizability of 
findings. Second, these variables were examined with self-report data; future work should 
replicate these findings with multiple-informant and observational measures, as sources of 
data may affect relationships between theoretical constructs (Compas, 1987). Finally, a 
substantial proportion of the variance in the outcome measure remains unexplained by these 
independent variables. Future research should explore additional genetic, biological, and 
contextual variables that may precipitate or protect against the development of depression 
during adolescence. In spite of these limitations, this study adds to our understanding of 
intergenerational depression and has important applied implications including a number of 
potential targets for behavior change that may promote resilience in adolescent offspring of 
depressed fathers. For example, therapeutic interventions aimed at reducing family conflict, 
particularly between fathers and daughters, may be especially helpful in preventing or 
alleviating adolescent depression. 
Earlier studies of family interactions and intergenerational psychopathology have typically 
overlooked characteristics of the father (Phares, 1992) and have assessed concurrent 
relations between paternal and child functioning, thus limiting inferences about temporal 
order and direction of effect (see review by Kane & Garber, 2004). Results from this study 
highlight the importance of including fathers in developmental research and contribute to 
our understanding of the psychosocial mechanisms by which risk for depression is 
transmitted across generations. We hope these results will lead to future research on fathers’ 
role in the development of adolescent psychopathology, and on how risk may be influenced 
by intrafamily relationships and adolescent gender. Family-based preventative and treatment 
interventions for adolescent depression will benefit from a more thorough understanding of 
the direct and indirect paths through which paternal depression influences adolescent 
development. It may be particularly important to help depressed fathers recognize their 
psychological problems and pay special attention to family conflict as a mechanism by 
which adolescent offspring inherit risk for depression. 

This research is currently supported by grants from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, and the National Institute of Mental Health (HD047573, HD051746, and 
MH051361). Support for earlier years of the study also came from multiple sources, including the National Institute 
of Mental Health (MH00567, MH19734, MH43270, MH59355, MH62989, and MH48165), the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse (DA05347), the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (HD027724), the 



Bureau of Maternal and Child Health (MCJ-109572), and the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on 
Successful Adolescent Development Among Youth in High-Risk Settings. 




perceptions of parents, parental psychological symptoms, and adolescent functioning. Applied 
Developmental Psychology 2003;24:179–200. 






Conger RD, Conger KJ, Elder GH, Lorenz FO, Simons RL, Whitbeck LB. A family process model of 
economic hardship and adjustment of early adolescent boys. Child Development 1992;63:526–541. 
[PubMed: 1600820] 

children’s internalizing and externalizing behavior problems: A metaanalysis. Psychological 
Bulletin 2002;128:746–773. [PubMed: 12206193] 






Davies PT, Windle M. Gender-specific pathways between maternal depressive symptoms, family 
discord, and adolescent adjustment. Developmental Psychology 1997;33:657–668. [PubMed: 
9232381] 



of diagnostic interview schedule/DSM-IV major depression: The Baltimore epidemiologic 
catchment area follow-up. Archives of General Psychiatry 1997;54:993–999. [PubMed: 9366655] 
Eberhart NK, Shih JH, Hammen CL, Brennan PA. Understanding the sex difference in vulnerability to 
adolescent depression: An examination of child and parent characteristics. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology 2006;34:493–506. 






Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Lynskey MT. Maternal depressive symptoms and depressive symptoms 
in adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1995;36:1161–1178. [PubMed: 
8847378] 
Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Ridder EM, Beautrais AL. Subthreshold depression in adolescence and 
mental health outcomes in adulthood. Archives of General Psychiatry 2005;62:66–72. [PubMed: 
15630074] 








developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychological Review 
1999;106:458–490. [PubMed: 10467895] 








Hill, JP.; Lynch, ME. The intensification of gender-related role expectations during early adolescence. 
In: Brooks-Gunn, J.; Petersen, A., editors. Girls at puberty. New York: Plenium Press; 1983. p. 
201-228. 
Holmbeck GM. Post-hoc probing of significant moderational and mediational effects in studies of 
pediatric populations. Journal of Pediatric Psychology 2002;27:87–96. [PubMed: 11726683] 

considerations. In: Mundt, C.; Goldstein, M.; Hahlweg, K.; Fiedler, P., editors. Interpersonal 
Factors in the Origin and Course of Affective Disorders. London: Royal College of Psychiatrists; 
1996. p. 113-129. 



child conflict: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review 2004;24:339–360. [PubMed: 
15245835] 



Symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 2000;109:345–351. [PubMed: 10895574] 
Lieb R, Isensee B, Hofler M, Pfister H, Wittchen HU. Parental major depression and the risk of 
depression and other mental disorders in offspring: A prospective-longitudinal community study. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;59:365–374. [PubMed: 11926937] 

depressed mood, marital hostility, parent-child-hostility, and children’s adjustment. Journal of 
Family Psychology 2005;19:394–403. [PubMed: 16221020] 


Nolen-Hoeksema S. The role of rumination in depressive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive 
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 2000;109:504–511. [PubMed: 11016119] 
Nolen-Hoeksema S, Girgus JS, Seligman MEP. Predictors and consequences of childhood depressive 
symptoms: A 5-year longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 1992;101:405–422. 
[PubMed: 1500598] 



Stress, Parenting, and Child Adjustment in Mexican American and European American Families. 
Child Development 2004;75:1632–1656. [PubMed: 15566370] 







Phares, V. Psychological adjustment, maladjustment, and father-child relationships. In: Lamb, M., 
editor. The role of the father in child development. New York, NY: Wiley; 1997. p. 261-283. 
Plunkett SW, Henry CS, Robinson LC, Behnke A, Falcon PC. Adolescent perceptions of parental 
behaviors, adolescent self-esteem, and adolescent depressed mood. Journal of Child and Family 
Studies 2007;16:760–772. 


Rao UMA, Hammen C, Daley SE. Continuity of depression during the transition to adulthood: A 5- 
year longitudinal study of young women. Journal of the Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 1999;38:908–915. 

Associations with gender and father-adolescent relationship closeness. Journal of Family 
Psychology 2009;23:758–761. [PubMed: 19803611] 
Sheeber LB, Davis B, Leve C, Hops H, Tildesley E. Adolescents’ relationships with their mothers and 
fathers: Associations with depressive disorder and subdiagnostic symptomatology. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology 2007;116:144–154. [PubMed: 17324025] 


Smetana, JG. Adolescent-parent conflict: Implications for adaptive and maladaptive development. In: 
Cicchetti, D.; Toth, SL., editors. Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology in 
Adolescence: Opportunities and challenges. Vol. vol. 7. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester 
Press; 1996. p. 1-46. 



Figure 1. 
Adolescent Depressive Symptoms as a Function of Paternal Depressive Symptoms, Paternal 
Hostility, and Adolescent Gender. 
Note. SD = standard deviation, b = unstandardized regression coefficient. 
* p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001 



Standardized Regression Coefficients Predicting Adolescent Depressive Symptoms from Paternal Depressive 
Symptoms, Paternal Hostility, and Interaction Effects, Controlling for Prior Adolescent Depressive 
Symptoms, Maternal Depressive Symptoms, and Gender (n=420) 



























































Note. Unstandardized coefficients are in brackets and standard errors are in parentheses, models controlled for family income and parents' age and 
education. 










