




Janet R. Cummings, Ph.D. and Benjamin G. Druss, M.D., M.P.H. 
Dr. Cummings and Druss are with the Rollins School of Public Health 

Objective—Little is known about racial/ethnic differences in the receipt of treatment for major 
depression among adolescents. This study examines differences in mental health service use 
among non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic, and Asian adolescents who experienced an episode of 
major depression. 
Method—Five years of data (2004–2008) were pooled from the National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health to derive a nationally representative sample of 7,704 adolescents (age 12–17) 
diagnosed with major depression in the past year. Racial/ethnic differences were estimated with 
weighted probit regressions across several measures of mental health service use controlling for 
demographics and health status. Additional models assessed whether family income and health 
insurance status accounted for these differences. 
Results—The adjusted percentages of blacks (32%), Hispanics (31%), and Asians (19%) who 
received any treatment for major depression were significantly lower than among non-Hispanic 
whites (40%; p<0.001). Black, Hispanic, and Asian adolescents were also significantly less likely 
than non-Hispanic whites to receive prescription medication for major depression, to receive 
treatment for major depression from a mental health specialist or medical provider, and to receive 
any mental health treatment in an outpatient setting (p<0.01). These differences persisted after 
adjusting for family income and insurance status. 
Conclusion—Results indicated low rates of mental health treatment for major depression among 
all adolescents. Improving access to mental health care for adolescents will also require attention 
to racial/ethnic subgroups at highest risk for nonreceipt of services. 



The onset of major depression is common during adolescence1 and associated with 
substantial short and long-term health, developmental, and social consequences.2, 3 

Correspondence to: Janet R. Cummings, Assistant Professor, Department of Health Policy and Management, Emory University, 
1518 Clifton Road NE, Room 610, Atlanta, GA 30322, jrcummi@emory.edu (p) 404-727-9198, (f) 404-727-9198. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 

NIH Public Access 
Author Manuscript 
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 February 1. 
 


Although highly effective treatments are available,4 major depression commonly goes 
untreated.5 It is therefore a central clinical and public health priority to identify the groups 
most at risk for nonreceipt of care. 
In adults, one of the most important predictors of failure to receive care for depression is 
race/ethnicity – with members of racial/ethnic minority groups being 30% (African 
Americans) to 50% (Asians) less likely to receive any mental health treatment compared to 
non-Latino whites.6 However, less is known about racial/ethnic differences in the receipt of 
treatment for depression among adolescents. Although the existing literature has indicated 
that racial/ethnic minorities may be less likely to receive services than non-Hispanic whites, 
7–10 these studies have been limited by sample size constraints for assessing differences in 
service use across multiple racial/ethnic groups, lack of population-based survey measures 
to identify those with clinical depression, and/or little information about the treatment that 
was received for depression. Thus, further research is needed with samples that are 
nationally representative and with sufficient power to detect differences in service use across 
multiple racial/ethnic groups identified with clinical depression. 
This study examines differences in mental health treatment across four racial/ethnic groups 
of adolescents with major depression (i.e. non-Hispanic whites, blacks, Hispanics, and 
Asians) using a large, nationally representative sample. In addition to having sufficient 
statistical power to make comparisons across these four groups, this study adds to existing 
literature by characterizing racial/ethnic differences in service use with multiple outcome 
measures including the receipt of any treatment for major depression, the use of prescription 
medication for major depression, the receipt of treatment for major depression across 
provider types, and the use of mental health services across inpatient, outpatient, and school 
settings. 


Five years of data (2004–2008) are pooled from the National Survey of Drug Use and 
Health (NSDUH), an annual, nationally-representative, cross-sectional survey that is 
sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. NSDUH 
samples non-institutionalized individuals ages 12 and older in the U.S. civilian population 
from all 50 states and the District of Columbia in multiple stages. The survey was 
administered in English and Spanish. Our study uses data from the adolescent component 
(ages 12–17), which includes a series of questions to assess major depressive episodes 
(MDE) experienced in the previous year, information about mental health services 
utilization, health insurance status, and socio-demographic characteristics. Given the lack of 
private identifiers in this publically available dataset, the Emory IRB determined that the 
study did not meet the criteria for "Human Subjects Research" and that review was not 
necessary. 

Our analytic sample is derived from the sub-sample of adolescents who experienced an 
episode of MDE in the previous year. Past year MDE was assessed with an adolescent 
depression module administered using computer-assisted interviewing (CAI) 
instrumentation. This module was adapted from the depression section of the National 
Comorbidity Survey-Adolescent,11 which is based on a modified version of the World 
Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview-Short Form (CIDI-SF). 
12 For MDE, research has reported good psychometric concordance between the CIDI-SF 
and the full CIDI.12 Furthermore, research has indicated a high concordance between the 




full CIDI and independent clinical diagnoses in the adolescent population13 as well as in a 
U.S. sample of English- and Spanish-speaking Latinos.14 
Of the 90,855 adolescents who participated in the NSDUH between 2004 and 2008, 7,704 
(8.5%) experienced MDE in the past year. When examining the prevalence of MDE 
(unweighted) by race/ethnicity, 8.7% of non-Hispanic whites experienced MDE in the past 
year, compared to 8.4% of Hispanics, 7.4% of Asians, and 7.3% of blacks. 
Treatment for Major Depression—After answering questions about MDE symptoms, 
adolescents were asked if in the past 12 months they talked to a medical doctor or other 
professional about these problems or if they received prescription medication for these 
problems. Two dichotomous measures assessed whether the adolescent received the 
following in the past year: (1) any MDE treatment from a mental health professional and/or 
medical professional and (2) any prescription medication for MDE. Two additional 
indicators assessed whether the adolescent received MDE treatment from: (1) a mental 
health professional (i.e. psychologist, psychiatrist, social worker, counselor, and/or other 
mental health professional), and a (2) a medical professional (i.e. general practitioner, family 
doctor, other medical doctor, nurse, occupational therapist, and/or other health professional). 
Receipt of Mental Health Treatment Across Settings—NSDUH also provides 
information about past year mental health care use across settings irrespective of the specific 
mental health problem for which the adolescent sought treatment. Three indicators assess 
whether the adolescent: (1) had an inpatient stay for a mental health problem in a hospital 
and/or a residential treatment center, (2) received any outpatient treatment for a mental 
health problem at a clinic, day treatment center, therapist’s office, physician’s office, and/or 
home residence, and (3) received counseling from an individual (e.g. teacher and/or 
counselor) at school for a mental health problem. An additional measure was created for the 
total number of mental health outpatient visits during the past year and analyzed in 
supplemental analyses. 
Race/Ethnicity—Race/ethnicity was reported as five mutually exclusive categories: non- 
Hispanic white, black, Hispanic, Asian, and other race/ethnicity. Other race/ethnicity 
comprises non-Hispanics who reported more than one racial background as well as groups 
with cell sizes that were too small for statistical analyses (e.g. Native Americans). 
Socio-demographic and Health Status Measures—Prior research has indicated that 
age, gender, family status, income, and health insurance are important determinants of 
mental health care use among youth.15–17 These socio-demographic characteristics were 
assessed with a continuous measure of age in years (12–17), an indicator for females, an 
indicator for family status identifying adolescents who live with two parents versus those 
who do not, a categorical measure of family income (<$20K, $20K–$50K, $50K–$75K, > 
$75K), and a categorical measure of insurance status (any private insurance, public 
coverage, no insurance, and insurance status unknown). Lastly, although school enrollment 
may differ across racial/ethnic groups and facilitate MH service use, this measure is not 
included because 98% of the sample with MDE attends school. 
To adjust for differences in underlying mental health status, analyses included an indicator 
for whether adolescents reported that their depressive symptoms resulted in severe or very 
severe impairment (versus no, mild, or moderate impairment) in at least one of four life 
domains: chores at home, school or work, family relationships, or social life. Additionally, 
because alcohol and drug use are correlated with depression,18 two indicators measured 



alcohol abuse/dependence and illicit drug abuse/dependence based on a series of questions 
designed to measure substance abuse and dependence according to DSM-IV criteria.11 
Lastly, general health status, which is correlated with depression,19 was assessed with a 
self-reported measure of fair or poor health status (versus good, very good, or excellent). 

We estimated pooled weighted probit regressions and negative binomial regression models 
with the “svy” procedure in Stata to account for the complex survey design elements in 
NSDUH.20 Sampling weights adjusted for differential probabilities of sampling selection, 
non-response bias, and non-coverage bias. All models included year fixed effects. Risk 
differences for each minority racial/ethnic group were estimated at the weighted mean 
values of the control variables. The risk differences can be interpreted as the predicted 
difference in the percentage of adolescents in a racial/ethnic minority group with a positive 
value on the outcome variable compared to non-Hispanic whites, holding the covariates 
constant at their mean value. Individuals with missing values on study variables are 
excluded to yield two primary analytic samples: 7,618 adolescents for models examining 
racial/ethnic differences in measures of MDE treatment and 7,598 adolescents for models 
examining differences in mental health service use across settings. 
According to the Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) report Unequal Treatment: Confronting 
Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Healthcare, a health care disparity is defined as, 
“differences in the quality of healthcare that are not due to access-related factors or clinical 
needs, preferences, and appropriateness of intervention.”21 However, previous studies 
implementing this definition to examine mental health care disparities among the adult 
population have contended that “access-related factors” such as socioeconomic status (SES) 
and health insurance status should not be accounted for when estimating the total disparity 
in service use, but may be included in subsequent models to assess the degree to which they 
mediate the disparity.6, 22 Although we do not explicitly examine differences in mental 
health care quality, we estimate our models in a manner that is consistent with this general 
approach by first adjusting for differences in demographics (i.e. age, gender, family status) 
and mental health status and further adjusting for family income and insurance status in a 
subsequent model. 
Additional analyses assessed the robustness of findings when including measures of 
population density (as a proxy for access to medical and mental health professionals)23 and 
language of interview (i.e. Spanish vs. English). Although all five years of NSDUH data 
contain a measure of population density, these measures differ across years; consequently, 
the creation of a single measure for use in the pooled data must be interpreted with caution. 
Among adolescents with MDE, only 38% received any MDE treatment, 17% took 
prescription medication for MDE, 30% received MDE treatment from a mental health 
specialist, and 11% received MDE treatment from a medical provider (Table 1). When 
examining measures of past year mental health treatment across settings, 5% had an 
inpatient stay, 36% had an outpatient visit, and 25% received counseling in a school setting. 
When comparing these measures across racial/ethnic groups using Wald tests, results 
indicate that Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians are significantly less likely than non-Hispanic 
Whites to receive any MDE treatment (p<0.01), use prescription medication for MDE 
(p<0.001), receive MDE treatment from a mental health specialist (p<0.01), receive MDE 
treatment from a medical professional (p<0.001), and have a mental health visit in an 
outpatient setting (p<0.001). Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians also have lower family incomes 




(p<0.001) and are less likely to have private health insurance (p<0.05) than non-Hispanic 
Whites. 
Controlling for demographics and health status (Table 2, Model 1), the absolute percentage 
of racial/ethnic minorities who received any MDE treatment is between 7.6 (Blacks: 95% 
CI=−12.3%, −3.0%) and 21.0 percentage points lower (Asians: 95% CI= −29.1%, −12.9%) 
than among non-Hispanic Whites. In other words, the adjusted percentages of those who 
received any MDE treatment are 31.9% for blacks, 31.0% for Hispanics, and 18.5% for 
Asians, compared to 39.5% for non-Hispanic whites. These adjusted percentages for each 
racial/ethnic group are depicted graphically in Figure 1, where the height difference between 
the bars corresponds to the adjusted risk differences estimated in this model. After including 
family income and insurance status, these risk differences are slightly reduced for each 
group but remain statistically significant (Table 2, Model 2). 
Results examining racial/ethnic differences in the use of prescription medication yield a 
similar pattern (Table 2, Model 3). Among racial/ethnic minorities, the absolute percentage 
of adolescents who use prescription medication for MDE is between 11.2 (Hispanics: 95% 
CI=−13.9%, −8.6%) and 16.0 percentage points lower (Asians: 95% CI= −19.3%, −12.7%) 
relative to non-Hispanic Whites. Consequently, the adjusted percentages of adolescents who 
received prescription medication for MDE are 19.8% for non-Hispanic whites, 6.7% for 
blacks, 8.6% for Hispanics, and 3.8% for Asians (Figure 1). As before, the inclusion of 
family income and insurance status slightly accounts for these differences, but the findings 
remain statistically significant (Model 4). 
Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians are also significantly less likely than non-Hispanic whites to 
receive MDE treatment from a mental health professional or a medical provider (Table 3: 
Model 1, Model 3). Once again, the risk differences are largest for Asians. The adjusted 
percentage of non-Hispanic whites with MDE who received treatment from a mental health 
professional and a medical provider are 31.5% and 12.4%, respectively, compared to only 
15.6% (RD=−16.0, 95% CI=−23.2%,−8.7%) and 2.2% (RD=−10.2, 95% CI=−12.8%, 
−7.5%) of Asians with MDE (Figure 1). Although the inclusion of family income and 
insurance status slightly reduces these differences, they remain statistically significant 
(Model 2, Model 4). 
Results examining racial/ethnic differences in past year mental health treatment across 
settings among adolescents with MDE, irrespective of the problem that was treated, are 
presented in Table 4. Although there are no racial/ethnic differences in the likelihood of 
having an inpatient stay, there are significant differences in the likelihood of having an 
outpatient visit and receiving counseling in a school setting. Findings from Model 3 indicate 
that 39.7% (model based prediction not shown) of non-Hispanic whites received an 
outpatient mental health visit during the year, compared to only 27.9% of blacks (RD= 
−11.7%, 95% CI=−15.8%, −7.6%), 28.7% of Hispanics (RD=−11.0%, 95% CI=−14.9%, 
−7.0%), and 23.1% of Asians (RD=−16.5%, 95% CI=−25.5%,−7.5%). These differences 
are slightly reduced, but remain significant, after accounting for family income and 
insurance status (Model 4). Lastly, results from Model 5 show that the percentage of 
Hispanics (RD= −3.7%; 95% CI= −7.1%, −0.2%) and Asians (RD= −7.6%; 95% CI= 
−13.7%, −1.5%) who received counseling in a school setting is significantly lower than 
among non-Hispanic whites (24.5%; Model based prediction not shown). 
Supplemental analyses further explored racial/ethnic differences in the number of outpatient 
visits among those who received any outpatient treatment. Among adolescents who received 
any outpatient visit, results from a negative binomial regression model indicated that 
Hispanics have approximately 2.8 fewer visits per year (95% CI = −5.0, −0.6) than non- 



Hispanic whites, who have approximately 13.6 visits per year. This difference was slightly 
reduced to 2.5 fewer visits among Hispanics after adjusting for family income and insurance 
status. Blacks and Asians, however, did not differ significantly from non-Hispanic whites in 
their number of outpatient visits. Lastly, supplemental models that also included language of 
interview and population density were virtually unchanged across all outcome measures. 

Findings from this nationally-representative sample revealed high rates of unmet need for 
mental health treatment among all adolescents with MDE and sizeable racial/ethnic 
differences in service use before and after adjusting for demographics and health status. The 
adjusted percentage of non-Hispanic whites who received any MDE treatment was 40%, 
compared to 32% among blacks, 31% among Hispanics, and 19% among Asians. Black, 
Hispanic, and Asian adolescents were also significantly less likely than non-Hispanic whites 
to receive MDE treatment from mental health professionals, to receive MDE treatment from 
medical providers, and to have any mental health outpatient visits, with Asians exhibiting 
the lowest rate of service use on each measure. 
When examining racial/ethnic differences in the receipt of mental health outpatient 
treatment, it is notable that although black, Hispanic, and Asian adolescents were 
significantly less likely than non-Hispanic whites to receive any outpatient services, only 
Hispanics had significantly fewer outpatient visits than non-Hispanic whites among those 
who received services. This pattern of findings highlights the importance of implementing 
programs to address the barriers that exist to entering the mental health care treatment 
system for racial/ethnic minorities. Research has demonstrated that mental health care 
quality improvement programs in primary care settings may improve care among youth with 
depression, but may also have the benefit of reducing disparities in care for vulnerable 
racial/ethnic subpopulations.24 
The adjustment for socioeconomic status and health insurance status accounts for only a 
small portion of the estimated differences in MDE treatment measures and outpatient 
utilization across racial/ethnic groups. Consequently, our results suggest that other factors 
are predominantly driving these differences. While stigma likely plays a large role in the low 
rates of service use among all adolescents,25, 26 it may also account for the differences in 
service utilization across racial/ethnic groups27 – especially for Asians.28, 29 In many Asian 
cultures, seeking help for problems outside of the family is a source of shame.30 
Navigational barriers such as limited English proficiency could also explain a portion of the 
lower rates of service use among racial/ethnic minorities, especially among Hispanics and 
Asians.31 Even though supplemental analyses adjusting for language of interview (English 
versus Spanish) did not account for any of the difference in service use observed for 
Hispanic adolescents, it is possible that unmeasured differences in the English proficiency of 
the parents could account for part of the observed differences in service utilization. 
Unlike treatment in outpatient settings, we did not find any significant racial/ethnic 
differences in the receipt of inpatient treatment. It may be that there is less discretion on the 
part of both patients and providers in the decision to pursue inpatient treatment once a 
mental health condition reaches the severity and acuity to require hospitalization. This 
finding is consistent with research documenting that disparities are likely to be particularly 
prominent under conditions of higher clinical uncertainty.32 
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP) recommends that 
antidepressants should be considered for adolescents who have severe, psychotherapy- 
resistant depression.4 More than 20% of non-Hispanic white adolescents reported using 



prescription medication for major depression, compared to 4% to 9% of Asians, blacks, and 
Hispanics. Because NSDUH does not provide sufficient detail to determine whether the use 
of prescription medication was consistent with AACAP guidelines for each individual, it is 
unclear whether these patterns are indicative of worse access to treatment by minorities, 
overutilization of medication by non-Hispanic whites, or both. However, racial/ethnic 
differences remained significant in supplemental analyses in which separate regressions 
were estimated for: (1) adolescents who reported having severe or very severe role 
impairment due to MDE, and (2) for adolescents who did not (not shown). Results from 
these supplemental models suggest that the overall racial/ethnic differences in prescription 
drug use may represent greater overutilization by whites as well as underutilization by 
racial/ethnic minorities. 
We found that Asians and Hispanics with MDE are less likely than non-Hispanic whites to 
receive school-based counseling. However, results from a previous study using data from 
the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) did not find racial/ 
ethnic differences in the receipt of school-based counseling among adolescents with high 
depressive symptoms.9 One possible explanation is that there may be important differences 
in the composition of the racial/ethnic subgroups that comprise Hispanics and Asians in each 
dataset, although it is not possible to make a direct comparison because this information is 
not available in the public-use NSDUH files. For example, because Cubans and Puerto 
Ricans were oversampled in Add Health,33 they likely comprise a larger percentage of the 
Hispanic population in Add Health than in NSDUH. Future research should collect data that 
allows for comparisons across subgroups among the Hispanic and Asian adolescent 
populations. 
Notably, one-fourth of all adolescents with MDE received school-based counseling, and the 
relative size of the difference in service use for Asians and Hispanics compared to non- 
Hispanic whites is smaller in school settings than in outpatient settings. Furthermore, blacks 
do not differ in their likelihood of receiving school-based counseling relative to non- 
Hispanic whites. Considered altogether, these findings suggest that greater investment in 
school-based mental health services could be one mechanism for reducing levels of unmet 
need for mental health services among all adolescents as well as racial/ethnic disparities in 
treatment. For example, the provision of mental health services through school-based health 
centers (SBHCs) has been shown to increase mental health care utilization among low- 
income adolescent populations across multiple racial/ethnic groups.34 Moreover, racial/ 
ethnic minorities are as likely, if not more likely, to use SBCH services than non-Hispanic 
whites.35, 36 
Along with these significant findings, it important to acknowledge several limitations in this 
study. First, causality cannot be established because the data are cross sectional. Second, 
although there may be important subgroup differences in service use within the racial/ethnic 
groups that were examined, it is not possible to disaggregate these groups any further due to 
both small cell sizes (e.g. Native Americans and Alaskan Natives) and lack of information 
about the country/region of origin for Hispanics and Asians. Third, because NSDUH was 
only conducted in English and Spanish, there may be other non-English speaking 
populations that are not represented in the sample. Fourth, several constructs such as family 
status and health status are assessed with proxy measures that may be imprecise. Lastly, the 
NSDUH public use files do not contain information about several mechanisms that could 
further explain these racial/ethnic differences in service use including nativity, immigration 
status, knowledge and stigma concerning mental health treatment, and geographic access to 
providers. 



Notwithstanding these limitations, this study documents low rates of mental health service 
use among all adolescents with major depression and significantly lower rates among each 
racial/ethnic minority group that was examined. Investment in quality improvement 
programs implemented in primary care settings as well as school-based mental health 
services may reduce unmet need for mental health services among all adolescents with 
major depression as well as reduce the sizeable differences in service use across racial/ethnic 
groups. Future research should seek to collect the necessary data to examine subgroup 
differences and elucidate the distinct pathways that account for racial/ethnic disparities in 
use of services. 


The authors are grateful for the helpful comments and suggestions by Neetu Chawla and Michelle Ko at the UCLA 
School of Public Health. 



2. Fergusson D, Woodward L. Mental health, educational, and social role outcomes of adolescents 
with depression. Archives of General Psychiatry 2002;59(3):225–231. [PubMed: 11879160] 
3. Weissman MM, Wolk S, Goldstein RB, et al. Depressed adolescents grown up. Jama 1999 May 


treatment of children and adolescents with depressive disorders. American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1998 Nov;37(11):1234–1238. 
[PubMed: 10075518] 
5. Kessler RC, Walters EE. Epidemiology of DSM-III-R major depression and minor depression 
among adolescents and young adults in the National Comorbidity Survey. Depress Anxiety 
1998;7(1):3–14. [PubMed: 9592628] 

minority populations in the United States. Psychiatr Serv 2008 Nov;59(11):1264–1272. [PubMed: 
18971402] 
7. Olfson M, Gameroff MJ, Marcus SC, Waslick BD. Outpatient treatment of child and adolescent 
depression in the United States. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003 Dec;60(12):1236–1242. [PubMed: 
14662556] 
8. Wu P, Hoven CW, Cohen P, et al. Factors associated with use of mental health services for 
depression by children and adolescents. Psychiatr Serv 2001 Feb;52(2):189–195. [PubMed: 
11157117] 

Service Use Among High-Need Subpopulations Across Clinical and School-Based Settings. Journal 
of Adolescent Health 2010;46(6):603–606. [PubMed: 20472219] 
10. Alexandre PK, Martins SS, Richard P. Disparities in adequate mental health care for pastyear 
major depressive episodes among Caucasian and Hispanic youths. Psychiatr Serv 2009 Oct; 
60(10):1365–1371. [PubMed: 19797377] 


12. Kessler RC, Andrews G, Mroczek D, Ustun B, Wittchen HU. The World Health Organization 
Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-SD). International Journal of 
Methods in Psychiatric Research 1998;7(4):171–185. 




supplement (NCS-A): III. Concordance of DSM-IV/CIDI diagnoses with clinical reassessments. J 
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2009 Apr;48(4):386–399. [PubMed: 19252450] 

Composite International Diagnostic Interview with Latinos. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res 2009 Jun; 
18(2):84–95. [PubMed: 19507168] 
15. Alexandre PK, Stephens RM, Laris AS, Dowling K, Rely K. Predictors of Outpatient Mental 
Health Service Use by American Youth. Psychol Serv 2008 Aug 1;5(3):251–261. [PubMed: 
19587845] 
16. Glied S, Bowen Garrett A, Hoven C, et al. Child outpatient mental health service use: why doesn't 
insurance matter? J Ment Health Policy Econ 1998 Dec 1;1(4):173–187. [PubMed: 11967395] 

child mental health problems: evidence from a national sample. Health Serv Res 2005 Oct;40(5 Pt 
1):1514–1533. [PubMed: 16174145] 


19. Rohde P, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR. Are adolescents changed by an episode of major depression? 
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1994 Nov–Dec;33(9):1289–1298. [PubMed: 7995795] 





Medicine definition of disparities: an application to mental health care. Health Serv Res 2006 Oct; 
41(5):1979–2005. [PubMed: 16987312] 


24. Ngo VK, Asarnow JR, Lange J, et al. Outcomes for youths from racial-ethnic minority groups in a 
quality improvement intervention for depression treatment. Psychiatr Serv 2009 Oct;60(10):1357– 
1364. [PubMed: 19797376] 



perceive the stigma of mental illness and alcohol abuse. Psychiatr Serv 2005 May;56(5):544–550. 
[PubMed: 15872162] 

Ethnicity. A Supplement to Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office; 2001. 

depression and ADHD: magnitude and demographic variation in a national sample. J Am Acad 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2008 Aug;47(8):912–920. [PubMed: 18596557] 
29. Georg Hsu LK, Wan YM, Chang H, Summergrad P, Tsang BY, Chen H. Stigma of depression is 
more severe in Chinese Americans than Caucasian Americans. Psychiatry 2008 Fall;71(3):210– 
218. [PubMed: 18834272] 

mental health help seeking: a focus on ethnic minority youth. J Consult Clin Psychol 2002 Feb; 
70(1):44–55. [PubMed: 11860055] 
31. Sentell T, Shumway M, Snowden L. Access to mental health treatment by English language 
proficiency and race/ethnicity. J Gen Intern Med 2007 Nov;22 Suppl 2:289–293. [PubMed: 
17957413] 






Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health Research Design. 2008 [Accessed September 12, 2010]. 
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design/wave1 
34. Juszczak L, Melinkovich P, Kaplan D. Use of health and mental health services by adolescents 
across multiple delivery sites. Journal of Adolescent Health 2003 Jun;32(6 Suppl):108–118. 
[PubMed: 12782449] 

care for urban minority junior high school students. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1995 Nov;149(11): 
1221–1225. [PubMed: 7581753] 

students' use of medical, mental health, and substance abuse services. Pediatrics 1996 Mar;97(3): 
318–330. [PubMed: 8604264] 



Figure 1. 
Adjusted percentage of U.S. adolescents who received treatment for major depression by 
race/ethnicity. Note: N=7,618. Results from multivariate probit models adjusting for age, 
gender, family status, depression-related impairment, substance abuse/dependence, and self- 
rated health 


































