


Ethnic disparities in school-based behavioral health service use 
for children with psychiatric disorders 
Jill Locke, PhD [Assistant Professor], 
University of Washington, Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington Autism 
Center, Box 357920, Phone: 206-616-6703, jjlocke@uw.edu 
Christina D. Kang-Yi, PhD [Research Assistant Professor], 
University of Pennsylvania Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, ckangyi@upenn.edu 
Melanie Pellecchia, PhD [Postdoctoral Fellow], 
University of Pennsylvania Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, Phone: 215-746-1950, pmelanie@upenn.edu 
Steve Marcus, PhD [Research Associate Professor], 
3701 Locust Walk, Caster Building Room C16, Philadelphia, PA 19104, marcuss@sp2.upen.edu 
Trevor Hadley, PhD [Professor], and 
University of Pennsylvania Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, thadley@upenn.edu 
David S. Mandell, ScD [Associate Professor] 
University of Pennsylvania Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Center for Autism Research, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
mandelld@upenn.edu 

BACKGROUND—We examined racial/ethnic disparities in school-based behavioral health 
service use for children with psychiatric disorders. 
METHODS—Medicaid claims data were used to compare the behavioral healthcare service use of 
23,601 children aged 5–17 years by psychiatric disorder (autism, attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), conduct/oppositional defiant disorder, and “other”) and by race/ethnicity 
(African-American, Hispanic, white, and other). Logistic and generalized linear regression 
analyses were used. 
RESULTS—Differences in service use by racial/ethnic group were identified within and across 
diagnostic groups, both for in-school service use and out-of-school service use. For all disorders, 
Hispanic children had significantly lower use of in-school services than white children. Among 
children with ADHD, African-American children were less likely to receive in-school services 
than white children; however, there were no differences in adjusted annual mean Medicaid 
expenditures for in-school services by race/ethnicity or psychiatric disorders. Statistically 

HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Sch Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01. 
J 
 
 


significant differences by race/ethnicity were found for out-of-school service use for children with 
ADHD and other psychiatric disorders. There were significant differences by race/ethnicity in out- 
of-school service use for each diagnostic group. 
CONCLUSIONS—Differences in the use of school-based behavioral health services by racial 
and ethnic groups suggest the need for culturally appropriate outreach and tailoring of services to 
improve service utilization. 


How race/ethnicity affects school-based behavioral health service use is poorly 
understood.1–5 Many minority youth with psychiatric disorders do not receive needed 
behavioral health services, perhaps because of their and their families’ interpretation of 
symptoms, beliefs about the most appropriate responses, and poor access to specialty 
care.1, 6–10 One way to improve access and reduce racial/ethnic disparities in service use is 
to provide behavioral health services in schools.6 Public schools have become the main 
provider of behavioral health services to children in the United States (US) and are 
responsible for approximately 70–80% of all behavioral health services delivered to 
children.11–14 Schools provide convenient access to behavioral health services and 
significantly reduce barriers to treatment seen in traditional outpatient settings, particularly 
in ethnic minority groups15–17 
The increase in schools’ provision of behavioral health services resulted from new education 
policies mandating that supports be given to children with psychiatric disorders,18 new 
federal funding initiatives,19 and that disparities in service use based on socio-economic 
status, race, and ethnicity must be eliminated.12 Currently, 32 states leverage Medicaid funds 
to provide school-based services. Despite an improved policy environment and increased 
funding, some research indicates that approximately half of children with developmental 
conditions (autism, developmental delay and intellectual disability) lack easy access to 
school-based services, and 17% do not have an individualized education plan.20 
While school-based services hold promise for decreasing racial/ethnic disparities by 
improving access, there has been little comparison of service use by racial/ethnic group 
between school-based services and more traditional outpatient behavioral health services. 
More importantly, while many studies have demonstrated racial/ethnic disparities in access, 
diagnosis, and outcomes in youth with various psychiatric disorders,5–7, 21 none, to our 
knowledge, has directly compared racial/ethnic disparities by psychiatric diagnosis between 
school-based and other behavioral health services. Understanding how disparities in school- 
based behavioral health service use differ across race/ethnicity and psychiatric disorders will 
potentially point to the ways in which schools may differentiate care to address unmet 
behavioral health needs. It may be that for some disorders, providing school-based 
behavioral health services increases access to behavioral health services for children who 
otherwise would not receive care. If racial/ethnic disparities are similar across disorders, it 
suggests the need for global interventions to reduce them. However, if racial/ethnic 
disparities differ by disorder, it may suggest the need for more targeted strategies to 


 


determine why they exist and how to address them. The purpose of this study was to 
compare in-school and out-of-school behavioral health service use and associated Medicaid 
expenditures among ethnic minority children with different psychiatric disorders. All 
students were from the same school district, were Medicaid enrolled and had equal access to 
behavioral health services at their schools leveraged through Medicaid. 



The study sample included 23,601 Medicaid-enrolled children between 5–17 years of age 
who used behavioral health services between October 1, 2008 and September 30, 2009. 
Medicaid claims data were used. The sample represents the entire population of Medicaid- 
enrolled youth in Philadelphia who used behavioral health services. 
Psychiatric disorder was defined as having a diagnosis in the Medicaid claims of autism, 
conduct disorder/oppositional defiant disorder (conduct/ODD), attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), or a different disorder (other psychiatric disorders). 
Diagnoses were identified using the International Classification of Diseases (9th ed., ICD-9). 
Children with 2 or more Medicaid claims that indicated primary diagnosis of: (1) 299.xx 
were identified as having autism; (2) 312.xx or 313.xx were identified as having conduct/ 
ODD; and (3) 314.xx were identified as having ADHD. Other psychiatric disorders included 
affective mood disorder, substance abuse, schizophrenia, and other psychiatric diagnoses. 
We focused on these disorders because: (1) most children served through the public mental 
health system are diagnosed with either ADHD or disruptive behavior disorders;22 and (2) 
autism is the developmental disorder with the most rapidly increasing prevalence, is 
expensive to treat, and often requires care in school.23 Less than 5% of study participants 
had more than one diagnosis. Consistent with previous studies, children who met study 
criteria for more than one diagnosis were classified in the hierarchy of autism, ADHD, 
conduct/ODD and other psychiatric disorders.23 
In-school behavioral health service use was defined as receiving in-school individual 
behavioral services (one-on-one behavioral support) during the school day. Out-of-school 
behavioral services were defined as receiving outpatient treatment in a specialty mental 
health setting or out-of-school Behavioral Health Rehabilitation Services (BHRS). BHRS is 
Pennsylvania’s version of wraparound services, designed to provide therapeutic intervention 
to children aged 3–21 years with serious emotional disturbance, social, or behavioral 
problems in the least restrictive environment maintaining the child in his/her natural 
setting.24 Both in-school behavioral health services and out-of-school BHRS require the 
same level of clinical necessity, which is more intensive care than outpatient care.24 Children 
who are Medicaid beneficiaries and meet clinical necessity through psychiatric evaluation 
have equal access to both types of services. Our definition of non-school services did not 
include acute services such as crisis center visits and inpatient psychiatric hospitalization 
and restrictive care such as psychiatric residential treatment. Unadjusted and adjusted mean 
Medicaid expenditures for each type of service were calculated for each race/ethnic group 


 


by psychiatric disorder. Demographic variables included sex (male vs. female) and race/ 
ethnicity (African-American, white, Hispanic including both white and African-American, 
and other). 

Chi-square tests were used to test for differences in demographic characteristics and 
behavioral health service use by psychiatric disorder. In-school individual behavioral health 
service use and out-of-school behavioral health service use were not mutually exclusive. 
Logistic regression analyses were used to identify children’s in-school and out-of-school 
behavioral health service use (the dependent variables) by race/ethnicity and psychiatric 
disorder adjusting for age and sex. Two logistic regression analyses were performed for each 
type of service use: (1) significant difference test of service use by race/ethnicity within each 
psychiatric disorder; and 2) significant difference test of service use by race/ethnicity across 
psychiatric disorders. The 2 models were used to identify if: (1) differences in service use 
exist by race/ethnicity within each psychiatric disorder group; and (2) within-group 
differences in service use by race/ethnicity significantly differ across psychiatric disorders. 
For the Medicaid expenditures analyses, unadjusted annual mean Medicaid expenditures by 
race/ethnicity, psychiatric disorder, and service type among users were calculated. 
Generalized linear models with a gamma distribution and log link function were used to 
compare differences in the expenditures for in-school and out-of-school behavioral health 
service use by race/ethnicity and psychiatric disorder, adjusting for age and sex. Two 
generalized linear regression analyses were performed for Medicaid expenditures for each 
type of service use testing: (1) significant differences in Medicaid expenditures by race/ 
ethnicity within each psychiatric disorder; and (2) significant differences in Medicaid 
expenditures by race/ethnicity across psychiatric disorders. 
The most common psychiatric diagnosis was ADHD (39.9%); 35.2% were diagnosed with 
other psychiatric disorders, 21.3% with conduct/ODD, and 3.6% with autism (Table 1). The 
majority (63.0%) of the sample was male and about half (49.4%) was aged 5–11 years. Sex 
and race/ethnicity distributions significantly differed by psychiatric disorder. Whereas only 
16.0% of children with autism were girls, 33.4% of children with conduct/ODD, 28.1% of 
children with ADHD and 51.4% of children with other psychiatric disorders were girls. The 
proportion of African-American children was the highest among children with 
conduct/ODD (76.1%), followed by other psychiatric disorders (61.3%), autism (51.4%) and 
ADHD (50.5%). The majority of Hispanic children was diagnosed with ADHD (39.8%), 
followed by other psychiatric disorders (25.4%), conduct/ODD (16.5%) and autism (15.2%). 


Tables 2 and 3 present significance tests in service use by race/ethnicity within each 
psychiatric disorder and within-group disparities in service use by race/ethnicity across 
psychiatric disorders. There were significant differences by race/ethnicity in use of in-school 
behavioral health services. For each diagnosis group, Hispanic children were less likely to 


 


use in-school behavioral health services than White children (Table 2). They were 49% less 
likely for autism (p = .002); 48% less likely for conduct/ODD (p = .039); 55% less likely for 
ADHD (p < .001); and 50% less likely for other psychiatric disorders (p = .039). For the 
ADHD group, African-American children were 62% more likely than white children with 
ADHD to use in-school individual behavioral health services (p < .001). The lower use of in- 
school service among Hispanic children compared to white children was similar across all 
psychiatric disorders. Disparities in in-school service use between African-American and 
white children were found only for the ADHD group (p = .02). 
The analysis of out-of-school behavioral health service use showed significant differences 
by race/ethnicity within the ADHD group and the other psychiatric disorders group (Table 
3). African-American children with ADHD were 58% less likely than white children with 
ADHD to use out-of-school behavioral health services (p = 0.002). Hispanic children with 
ADHD were 91% more likely than white children with ADHD to use out-of-school 
behavioral health services (p = .043). Hispanic children with other psychiatric disorders 
were 79% more likely than white children with other psychiatric disorders to use out-of- 
school behavioral health services (p = .036). The racial/ethnic differences did not differ by 
psychiatric disorder. 

As Figure 1 shows, the unadjusted annual mean Medicaid expenditures for in-school 
individual behavioral health service use ranged from $4,768 for Hispanic children with 
ADHD to $7,846 for white children with conduct/ODD. With the exception of children with 
autism, in-school behavioral health Medicaid expenditures for white children was the 
highest followed by the expenditures for African-American and Hispanic children. The 
unadjusted Medicaid expenditures for in-school behavioral health service use by psychiatric 
disorder was the highest for children with autism, and ranged from $6273 for Hispanic 
children to $7280 for African-American children. Despite the differences in the unadjusted 
Medicaid expenditures, the age and sex adjusted mean Medicaid estimates for in-school 
individual behavioral health service use were not significantly different by race/ethnicity 
within each psychiatric disorder or across psychiatric disorders. 
As Figure 1 shows, the unadjusted annual mean Medicaid expenditures for out-of-school 
behavioral service use ranged from $1169 for Hispanic children with ADHD to $4462 for 
African-American children with autism. The unadjusted Medicaid expenditures for out-of- 
school behavioral health services were the highest for African-American children for all 
psychiatric disorder groups, followed by white children and Hispanic children. The adjusted 
mean Medicaid expenditures for out-of-school behavioral health service use reflected the 
pattern of unadjusted expenditures by race/ethnicity within and across psychiatric disorder 
groups; the disparities in service use between Hispanic and white children and between 
African-American and white children were significantly different by psychiatric disorders. 
Compared with white children, the adjusted mean Medicaid estimates for out-of-school 
behavioral health service use for Hispanic children were 0.72 times lower for autism (p = . 
003), 0.72 times lower for conduct/ODD (p < .001), 0.62 times lower for ADHD (p < .001), 
and 0.72 times lower for other psychiatric disorders (p < .001). The adjusted mean Medicaid 


 


estimates for African-American children with ADHD were 24% higher than those for white 
children with ADHD (p < .001) and 10% higher for African-American children with other 
psychiatric disorders compared to white children with other psychiatric disorders (p = .010). 
The differences in the adjusted mean expenditures between Hispanic and white children and 
between African-American and white children significantly differed across psychiatric 
disorder (p = .045 and p = .032, respectively). 

The observed disparities in use of in-school services are particularly important and have 
direct implications for improving access to care for ethnic minorities. The results indicated 
that many Hispanic children with psychiatric disorders were not using in-school behavioral 
health services. These differences were not observed when comparing expenditures among 
users, suggesting that once children access in-school behavioral health services, they use a 
similar amount of service. The literature suggests that there may be important cultural 
differences among Hispanics in accessing one-to-one school based care.25, 26 Delphin- 
Rittmon et al27 found that Hispanics reported stigmatizing views about seeking behavioral 
health services and only used care in crisis situations or as a last resort. Furthermore, studies 
have shown that Hispanic families may view teachers and school personnel as having a great 
deal of power and authority over their child’s education and may trust that their children 
already receive adequate supports in school.28, 29 Research also has shown that Hispanic 
parents often stress the importance of both behavior and academics within education30 and 
may assume the educational system is addressing their child’s behavioral needs without the 
need of additional services. Therefore, Hispanic families may be hesitant to request 
additional school support services for their children if the school does not indicate a need for 
these services. Whereas the process of obtaining services may be complicated for both in 
and out of school services, research suggests that language barriers may likely present some 
unique challenges for families that are Spanish-speaking only, as applying for services may 
require both an understanding of legal rights and a mastery of the English language.31 
Spanish speaking only families may be at a significant disadvantage, and there is some 
research that suggests many undocumented families may be fearful of advocating for 
additional services for their child.32 Culturally responsive efforts to improve the rates at 
which Hispanic families of children with psychiatric disorders gain initial access and 
enrollment in school-based behavioral health services are needed in order to reduce this 
disparity and improve access to care. Schools may need to consider adopting targeted 
outreach services for Hispanic families who may benefit from school-based behavioral 
health services. 
Additionally, Hispanic children with ADHD and other psychiatric disorders had 
significantly higher use of out-of-school services than white children with these same 
diagnoses; however, their associated expenditures were significantly lower than those of 
white children. This finding suggests that the disparity in out-of-school service use relates to 
dosage or intensity, as opposed to access as observed for in-school service use. 
Unlike Hispanic children, African-American children with ADHD were more likely to use 
in-school behavioral health services and less likely to use out-of-school services than white 


 



children with ADHD. This finding has several potential explanations. First, it is possible that 
many African-American children with autism are incorrectly diagnosed with ADHD,33 
which may inflate the service use observed among children diagnosed with ADHD in this 
sample. Previous research has demonstrated that children from different racial/ethnic groups 
are assigned psychiatric diagnoses at different rates,34 with African-American children being 
much more likely to receive an ADHD diagnosis before being diagnosed with autism.33 
Differences in diagnostic labels across racial/ethnic groups may contribute to creating a 
group of African-American children diagnosed with ADHD who have intensive in-school 
service needs. Second, it is possible that African-American children who demonstrate 
externalizing behavior problems often associated with ADHD are more likely to be referred 
for in-school services by their teachers, as has been demonstrated in previous reports of 
disproportionalities in school-based referrals to special education and behavioral support 
services.35–36 Whereas more accurate and refined diagnostic assessments and referrals to 
service for African-American children may be needed,37 future research to determine what 
factors may explain higher in-school service use for African-American children with ADHD 
is needed. It also is possible that African-American children with ADHD use more intensive 
in-school behavioral health services to address their needs and more research is needed to 
understand if this is a factor. 
The study had several limitations. First, the geographic generalizability of the results is 
limited to the areas with similar racial/ethnic diversity and behavioral health services for 
children with psychiatric disorders; however, the findings may be generalizable to the large, 
urban school districts that serve a disproportionately large number of minority children and 
children with special needs.37 Second, the study was conducted using the Philadelphia 
behavioral health Medicaid claims data and does not take into account the potential role of 
other funding streams (the education system, private insurance, and out of pocket). Although 
these data are important for understanding one population of behavioral health users, 
additional research is needed to understand service use by different providers. Third, it was 
not possible to ascertain the linguistic backgrounds of the families from this dataset and 
whether accessing services was impacted by language skills; although, it is likely that 
language barriers may affect families’ procurement of services. Fourth, although all children 
had equal access to in-school individual behavioral health support through Medicaid, it was 
not possible to ascertain whether the schools also provided other behavioral health services 
such as counseling or medication management. Fifth, the difference in Medicaid 
expenditures across race/ethnic groups reflects the difference in volume of service use and 
does not reflect differences in quality of care. We did not have data to examine quality of 
services rendered in either in-school or out-of-school settings. Lastly, our analysis is based 
on one year of cross-sectional data of behavioral health claims. Additional research that 
includes the analysis of physical health and prescription claims combined with the 
behavioral health claims are likely to provide more meaningful racial/ethnic disparity 
information, as children might be prescribed medication for their behavioral symptoms 
through pediatricians and may not be identified as needing behavioral health services, 
thereby inflating the out of school to in school service ratio. 


 



This is one of the first studies to examine disparities in in-school and out-of-school 
behavioral health services and Medicaid expenditures across psychiatric diagnoses and race/ 
ethnicity. The results suggest that significant disparities in in-school individual behavioral 
health service use exist by race/ethnicity and differ across psychiatric disorders. 
Additionally, significant disparities in Medicaid expenditures for out-of-school behavioral 
health service use by race/ethnicity exist and significantly differ across psychiatric disorders. 
There is a distinction between not using available services and not having access to needed 
services, which suggests the need for different types of interventions to reduce racial/ethnic 
disparities in the behavioral health system and schools. In this study, Hispanic children used 
the lowest amount of behavioral health Medicaid services across all diagnostic groups. The 
reasons for this disparity are unclear; however, the results indicate a large proportion of 
Hispanic children with psychiatric disorders that are being underserved, particularly in 
school settings. These data suggest that merely changing the setting in which services are 
delivered does not completely address existing disparities. In fact, school-based services 
may be necessary but not sufficient in ameliorating disparities among Hispanics. This 
disparity points to the need for culturally sensitive methods and targeted outreach services to 
inform Hispanic families of the critical need for intervention, as well as the need to 
concurrently implement interventions that are consistent with and sensitive to the cultural 
beliefs and practices of Hispanic families. Future research on how the higher use of in- 
school behavioral health service among African Americans with ADHD compared to other 
children with ADHD is associated with school outcomes as well as behavioral functioning 
will lead policymakers and practitioners to identify whether higher use is associated with 
better quality of in-school behavioral healthcare. Cultural awareness may affect assessment, 
diagnosis, and treatment3 resulting in disparities in access to and utilization of services 
among students with psychiatric disorders. Training behavioral health practitioners to 
provide culturally appropriate assessment and services will help alleviate disparities among 
all ethnic groups. Finally, tailoring in-school behavioral health service to be culturally 
appropriate by psychiatric disorder is important to reduce disparities in use. 

The University of Pennsylvania’s Institutional Review Board (Protocol # 809866) and the 
Institutional Review Board of City of Philadelphia Department of Public Health (Protocol # 
2009–27) approved this study. The Medicaid claims data were shared through the 
Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Philadelphia Department of Behavioral 
Health and Intellectual Disability Services and the University of Pennsylvania. 

This study was partially funded by the City of Philadelphia Department of Behavioral Health and Intellectual 
Disability Services. The preparation of this article also was supported in part by the City of Philadelphia 
Department of Behavioral Health and Intellectual Disability Services, NIMH K01MH100199, the Autism Science 
Foundation (Grant # 13-ECA-01L) and FARFund Early Career Award (Locke). 


 



1. Angold A, Erkanli A, Farmer EMZ, Fairbank JA, Burns BJ, Keeler G, et al. Psychiatric disorder, 
impairment, and service use in rural African American and white youth. JAMA Psychiatry. 2002; 
59(10):893–901. 
2. Nguyen L, Huang LN, Arganza GF, Liao Q. The influence of race and ethnicity on psychiatric 
diagnoses and clinical characteristics of children and adolescents in children’s services. Cultur 
Divers Ethnic Minor Psychol. 2007; 13(1):18–25. [PubMed: 17227173] 




5. Mandell DS, Wiggins LD, Carpenter LA, Daniels J, DiGuiseppi C, Durkin MS, et al. Racial/ethnic 
disparities in the identification of children with autism spectrum disorders. Am J Public Health. 
2009; 99(3):493–498. [PubMed: 19106426] 

health service disparities for racial and ethnic minority youth. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2012; 51(7):703–711. e2. [PubMed: 22721593] 



in utilization of mental health services among high-risk youths. Am J Psychiatry. 2005; 162(7): 
1336–1343. [PubMed: 15994717] 
9. Kataoka SH, Zhang L, Wells KB. Unmet need for mental health care among US children: variation 
by ethnicity and insurance status. Am J Psychiatry. 2002; 159(9):1548–1555. [PubMed: 12202276] 
10. Merikangas KR, He J, Burstein M, Swendsen J, Avenevoli S, Case B, et al. Service utilization for 
lifetime mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: results of the National Comorbidity Survey- 
Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011; 50(1):32–45. 
[PubMed: 21156268] 
11. Slade EP. The relationship between school characteristics and the availability of mental health and 
related health services in middle and high schools in the United States. J Behav Health Serv Res. 
2003; 30(4):382–392. [PubMed: 14593662] 
12. New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. Achieving the Promise: Transforming Mental 
Health Care in America. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration; 2003. 
13. Farmer EMZ, Burns BJ, Phillips SD, Angold A, Costello EJ. Pathways into and through mental 
health services for children and adolescents. Psychiatr Serv. 2003; 54(1):60–66. [PubMed: 
12509668] 

treatment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352(24):2515–2523. [PubMed: 
15958807] 

sustainability in an urban after-school program. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2011; 38(6):504–517. 
[PubMed: 21416160] 
16. Kataoka S, Stein BD, Nadeem E, Wong M. Who gets care? Mental health service use following a 
school-based suicide prevention program. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007; 46(10): 
1341–1348. [PubMed: 17885576] 

participation in a rural system of care for children with serious emotional problems. Community 
Ment Health J. 2010; 46(3):211–220. [PubMed: 19551506] 

SW.; Lever, NA., editors. Handbook of School Mental Health: Advancing Practice and Research. 
New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers; 2003. p. 89-106. 


 


19. Flaherty, LT.; Osher, D. History of school-based mental health services in the United States. In: 
Weist, MD.; Evans, SW.; Lever, NA., editors. Handbook of School Mental Health: Advancing 
Practice and Research. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers; 2003. p. 11-22. 


21. Delphin-Rittman ME, Flanagan EH, Andres-Hyman R, Ortiz J, Amer MM, Davidson L. Racial- 
ethnic differences in access, diagnosis, and outcomes in public-sector inpatient mental health 
treatment. Psychol Serv. 2015; 12(2):158–166. [PubMed: 25961650] 

disorders in youths across five sectors of care. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2001; 40(4): 
409–418. [PubMed: 11314566] 

expenditures for children with autism and children with other disorders. Psychiatr Serv. 2016; 
67(1):101–106. [PubMed: 26278232] 

Utilizing Management Guide: Community Behavioral Health. Philadelphia, PA: Department of 
Behavioral Health and Intellectual Disability Services; 2006. Available at: http://www.dbhids.org/ 
providers-seeking-information/community-behavioral-health/cbh-utilization-management-guide/. 
[Accessed September 30, 2016] 


26. Magaña S, Parish SL, Rose RA, Timberlake M, Swaine JG. Racial and ethnic disparities in quality 
of health care among children with autism and other developmental disabilities. Intellect Dev. 
Disabil. 2012; 50(4):287–299. [PubMed: 22861130] 

discuss that with my clinician’: US consumer perspectives on the place of culture in behavioural 
healthcare. Divers Equal Health Care. 2013; 10(3):143–154. 





with Children and Families. 3rd. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development; 2008. 
31. Kim G, Loi CXA, Chiriboga DA, Jang Y, Parmelee P, Allen RS. Limited English proficiency as a 
barrier to mental health service use: a study of Latino and Asian immigrants with psychiatric 
disorders. J Psychiatr Res. 2011; 45(1):104–110. [PubMed: 20537658] 


33. Mandell DS, Ittenbach RF, Levy SE, Pinto-Martin JA. Disparities in diagnoses received prior to a 
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. J Autism Dev Disord. 2007; 37(9):1795–1802. [PubMed: 
17160456] 
34. Kilgus MD, Pumareiga AJ, Cuffe SP. Influence of race on diagnosis of adolescent psychiatric 
inpatients. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1995; 34(1):67–72. [PubMed: 7860460] 
35. NASP Position Statement. Racial and Ethnic Disproportionality in Education. National Association 
of School Psychologists. 2013. Available at: www.nasponline.org [Accessed September 30, 2016] 

investigation of African American and Latino disproportionality in school discipline. School Psych 
Rev. 2011; 40(1):85–107. 

Secondary School districts in the United States: 2008–09 (NCES 2011-301). Washington, DC: US 
Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics; 2010. 


 


Figure 1. Annual mean Medicaid expenditures by race, psychiatric disorder and service type 
among service users 
Note. 2008/2009 dollar rate presented. Unadjusted annual mean Medicaid expenditures 
among service users are presented in Figure 1. ASD: Autism spectrum disorder, ODD: 
Oppositional defiant disorder, ADHD: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 


 






 




 




 
