


Access to health professionals by 
children and adolescents with mental 
disorders: Are we meeting their needs? 
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 
1–11 
 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0004867418760713 
DOI: 10.1177/0004867418760713 
© The Royal Australian and 
New Zealand College of Psychiatrists 2018 
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav 
journals.sagepub.com/home/anp 
Michael G Sawyer1,2, Christy E Reece1,2, Alyssa CP Sawyer1,2, 
 and David Lawrence7 
Sarah E Johnson3, Harriet Hiscock4,5,6 

Objective: To identify the percentage of 4–17 year olds with mental disorders in Australia who attended health pro- 
fessionals for single or repeat visits to get help for emotional and behavioural problems during a 12-month period. To 
identify factors associated with single and repeat visits, and the average length of time between visits. To compare the 
number of parent-reported visits with visits recorded in the Medicare Benefits Schedule. 
Method: The study used data from the national survey of the mental health and wellbeing of 4–17 year olds conducted 
in 2013–2014 (n = 6310). Participants were randomly selected from all 4 to 17 year olds in Australia. Information about 
visits was available from face-to-face interviews with parents, the Medicare Benefits Schedule and self-reports from 13 to 
17 year olds. Mental disorders were assessed using the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version IV completed 
by parents. 
Results: Parents reported that 51.1% of 4–17 year olds with mental disorders had attended a health professional during 
the previous 12 months. However, 13.6% of these children had attended on only a single occasion, most commonly with 
a general practitioner. With the exception of occupational therapists, 2–4 visits was the most common number of repeat 
visits. Children with comorbid disorders and severe functional impairment and those aged 12–17 years were more likely 
to have repeat visits. Among those with linked Medicare Benefits Schedule data, more children were reported by par- 
ents to have attended Medicare Benefits Schedule-funded health professionals (47.9%) than were recorded in Medicare 
Benefits Schedule data (38.0%). 
Conclusion: The typical number of visits to health professionals by children with mental disorders during a 12-month 
period is relatively small. Furthermore, parent-reports may overestimate the number of visits during this time. It seems 
unlikely that current patterns of attendance are of sufficient duration and frequency to allow full implementation of 
evidence-based treatment programmes for child and adolescent mental disorders. 
Keywords 
Adolescents, Australia, children, health service use, mental disorders 
1Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia 
2Research and Evaluation Unit, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Women’s and Children’s Health Network, North Adelaide, SA, Australia 
3Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, West Perth, WA, Australia 
4Centre for Community Child Health, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia 
5Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
6Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
7Graduate School of Education, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia 
Corresponding author: 
Michael G Sawyer, Research and Evaluation Unit, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Women’s and Children’s Health Network, 72 King William 
Road, North Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia. 
Email: Michael.sawyer@adelaide.edu.au 



Child and adolescent mental disorders have a significant 
adverse impact on children, families and the community 
(for brevity, the term ‘children’ will be used to describe 
children and adolescents in this manuscript) (Institute for 
Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), 2017; Kessler 
et al., 2005; Knapp et al., 2011). To successfully address 
this problem at a population level, it is essential that univer- 
sal, targeted and clinical services are employed in the most 
effective manner possible. This is particularly important for 
services provided by health professionals because such ser- 
vices are expensive to provide and often relatively scarce. 
Accurate information about the proportion of children 
with mental disorders in the general community who have 
contact with health professionals and the nature of this con- 
tact is an essential prerequisite to determine the effective- 
ness of clinical interventions at a population level. While 
more recent studies have reported that a higher proportion 
of children with mental disorders in the community have 
contact with health professionals, a significant limitation of 
almost all previous studies is lack of information about the 
extent to which this contact is comprised of a single visit or 
includes sufficient ongoing contact to allow delivery of 
evidence-based treatment programmes (Farmer et al., 1999; 
Green et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2016). This is an impor- 
tant issue because interventions recommended in treatment 
guidelines for the management of childhood mental disor- 
ders such as major depressive disorder (MDD), attention- 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder 
(CD) or anxiety disorders (AD) uniformly require multiple 
contacts with service providers (National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence, 2016, 2017a, 2017b). In con- 
trast, there is no evidence of which the authors are aware 
that demonstrates a single visit with a health professional is 
sufficient to effectively treat these disorders. A further limi- 
tation of previous studies is lack of information about the 
frequency of visits (e.g. weekly, monthly or annually). This 
is a significant omission because of the potential adverse 
impact that long gaps between visits can have on the quality 
of therapeutic relationships required for effective delivery 
of treatment programmes. 
Four previous studies have reported the number or fre- 
quency of service attendances by children with mental dis- 
orders in population samples (Farmer et al., 1999; Lawrence 
et al., 2015; Meltzer et al., 2000; Merikangas et al., 2011). 
In Australia, Lawrence et al. (2015) reported that over a 
12-month period, 41.7% of visits to general practitioners, 
31.7% to paediatricians, 21.3% to psychiatrists and 17.2% 
to psychologists by children with mental disorders seeking 
help for emotional and behavioural problems consisted of 
single visits (Lawrence et al., 2015). However, the extent to 
which these children had also attended other health profes- 
sionals on repeated occasions during this time was not 
reported. This makes it difficult to interpret the meaning of 


the results as access to psychiatrists and paediatricians, and 
commonly psychologists, for the treatment of mental health 
problems requires a referral from a general practitioner in 
Australia. As such, a single visit with a general practitioner 
may have been for the purpose of obtaining a referral to a 
specialist. It is also possible that a child who had a single 
consultation with one health professional may have 
attended another on several occasions. 
In Great Britain, Meltzer et al. (2000) reported that over 
a 12-month period 25% of 5–15 year olds with a mental 
disorder had attended their general practitioner >2 times 
compared to 13% of children without a disorder. However, 
the authors indicated that these visits could be for any 
health problem rather than specifically for management of 
mental health problems. In the United States, in a 1-year 
prospective study of 1007 children aged 9, 11 or 13 years at 
baseline, approximately 30% of those who used a health or 
education service to address a mental health problem dur- 
ing a 3-month period continued to use services during a 
subsequent 3-month period. However, less than 10% used 
services during multiple 3-month periods across the year of 
the study (Farmer et al., 1999). For mental health services, 
the most common pattern was 1–2 visits over a 3-month 
period. Using data from the National Comorbidity Survey, 
Merikangas et al. (2011) reported that 68% of 13–18 year 
olds with mental disorders in the United States had less 
than six ‘service contacts’ (p. 38) across their life time. The 
authors described this as a very small number of lifetime 
visits for young people with disorders typically associated 
with high service needs. 
This study had three main aims: (1) to identify the per- 
centage of 4–17 year olds with mental disorders in Australia 
who attended health professionals for single or repeat visits 
during a 12-month period, (2) to identify factors associated 
with single and repeat visits and (3) to identify the typical 
length of time between repeat visits. To assess the accuracy 
of parent-reported service use, for 13–17 year olds we also 
compared the number of parent-reported visits to health 
professionals, visits recorded in the Medicare Benefits 
Schedule (MBS) and self-reported visits over the 12-month 
period. 


The participants were children identified as having a mental 
disorder in the second Australian Child and Adolescent 
Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing (Lawrence et al., 
2015). The survey was conducted during 2013–2014 and the 
dataset is available to research professionals (Zubrick et al., 
2014). Participants were a nationally representative sample 
of 6310 4–17 year olds and their parents/carers (for brevity 
referred to as parents; response rate = 55%). Young people 
aged 11–17 years (89% of those eligible, n = 2967) completed 


their own questionnaire. Details of the survey methodology 
have been described elsewhere (Hafekost et al., 2016). 
Participation in the survey was voluntary and all partici- 
pants gave written consent to participate. The research pro- 
tocol for the study was approved by the Australian 
Government Department of Health Human Research Ethics 
Committee and The University of Western Australia Human 
Research Ethics Committee. 

Mental disorders. Mental disorders were assessed using the 
Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children–Version IV 
(DISC-IV) completed by parents (Fisher et al., 1993; Shaf- 
fer et al., 2000). The DISC-IV implements the criteria for 
mental disorders set out in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition (American Psy- 
chiatric Association, 2000). Seven DISC-IV modules were 
completed by parents in relation to their children’s symp- 
toms and the impact of these over the previous 12 months: 
AD (including social phobia, separation anxiety disorder, 
generalised anxiety disorder, obsessive–compulsive disor- 
der); MDD; ADHD; and CD. For the purpose of this study, 
we report visits to health professionals by those who met 
criteria for a disorder during the previous 12 months. 
Functional impairment. Detailed information about the mea- 
sure used to assess children’s level of functional impairment 
is available in a technical report (Zubrick et al., 2015). In 
brief, the measure consists of 17 items that rate the extent to 
which AD, MDD, ADHD or CD adversely affect children’s 
schooling, friendships, family and the children themselves. 
For the purpose of this study, we used tertiles from the total 
functional impairment score to categorise children into one 
of three impairment groups described as mild, moderate and 
severe impairment. If a child had an impairment score for 
more than one diagnosis, the most severe level of functional 
impairment was utilised in this study. 
Parental psychological distress. The Kessler-6 (K6) scale was 
used to assess parental psychological distress in the past 
4 weeks. For the purpose of this study, recommended cut-off 
scores were used to categorise parents into one of two dis- 
tress levels described as ‘high’ and ‘normal’ (Furukawa 
et al., 2003). 
Family functioning. A short version of the General Function- 
ing Scale of the Family Assessment Device completed by 
parents was used to assess family functioning. Recom- 
mended cut-off scores were used to categorise families into 
one of two groups described as ‘unhealthy’ and ‘healthy’ 
(Boterhoven de Haan et al., 2015). 
Parent-reported service use. Parents were asked whether 
their child had attended a general practitioner, 
paediatrician, psychologist, psychiatrist and/or another 
health professional (i.e. social worker, occupational 
therapist, counsellor/family therapist) to get help for 
emotional or behavioural problems during the last 
12 months. Parents who responded positively were asked 
for the location of this service (e.g. ‘doctor’s rooms or 
other private practice’, Child and Adolescent Mental 
Health Service and hospital emergency). They were also 
asked whether their child had attended 1, 2–4, 5–9 or 
⩾10 times during the 12 months. Children aged 13– 
17 years (n = 2314) were also asked whether they had 
attended any of these professionals but were not required 
to identify the number of visits. 
For the purpose of this study, the number of visits with 
health professionals during the 12 months before the survey 
were categorised as follows: 
One visit. The child had only one visit with a health pro- 
fessional. Note that this category includes a small num- 
ber of children (n = 14) who had one visit with more than 
one health professional during the 12 months. 
One visit plus ⩾2 visits with another health profes- 
sional. The child attended a combination of single and 
repeat visits with health professionals in different dis- 
ciplines. For example, if a child had one visit with a 
general practitioner and ⩾2 visits with another health 
this 
professional, 
category. 



Number of visits. The number of visits to health profes- 
sional during the previous 12 months as specified in the 
parent survey questionnaire (i.e. 1 visit, 2–4 visits, 5–9 
visits, or ⩾10 visits). 
Data from MBS. Consent to access MBS data was obtained 
from children aged ⩾14 years and from their parents for 
78.1% (n = 4817) of children in the survey. Information 
about visits with general practitioners, paediatricians, psy- 
chologists, psychiatrists, social workers and occupational 
therapists was available from MBS data. The MBS items 
used to identify visits with each of these health professionals 
are shown in Supplementary Appendix A. For general prac- 
titioners, occupational therapists and social workers, we 
limited visits to those relating to mental health support. 
There are no specific MBS items relating to the assessment 
or treatment of AD, MDD, ADHD or CD for paediatricians. 
However, paediatricians generally use MBS items 110 and 
132 for new cases related to mental health, and items 116 
and 133 for any mental health treatment and reviews (His- 
cock et al., 2017). 
Sociodemographics. Family type, household income and 
household location (metropolitan vs non-metropolitan) 
were collected using 
the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics standard formats (Australian Bureau of Statis- 
tics, 2014). 



Table 1. Percentage of children with mental disorders having 
one or more visits with health professionals (n = 442).a,b,c 
CI: confidence interval. 
Weighted %; sample n. 
aThis represents 51.1% of all children with disorders in the survey. 
bThe correct attendance category in this table could not be identified 
for six children due to missing data. 
cIncludes visits to general practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, 
paediatricians, social workers, occupational therapists and counsellors/ 
family therapists. 
dChildren who attended health professionals in more than one discipline 
were placed in the category containing their largest number of visits. 
eChildren may have had a single visit with more than one health 
professional. 

Statistical analyses used parent responses to the national 
survey to identify the percentage of children with mental 
disorders who had single and/or repeat visits with health 
professionals during the 12 months prior to the survey. In 
all the analyses, survey data were weighted to represent the 
full Australian population of 4–17 year olds and to adjust 
for patterns of non-response. Visits to nurses or health pro- 
fessionals whose professional discipline was unknown 
were not included in these analyses. 
Logistic regression was then used to examine the strength 
of the relationship between number of visits (single and 
repeated), and child and family demographic characteris- 
tics, children’s level of functional impairment, family func- 
tioning, parental distress and the presence of comorbid 
disorders. All analyses were conducted using the Stata soft- 
ware ‘svy’ procedure to account for the clustered nature of 
the sample design and use of survey weights (StataCorp, 
2017). In these analyses, two sets of logistic regression 
models were fitted. Initially bivariable logistic models were 
used to assess the strength of the relationship between ser- 
vice use and each predictor variable. Subsequently, a single 
multivariable model was produced in which all the predictor 
variables were included in the model to identify the strength 
of the relationship between service use and each predictor 
variable, after adjusting for the effect of the other predictor 
variables. The analyses using parent-reported visits were all 
repeated using MBS data. 
Throughout the presentation of results, the percentages 
are weighted to represent the full Australian population of 
4–17 year olds while the number of participants shown is 
the number in the survey sample. 

As previously reported, 13.9% (n = 870) of the children in the 
second Australian Child and Adolescent Survey of Mental 
Health and Wellbeing had problems that met the criteria for 
AD, MDD, ADHD or CD (American Psychiatric Association, 
2000; Lawrence et al., 2015). No information about service 
use was available for seven of these children and due to miss- 
ing data it could not be determined if an additional 17 chil- 
dren had ⩾2 visits with a health professional. The majority 
of these 17 children had visited a general practitioner. This 
left 846 children with mental disorders for whom relevant 
service use data were available. Within this group, some 
information about their repeat visits was missing for six par- 
ticipants. They were included in the analyses of results where 
the missing information was not required. 
Percentage of children attending health 
professionals 
Of the 846 children with mental disorders for whom infor- 
mation was available, parents reported that 51.1% (n = 448) 
had attended a health professional on one or more occa- 
sions during the previous 12 months. Among these chil- 
dren, 10.8% (n = 44/448) had a single visit with only one 
health professional while a further 2.8% (n = 14/448) had 
single visits with two or more health professionals. The 
remaining children had attended ⩾2 appointments with at 
least one health professional during the previous 12 months 
(Table 1). The most common pattern among these children 
was for 2–4 visits (32.5%, n = 142/442). 
General practitioners (67.2%, n = 309/445), psychologists 
(52.8%, n = 242/446), paediatricians (41.1%, n = 170/447) 
and counsellors/family therapists (40.2%, n = 183/445) were 
the professionals most commonly attended by children with 
mental disorders (Table 2). Among those who attended gen- 
eral practitioners, 41.1% (n = 119/309) had only one visit 
during the 12-month period (Table 2). Of these, 29.6% 
(n = 84/119) of the children had also attended another profes- 
sional for ⩾2 visits during this time (Table 2). Among those 
who attended general practitioners for ⩾2 visits, 40.0% 
(127/309) attended 2–4 times, 13.8% (44/309) attended 5–9 
times and 5.0% (19/309) attended ⩾10 times (Table 2). 
A single visit was also a common pattern with several 
other health professionals (Table 2). For example, 30.6% 
(n = 53/170) of the children had only one visit to a paediatri- 
cian, 19.1% (n = 16/71) to a psychiatrist and 16.1% 
(n = 38/242) to a psychologist. The percentage of children 
who had one visit to these health professionals and who also 
had ⩾2 visits with a health professional in another disci- 
pline was 23.5% (n = 42/170) for paediatricians, 14.5% 
(n = 12/71) psychiatrists and 10.1% (n = 23/242) for psychol- 
ogists. With the exception of occupational therapists, 2–4 
visits was the most common number of repeat visits by chil- 
dren with each of the health professionals shown in Table 2. 
























Weighted %; sample n. 
aThe correct attendance category in this table could not be identified for six children due to missing data. 
bChildren had 1 visit with the health professional. 
cChildren had 1 visit with the health professional plus ⩾2 visits with another health professional. 
Factors associated with visits to health 
professionals 
To identify the strength of the relationship between the 
number of visits with health professionals reported by par- 
ents and the demographic and psychosocial characteristics 
of children with disorders, children were grouped into one 
of three categories: (1) no visits, (2) 1 visit and (3) ⩾2 vis- 
its. There was little difference in the demographic and psy- 
chosocial characteristics of children with no visits versus 
single visits with health professionals (Table 3). As well, 
none of the multivariable coefficients in the logistic regres- 
sion models testing the strength of the differences across 
the two groups were significant at the level of p < 0.05 
(Table 4). 
As compared to those with no visits to health profession- 
als, a higher percentage of children who had ⩾2 visits were 
12–17 year olds, had severe functional impairment, a 
comorbid disorder and lived in lower income and single- 
parent families (Table 3). In the multivariable logistic 
regression models, children with ⩾2 visits were 6.1 times 
more likely to have severe functional impairment, 2.0 times 
as likely to have a comorbid disorder and 1.5 times more 
likely to be in the 12–17 year age group than children with 
no visits to health professionals (Table 4). 

Information about the time between visits for children 
with ⩾2 visits was available for 181 of the children with 
linked MBS data (Table 5). This showed that repeat visits 
with general practitioners had a median gap of 75 days 
(IQR = 33–153 days) (Table 5). The median gap for psy- 
chologists was 14 days (IQR = 9–28 days), for psychia- 
trists 
for 
paediatricians it was 70 days (IQR = 29–125 days). 



1. MBS-recorded visits. Consent for MBS data access 
was provided for 80.2% (n = 657/846) of the chil- 
dren. With the exception of child age, there was little 
difference in the demographic and psychosocial 
characteristics of children, and parent-reported ser- 
vice use, for children for whom consent was pro- 
vided versus those for whom it was not provided. 
However, consent from 14 to 17 year olds as well as 
parents was required for MBS data linkage for chil- 
dren aged 14 years and older. As a result of a lower 
rate of consent by 14–17 year olds, there was a 
smaller proportion of 12–17 year olds in the group 
for whom MBS data were available (38.4%, 
n = 283/657) versus those for whom data were not 
available (62.2%, n = 126/189). 
In total, 47.9% (n = 323/657) of the parents who consented 
to MBS access reported that their child had attended a MBS- 
funded health professional during the previous 12 months. 
This included visits to general practitioners, paediatricians, 
psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers and occupational 
therapists (counsellors/family therapists were not included in 
these analyses as they cannot be identified in MBS data). 
However, only 38.0% (n = 245/657) of these children had an 
attendance recorded in the MBS data. Unlike other 





1 visitb 
% (n) 
1 visit plus ⩾2 visits with 
another professionalc 
% (n) 
2–4 visits 
% (n) 
5–9 visits 
% (n) 
⩾10 visits 
% (n) 












































Table 3. Demographic and psychosocial characteristics of children and families, by number of visits with health professionals 
(n = 846).a 
Weighted %; sample n. 
aIncludes visits to general practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, paediatricians, social workers, occupational therapists and counsellors/family 
therapists. 
bChildren may have had 1 visit with more than one health professional. 
cExcludes 34 participants who did not report family income. 
dBased on short-form Family Assessment Device Subscale score. 
eBased on Kessler K6 score. Excludes two participants who did not complete the Kessler K6. 
MBS-funded health professionals, paediatricians have no 
specific MBS items with which to bill the MBS for provision 
of mental health services to children with AD, MDD, ADHD 
or CD. As a result, it is not possible in MBS data to distin- 
guish between these services and those provided by 
paediatricians for other health problems. In light of this, we 
repeated comparisons between parent-reported and MBS- 
recorded service use after dropping paediatricians from the 
analyses. When this was done the difference between parent- 
reported service use and MBS-recorded service was 


No visits (n = 398) 
% (n) 
1 visitb (n = 58) 
% (n) 
⩾2 visits (n = 390) 
% (n) 




























































































CI: confidence interval (weighted); OR: odds ratio (weighted). 
aIncludes visits to general practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, paediatricians, social workers, occupational therapists and counsellors/family 
therapists. 
bChildren may have had a single visit with more than one health professional. 
cExcludes 34 participants who did not report family income. 
dBased on short-form Family Assessment Device Subscale score. 
eBased on Kessler K6 score. Excludes two participants who did not complete the Kessler K6. 
somewhat larger (parent-reported = 44.8%, n = 305/657 vs 
MBS-recorded = 23.3%, 163/657). 
Parents reported that a smaller percentage of children 
(16.7%, n = 52/323) had a single visit with health profes- 
sionals than was recorded in MBS data (27.6%, n = 64/245). 
They also reported that a larger percentage of children 
(23.5%, n = 79/323) had ⩾10 visits than was recorded in the 
MBS data (7.3%, n = 22/245; Table 6). Both sources of 
information indicated that 2–4 visits was the most common 
number of repeat visits. To reduce the possibility that dif- 
ferences between parent and MBS results were due to 
health professionals providing care in settings such as 























































































































Table 5. Median number of days between visits for children with mental disorders who had ⩾2 visits reported in MBS data 
(n = 181). 
IQR: interquartile range; MBS: Medicare Benefits Schedule. 
Sample n; weighted median (IQR) and range. 
schools or community health services where they did not 
seek payment from MBS, these analyses were repeated for 
visits that were specifically identified as taking place in 
‘doctor’s rooms or other private practice’. The results of 
these analyses were very similar to those obtained using all 
the contacts with health professionals and do not change 
the study’s conclusions (data not shown). 
Consistent with results obtained from parent-reports, 
there was little difference in the demographic and psycho- 
social characteristics of children with no visits versus sin- 
gle visits with health professionals (see Supplementary 
Appendix B, Table 1). In the multivariable logistic regres- 
sion analyses, only the multivariable coefficient describ- 
ing the relationship between single visits and severe 
functional impairment was significant at the level of 
p < 0.05 (see Supplementary Appendix B, Table 2). In 
contrast, as compared to children with no visits to health 
professionals, a higher percentage of children who had 
⩾2 visits were 12–17 year olds, had severe functional 
impairment, a comorbid disorder, lived in metropolitan 
regions and lived in lower income and single-parent fami- 
lies (see Supplementary Appendix B, Table 1). In the mul- 
tivariable logistic regression model, children with ⩾2 
visits were 3.8 times more likely to have severe functional 
impairment and 2.6 times more likely to have comorbid 
disorders than children with no visits to health profession- 
als. They were also 1.7 times more likely to live in metro- 
politan regions (see Supplementary Appendix B, Table 2). 

Parent-reportedand self-reported versus MBS- 
 
recorded visits. Information about visits by 13–17 year 
olds to MBS-funded health professionals was available 
from parent-reports, MBS records and self-reports for 
232 children. We included the later reports in this com- 
parison because of the possibility that older children 
had visits to health professionals of which their parents 
were unaware. Among these children, 56.2% (n = 131) 

had parent-reported visits, 42.3% (n = 99) MBS- 
recorded visits and 37.4% (n = 90) self-reported visits 
(see Supplementary Appendix B, Table 3). 

Several findings are evident from this study. First, parents 
reported that 51.1% of the 4–17 year olds with mental dis- 
orders in the study had contact with a health professional 
during the 12 months prior to the national survey. However, 
13.6% of these contacts were for a single visit, most com- 
monly with a general practitioner. Single visits were also 
relatively common with other health professionals ranging 
from 16.1% of visits with psychologists to 30.6% of visits 
with paediatricians. With the exception of occupational 
therapists, 2–4 visits was the most common number of vis- 
its with each of the health professionals over the 12 months 
assessed in this study. 
Second, none of the demographic and psychosocial fac- 
tors examined in the study had a strong relationship with 
single visits. In this area, the absence of a relationship 
between family functioning and service use is consistent 
with results of previous studies (Ryan et al., 2015). 
However, as compared to children with no visits to health 
professionals, children with ⩾2 visits were six times more 
likely to have severe functional impairment, twice as likely 
to have comorbid disorders and 1.5 times more likely to be 
aged 12–17 years old. 
Third, there was a sizable gap in time between visits 
with most health professionals. For example, the median 
number of days between appointments with psychiatrists 
was 31 days and for paediatricians it was 70 days. For psy- 
chologists, the median number of days between visits was 
14 days. For all these health professionals, there was also a 
very wide range in the length of time between visits. 
Finally, comparisons of parent-reports and MBS records 
suggest that parent-reports may overestimate the number of 

































MBS: Medicare Benefits Schedule. 
Weighted %; sample n. 
aIncludes visits to general practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, paediatricians, social workers and occupational therapists and does not include 
counsellors/family therapists. 
bChildren who attended health professionals in more than one discipline were placed in the category containing the largest number of visits. 
cThe correct attendance category in this table could not be identified for three children due to missing data. Three participants had ⩾2 visits but 
were missing the specific attendance category. 
dChildren may have had 1 visit with more than one health professional. 
13–17 year olds who attend health professionals for help 
with mental health problems. They also suggest that parent- 
reports may overestimate the number of repeat visits 13– 
17 year olds have with health professionals. 
The results suggest that although the number of children 
having contact with health professionals appears to have 
increased in Australia over the last 20 years (Lawrence 
et al., 2015; Sawyer et al., 2000), the number of repeat vis- 
its to health professionals remains small. Saloner et al. 
(2014) have suggested that ⩾4 visits are required for mini- 
mally adequate treatment for mental disorders involving a 
psychotropic medication and ⩾8 visits for treatment with- 
out medication. While it was not possible to identify the 
nature of children’s treatment in this study, it is notable that 
among the children with mental disorders, less than 30% 
(n = 242/840) had ⩾5 visits with a health professional and 
only 15% (n = 136/840) had ⩾10 visits during the 12 months 
of the study. It was also notable that there was often a sub- 
stantial gap in time between repeat visits. The latter is 
important because long gaps between visits have the poten- 
tial to both hinder the implementation of evidence-based 
treatment programmes and adversely affect the quality of 
therapeutic relationships that are a key element of many 
such programmes. 
Relatively little is known about how long children with 
mental disorders stay enrolled in services and what influ- 
ences ongoing use of services. The results from this study 
suggest that somewhat different factors influence single 
versus repeat visits with health professionals. Specifically, 
the characteristics of those with single visits were not sig- 
nificantly different from those with no visits. However, 
those with ⩾2 visits had higher levels of functional impair- 
ment and comorbidity and were also more commonly older 
than those with no visits. This is consistent with one of the 
few previous studies to examine this issue which reported 
that higher symptom levels among children, greater 
parental psychopathology and higher parent education were 
associated with persisting service use over a 12-month 
period (Farmer et al., 1999). In this study, level of func- 
tional impairment and presence of comorbid disorders had 
a stronger association with participation in ongoing treat- 
ment than other demographic characteristics such as family 
income and family structure. This suggests that it is the 
clinical characteristics of children’s problems, rather than 
their demographic characteristics that are playing the key 
role in decisions about the provision of ongoing care and 
support. 
The low percentage of children with mental disorders 
receiving minimally adequate treatment is similar to that 
reported in a recent national study of adults with affective 
and/or anxiety disorders in Australia where only 16% of 
participants were receiving minimally adequate treatment, 
defined in a similar way to this study (Harris et al., 2015; 
Saloner et al., 2014). This frequent pattern of inadequate 
care cannot be identified in studies where level of service 
use is described using a dichotomous indicator that simply 
records service contact versus no contact. However, it is an 
important issue because epidemiological studies conducted 
during the last decade have demonstrated that the preva- 
lence of child and adult mental disorders is not decreasing 
in Australia and other industrialised countries (Collishaw, 
2015; Collishaw et al., 2010; Jorm et al., 2017; Lawrence 
et al., 2015; Sawyer et al., 2000). Jorm et al. (2017) have 
suggested that a potential reason for the lack of change in 
prevalence of mental disorders among adults is that much 
of the treatment provided may fail to meet minimal stand- 
ards of clinical practice guidelines. The results from this 
study suggest that similar problems may exist with much of 
the treatment provided to children with mental disorders. 
Problems with service systems, health practitioner 
issues, and parental knowledge and attitudes all have the 
potential to adversely affect the dose of treatment received 




















by children with mental disorders. Service system issues 
include problems with service access, the cost of services 
(including incidental costs such as travel costs, lost work 
time and costs of child care for siblings) and lack of avail- 
ability of ongoing appointments (Lawrence et al., 2015; 
Sawyer et al., 2000). Health care provider issues include 
failure to deliver evidence-based treatments, variations in 
clinical practice and insufficient time or remuneration for 
delivery of evidence-based treatments. Parent issues 
include uncertainty about whether children need help, a 
preference to handle problems themselves and difficulties 
getting children to attend appointments (Lawrence et al., 
2015; RCH National Child Health Poll, 2017). It is notable 
that in both Australian national surveys, practical problems 
of this kind were more commonly identified as barriers 
than issues related to stigma (Lawrence et al., 2015; Sawyer 
et al., 2000). This suggests that while it is important to con- 
tinue addressing issues of stigma, doing this without 
addressing the significant practical problems experienced 
by parents seeking help for children with mental disorders 
will not improve treatment outcomes. 
Finally, the results highlight the value for population- 
level service planning of combining information collected 
in epidemiological studies with that available in electronic 
health records, such as MBS. As noted by Angus (2015), 
electronic health records have the advantages of being 
inexpensive to access, specific to individuals and also 
descriptive of entire populations. The value of this informa- 
tion is evident in this where it appears that parents may 
overestimate the number of visits children with mental dis- 
orders have with health professionals as compared to data 
collected contemporaneously at the time of the visit. It is 
possible that this occurred because parents were reporting 
visits to health professionals funded through private health 
insurance schemes or for services based in schools or in 
public health services. However, when comparisons were 
limited to services provided in doctor’s rooms or other pri- 
vate practice settings, the gap remained. 

Strengths of this study include its national scope, the qual- 
ity of its sampling methods, and its use of well-established 
diagnostic criteria and methods. However, it also has some 
limitations. These include a response rate of 55% and diag- 
nostic information limited to parent-report. Extensive 
checking showed that the participants were highly repre- 
sentative of the national population of 4–17 year olds 
(Hafekost et al., 2016; Lawrence et al., 2015). However, it 
is possible that inclusion of children who did not participate 
in the survey may have changed population estimates. It is 
also possible that additional information from other inform- 
ants such as children or teachers may have altered the pro- 
portion of children who were considered to meet the criteria 
for one or more of the disorders in the study. Finally, it was 

beyond the scope of this study to investigate use of school- 
based services, but previous work has shown that these are 
also an important source of support for children with men- 
tal disorders (Lawrence et al., 2015). 

This study demonstrates that while slightly more than 50% 
of children with mental disorders have contact with health 
professionals during a 12-month period, many of these 
children will have insufficient visits to allow for the deliv- 
ery of interventions that meet minimum recommended 
clinical practice guidelines (National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence, 2016, 2017a, 2017b). 
The results highlight an urgent need to better understand 
why so few children with mental disorders receive mini- 
mally adequate care. There is also a continuing need to 
develop, implement and evaluate new interventions deliv- 
ered in routine clinical practice that can benefit larger num- 
bers of children than is possible with traditional face-to-face 
treatment approaches. Achieving these goals will require 
changes to service systems to optimise access to care, 
upskilling of existing workforces in evidence-based mental 
health care and greater use of Internet-based services to 
reach larger numbers of children with disorders. It will also 
require ongoing monitoring and feedback to health care 
professionals about both the care they provide and its effec- 
tiveness in providing help for children with mental disor- 
ders. Finally, success in these areas will only be achieved 
by working in partnership with parents and children to help 
facilitate early recognition of mental health problems and 
reduction of practical barriers that currently impede effec- 
tive engagement with mental health systems of care. 

The authors wish to express their gratitude to the 6310 families 
who participated in the survey. 

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article. 

The second Australian Child and Adolescent Survey of Mental 
Health and Wellbeing was funded by the Australian Government 
Department of Health. H.H.’s position is funded by an Australian 
National Health and Medical Research Council career develop- 
ment award (No. 607351). Murdoch Children’s Research Institute 
is supported by the Victorian Government’s operational infra- 
structure support programme. 






Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry 62: 
593–602. 
American Psychiatric Association (2000) Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Rev. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association. 
Knapp M, McDaid D and Parsonage M (2011) Mental Health Promotion 
and Mental Illness Prevention: The Economic Case. London: 
Department of Health. 
Angus DC (2015) Fusing randomized trials with big data: The key to 
self-learning health care systems? Journal of the American Medical 
Association 314: 767–768. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2014) 3101.0: Australian Demographic 
Statistics, June 2013. Canberra, ACT, Australia: Australian Bureau of 
Statistics. 
Boterhoven de Haan KL, Hafekost J, Lawrence D, et al. (2015) Reliability 
and validity of a short version of the general functioning subscale 
of the McMaster Family Assessment Device. Family Process 54: 
116–123. 
Collishaw S (2015) Annual research review: Secular trends in child and 
adolescent mental health. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
56: 370–393. 
Collishaw S, Maughan B, Natarajan L, et al. (2010) Trends in adolescent 
emotional problems in England: A comparison of two national cohorts 
twenty years apart. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 51: 
885–894. 
Farmer EM, Stangl DK, Burns BJ, et al. (1999) Use, persistence, and 
intensity: Patterns of care for children’s mental health across one year. 
Community Mental Health Journal 35: 31–46. 
Fisher PW, Shaffer D, Piacentini JC, et al. (1993) Sensitivity of the 
Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children, 2nd edition (DISC- 
2.1) for specific diagnoses of children and adolescents. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 32: 
666–673. 
Furukawa TA, Kessler RC, Slade T, et al. (2003) The performance of 
the K6 and K10 screening scales for psychological distress in the 
Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being. 
Psychological Medicine 33: 357–362. 
Green JG, McLaughlin KA, Alegria M, et al. (2013) School mental health 
resources and adolescent mental health service use. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 52: 501–510. 
Hafekost J, Lawrence D, Boterhoven de Haan K, et al. (2016) Methodology 
of young minds matter: The second Australian Child and Adolescent 
Survey of mental health and wellbeing. Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Psychiatry 50: 866–875. 
Harris MG, Hobbs MJ, Burgess PM, et al. (2015) Frequency and quality 
of mental health treatment for affective and anxiety disorders among 
Australian adults. The Medical Journal of Australia 202: 185–189. 
Hiscock H, Danchin MH, Efron D, et al. (2017) Trends in paediatric prac- 
tice in Australia: 2008 and 2013 national audits from the Australian 
Paediatric Research Network. Journal of Paediatrics and Child 
Health 53: 55–61. 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) (2017) GBD compare 
data visualization. Available at: www.healthdata.org/data-visualization/ 
gbd-compare (accessed 20 September 2017). 
Johnson SE, Lawrence D, Hafekost J, et al. (2016) Service use by 
Australian children for emotional and behavioural problems: Findings 
from the second Australian Child and Adolescent Survey of Mental 
Health and Wellbeing. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry 50: 887–898. 
Jorm AF, Patten SB, Brugha TS, et al. (2017) Has increased provision of 
treatment reduced the prevalence of common mental disorders? Review 
of the evidence from four countries. World Psychiatry 16: 90–99. 
Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, et al. (2005) Lifetime prevalence 
and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National 
Lawrence D, Johnson S, Hafekost J, et al. (2015) The Mental Health of 
Children and Adolescents: Report on the second Australian Child 
and Adolescent Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing. Australian 
Government Department of Health, Canberra. 
Meltzer H, Gatward R, Goodman R, et al. (2000) The Mental Health of 
Children and Adolescents in Great Britain. London: The Stationery 
Office. 
Merikangas KR, He JP, Burstein M, et al. (2011) Service utilization for 
lifetime mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: Results of the National 
Comorbidity Survey-Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 50: 32–45. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016) Attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder: Diagnosis and management. NICE Clinical 
Guideline No. 72 Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ 
cg72 (accessed 15 September 2017). 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2017a) Antisocial 
behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people: 
Recognition and management. NICE Clinical Guideline No. 158 
Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg158 (accessed 
15 September 2017). 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2017b) Depression in 
children and young people: Identification and management. NICE 
Clinical Guideline No. 28. Available from https://www.nice.org.uk/ 
guidance/cg28 (accessed 15 September 2017). 
RCH National Child Health Poll (2017) Child mental health problems: 
Can parents spot the signs? Available at: www.rchpoll.org.au/polls/ 
child-mental-health-problemscan-parents-spot-the-signs/ (accessed 
10 January 2018). 
Ryan SM, Jorm AF, Toumbourou JW, et al. (2015) Parent and family fac- 
tors associated with service use by young people with mental health 
problems: A systematic review. Early Intervention in Psychiatry 9: 
433–446. 
Saloner B, Carson N and Cook BL (2014) Episodes of mental health treat- 
ment among a nationally representative sample of children and ado- 
lescents. Medical Care Research and Review 71: 261–279. 
Sawyer MG, Arney FM, Baghurst PA, et al. (2000) Child and Adolescent 
Component of the National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing: 
The Mental Health of Young People in Australia (ed Commonwealth 
Department of Health and Aged Care). Canberra, ACT, Australia: 
Commonwealth of Australia. 
Shaffer D, Fisher P, Lucas CP, et al. (2000) NIMH Diagnostic Interview 
Schedule for Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV): Description, 
differences from previous versions, and reliability of some common 
diagnoses. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 39: 28–38. 


Zubrick S, Lawrence D, Johnson S, et al. (2015) Measuring Severity of 
Mental Disorders with the Young Minds Matter Parent/Carer-Reported 
Impact Items: Technical Report. Perth, WA, Australia: Centre for Child 
Health Research, The University of Western Australia. 
Zubrick SR, Lawrence D, Sawyer M, et al. (2014) Young minds matter 
dataset: The second Australian child and adolescent survey of mental 
health and wellbeing, 2013–14. Canberra: Australian Data Archive, 
The Australian National University, 2016. Available from: https://ada. 
edu.au/ada/01295 (accessed 1 November 2017). 

