Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2017) 26:1483–1499 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-017-0999-6 
Mental health problems in Austrian adolescents: a nationwide, 
two‑stage epidemiological study applying DSM‑5 criteria 
Gudrun Wagner1 · Michael Zeiler1,2 · Karin Waldherr2,3 · Julia Philipp1 · 
Stefanie Truttmann1 · Wolfgang Dür2 · Janet L. Treasure4 · Andreas F. K. Karwautz1 
Received: 12 December 2016 / Accepted: 8 May 2017 / Published online: 24 May 2017 
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication 
Abstract This is a nationwide epidemiological study using 
DSM-5 criteria to assess the prevalence of mental disor- 
ders in a large sample of Austrian adolescents between 10 
and 18 years including hard-to-reach samples. A sample of 
3615 adolescents from four cohorts (school grades 5, 7, 9, 
11; age range 10–18 years) was recruited from 261 schools, 
samples of unemployed adolescents (n 
 39) and adoles- 
= 
 137) were added. 
cents from mental health institutions (n 
= 
The Youth Self-Report and SCOFF were used to screen 
for mental health problems. In a second phase, the Child- 
rens’ Diagnostic Interview for Mental Disorders was used 
to make point and lifetime psychiatric diagnoses. Mental 
health service use was also assessed. Point prevalence and 
lifetime prevalence rates for at least one psychiatric disor- 
der were 23.9% and 35.8%. The highest lifetime prevalence 
rates were found for anxiety disorders (15.6%), neurode- 
velopmental disorders (9.3%; ADHD 5.2%) and depressive 
disorders (6.2%). Forty-seven percent of adolescents with 
a lifetime psychiatric disorder had a second diagnosis. 
Internalising disorders were more prevalent in girls, while 
neurodevelopmental disorders and disruptive, impulse con- 
trol and conduct disorders were more prevalent in boys. Of 
those with a lifetime psychiatric disorder, 47.5% had con- 
tacted mental health services. Of the residual 52.5% who 
had not contacted mental health services, 18.1% expressed 
an interest in treatment. DSM-5 mental health disorders are 
highly prevalent among Austrian adolescents. Over 50% 
had or were interested in accessing treatment. Early access 
to effective interventions for these problems is needed to 
reduce burden due to mental health disorders. 
Keywords Mental disorders · DSM-5 · Adolescents · 
Epidemiology 
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this 
article (doi:10.1007/s00787-017-0999-6) contains supplementary 
material, which is available to authorized users. 
* Gudrun Wagner 
 

* Andreas F. K. Karwautz 
 


Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 
1090 Vienna, Austria 





Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings 
College University, London, UK 

Epidemiological studies are essential not only to provide 
data on children and adolescents who are affected by men- 
tal health problems, but also to provide information on 
the need, availability and access to mental health services. 
Information about prevalence and incidence is useful for 
planning primary, secondary and tertiary prevention and 
treatment services [1]. 
A meta-analysis of population studies assessing the 
prevalence of mental disorders in children and adolescents 
found a worldwide pooled prevalence rate of 13.4% for 
any mental disorder, surveys including epidemiological 
studies from 1970 to 2000 found median prevalence rates 
of 18%, and a US sample in 2010 revealed 20% of adoles- 
cents between 13 and 18 years with mental health problems 
who need treatment [2–7]. The most frequent psychiatric 


 
 
 
 

disorders in childhood and adolescence are anxiety dis- 
orders (up to 31.9%), behaviour disorders (16.3–19.1%), 
substance use disorders (8.3–11.4%), emotional disor- 
ders (3.7–14.3%), hyperkinetic disorders (2.2–8.6%) and 
aggressive dissocial disorders (2.1–7.6%) [2]. In child- 
hood, mental health problems in general are more frequent 
in boys than in girls (2:1), but from the age of 13 years 
onward, the prevalence rates are higher for girls. However, 
there are gender differences between various disorders. For 
example, adolescent boys suffer more often from external- 
ising and substance use disorders, while female adolescents 
are more often affected by internalising disorders, such as 
eating disorders and depressive disorders [3]. 
The severity and persistence of adolescent mental 
health problems are also of relevance [8–11]. In the Dutch 
TRAILS report, 22% out of 45% youth with a lifetime 
mental health disorder showed severe impairment. Func- 
tional impairment can be assessed from disorder-specific 
measures or a global measure such as the CGAS (Child 
Global Assessment Scale) [12]. Although anxiety disorders 
are most prevalent they are usually less severe, whereas 
the less prevalent mood and behaviour disorders are more 
severe [11]. The longitudinal BELLA study in Germany 
revealed a high persistence rate of mental health problems 
(>30% in a 6 year follow-up). Mental health service use 
was limited to only 33% with acute or recurrent mental 
health problems and 63.9% with persistent mental health 
problems [13]. A similar pattern was identified in the Dutch 
TRAILS cohort study with only 35% of adolescents with 
problems accessing specialised mental health services, 
increasing to 54.5% of those with multiple psychiatric dis- 
orders [10]. Of the 6–16 years old children and adolescents 
who were treated in specialised mental health services in 
Denmark, neurodevelopmental disorders and conduct dis- 
orders were the principal diagnostic group, especially in 
male children and adolescents, while affective, eating, neu- 
rotic, stress-related and adjustment disorders were more 
common in girls [8]. 
Several methodological issues are of relevance for the 
conduct of epidemiological studies. Information from mul- 
tiple sources produces a more complete picture of behav- 
iour and functioning [14]. The combination of a popula- 
tion-based cohort with a clinical cohort has been strongly 
recommended to examine continuities between the milder 
and the more severe ends of pathology. Barkmann and 
Schulte-Markwort (2004) suggest that additional quo- 
tas should be sampled from hard-to-reach groups such as 
inhabitants of youth welfare institutions or the offspring of 
migrants [15]. In Austria, there is compulsory education 
for nine school years, typically until the age of 15 years. 
According to surveys in the German-speaking area, about 
5% are school refusers and 7.2% leave after 9 years [16]. 
These individuals who will not be captured from school 
surveys might overlap with those in mental health institu- 
tions or from institutions providing courses for adolescents 
not in education or employment. 
The aim of our study was to determine the point and 
lifetime prevalence rates of psychiatric disorders (apply- 
ing DSM-5 criteria) in a national school sample of Austrian 
adolescents aged between 10 and 18 years using a two- 
stage design which also sampled hard-to-reach groups. 


The Mental Health in Austrian Teenagers (MHAT) study is 
a two-stage cross-sectional epidemiological study assess- 
ing mental disorders in a population of Austrian teenagers 
aged between 10 and 18 years. A random sample of adoles- 
cents from four age cohorts, grades 5, 7, 9 and 11 is drawn 
from different types of schools in all nine federal states of 
Austria (school sample). Additionally, adolescents not in 
school (early school leavers or school absenteeism) were 
also recruited through courses for unemployed youths and 
through mental health service centres. The latter formed the 
non-school sample. 
A screening phase using questionnaires was followed by 
a diagnostic interview conducted by telephone applying the 
new criteria of the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statis- 
tical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5, [17]). All ado- 
lescents scoring above a pre-determined cut-off point were 
recruited for detailed clinical interviews (“at-risk group”). 
Additionally, 10% of the adolescents scoring below the cut- 
off point were selected randomly for the clinical interview 
(“not at-risk group”). In addition to the adolescents, their 
parents (either mother or father) were also asked to par- 
ticipate in a clinical interview. The MHAT study was con- 
ducted between 2013 and 2015. 

A clustered prevalence sampling calculation based on Sul- 
livan (2010) was used to obtain the required sample size for 
the screening stage [18]. For the sample size calculation, a 
prevalence of 20% of any psychiatric disorder in childhood 
and adolescence is used as a conservative assumption. Fur- 
thermore, a cluster size of 60 per school grade was intended 
and a design effect of 2 was assumed. The calculated sam- 
ple size was N 
 2008 
for all four included school grades). As we also intended to 
calculate gender prevalence estimates without losing pre- 
cision, the required sample size was doubled leading to a 
total required sample size of N 
 4016. According to the 
national report on education, 7.2% of adolescents leave 










school after the compulsory 9 years (grade 7 and above) 
[16]. 4% of the sample of 11th graders were recruited from 
training courses for early school leavers and unemployed 
adolescents (N 
 20 per sex). There might be some 
overlap with the group of adolescents who cannot attend 
a school due to severe mental health problems, children 
and adolescents with a psychiatric disorder who are often 
absent from school [19] approximate to 3% (N 
 128, 
n 
 16 per sex and school grade). Therefore, a sample of 
these adolescents was recruited from mental health service 
institutions (departments for child and adolescent psychia- 
try) in Austria. 






Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Eth- 
ics Commission of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 
1134/2013). A multidisciplinary commission of the Aus- 
trian Federal Ministry of Education and Women’s Affairs 
also approved the study. For the screening phase, all Aus- 
trian schools (N 
 2547) at lower and upper secondary 
educational level for pupils in the age group between 10 
and 18 years were contacted by e-mail and/or telephone 
and invited to participate. Subsequently, a stratified ran- 
dom cluster sample was ascertained. School classes were 
recruited as distinct clusters, from strata defined by school 
type and federal state. Four school grades (5th, 7th, 9th 
and 11th) were included in the sample. No more than a 
maximum of two classes per school were selected. Indi- 
vidual exclusion criteria included low intellectual abil- 
ity, low essential German language skills or attending a 
special needs school. Written informed consent from the 
adolescents and their legal representatives was obtained 
by the class teachers. Teachers rated all participating and 
non-participating students regarding school performance, 
behavioural problems and social integration. Adolescents 
completed the questionnaires during one school lesson 
(50 min). An online form and an equivalent paper–pencil 
form of the questionnaire were used (76.7% online). The 
feasibility and acceptability of the screening phase proce- 
dure was evaluated in a pilot study [21]. 
For the sample of early school leavers, different course 
providers for unemployed adolescents were selected ran- 
domly from a list of course providers and asked for par- 
ticipation. For the sample of mental health institutions, 
eight departments for child and adolescent psychiatry (out 
of 11) located in five federal states of Austria (in the fol- 
lowing sections named as “clinical sample”) were selected 
and patients were asked to participate. The same procedure 
was applied as in the school sample with the difference that 
the paper–pencil version of the screening questionnaire was 
used only. 




With regard to the school sample, we approached 7643 
adolescents. According to the teachers’ records, no stu- 
dent had to be excluded due to low intellectual ability and 
n 
 12 had to be excluded due to low German language 
skills. We received questionnaires from a total of 3615 ado- 
lescents which correspond to a participation rate of 47.3%. 
One hundred and thirty-eight datasets had to be excluded 
because of too many missing values to calculate the risk 
status, leading to a final sample size of 3477 adolescents 
(44.7% males, 55.3% females). 
To detect potential differences between participating 
and non-participating students, teachers rated all students 
of their class on a few basic questions. Logistic regression 
analyses were performed to predict participation (yes vs. 
no). According to the teachers, students who did not partici- 
pate were more often absent from schools (p 
 0.001), con- 
 0.001), were less socially integrated 
centrated poorly (p 
(p < 0.001), more socially withdrawn at school (p 
 0.050) 
= 
 0.040). However, 
and had more behavioural problems (p 
effect sizes were all minimal to low (odds ratios 1.3–1.6). 



In the sample of the unemployed adolescents and early 
school leavers, n 
 76 adolescents were approached and 
data from 19 (48.7%) girls and 20 (51.3%) boys were 
obtained, which is approximately the planned sample size. 


 292 patients aged 10–18 years 
were approached, of whom 137 (30 boys, 21.9% and 107 
girls, 78.1%) provided informed consent for participation 
in the study. 


At the screening phase, socio-demographic data, mental 
health and potential risk factors affecting mental health 
were assessed by questionnaires including the following: 
Socio-demographic variables include age, sex, school 
grade, school type, federal state, familial factors such as fam- 
ily structure (including single parent structure, stepparent in 
household), chronic somatic or mental diseases of parents 
and siblings, negative life events (death of close others, acci- 
dent, traumatic experiences like physical and sexual abuse) 
and potential social risk factors such as migration back- 
ground or low socio-economic status (including parental 
unemployment). The socio-economic status was assessed by 
the Family Affluence Scale [22]. 
The German version of the widely used Youth Self- 
Report was used to obtain the general psychopathology 

 
 









[23–25]. Behavioural and emotional problems were 
assessed by 103 problem items on a three-point scale 
(“0” 
 often 
true). Items were summed up to eight syndrome scales 
including Withdrawn, Somatic Complaints, Anxious/ 
Depressed, Social Problems, Thought Problems, Atten- 
tion Problems, Delinquent Behaviour and Aggressive 
Behaviour, and three second-order scales (Total Problem 
score, Internalising Problems, Externalising Problems). 
Good internal consistencies were reported for the sec- 
ond-order scales (Cronbach alphas >0.86) and have been 
identified for the syndrome scales Anxious/Depressed 
and Aggressive Behaviour. They range between α 
 0.80 
and α 
 0.86 for boys and girls. Internal consisten- 
cies for Somatic Complaints, Delinquent Behaviour 
and Attention Problems range between α 
 0.70 and 
α 
 0.77 and are satisfactory. Consistencies lower than 
α 
 0.70 have been found for Withdrawn, and Thought 
Problems in boys and girls as well as Social Problems in 
boys [25]. 
= 
= 





As eating pathology is not covered in the Youth Self- 
Report, the SCOFF questionnaire [26] was used to assess 
a potential risk for eating disorders. The SCOFF is an 
acronym for the following five questions: Do you make 
yourself Sick because you feel uncomfortably full? Do 
you worry that you have lost Control over how much you 
eat? Have you recently lost more than One stone (6 kg) 
in a 3-month period? Do you believe yourself to be Fat 
when others say you are too thin? Would you say that 
Food dominates your life? The questions are answered on 
a dichotomous scale (“yes” vs. “no”). Those five items 
assess core features of anorexia nervosa, bulimia ner- 
vosa and binge eating disorders. One point is given for 
every “yes” answer. A score of 
2 reflects a risk for an 
ED. A pooled sensitivity of 0.80 and a pooled specificity 
of 0.93 have been found in a meta-analysis of diagnos- 
tic accuracy of the SCOFF across several countries [27]. 
However, other disorders have not been included in the 
screening as they are better assessed through parent rat- 
ing instead of self-rating, such as autism spectrum dis- 
order. Following the completion of the screening ques- 
tionnaire, the adolescents were divided into two groups 
(at-risk vs. not at-risk for mental disorders) according 
to pre-determined cut-offs derived from the Youth Self- 
Report and the SCOFF. The at-risk group was defined 
as reaching t-levels >70 in at least one of the eight YSR 
syndrome scales or a SCOFF total score of 
2, includ- 
ing either weight loss of at least 6 kg within 3 months 
or intentional vomiting. All other adolescents who did 
not fulfil those criteria were assigned to the group “not 
at-risk”. 














 792 (22.8%) reached the cut-off 
In the school sample, n 
level, including n 
 328 boys 
(21.2%) with 11 missing values in the variable sex and 
 2685 (77.2%) ranged below cut-off. Within the sample 
n 
who scored over the cut-off level, n 
 602 (76.0%) pro- 
vided a telephone number and contact address for the tel- 
ephone interview. We randomly selected n 
 301 (11.2%) 
adolescents from the pool under the cut-off level; of those 
 62 (20.6%) did not provide a telephone number. Of 
n 
 323 cases, both one 
those with contact address, in n 
parent and the adolescent could be interviewed; in n 
 54 
 84 cases only the par- 
cases only the adolescent and in n 
ent could be interviewed. In total, for n 
 461 cases at least 
the adolescent’s or parent’s interview was available, lead- 
ing to a total response rate of 54.8% of those who were 
approached. Those students who were selected for the 
interview but did not participate did not differ significantly 
from students who participated with regard to the YSR total 
score (mean 
 0.323). In 
 11 (57.9%) of 
the sample of unemployed adolescents, n 
 8 (40%) of the boys reached the cut-off 
the girls and n 
level. In this group n 
 21 (53.8%) did not provide contact 
= 
information and n 
 13 (33.3%) were not approachable 
for the interview or declined after initial consent. As from 
the remaining five unemployed adolescents no prevalence 
estimates are possible, we had to refrain from performing 
detailed interviews. Of the cases in the clinical sample, 
 115 (83.9%) provided contact information to approach 
n 
them for the interview. 











All adolescents and respective parents selected for phase 2 
underwent a structured clinical telephone interview (Child- 
rens’ Diagnostic Interview for Mental Disorders; CDI-MD) 
[28]. 
The Childrens’ Diagnostic Interview for Mental Disor- 
ders (CDI-MD) is a structured clinical interview for chil- 
dren and adolescents aged from 6 to 18 years and their 
parents for assessing a broad range of psychiatric dis- 
orders. It comprises an interview guide for children and 
one for parents. The current published CDI-MD version 
for the diagnostics of psychiatric disorders according to 
the classification of DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 has been 
adapted for the classification of DSM-5 by the authors of 
the CDI-MD. Point prevalence and lifetime prevalence 
rates were assessed for the following disorders: 



hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), tic disorders], depres- 
sive disorders (disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 
major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders (separation 

 
 

anxiety disorder, selective mutism, specific phobia, social 
anxiety disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, general- 
ized anxiety disorder), obsessive–compulsive disorder, 
posttraumatic stress disorder, feeding and eating disor- 
ders (pica, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge eat- 
ing disorder), elimination disorders (enuresis, encopre- 
sis), disruptive, impulse control, and conduct disorders 
(oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorders). Listed 
under the section “Conditions for further study” in the 
DSM-5, suicidal behaviour disorder and non-suicidal 
self-injury can also be diagnosed by means of the CDI- 
MD. Screening questions for alcohol-, tobacco- and other 
substance-related disorders as well as for the schizophre- 
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorders are included. 
The interview guides for assessing disrupted mood dys- 
regulation disorder, suicidal behaviour disorder and non- 
suicidal self-injury have been included in the CDI-MD by 
Schneider and colleagues for the first time. Additionally, 
we have developed interview guides for the assessment of 
Internet gaming disorder (also in the “Conditions for fur- 
ther study”) as well as for avoidant/restrictive food intake 
disorder and rumination disorders. 
The interrater reliability (kappa coefficient) ranged 
between 0.67 and 0.90 for the classes of lifetime diagno- 
ses included in the children version and between 0.85 and 
0.94 in the parent version [28]. Content validity can be 
derived from the classification scheme of the DSM-5. It is 
a widely used and well-accepted instrument for the assess- 
ment of mental disorders in children and adolescents. 


with skipping rules if the first two starting questions are 
not applicable. The prevalence of full-syndrome disorders 
will be presented in this paper. Full syndrome means that 
all diagnostic criteria of a psychiatric diagnosis were met, 
including subjective impairment. In the CDI-MD, impair- 
ment is judged by the interviewer on a four-point Likert 
scale from 0 
 very strong and has to be 
= 
 strong impairment) to be rated as clinical case. 
at least 2 ( 
Constraint in four social areas (at home, at school or work, 
at leisure time, with friends) and personal suffering of the 
adolescent are considered. Evaluation as impairment is 
dependent on the individual diagnosis and follows the rules 
of DSM-5. If one diagnostic criterion was not reached but 
there was a significant impairment, a diagnosis within the 
category “other specified disorder” was assigned. 


Furthermore, there are sections on the family history 
of mental disorders, as well as axis IV (psychosocial and 
environmental problems) and axis V (Global Assessment 
Functioning scale, ranging from 1 to 100). We chose to use 
the GAF score from DSM-IV representing the judgement 
of the individual’s overall level of functioning ranging from 
1 to 100 (indicating the lowest 1 to the highest 100 levels 
of functioning) rather than WHO Disability Assessment 
Schedule (WHODAS) which has replaced it in DSM-5, to 
get the clinician’s judgement. 
Interviewers were eight psychologists trained in clinical 
and health psychology, and one medical doctor in training 
for child and adolescent psychiatry. All interviewers com- 
pleted a standardized training given by GW. Cases were 
discussed in regular supervision group meetings led by GW 
and KW to ensure a consistent approach across all inter- 
viewers. Each uncertain diagnosis was discussed inten- 
sively and a diagnosis was confirmed only when there was 
consensus. 
For the present study, the interview sections were 
divided between adolescents and parents. Internalising 
disorders were assessed in the adolescents’ interview, and 
externalising disorders as well as disorders primarily occur- 
ring in infancy and early childhood were assessed in the 
parents’ interview. This decision was based on economic 
reasons and previous results which showed that externalis- 
ing disorders can be observed and better judged by parents, 
whereas internalising disorders such as anxiety and depres- 
sive disorders cannot be identified well externally and are 
therefore better judged by the adolescents (see also [28]). 
Mental health service use was assessed by the end of each 
interview section by asking if any health service was used 
with regard to the reported problem and, if so, in what form 
(i.e. psychotherapy, psychological treatment, outpatient/ 
inpatient treatment in a psychiatric clinic). Furthermore, 
the participants were asked if they had to take any medica- 
tions due to the reported problem. 

Analyses were conducted using IBM Statistics 22.0 soft- 
ware and Microsoft Excel 2010. Data from the screening 
stage (including calculation of the risk status) were only 
analysed if there were no more than eight missing values 
in the YSR and no missing value in the SCOFF, which 
is in line with the manuals. The prevalence estimates of 
the psychiatric disorders obtained in the interview stage 
were derived as follows: for the school sample, preva- 
lence estimates were calculated applying the law of total 
probability meaning that the prevalence estimates within 
the “at-risk” sample and within the “not at-risk” sample 
were pooled by weighting them with the probability for 
being at risk, respectively, and not at-risk. Prevalence 
estimates are provided separately for the “at-risk” and 
“not at-risk” group in a supplement table. Standard errors 



and confidence intervals were based on a simple random 
sampling. As there was a very high number of clusters 
(345 school classes) in combination with a low number of 
individuals within one cluster, standard errors calculated 
based on cluster sampling were quite the same as stand- 
ard errors calculated based on a simple random sampling 
(design effect ~1). 
The prevalence estimates in the clinical sample were cal- 
culated by the number of patients with a specific diagnosis 
divided by the total number of clinical patients who par- 
ticipated in the interview stage. As described below in more 
detail, the prevalence estimates within the sample of unem- 
ployed adolescents could not have been calculated due to 
the high dropout from the screening to the interview stage. 
Finally, the prevalence estimates from the school and 
clinical sample were pooled to obtain a “total prevalence” 
that takes into account that a certain proportion of ado- 
lescents could not be reached via the school setting due 
to severe mental health problems. The school and clinical 
sample were weighted in accordance with the original sam- 
ple plan. Detailed information on the calculations of the 
prevalence estimates can be requested from the correspond- 
ing authors. 
The prevalence estimates for different psychiatric diag- 
noses are based on different numbers of cases. For the 
diagnoses that were assessed through the adolescent’s 
interview, prevalence estimates are based on all available 
adolescents’ interviews regardless of whether the par- 
ent’s interview was available or not. For the diagnoses 
that were assessed through the parents’ interview, preva- 
lence estimates are based on all available parents’ inter- 
views regardless of whether the adolescent’s interview 
was available or not. For calculating the prevalence of 
groups of psychiatric disorders (e.g. anxiety disorders) 
and the prevalence of any psychiatric disorder, all cases 
where both the adolescent’s and the parent’s interview 
were available were included. For all assessed diagnoses, 
the point prevalence and lifetime prevalence were calcu- 
lated. The same procedure was applied separately to girls 
and boys to obtain gender-specific prevalence estimates. 
Furthermore, comorbidities between groups of psychiat- 
ric disorders were calculated. Only cases where both the 
adolescent’s and parent’s interview were available were 
included. Socio-demographic differences between stu- 
dents with and without a full-syndrome psychiatric diag- 
nosis and the clinical sample were analysed by means of 
ANOVAs in case of metric variables and χ2-tests in case 
of frequency variables. All factors that turned out as sig- 
nificant in the univariate analyses were further included 
in a multinomial logistic regression analysis to find out 
which factors still reach statistical significance when they 
are mutually adjusted for. 

Point and lifetime prevalence rates of psychiatric 
disorders in school, clinical sample and total sample 


The point and lifetime prevalence rates of any psychi- 
atric disorder in the school sample were 21.89% ( 
4.5) 
and 34.09% ( 
5.2). When correcting these estimates 
with participants from the departments of child and 
adolescent psychiatry, the point and lifetime prevalence 
rates increased to 23.93% ( 
4.8), 
respectively. The figures for each diagnosis are shown in 
Table 1. As expected, we found large discrepancies in the 
lifetime prevalence rates between the sample currently in 
psychiatric inpatient treatment and the school sample for 
depressive disorders, eating disorders, anxiety disorders, 
non-suicidal self-injury and trauma- and stress-related 
disorders. 




Overall, there were no gender differences for the total 
number of lifetime diagnoses (34.41% for females 
and 37.95% for males, see also Table 2). However, 
between diagnostic groups there were some differ- 
ences; for example within the group of neurodevelop- 
mental disorders, ADHD was three times as high in 
boys than in girls (15.4 and 5.2%, respectively) and 
disruptive, impulse control and conduct disorders were 
six times higher in boys than in girls (7.44 and 1.26%, 
respectively). In contrast, lifetime prevalence rates of 
some internalising disorders were higher in girls than 
in boys: anxiety disorders were twice as high in girls 
than in boys (19.53 and 9.52%, respectively), trauma- 
and stressor-related disorders were almost four times 
as high in girls than in boys (4.94 and 1.30%, respec- 
tively), and feeding and eating disorders were eight 
times higher in girls than in boys (5.47 vs. 0.64%, 
respectively). Within the category “Conditions for fur- 
ther studies (appendix B)”, no girls were found to fulfil 
the criteria for Internet gaming disorder, while 2.01% 
of the boys fulfilled the criteria. Suicidal behaviour dis- 
order was prevalent in 2.53% of the girls and 0.33% of 
the boys, and non-suicidal self-injury in 3.49% of the 
girls and absent in the boys, reflecting the internalising 
character of the disorders. 

Over 40% of individuals within each diagnostic category 
met the criteria for another diagnostic category during 

 
 




Table 2 Lifetime disorders (%) by sex including school and clinical 
sample 





































their lifetime with depressive disorders and anxiety dis- 
orders being the most frequent. The highest comorbid- 
ity rates were found within the category “Conditions 
for further studies”. Depression and anxiety disorders 
were present in 87.5% and 68.8% of cases with suicidal 
behaviour disorder. Depression, anxiety disorders and 
suicidal behaviour disorder were prevalent in 84%, 60% 
and 44% of cases with non-suicidal self-injury. Life- 
time comorbidities of all mental disorders are listed in 
Table 3. 
Socio‑demographic, clinical and risk differences 
between healthy adolescents and adolescents 
with mental disorders in the school and clinical sample 
Significant group differences were found for adolescents 
without lifetime mental health problems and the clini- 
cal sample with respect to sex, age, family status, chronic 
physical or mental illness within the family, and the history 
of a traumatic life event (see Table 4). The clinical sample 
showed a higher percentage of female patients compared 
to students without a full-syndrome psychiatric disorder, 
who were older, lived more often with a single parent, had 
a higher percentage of chronic physical illness and mental 
illness within the core family, and were more often exposed 
to traumatic life events such as abuse and violence. In 
comparison with the school sample with a full-syndrome 
psychiatric disorder, the clinical sample revealed a higher 
percentage of mental health problems within the family. 
No differences between the groups were found for migra- 
tion background, socioeconomic status, parental employ- 
ment status, comorbidity with a chronic somatic illness and 
negative life events. Applying logistic regression analy- 
sis, family status (χ2 
 0.047) and a diagnosed 
 9.65, p 
mental illness in the family (χ2 
 0.004) were 
 11.13, p 

= 
= 


 
 




significant predictors for the group membership (students 
with vs. without full-syndrome diagnosis vs. clinical sam- 
ple), whereas age and the experience of any severe life 
events just failed to reach statistical significance (p 
 0.073 
and p 




The school sample and clinical sample differed with 
respect to global functioning with higher functioning 
scores in the school sample, ranging between 62.5 for 
non-suicidal self-injury and 82.3 for feeding and eat- 
ing disorders. In the clinical sample, mean GAF scores 
ranged from 47.5 for neurodevelopmental disorders to 
67.5 for elimination disorders. Table 5 illustrates the 
mean GAF scores for all psychiatric disorders, reported 
separately for the school and clinical samples. 
Service use of school‑based adolescents with psychiatric 
conditions 
In the school sample, 34.09% of the students fulfilled 
the diagnostic criteria for any lifetime psychiatric dis- 
order. Within this group, 47.5% had received treatment, 
8.0% with inpatient treatment and 57.3% received out- 
patient treatment in mental health service, psychothera- 
peutic or clinical-psychological treatment, and 13.9% 
received medication. Of the group without treatment, 
18.1% expressed an interest in treatment. Mental health 
care utilization for each diagnostic group is listed in 
Table 6. Service use differs between diagnostic groups, 
with highest health care utilization in externalising men- 
tal health problems, including neurodevelopmental dis- 
orders (63.4%) and elimination disorders (44.4%). For 
internalising disorders, lower mental health care use was 
detected, i.e. 27.3% in anxiety disorders, 18.8% in eating 
disorders, 16.7% in suicidal behaviour disorders and 10% 
in non-suicidal self-injury. 

This is an epidemiological study of mental disorders apply- 
ing DSM-5 criteria in adolescents aged between 10 and 
18 years. We assessed almost 4000 adolescents for men- 
tal health problems, functional impairment and treatment 
seeking and included hard-to-reach groups. We used a two- 
stage design as it is more time efficient and can obtain sam- 
ples from a broad base. The second stage, using structured 
clinical interview is intended to overcome limitations of 
exclusively using screening instruments [29]. 
We found an overall point prevalence of 21.89% of 
mental disorders in adolescent students aged 10–18 years 
(23.93% when correcting for a sample which cannot be 
reached via schools). Anxiety disorders (9.52%) were the 
most common followed by neurodevelopmental disorders. 
These prevalence rates are comparable to those found in 

















































































































































 
 











































































Overall mental health 
service use (% yes) 

Medication use (% yes) Help wished by participant 
(%)b 







Trauma- and stressor- 
related disorders 




control, and conduct 
disorders 










44.4 
38.9 




n.a. not applicable 
a % of those who use mental health services 
b % of those who did not use mental health services 













0.0 
0.0 
66.7 
71.4 














33.3 
26.8 










18.5 
0.0 










0.0 
18.2 







a US nationwide epidemiological study for mental health 
problems in adolescents, applying DSM-IV criteria where a 
30 day prevalence rate of 23.4% for any disorder and 4.5% 
for ADHD was found. However, the rates for anxiety disor- 
ders (14.9% vs. 11.01%), mood disorders (3.1% vs. 1.36%) 
and oppositional and conduct disorders (4.4% compared to 
1.91%) were higher in the US sample [30]. 
A meta-analysis of 41 studies published between 1985 
and 2012 from 27 countries concluded that the worldwide 
prevalence of any mental disorder in children and ado- 
lescents was 13.4%. However, the conclusion from the 
meta-regression analyses was that these pooled preva- 
lence estimates are likely to be an underestimate. Preva- 
lence estimates are influenced by the representativeness 
of the sample, the sample frame and the diagnostic inter- 
view used and may also differ by area and timing [12]. 
Another cause for higher prevalence rates in our study 
might be lower diagnostic requirements for some diag- 
noses and the incorporation of new disorders in DSM-5 
compared to DSM-IV. This increase in prevalence is seen 
in eating disorders (3.7% vs. 1.8%) [31]. 
Within the category “Condition for further study” we 
have found lower point and lifetime prevalence rates for 
suicidal behaviour disorder than in German-based stud- 
ies (where point and lifetime prevalence rates of suicide 
attempts of 1.9% and 4.1% for adolescents between 13 
and 18 years were reported) [32]. Comorbidities between 
psychiatric disorders were common. This may be an arte- 
fact caused by the current system of classification. These 
empirical findings can be used to answer some of the criti- 
cisms made against DSM-5 [33]. For example, it is ques- 
tionable whether non-suicidal self-injury is a stand-alone 
entity as it is often present in the context of depressive and 
anxiety disorders, borderline personality or posttraumatic 
stress. The same argument applies to suicidal behaviour 
disorder. 
The differential diagnostic pattern found between gen- 
ders is in line with other surveys [2, 30]. The clinical 
sample included a higher percentage of older female ado- 
lescents who were living with a single parent or patch- 
work household. The clinical group also had more chronic 
somatic or mental illnesses in family members (parent/ 
sibling) and had experienced more often a severe life event 
such as abuse or violence. However, migration background, 
socioeconomic or parental employment status did not differ 
from adolescents without a full-syndrome diagnosis. This 
is in line with Rescorla et al. (2007) who found no associa- 
tion between YSR-scores with ethnicity, religion or geogra- 
phy in a worldwide survey of 24 countries [34, 35]. 
Single-wave, cross-sectional studies such as this are 
likely to underestimate the burden of disease in the gen- 
eral population. While around 13.3% children on average 
show a psychiatric diagnosis at any measurement point, 
almost three times this number had one or more disorders 
in multiple wave designs [36]. This and the fact that most 
mental health problems start early in life (50% before the 
age of 15 years and 75% before the age of 18 years) and 
tend to persist suggests that early interventions may be of 
value [37]. 
In our school sample, 47.5% of adolescents had 
engaged in treatment. This is a higher treatment rate 
compared with the rate of 20–25% service use by young 
people with mental health problems reported for the 
USA and European countries [38, 39]. The numbers are 
comparable to the study of Merikangas who found fewer 
than half of youth with current mental disorders receiv- 
ing treatment within the mental health service and that 
health service use differed a lot between diagnoses with 
highest treatment use for neurodevelopmental disorders 
and lowest for internalising disorders [40]. Comorbidity 
and severe impairment were associated with service uti- 
lisation, especially in behaviour disorders. This is in line 
with a recent study of mental health care use in Germany 
(longitudinal BELLA study) and in the Netherlands, 
showing the highest treatment rates within specialist cen- 
tres for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders [10, 41]. 
However, in the Netherlands in younger children, only 
50% of clinically referred cases met the requirement of 
severe impairment. It has been discussed that many chil- 
dren with psychiatric symptoms and mild impairment 
seeking mental health care will be undiagnosed and 
might therefore not be treated [42]. Low service use was 
found for mental health problems with high egosyntonic- 
ity such as eating disorders. Our findings with treatment 
rates of 25% are in line with the first epidemiologic study 
for eating disorders in the UK applying DSM-5 criteria, 
where service use of 27.9% was found [43]. In contrast, 
the most recent data of the National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health reported depression as the most frequent men- 
tal health problem for receiving mental health services 
(56.5%) in adolescents, whereas in our sample only 36% 
received treatment [44]. 
There are several barriers to seeking treatment. The first 
is related to parental factors such as their recognition of 
the problem as an entity that can possibly be treated and 
the resource (time and financial resources) involved in 
seeking treatment [45]. Second, only a few children and 
adolescents meeting symptom criteria are diagnosed by 
health professionals [46]. Third, there is an enormous dis- 
crepancy between needs and resource availability [47]. For 
Austria, a shortage of inpatient, outpatient and day patient 
facilities by around 50% of mental health care needed and 
a shortage of specialists (child and adolescent psychia- 
trists) have been reported [48]. In 2012, there was only 
one child and adolescent psychiatrist available for 30,000 
children and adolescents with massive regional variation. 

 
 

Fourth, egosyntonicity and stigma are further factors that 
have an impact on treatment seeking [10]. 
A continuum of different treatment levels, from primary 
to tertiary prevention, from the community to specialist 
health services has been proposed, and appropriate inter- 
ventions should be widely available to speed initial treat- 
ment contact [49, 50]. Milder but potentially serious mental 
disorders might respond to measures such as psychosocial 
support, self-help programs and non-clinical settings in an 
early stage [51]. Such interventions could be developed in 
youth-friendly ways and disseminated through community- 
based channels such as educational settings in schools and 
be provided by Internet platforms or smart-phone applica- 
tions [52]. Specialised and multidisciplinary care will be 
required for young people with multiple or complex needs. 
The tertiary system has an important part to play in the care 
of young people with serious mental disorders and must 
be strengthened. It has been stated that especially inpatient 
facilities are needed for young people so that they are no 
longer placed in adult inpatient units for mental disorders 
[53]. 

This study has several strengths. We did not only include 
a school sample, but also hard-to-reach groups such as 
unemployed adolescents and those hospitalized in child 
and adolescent departments of psychiatry. The importance 
of including these subgroups is supported by the fact that 
a higher percentage of this subgroup scored within the 
clinical range in the screening phase. However, the popula- 
tion of adolescents between 10 and 18 years also includes 
youths who have not been approached in our survey, such 
as youths who do not speak German (minor refugees, 
migrants), who are intellectually impaired or chronically ill 
and are known to have an elevated risk for mental health 
problems. 


 27) of mental 
health problems. We assessed point and lifetime prevalence 
rates, sex differences in mental health problems, comorbid- 
ities, general functioning, treatment rates and request for 
treatment. For higher diagnostic accuracy, we used in-depth 
interviews performed by experts (graduated psychologists 
in clinical training and under permanent supervision of 
experienced clinicians) instead of disease-specific self-rat- 
ing questionnaires. 
We illustrated the gap between the prevalence of men- 
tal health problems, availability of treatment facilities and 
request for treatment. 
Nevertheless, some limitations should be noted. Of all 
 428 
 75 
= 


schools (n 
(16.8%) agreed to participate initially, of which n 

(22.3%) declined in the subsequent stage. The response 
rate in the screening stage was low (47.3%) and another 
57.8% dropped out in the interview stage. Non-response 
in the screening stage was primarily caused by the fact 
that many students did not bring the informed consent 
form signed by the parents to school and were there- 
fore not allowed to participate. Data protection discus- 
sions that took place in the media just at the time of the 
data collection might also have influenced participation 
rates. To evaluate a possible response bias, teachers were 
asked to rate all students of their class (participating and 
not participating) regarding a few basic items. Accord- 
ing to the teachers, students who did not participate in 
the screening stage were significantly more often absent 
from school, had lower ability to concentrate during 
lessons, were less likely to be well integrated in class, 
were more socially withdrawn in school and had more 
behavioural problems than students participating in the 
study. Although these differences reached statistical sig- 
nificance, the effect sizes were minimal to low. However, 
this might suggest that the real prevalence rates were 
higher. Despite great efforts made by the interviewers (at 
least three contact attempts, mailbox messages, text mes- 
sages), a significant proportion of adolescents and par - 
ents could not have been reached for the telephone inter- 
view. Those students who participated in the interview 
did not significantly differ from students who could not 
be reached for or declined participation in the interview 
regarding the YSR total score, indicating that there was 
no selective bias in the interview stage. 
However, due the low response and high dropout rate 
and due to the differences in the screening phase, the 
obtained prevalence estimates might most likely be lower 
than the real prevalence rates. 
The use of information from multiple sources has been 
considered as important for obtaining a complete picture of 
behaviour and functioning of adolescents in epidemiologic 
mental health studies and reducing mono-informant infor- 
mation bias [11, 14]. Adolescents, parents, teachers and 
peers observe different aspects of behaviour and functioning 
and help to better understand mental health of adolescents. 
However, limited financial resources compel researchers 
to reduce the use of information sources. In our survey, 
we used three types of informants: Adolescents, their par- 
ents and teachers. Moreover, instead of obtaining informa- 
tion from different informants on the same problem, we 
received information from different informants about dif- 
ferent problems: We applied the teacher’s judgment in the 
screening phase to rate non-participating adolescents. In 
stage 1, we applied self-rating questionnaires, in stage 2, we 
had interviewed only the adolescents for internalising prob- 
lems and only parents for externalising disorders, although 



it has been commonly recommended to use both sources of 
information. So we might have lost important information 
and therefore could not profit from multi-informant data for 
comparing, contrasting and combining results obtained from 
different informants. This procedure might have limited the 
validity of the obtained diagnosis. When comparing preva- 
lence figures across disorder and interpreting comorbidities, 
the fact that different information sources were used for dif- 
ferent types of disorders should be taken into account. 
Lifetime diagnoses were given retrospectively to capture 
mental health problems present at an earlier age. Recall 
bias might influence these results. Problems prevalent ear - 
lier in life might be difficult to recall for both adolescents 
and parents and therefore be underestimated. Additionally, 
transition between different diagnoses could have occured 
and current problems overlap previous mental health 
disorders. 
In conclusion, this first broad nationwide and DSM-5 
based study revealed a high prevalence of mental health 
problems in youths and low attrition to treatment despite 
suffering. Thus, more efforts are needed to recognize these 
disorders and close the gap between needs and resources 
for this highly vulnerable group of young people with men- 
tal health problems. 
Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by Medical 
University of Vienna. The authors would like to thank all schools, 
teachers and students as well as their parents for their coopera- 
tion and participation in this study. We also thank “WUK m.power” 
and “Berufsförderungsinstitut Steiermark” for their help in recruit- 
ing unemployed adolescents and early school leavers. Last, but not 
least, we thank Prim. Dr. Michael Merl, Prim. Dr. Ralf Gößler, Dr. 
Harald Eder, Dr. Helmut Krönke, Prim. Dr. Katharina Purtscher- 
Penz, Prim. Univ. Prof. Dr. Leonhard Thun-Hohenstein, Prim. Assoc. 
Prof. Dr. Paulus Hochgatterer and Prim. Dr. Rainer Fliedl, as well as 
their teams for their invaluable help and personal effort in recruiting 
adolescents in inpatient psychiatric treatment as well as the patients 
themselves for participating in this study. 

Funding The MHAT study is funded by “Gemeinsame Gesund- 
heitsziele-Pharma Master Agreement” (a cooperation between the 
Austrian pharmaceutical industry and the Austrian social insurance)- 
Project code: 99901001300 given to WD and AK. 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that there is no competing 
interest. 
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea- 
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea- 
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made. 

 1. Costello EJ, Burns BJ, Angold A, Leaf PJ (1993) How can epi- 
demiology improve mental health services for children and ado- 
lescents? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 32(6):1106–1114 
(discussion 1114–1107) 
 2. Fuchs M, Bosch A, Hausmann A, Steiner H (2013) The child is 
father of the man—review of literature on epidemiology in child 
and adolescent psychiatry. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 
41(1):45–55. doi:10.1024/1422-4917/a000209 (quiz 56–47) 
 3. Ihle W, Esser G (2002) Epidemiologie psychischer Störun- 
gen im Kindes- und Jugendalter. Psychologische Rundschau 
53(4):159–169 
 4. Merikangas KR, He J-P, Burstein M, Swanson SA, Avenevoli 
S, Cui L, Benjet C, Georgiades K, Swendsen J (2010) Life- 
time prevalence of mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: results 
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication-Adolescent 
Supplement (NCS-A). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
49(10):980–989 
 5. Roberts RE, Attkisson CC, Rosenblatt A (1998) Prevalence of 
psychopathology among children and adolescents. Am J Psychi- 
atry 155(6):715–725. doi:10.1176/ajp.155.6.715 
 6. Verhulst FC, Koot HM (1991) Longitudinal research in child 
and adolescent psychiatry. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
30(3):361–368 
 7. Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J (1991) Four-year follow-up of 
teacher-reported problem behaviours. Psychol Med 21(4):965–977 
 8. Castagnini AC, Foldager L, Caffo E, Thomsen PH (2016) Early- 
adult outcome of child and adolescent mental disorders as evi- 
denced by a national-based case register survey. Eur Psychiatry 
38:45–50. doi:10.1016/j.eurpsy.2016.04.005 
 9. Ford T, Macdiarmid F, Russell AE, Racey D, Goodman R (2016) 
The predictors of persistent DSM-IV disorders in 3-year follow- 
ups of the British Child and Adolescent Mental Health Surveys 
1999 and 2004. Psychol Med. doi:10.1017/S0033291716003214 
10.Jorg F, Visser E, Ormel J, Reijneveld SA, Hartman CA, Old- 
 
ehinkel AJ (2016) Mental health care use in adolescents with 
and without mental disorders. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
25(5):501–508 
11.Ormel J, Raven D, van Oort F, Hartman CA, Reijneveld SA, 
 
Veenstra R, Vollebergh WA, Buitelaar J, Verhulst FC, Oldehinkel 
AJ (2015) Mental health in Dutch adolescents: a TRAILS report 
on prevalence, severity, age of onset, continuity and co-morbid- 
ity of DSM disorders. Psychol Med 45(2):345–360. doi:10.1017/ 
S0033291714001469 
12.Polanczyk GV, Salum GA, Sugaya LS, Caye A, Rohde LA (2015) 
 
Annual research review: a meta-analysis of the worldwide preva- 
lence of mental disorders in children and adolescents. J Child 
Psychol Psychiatry 56(3):345–365. doi:10.1111/jcpp.12381 
13.Ravens-Sieberer U, Otto C, Kriston L, Rothenberger A, Dop- 
 
fner M, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Barkmann C, Schon G, Holling 
H, Schulte-Markwort M, Klasen F (2015) The longitudinal 
BELLA study: design, methods and first results on the course 
of mental health problems. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
24(6):651–663. doi:10.1007/s00787-014-0638-4 
14.Huisman M, Oldehinkel AJ, de Winter A, Minderaa RB, de 
 
Bildt A, Huizink AC, Verhulst FC, Ormel J (2008) Cohort pro- 
file: the Dutch ‘TRacking Adolescents’ Individual Lives’ Sur - 
vey’. TRAILS. Int J Epidemiol 37(6):1227–1235. doi:10.1093/ 
ije/dym273 
15.Barkmann C, Schulte-Markwort M (2004) Prevalence of emo- 
 
tional and behavioral disorders in children and adolescents 
in Germany—a systematic literature review. Psychiatr Prax 
31(6):278–287. doi:10.1055/s-2003-814855 

 
 

16.Bruneforth M, Herzog-Bunzenberger B, Lassnig L (eds) 
 
(2012) Nationaler Bildungsbericht Österreich: Indikatoren und 
Themen im Überblick. Leykam, Graz 
17.Association AP (ed) (2013) Diagnostic and statistical manual 
 
of mental disorders, 5th edn. American Psychiatric Associa- 
tion, Arlington 
18.Sullivan KM (2010) Sampling for epidemiologists. http:// 
 
www.parkdatabase.org/files/documents/2010_Sampling-for- 
epidemiologists_CDC.pdf. Accessed 3 Nov 2016 
19.Wittchen HU (2000) Bedarfsgerechte Versorgung psychischer 
 
Störungen. Abschätzungen aufgrund epidemiologischer, bev- 
ölkerungsbezogener Daten. Stellungnahme im Zusammenhang 
mit der Befragung von Fachgesellschaften für die konzertierte 
Aktion im Gesundheitswesen. Max-Planck-Institut für Psychi- 
atrie, München 
20.Zeiler M, Wagner G, Philipp J, Nitsch M, Truttmann S, Dür 
 
W, Karwautz A, Waldherr K (submitted) The Mental Health in 
Austrian Teenagers (MHAT)—Study: Study design, methodol- 
ogy and description of study population 
21.Philipp J, Zeiler M, Waldherr K, Nitsch M, Dur W, Karwautz 
 
A, Wagner G (2014) The Mental Health in Austrian Teenagers 
(MHAT)-Study: preliminary results from a pilot study. Neu- 
ropsychiatr 28(4):198–207. doi:10.1007/s40211-014-0131-9 
22.Boyce W, Torsheim T, Currie C, Zambon A (2006) The family 
 
affluence scale as a measure of national wealth: validation of 
an adolescent self-report measure. Soc Indic Res 78:473–487 
23. Achenbach TM (1991) Manual for the youth self-report and 
 
1991 profile. Department of Psychiatry, University of Vermont, 
Burlington 
24.Achenbach TM, Ivanova MY, Rescorla LA, Turner LV, Althoff 
 
RR (2016) Internalizing/externalizing problems: review and 
recommendations for clinical and research applications. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 55(8):647–656 
25.Döpfner M, Plück J, Bölte S, Lenz K, Melchers P, Heim K 
 
(1998) Fragebogen für Jugendliche. Deutsche Bearbeitung des 
Youth Self-Report (YSR) der Child Behaviour Checklist. Ein- 
führung und Anleitung zur Handauswertung. 2 Aufl. eds. Arbe- 
itsgruppe Kinder-, Jugend- und Familiendiagnostik, Köln 
26.Morgan JF, Reid F, Lacey JH (1999) The SCOFF question- 
 
naire: assessment of a new screening tool for eating disorders. 
BMJ 319(7223):1467–1468 
27.Botella J, Sepulveda AR, Huang H, Gambara H (2013) A 
 
meta-analysis of the diagnostic accuracy of the SCOFF. Span J 
Psychol 16:E92. doi:10.1017/sjp.2013.92 
28.Schneider S, Unnewehr S, Margraf J (eds) (2009) Kinder- 
 
DIPS. Diagnostisches Interview bei psychischen Störungen im 
Kindes- und Jugendalter. Springer Medizin, Heidelberg 
29.Jacobi C, Abascal L, Taylor CB (2004) Screening for eating 
 
disorders and high-risk behavior: caution. Int J Eat Disord 
36(3):280–295. doi:10.1002/eat.20048 
30.Hafeman DM, Merranko J, Axelson D, Goldstein BI, Gold- 
 
stein T, Monk K, Hickey MB, Sakolsky D, Diler R, Iyengar S, 
Brent D, Kupfer D, Birmaher B (2016) Toward the definition of 
a bipolar prodrome: dimensional predictors of bipolar spectrum 
disorders in at-risk youths. Am J Psychiatry 173(7):695–704. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15040414 
31. Flament MF, Buchholz A, Henderson K, Obeid N, Maras D, 
 
Schubert N, Paterniti S, Goldfield G (2015) Comparative distri- 
bution and validity of DSM-IV and DSM-5 diagnoses of eating 
disorders in adolescents from the community. Eur Eat Disord 
Rev 23(2):100–110. doi:10.1002/erv.2339 
32.Plener PL, Kapusta ND, Brunner R, Kaess M (2014) Non-sui- 
 
cidal self-injury (NSSI) and suicidal behavior disorder in the 
DSM-5. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 42(6):405–411. 
doi:10.1024/1422-4917/a000319 (quiz 412–403) 
33.Rodríguez-Testala JF, Senín-Calderónb C, Perona-Garcelána S 
 
(2014) From DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5: analysis of some changes. 
Int J Clin Health Psychol 14:221–231 
34.Rescorla L, Achenbach TM, Ivanova MY, Dumenci L, Almqvist 
 
F, Bilenberg N, Bird H, Broberg A, Dobrean A, Dopfner M, 
Erol N, Forns M, Hannesdottir H, Kanbayashi Y, Lambert MC, 
Leung P, Minaei A, Mulatu MS, Novik TS, Oh KJ, Roussos A, 
Sawyer M, Simsek Z, Steinhausen HC, Weintraub S, Metzke 
CW, Wolanczyk T, Zilber N, Zukauskiene R, Verhulst F (2007) 
Epidemiological comparisons of problems and positive qualities 
reported by adolescents in 24 countries. J Consult Clin Psychol 
75(2):351–358. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.75.2.351 
35.Rescorla L, Ivanova MY, Achenbach TM, Begovac I, Chahed 
 
M, Drugli MB, Emerich DR, Fung DSS, Haider M, Hansson K, 
Hewitt N, Jaimes S, Larsson B, Maggiolini A, Markovic J, Mitro- 
vic D, Moreira P, Oliveira JT, Olsson M, Ooi YP, Petot D, Pisa 
C, Pomalima R, da Rocha MM, Rudan V, Sekulic S, Shahini M, 
de Mattos Silvares EF, Szirovicza L, Valverde J, Vera LA, Villa 
MC, Viola L, Woo BSC, Zhang EY (2012) International epide- 
miology of child and adolescent psychopathology ii: integration 
and applications of dimensional findings from 44 societies. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 51(12):1273–1283.e1278 
36.Costello EJ, Mustillo S, Erkanli A, Keeler G, Angold A (2003) 
 
Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in child- 
hood and adolescence. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60(8):837–844. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.60.8.837 
37.Wykes T, Haro JM, Belli SR, Obradors-Tarrago C, Arango C, 
 
Ayuso-Mateos JL, Bitter I, Brunn M, Chevreul K, Demotes- 
Mainard J, Elfeddali I, Evans-Lacko S, Fiorillo A, Forsman 
AK, Hazo JB, Kuepper R, Knappe S, Leboyer M, Lewis SW, 
Linszen D, Luciano M, Maj M, McDaid D, Miret M, Papp S, 
Park AL, Schumann G, Thornicroft G, van der Feltz-Cornelis 
C, van Os J, Wahlbeck K, Walker-Tilley T, Wittchen HU (2015) 
Mental health research priorities for Europe. Lancet Psychiatry 
2(11):1036–1042. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00332-6 
38.Frigerio A, Rucci P, Goodman R, Ammaniti M, Carlet O, Cavo- 
 
lina P, De Girolamo G, Lenti C, Lucarelli L, Mani E, Martinuzzi 
A, Micali N, Milone A, Morosini P, Muratori F, Nardocci F, 
Pastore V, Polidori G, Tullini A, Vanzin L, Villa L, Walder M, 
Zuddas A, Molteni M (2009) Prevalence and correlates of men- 
tal disorders among adolescents in Italy: the PrISMA study. 
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 18(4):217–226. doi:10.1007/ 
s00787-008-0720-x 
39.Ryan SM, Jorm AF, Toumbourou JW, Lubman DI (2015) Parent 
 
and family factors associated with service use by young people 
with mental health problems: a systematic review. Early Interv 
Psychiatry 9(6):433–446. doi:10.1111/eip.12211 
40.Merikangas KR, He JP, Burstein M, Swendsen J, Avenevoli S, 
 
Case B, Georgiades K, Heaton L, Swanson S, Olfson M (2011) 
Service utilization for lifetime mental disorders in U.S. adoles- 
cents: results of the National Comorbidity Survey-Adolescent 
Supplement (NCS-A). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
50(1):32–45. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2010.10.006 
41.Hintzpeter B, Klasen F, Schon G, Voss C, Holling H, Ravens-Sie- 
 
berer U (2015) Mental health care use among children and ado- 
lescents in Germany: results of the longitudinal BELLA study. 
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 24(6):705–713. doi:10.1007/ 
s00787-015-0676-6 
42.Rijlaarsdam J, Stevens GW, van der Ende J, Hofman A, Jaddoe 
 
VW, Verhulst FC, Tiemeier H (2015) Prevalence of DSM-IV dis- 
orders in a population-based sample of 5- to 8-year-old children: 
the impact of impairment criteria. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
24(11):1339–1348. doi:10.1007/s00787-015-0684-6 
43.Solmi F, Hotopf M, Hatch SL, Treasure J, Micali N (2016) Eat- 
 
ing disorders in a multi-ethnic inner-city UK sample: prevalence, 



comorbidity and service use. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epide- 
miol 51(3):369–381 
44.Lipari RN, Hedden S, Blau G, Rubenstein L (2016) Adolescent 
 
mental health service use and reasons for using services in spe- 
cialty, educational, and general medical settings. In: The CBHSQ 
Report. Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration (US); 2013. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/books/NBK362074/. Accessed 11 May 2017 
45.Sayal K, Tischler V, Coope C, Robotham S, Ashworth M, Day 
 
C, Tylee A, Simonoff E (2010) Parental help-seeking in primary 
care for child and adolescent mental health concerns: qualitative 
study. Br J Psychiatry 197(6):476–481 
46.Ravens-Sieberer U, Wille N, Erhart M, Bettge S, Wittchen 
 
HU, Rothenberger A, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Resch F, Holling 
H, Bullinger M, Barkmann C, Schulte-Markwort M, Dopfner 
M (2008) Prevalence of mental health problems among chil- 
dren and adolescents in Germany: results of the BELLA study 
within the National Health Interview and Examination Survey. 
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 17(Suppl 1):22–33. doi:10.1007/ 
s00787-008-1003-2 
47.Rocha TB, Graeff-Martins AS, Kieling C, Rohde LA (2015) 
 
Provision of mental healthcare for children and adolescents: 
a worldwide view. Curr Opin Psychiatry 28(4):330–335. 
doi:10.1097/YCO.0000000000000169 
48.Karwautz A, Purtscher-Penz AK, Hochgatterer P, Kien- 
 
bacher C (2015) Child and adolescent psychiatry in Austria. 
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 24(3):359–360. doi:10.1007/ 
s00787-014-0657-1 
49.Patel V, Flisher AJ, Hetrick S, McGorry P (2007) Mental health 
 
of young people: a global public-health challenge. Lancet 
369(9569):1302–1313. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60368-7 
50.Jones PB (2013) Adult mental health disorders and their age at 
 

51.Wagner G, Penelo E, Wanner C, Gwinner P, Trofaier ML, 
 
Imgart H, Waldherr K, Wober-Bingol C, Karwautz AF (2013) 
Internet-delivered cognitive-behavioural therapy v. conventional 
guided self-help for bulimia nervosa: long-term evaluation of 
a randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 202:135–141. 
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.111.098582 
52.Green JG, McLaughlin KA, Alegria M, Costello EJ, Gruber MJ, 
 
Hoagwood K, Leaf PJ, Olin S, Sampson NA, Kessler RC (2013) 
School mental health resources and adolescent mental health ser- 
vice use. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 52(5):501–510 
53.Kieling C, Baker-Henningham H, Belfer M, Conti G, Ertem 
 
I, Omigbodun O, Rohde LA, Srinath S, Ulkuer N, Rahman 
A (2011) Child and adolescent mental health worldwide: evi- 
dence for action. Lancet 378(9801):1515–1525. doi:10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(11)60827-1 

