Help-Seeking for Child Psychopathology: Pathways to 
Informal and Professional Services in The Netherlands 
MARIEKE ZWAANSWIJK, PH.D., JAN VAN DER ENDE, M.S., PETER F. M. VERHAAK, PH.D., 
JOZIEN M. BENSING, PH.D., AND FRANK C. VERHULST, M.D. 











care, improving general practitioners’ skills in detecting child psychopathology, and direct contact of mental health pro- 
fessionals with general practitioners and schools may enhance access to care for children in need. J. Am. Acad. Child 
Adolesc. Psychiatry, 2005;44(12):1292–1300. Key Words: mental health services, child, psychopathology, health be- 

The pathway that leads to professional mental health 
care for children with psychopathology is paved with 
obstacles, causing a discrepancy between the number 
of disordered children in the community and those re- 
ceiving professional care (Burns et al., 1995; Flisher 
et al., 1997; Leaf et al., 1996; Pavuluri et al., 1996; Ver- 
hulst and Van der Ende, 1997). Understanding which 
Accepted June 28, 2005. 
Dr. Zwaanswijk is with the Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research 
(NIVEL), Utrecht, the Netherlands and the Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Dr. Verhaak is with 
NIVEL, and Dr. Bensing is with NIVEL and Utrecht University, the Nether- 
lands; Dr. Verhulst and J. van der Ende are with the Department of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 









factors are involved in the help-seeking process may pro- 
vide suggestions on how to increase service use for these 
children. A fruitful way to integrate ﬁndings on help- 
seeking stages and their determinants is to include them 
in one comprehensive model. Although many models 
concerning the help-seeking process have been formu- 
lated (e.g., Andersen, 1995; Fischer et al., 1983; Gold- 
berg and Huxley, 1980, 1992), few speciﬁcally apply to 
help-seeking for child and adolescent psychopathology. 
A ﬁrst example is the model by Verhulst and Koot 
(1992), who have adapted the Goldberg and Huxley 
(1980, 1992) model to make it applicable for child 
and adolescent help-seeking. In this model, help-seeking 
is described as consisting of ﬁve subsequent levels, each 
separated by a ﬁlter. The ﬁlters refer to (1) parental prob- 
lem recognition and consultation of a general practi- 
tioner (GP), (2) problem recognition by the GP, (3) 
referral to psychiatric care, and (4) referral to inpatient 
psychiatric care. Because general practice is the formal 
point of entry into mental health care in the United 
Kingdom and the Netherlands, and GPs are supposed 


