Journal Pre-proof
Evaluating the effect of a smartphone app-based self-management
program for people with COPD: A randomized controlled trial
Soo Kyung Park, Cho Hee Bang, Seung Hyeun Lee
PII:
S0897-1897(19)30284-8
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnr.2020.151231
Reference:
YAPNR 151231
To appear in:
Applied Nursing Research
Received date:
21 April 2019
Revised date:
7 September 2019
Accepted date:
5 January 2020
Please cite this article as: S.K. Park, C.H. Bang and S.H. Lee, Evaluating the effect of a
smartphone app-based self-management program for people with COPD: A randomized
controlled
trial,
Applied
Nursing
Research(2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apnr.2020.151231
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such
as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is
not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting,
typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this
version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production
process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers
that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2020 Published by Elsevier.

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
1
 
 Evaluating the Effect of a Smartphone App-Based Self-
Management Program for People with COPD:  
A Randomized Controlled Trial 
 
 
 
Authors: Soo Kyung Park, Cho Hee Bang, Seung Hyeun Lee 
Soo Kyung Park: PhD, RN, Associate Professor, School of Nursing, Korea University, Korea (ROK) 
Cho Hee Bang: MSN, RN, Doctoral student, School of Nursing, Ehwa Women’s University, Seoul, 
Korea (ROK) 
Seung Hyeun Lee: MD, PhD, Division of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Korea (ROK) 
 
Corresponding Author, Soo Kyung Park; sookyung.park7@gmail.com 
Address; School of Nursing, Korea University, 145 Anam-Ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, Korea (ROK)  
Phone; 82-2-3290-4926 
Running Head; App-based program in people with COPD 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
2
 This research study was funded by National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-
2014R1A1A1037712) 
 There is no conflict of interest. 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
3
                              ABSTRACT  
Aim. To examine the effect of a 6-month, smartphone app-based self-management program 
for people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Background. Technological interventions have been used for chronic disease management, 
but the effect of a self-management program using a smartphone app has not been evaluated 
in people with COPD. 
Methods. For this randomized controlled trial, patients with COPD (N = 44) were recruited 
in pulmonary medicine outpatient clinics at two, metropolitan, tertiary care, academic 
hospitals. Eligible participants were randomized into two groups and received group 
education and exercise sessions in the first month of the 6-month intervention. Participants in 
the experimental group received a smartphone app-based self-management program, which 
included education, exercises, self-monitoring of symptoms and exercise, and social support. 
Participants in the control group received one call a month from the research staff. Self-care 
behavior was measured as a primary outcome. All measures were administered at baseline 
and at 6 months.  
Results. After randomization, the experimental group numbered 22, the control group 
numbered 20, and 2 participants dropped out. Significant differences between groups were 
found in change score for self-care behavior, total activity count per wear time, and percent 
time spent in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity over 6 months.  
Conclusion. A self-management program, using a smartphone app, can effect behavioral 
change in people with COPD. This program could be a boon to patients with COPD who 
have limited access to a health care provider, no opportunities for pulmonary rehabilitation, 
and frequent exacerbations. 
Key words: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, smartphone application, self-
management program 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
4
Title; Evaluating the Effect of a Smartphone App-Based Self-Management Program for 
People with COPD: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
1. Introduction 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by limited airflow 
and persistent symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, and sputum production (Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD], 2018). Despite advanced medical treatment, 
people with COPD become increasingly more dyspneic, which limits activity, and experience 
frequent exacerbations as their disease progresses, which severely affects them physically, 
psychologically, and socially (Liang et al., 2014). Considering COPD‟s progressively 
declining trajectory, people with the disease should learn how to self-manage it. A self-
management program is defined as a “program aimed at teaching skills needed to carry out 
specific medical regimens specific to the disease and guide health behavior change for 
patients to control their disease and improve their well-being” (Bourbeau, Nault, & Dang-Tan, 
2004, p. 271). Studies have shown that such self-management programs improve health-
related outcomes in people with COPD (Cannon et al., 2016; Newham et al., 2017; Wang, 
Tan, Xiao, & Deng, 2017). One study reported that self-care behavior in Koreans with COPD 
was poor (Park et al., 2017). Despite the high prevalence of COPD in Korea and the poor 
self-care behavior of Koreans with the disease, self-management programs to improve self-
care behavior have been limited (Hwang, Park, & Yoo, 2017). Pulmonary rehabilitation, 
which may include a self-management program in addition to structured exercise, has been 
recommended as a management option for COPD (GOLD, 2018). However, in Korea, 
pulmonary rehabilitation has not been widely used, it may not be accessible to all patients, 
and it has limitations such as short duration and attenuation of its beneficial effects over time 
(Spruit & Singh, 2013). Thus, Koreans with COPD need a new option to learn self-
management skills, improve self-care behavior, and achieve better health-related outcomes. 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
5
Such an option should be more convenient, accessible to education, and supportive of their 
disease self-management.  
Many attempts have been made to improve self-management skills and health-related 
outcomes in people with COPD using information technology such as telephone follow-up, 
video conferencing, and the internet (Gregersen et al., 2016; Lundell, Holmner, Rehn, Nyberg, 
& Wadell, 2015; McLean et al., 2012; Polisena et al., 2010). Among the latest technologies is 
the smartphone, a communication marvel that offers portability, connectedness, continuous 
uninterrupted data streaming, computational capability, and ease of communication with 
health care providers (Boulos, Wheeler, Tavares, & Jones, 2011; Wang et al., 2014). 
Furthermore, people can run specialized applications (apps) on their smartphones (Boulos et 
al., 2011; Kirwan, Vandelanotte, Fenning, & Duncan, 2013). The high prevalence of 
smartphones also makes it possible to provide care to patients at their convenience. In 2016, 
the rate of smartphone use was reported to be as high as 88% in South Korea (Lee, 2018). As 
an aside, by 2013, 25% of Korean adults aged 55 years and older owned a smartphone (The 
statistics Portal, 2018). Offering several benefits, smartphone apps now enable health care 
providers to effectively manage the care of people with many chronic diseases (Lee, Choi, 
Lee, & Jiang, 2018; Mosa, Yoo, & Sheets, 2012; Wang et al., 2014). Although the smartphone 
has been used in past studies of COPD patients, it recorded symptoms or physical activity for 
the most part and was coupled with other physiological medical devices or technologies like 
the internet (Alwashimi et al., 2016). Recently, studies of COPD have focused on physical 
activity and pulmonary rehabilitation, taking full advantage of the smartphone app‟s 
functionality (Demeyer et al., 2017; Rassouli et al., 2018). However, research into the use of 
smartphone technology in a self-management program for people with COPD has been 
limited. This study examined the effect of a comprehensive, smartphone app-based, self-
management program (SASMP) on self-care behavior in Koreans with COPD, the 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
6
smartphone app being the main intervention.  
1.1. Literature review 
Past self-management programs, conducted mainly face to face, have been shown to 
benefit people with COPD (Cannon et al., 2016; Newham et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017). 
The interventions have included center-based, individual or group sessions; home care visits; 
and telephone follow-up. Compared with such programs, self-management programs that use 
smartphone technology offer several unique benefits. Smartphones enable health care 
providers to (1) monitor patients anywhere anytime; (2) provide frequent, interactive 
feedback to patients; (3) provide immediate access to social support from peers and health 
care providers; (4) provide effective communication between patients and health care 
providers; and (5) send tailored, motivational text messages (Free et al., 2013; Lee et al., 
2018; Mohammadzadeh & Safdari, 2014; Pellegrini et al., 2012). Additionally, the 
smartphone intervention minimizes the need for patient to travel to health care centers (Finn 
& Bria, 2009). Thus, a self-management program that uses smartphones may affect health-
related outcomes differently than face-to-face self-management programs. This innovative 
intervention bears investigation with COPD patients to assess its full potential.  
Past studies have examined the effect of self-management programs using smartphone 
apps in people with chronic diseases. For example, four studies examined self-management 
programs in people with diabetes (Gunawardena et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2015; Kirwan et al., 
2013; Zhou, Chen, Yuan, & Sun, 2016). Although the interventions in these studies varied, 
they mostly included recording glucose, insulin, and diet; educational material; and 
personalized text messages. These app interventions have shown beneficial effect, such as 
reduction in HbA1C (Gunawardena et al., 2019; Kirwan et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2016) and 
improvements in glucose level, diabetes knowledge, and self-care behavior (Kim et al., 2015; 
Zhou et al., 2016). In another example, Ong et al.‟s (2016) study of people with chronic 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
7
kidney disease used an app-based intervention that monitored blood pressure, assessed 
symptoms, managed medications, tracked laboratory results, and provided feedback on blood 
pressure and laboratory results. Ong et al. showed that their app-based intervention helped in 
reducing patients‟ blood pressure. Finally, to test a mobile health system to support self-
management in people with asthma, Licskai, Sands, and Ferrone (2013) developed a 
smartphone app that provided daily weather forecasts, recorded symptoms and peak flow data, 
provided automated control assessment, and monitored medication adherence. Licskai and 
colleagues found improvement in health-related quality of life (HRQOL). Thus, research in 
fields other than COPD have found apps to be useful interventions.  
Relatively few studies have used other technologies to examine the effect of 
comprehensive self-management programs for people with COPD. Three studies by Nguyen 
and colleagues evaluated the effect of internet-based, dyspnea self-management programs for 
people with COPD on dyspnea with activities. The programs included education, exercise, 
self-monitoring of symptoms and exercise, and support; the researchers did not find favorable 
results in the primary outcome between groups (Nguyen, Carrieri-Kohlman, Rankin, 
Slaughter, & Stulbarg, 2005; Nguyen et al., 2008, 2013). In another study, Koff, Jones, 
Cashman, Voelkel, and Vandivier (2009) examined self-management, which included 
education and instruction on self-management techniques, enhanced communication, and 
monitoring for symptoms and physiological data, using a “health buddy system” connected to 
a telephone line. They found that the participants‟ HRQOL improved. Kim et al. (2012) also 
tested the effect of a u-health service program, which included consultation by mobile phone 
and video phone, on knowledge, attitude, and skill in people with COPD. The main 
components of the study included education and monitoring of symptoms and physiological 
data. However, Kim et al. found no difference in knowledge level between groups. In another 
study, Farmer et al. (2017) tested the effect of self-management support on HRQOL using an 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
8
internet-linked tablet computer. The main components of this study included monitoring of 
symptoms, mood, and physiological data and teaching self-management strategies. Farmer et 
al. found no improvement in HRQOL. Thus far, researchers have used different technologies 
to test comprehensive self-management programs for different purposes; their effectiveness, 
however, has not been definitive. Limited information has been available on the effect of a 
comprehensive self-management program using a smartphone app for people with COPD. 
Thus, examining the effect of SASMP in people with COPD will offer health care providers a 
practical option for COPD management.   
The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of a 6-month SASMP on self-care 
behavior in people with COPD. Secondary outcomes included exercise capacity, exercise, 
physical activity, symptoms, HRQOL, and health care use. Mediators of treatment effects 
included self-efficacy, perception of control, and social support.  
2. Methods 
2.1. Design, Sample, and Settings 
 
A randomized controlled trial design was used. A convenience sample of patients with 
COPD was recruited from the outpatient clinics of pulmonary medicine departments at two 
tertiary hospitals in a metropolitan city in Korea. Patients were eligible to participate if they 
(a) had COPD, (b) were aged 45 years or old, (c) were classified as either GOLD Stage 1, 2, 
or 3, (d) had a smartphone and could text messages, and (e) were able to communicate. 
Patients were excluded if they (a) had a psychiatric disorder (b) were hospitalized and 
discharged within 8 weeks due to a COPD exacerbation, (c) had less than 93% oxygen 
saturation in a stable state, (d) had their saturation level fall to 85% after a six-minute walk 
test (6MWT), (e) had severe respiratory symptoms in a stable state, (f) had pulmonary 
rehabilitation within 12 months, (g) had other diseases that made physical activity and/or 
exercise difficult, and (h) used assistive devices to walk or had problems with balance.  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
9
 
In the past, self-care behavior has not been examined as a primary outcome of self-
management programs using a smartphone app in people with COPD. Thus, our sample size 
was estimated based on mean values of self-care behavior in two groups at postintervention 
in a study of patients with diabetes (Zhou et al., 2016), using G*power 3.1.9.2. That study 
revealed an effect size of .98. A total sample size of 36 (18 for each group) was required to 
have this effect with an alpha of .05 and 80% power. 
2.2. Measures 
2.2.1. Demographic and clinical characteristics.  
We interviewed each participant to obtain information on age, gender, education level, 
economic level, employment, living status, use of oxygen, smoking status, duration of disease, 
hospital admissions and visits to an emergency department (ED) during the past year due to 
exacerbations, and previous education on symptom management. Medical records provided 
information on medications and comorbidities. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 
and FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) were obtained by spirometry. Following guidelines of 
the American Thoracic Society (American Thoracic Society, 1995a, 1995b), we performed 
spirometry on each participant three times. The best of the three results was used for our 
analysis. GOLD stages were also based on FEV1% predicted value (GOLD, 2018).  
2.2.2. Dyspnea.  
The University of California, San Diego Shortness of Breath Questionnaire (UCSD-
SOBQ) was used to measure the level of dyspnea. Comprising 24 items, this instrument 
measures dyspnea‟s effect on 21 daily activities and 3 limitations in daily life (Eakin, 
Resnikoff, Prewitt, Ries, & Kaplan, 1998). We used only the former in our study. Participants 
answered the 21 questions on six Likert scales (0-5). Total scores range from 0 (best) to 105 
(worst). The reliability of the UCSD-SOBQ (Cronbach‟s alpha = .96) and its validity for 
perceived breathlessness following a 6MWT (r = .45) have been reported in the literature 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
10
(Eakin et al. 1998). In this study, Cronbach‟s alpha for the UCSD-SOBQ was .93. 
2.2.3. Other symptoms.  
We used the Profile of Mood States-Short Form (McNair, Lorr, & Droppleman, 1992) 
to assess the participants‟ anxiety and depression. The six subscales are included in this 
instrument: tension-anxiety, depression-dejection, anger-hostility, vigor-activity, fatigue-
inertia, and confusion-bewilderment. In our study, only the tension-anxiety and depression-
dejection subscales were used. Each subscale comprises five items. Participants were asked to 
rate each item on a 5-point scale (0-4). Each subscale score ranges from 0 to 20. Higher 
scores indicate more anxious and depressed states. The instrument‟s adequate reliability 
(Cronbach‟s alpha = .75-.91) and substantiated validity have been reported in the literature 
(McNair et al., 1992). In this study, Cronbach‟s alpha for the tension-anxiety and depression-
dejection subscales was .78 and .86, respectively. 
2.2.4. Exercise capacity.  
Following ATS guidelines (ATS Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical 
Pulmonary Function Laboratories, 2002), we performed a 6MWT on each participant to 
assess exercise capacity. Oxygen saturation, heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and 
dyspnea and fatigue, based on the Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion, were assessed before 
and after the test. The maximum distance covered in 6 min was used for analysis.  
2.2.5. Exercise.  
Exercise behavior was determined by asking two questions: How many days did you 
exercise past week? and How much time did you spend for each exercise? Total time spent 
for exercise in 1 week was calculated based on answers to these two questions.  
2.2.6. Physical activity.  
We measured physical activity with an accelerometer (wGT-3X-BT, ActiGraph, 
Shalimar, FL). Participants were instructed to attach the device to an elastic waist belt and 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
11
wear it on their right hip for 7 consecutive days during waking hours only. They were also 
instructed to remove it during water-based activities. This triaxial ActiGraph measures step 
count, duration and intensity of physical movement (counts per minute [cpm]), and time 
spent for different physical activities. Data were stored in 1-min epochs. “Nonwear time” is 
defined as no counts for 60 min with tolerance up to 2 min of activity between 0-100 cpm 
(Troiano et al., 2008). A “valid day” for analytical purposes is defined as a day when 
participants wear the device for at least 10 h. In our analysis, we included participants who 
wore the device at least four valid days. Accelerometer counts from the vertical axis were 
used for our analysis. We used the cutpoints for physical activity, as recommended by 
Freedson, Melanson, and Sirard (1998). Sedentary activity was defined as less than 100 cpm, 
light physical activity was 100-1,951 cpm, and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity 
(MVPA) was defined as equal to or more than 1,952 cpm. Total activity count per total wear 
time was analyzed by calculating total activity count divided by total wear time. Percentages 
of time spent in sedentary activity, light physical activity, and MVPA were analyzed by 
calculating time spent for each activity divided by total wear time. 
2.2.7. Health-related quality of life.  
We measured HRQOL with the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health 
Survey. The instrument‟s 36 items are apportioned into eight measures for physical 
functioning, role physical, bodily pain, general health perception, vitality, social functioning, 
role emotional, and mental health. The physical component subscale and mental component 
subscale were calculated for our analysis. Scores for the two subscales can range from 0 to 
100. Higher scores indicate better HRQOL. Adequate reliability for this instrument 
(Cronbach‟s alpha = .78-.93) has been reported, and its construct validity has been tested in 
people with different medical conditions (McHorney, Ware, Lu, & Sherbourne, 1994; 
McHorney, Ware, & Raczek, 1993). In our study, Cronbach‟s alphas for this instrument‟s 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
12
eight measures were .86, .69, .87, .75, .60, .69, .88, .62, respectively.   
2.2.8. Self-efficacy and perception of control.  
We used the Self-Efficacy for Managing Chronic Disease 6-Item Scale (SEMCD) to 
measure self-efficacy. This instrument records patient confidence in managing their disease 
and controlling symptoms, physical discomfort, or emotional distress (Lorig et al., 1996). It 
comprises six questions and uses a 10-point scale (1-10). Higher scores represent better self-
efficacy. Adequate reliability of this instrument (Cronbach‟s alpha = .88-.95) and its validity 
with activity limitation (r = -.33 - -.53) have been reported in the literature (Ritter & Lorig, 
2014). In this study, Cronbach‟s alpha for the SEMCD was .92.  
In addition to using the SEMCD, self-efficacy for dyspnea, exacerbations, and 
exercise was assessed by asking participants to answer five questions; their answers were 
recorded on a 10-point scale (1-10). Higher scores indicate more confidence. The five 
questions asked participants how confident they were that they could keep dyspnea from 
interfering with desired activity, they could notice early signs of COPD exacerbation, they 
could maintain exercise, they could increase physical activity, and they could reduce 
sedentary time to promote better health.  
We used the mastery subscale of the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire to 
measure perception of control (Wijkstra et al., 1994). This self-administered, standardized 
instrument comprises four subscales: dyspnea, mastery, emotion, and fatigue (Wijkstra et al., 
1994). We used only the mastery subscale for our analysis. That subscale comprises four 
questions and rates responses on a 7-point rating scale (1-7). Higher scores indicate more 
control over disease and symptoms. The reliability of this instrument (Cronbach‟s alpha 
= .83-.91) and its validity with symptom checklists (r = -.27 ~ -.55) have been reported in the 
literature (Wijkstra et al., 1994). In this study, Cronbach‟s alpha for the mastery subscale 
was .65. 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
13
2.2.9. Social support.  
We used the emotional-informational support subscale of the MOS Social Support 
Survey to assess each participant‟s level of social support (Sherbourne & Stewart, 1991). This 
subscale comprises eight questions, which ask how often each of the eight supports is 
available to participants when needed. Participants were asked to record their answers on a 5-
point scale (1-5). Higher scores indicate having a greater support system. The instrument‟s 
excellent reliability (Cronbach‟s alpha =.96) and validity with loneliness (r = -.60) have been 
reported in the literature (Sherbourne & Stewart, 1991). In this study, Cronbach‟s alpha for 
this instrument was .95. 
2.2.10. Self-care behavior.  
The Alberto Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Self-Care Behavior Inventory 
(Alberto, 1990) was used to evaluate the level of self-care behavior. This instrument 
comprises 36 items and uses a 5-point scale (1-5). Total scores range from 36 to 180. Higher 
scores indicate having better self-care behavior. Adequate reliability of this instrument 
(Cronbach‟s alpha = .87) and its content validity have been reported in the literature (Alberto, 
1993). In our study, Cronbach‟s alpha for this instrument was .83. 
2.2.11. Health care use.  
Participants were asked to answer the purpose and frequency of ED visits, hospital 
admissions, and outpatient clinic visits at a tertiary hospital over the past 6 months. Only 
health care use due to COPD exacerbations was included.  
2.2.12. Process metrics.  
The participants‟ engagement in the intervention over 6 months was measured by the 
frequency of using the smartphone app. Specifically, we analyzed the number of symptom 
scores and exercise data entered into the smartphone app by participants in the experimental 
group. The frequency of staff-participant interaction by text messages or calls was also 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
14
counted.  
2.2.13. Exit interviews.  
We conducted exit interviews with all of our participants. Participants were asked to 
answer following open-ended question, How was your experience in this program? 
Satisfaction with the program was also measured by another question; responses were entered 
on an 11-point rating scale that ranged from 0-100%. Finally, three questions assessed 
perceived support from the research team; again an 11-point rating scale (0-100%) was used 
to measure responses. These three questions assessed the support participants received from 
the research team on managing disease, managing symptoms, and increasing physical activity 
and reducing sedentary time.   
2.3. App Development 
 
The development of a smartphone app for COPD self-management predated our study. 
To determine the content and design of our app, the principal investigator reviewed relevant 
literature, educational resources, and the existing smartphone app for COPD management. 
We consulted a pulmonary physician and a nurse researcher who had experience with 
smartphone app research before finalizing the content and design of our app. Our app, created 
by a professional application developer, uses an Android platform (version 2.3 Gingerbread), 
which is the leading operating system in Korea. The font size of all content can be adjusted 
for comfortable viewing, which is especially important for older patients. Our consultants, the 
pulmonary medicine physician and nursing researcher, were asked again for suggestions on 
how the app-in-development could be further improved. We also asked three patients with 
COPD to test our prototype and made changes based on their feedback. After several 
refinements, the final version of our app was ready for field testing. 
2.4. Procedures 
 
The human research committees in the two tertiary academic hospitals approved this 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
15
study. We translated and then back translated research instruments that were not available in 
Korean, except for one, Exacerbations of Chronic Pulmonary Disease Tool-Respiratory 
Symptoms (E-RS). Two individuals translated the original English versions of the 
instruments into Korean; two different individuals back-translated the Korean versions into 
English. The original English versions were similar to the back-translated versions of these 
instruments.  
 
We explained our study‟s inclusion criteria to physicians and nurses in the outpatient 
clinics of the pulmonary medicine departments at the two, metropolitan, tertiary care, 
academic hospitals. After they referred potential participants to our research team, we 
contacted each person, explained the purpose of study, and obtained signed informed consent 
if they were willing participants. Subsequently, we used baseline tests to screen all 
individuals. After screening and baseline testing were done, participants were randomized 
into two groups. Randomization scheme was generated, using a SAS Software; the 
randomization was stratified by GOLD stage (i.e., GOLD Stages 1 and 2 vs. GOLD Stage 3). 
The coinvestigator assigned them to one of two groups using a list of random numbers 
stratified by GOLD stage. After group assignment, participants received their respective 
intervention for the 6-month study. See Table 1 for details on the interventions for both 
groups. 
 
We collected demographic and clinical data, and spirometry testing was performed at 
baseline. Participants completed all study questionnaires and underwent a 6MWT; they wore 
an accerelometer at baseline and 6 months. Health care data during the 6-month study was 
obtained, exit interviews were conducted, and satisfaction and perceived support from the 
research team were assessed at 6 months. The same research personnel conducted the 
interventions and testings. To maintain internal validity, all research staff were oriented to the 
study‟s protocol. Each participant was instructed on how to follow that standardized protocol.  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
16
2.5. Intervention 
After assignment, the experimental group received the SASMP; the control group did 
not. The SASMP was guided by social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986) and self-efficacy 
theory (Bandura, 1997). These theories suggest that self-efficacy has four primary sources: (1) 
enactive mastery experiences; (2) vicarious experiences; (3) verbal persuasion; and (4) 
physiological and affective states (Bandura, 1986, 1997). Each source of self-efficacy was 
incorporated into our study. To address enactive mastery experiences, participants were 
taught strategies to relieve their symptoms. They were asked to set achievable goals for 
exercise and physical activity and guided how to successfully reach those goals step by step. 
To prompt participants to share their experiences, those who successfully achieved exercise 
and physical activity goals were asked during group texting to relate their experiences. Verbal 
persuasion followed in due course. Those participants who successfully achieved their 
exercise and physical activity goals were praised, and their efforts to enter data in apps were 
encouraged. Finally, participants were taught to pay attention to their physiological and 
psychological symptoms. Strategies to relieve those symptoms were provided.  
Our SASMP incorporated behavioral components of self-monitoring, motivational 
feedback, and assistance to develop self-management skills and promote self-efficacy. The 
intervention‟s main components included education, individually tailored exercise, self-
monitoring of symptoms and exercise, and social support. We also incorporated Effing et al.‟s 
(2012) components for self-management programs for people with COPD. At the first 
education session, participants in the experimental group received instruction on how to use 
each feature of the smartphone app. The app includes a directory for symptom record, 
exercise, education materials, and a communication board. Main screens are depicted in 
Figures 1 and 2. 
The four education sessions offered to both groups during the study‟s first month 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
17
included definition, cause, diagnosis, and symptoms of COPD; pharmacological management 
of COPD; nonpharmacological management (i.e., pulmonary rehabilitation, exercise, 
physical activity, dyspnea management, smoking cessation, nutrition, comorbidity 
management, and psychological symptom management); management of COPD 
exacerbations, and strategies for self-care. An advanced practice nurse led the 30-min 
sessions. Typical symptoms during exacerbations were discussed, and participants were given 
an action plan with their specific signs and symptoms. For the experimental group, the 
educational material presented at the group sessions and video clips demonstrating how to 
use bronchodilators were available in the smartphone app‟s directory under education 
materials (Figure 2). Participants in the experimental group were encouraged to review this 
educational material, which was reinforced by research staff through text messages over the 6 
months.  
Four group exercise sessions were also offered during the first month of the 6-month 
intervention period for both groups. Each session, taught by an exercise expert who majored 
in exercise physiology, lasted about an hour and included stretching, main exercise, and 
stretching, in that order. The main exercise was circuit training, which focuses on 
strengthening the upper and lower extremities and abdomen using therabands with different 
resistance. We evaluated each participant‟s balance and exercise patterns, gave them a 
pamphlet that depicted each posture, and advised them how to safely perform each posture at 
home. Each participant‟s level of physical activity was also evaluated during the exercise 
session. The exercise expert helped the participants of both groups set an individualized goal 
for weekly exercise and physical activity, based on their personal exercise or physical activity 
status. For the experimental group, a video clip of each posture and motion, which was taught 
in the group exercise session, was included in the smartphone app‟s directory under exercise 
(Figure 1). These participants were encouraged to use the exercise video clip as a guide for 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
18
exercise at home. They were also asked to use a pedometer to increase their physical activity. 
We urged participants in the experimental group to increase the frequency and duration of 
exercise, increase MVPA to at least 150 min a week, and decrease sedentary time. The 
smartphone app also included a rating of perceived exertion to safeguard participants in the 
experimental group when performing exercises at home.  
Only participants in the experimental group were asked to monitor their symptoms 
using the E-RS, which comprises 11 respiratory symptoms (Leidy & Murray, 2013). The 
smartphone app included E-RS in its directory under symptom record (Figure 1). Participants 
were asked to fill out the E-RS at night at least 4 times a week and especially when having an 
exacerbation. In addition to symptoms, the smartphone app recorded the use of 
bronchodilators and health care due to worsening symptoms. Total scores for the E-RS were 
automatically calculated, stored in the symptom record, and depicted in graph form with past 
results. Participants were encouraged to review the graphic summaries of their symptoms to 
track their symptoms over time. We also monitored total E-RS scores, bronchodilator use, 
and health care use every day. Automatic alert messages were sent to the research team if a 
total E-RS score was above 33, if a total E-RS score increased 1 point above the previous 
score, and if participants recorded that they visited the pulmonary outpatient clinics or ED for 
dyspnea. Once alerted that participants had symptoms or needed medical care, we texted 
them or called. We helped them to recognize worsening symptoms and use the action plan in 
case of an exacerbation.  
Only participants in the experimental group were asked to monitor their exercise and 
physical activity by smartphone. They were asked to record the type and duration of exercise 
and step count from their pedometer in the smartphone app‟s exercise directory, whenever 
they exercised (Figure 1). These data were stored and displayed in their exercise record and 
presented in graph form with past results in the app. Participants were encouraged to review 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
19
their record of past exercise and physical activity to track their progress over time. We 
contacted the participants every 4 weeks to reset goals for individual exercise and physical 
activity for the next 4 weeks, based on their progress. New goals were displayed in the app. 
The achievement rate for exercise and physical activity goals was calculated automatically 
and also displayed in the app. We monitored the duration of exercise, step counts, and 
achievement rate for exercise and physical activity goals. We contacted them if they did not 
perform exercise or physical activity at least four consecutive days. The participants‟ past 
performance was discussed and achievement of their goal for exercise or physical activity 
was encouraged.  
 
The experimental group was encouraged to group-text other participants and 
communicate with the research team by sending text messages to the smartphone app‟s 
communication board (Figure 2). The group was encouraged to share their personal 
experiences with symptom management and exercise such as achievement of exercise and 
physical activity goals and to contact the research team when worsening symptoms arose. 
The research team also called those in the control group every month to check on their 
general health status.  
2.6. Data Analysis 
 
                               
All data analyses were performed using SPSS version 23.0. Descriptive statistics were 
used to present data on demographic and clinical characteristics of total sample and study 
variables. Demographic and clinical characteristics of samples between both groups and 
between the dropout group and total sample (n = 42) at baseline were compared using the chi-
square test and independent t-test. Variables that were measured before and after the 
intervention in each group were compared using the paired t-test. Variables that were 
measured at baseline and 6 months were compared between the two groups using the 
independent t-test. Health care use over the 6-month period was compared between groups, 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
20
using the chi-square test. A p-value less than .05 indicates statistical significance. The 
intention to treat principle was applied to all statistical analyses.  
3. Results 
3.1. Comparison of Sample Characteristics Between Groups at Baseline 
A flow chart for the final sample (n = 42) is presented in Figure 3. Initially, 44 
participants were randomized into one of two groups. Two participants dropped out of study. 
Finally, 22 participants comprised the experimental group; 20 comprised the control group. 
Recruitment started in March 2016; all interventions ended in June 2018. No statistical 
differences were found in all variables between the dropout group (n = 2) and final sample (n 
= 42; Table 2). The mean age of all participants was 67.88 (Table 2). None used oxygen. 
Participants were mainly men who had moderate COPD. No statistical differences were 
found in sample characteristics between the experimental and control groups (Table 2).  
3.2. Comparison of Outcomes Between Groups 
 
No statistical differences were found in the outcome variables between groups at 
baseline and at 6 months, except for self-care behavior (Table 3). At 6 months, the level of 
self-care behavior in the experimental group was significantly higher than in the control 
group. Participants in the experimental group showed (a) significant improvement in self-care 
behavior; (b) longer distance on the 6MWT; (c) an increase in total activity count per wear 
time, percent time spent in MVPA, and step count; and (d) better self-efficacy for maintaining 
exercise, increasing physical activity, and decreasing sedentary time, when compared with 
baseline measures. For the control group, no statistical differences were found in the outcome 
variables between baseline and 6 months. Significant differences were found in change score 
for self-care behavior, total activity count per wear time, and percent time spent in MVPA 
between the two groups over 6 months.  
3.3. Process Metrics 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
21
All participants attended the group education and exercise sessions. The weekly 
frequency of symptom scores and exercise data that the experimental group entered into the 
smartphone app over 6 months is presented in Table 4. Most entered data 3 or 4 times a week. 
The alert messages on symptom scores or health care use totaled 75 over 6 months (Table 4). 
Frequent text messages were sent, and 4 or 5 times call in a month have been made to 
participants in experimental group over 6 months by research team (Table 4). Two 
participants sought research staff assistance on logging in to the smartphone app. No adverse 
events occurred during intervention period.  
3.4. Exit interviews 
In the exit interviews, participants were asked, “How was your experience in this 
program?” The experimental group offered the following responses. Thirteen (59.1%) 
participants reported that they learned more about their disease; the importance of exercise, 
balanced nutrition, and changes in health behavior; and how to increase physical activity. 
Their symptom management and level of self-care behavior improved through education. 
Eleven (50%) participants said that it was good to learn how to do exercise, 7 (31.8%) 
participants appreciated the support of other participants and research staff, and 4 (18.2%) 
reported that their exercise time increased by watching the exercise video in the smartphone 
app. A few participants were grateful to learn how to use bronchodilators properly and avoid 
triggers for symptoms and being able to ask the research staff questions about COPD. For 
many, their mood improved, they felt more energy, they learned how to adjust exercise when 
having dyspnea, and they felt more confident about their health. A few participants mentioned 
that recording exercise and symptoms in the app was a burden, and sometimes they forgot to 
do so.  
On the other hand, most of the participants in the control group (n = 19, 95%) enjoyed 
participating in the education and exercise sessions. Some in control group (n = 7, 35%) 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
22
reported that this program made them think about COPD and the need to change health 
behavior, monitor symptoms, and increase exercise time. Others (n = 3, 15%) preferred the 
group exercise sessions to exercise at home.  
Complementing feedback from the exit interviews, all of the participants were asked 
to answer a question about their satisfaction with this program and three questions about 
perceived support from the research team (Table 5). Participants in both groups expressed 
high satisfaction and felt that the research staff provided great support on disease 
management, symptom management, and the need to increase physical activity and reduce 
sedentary time.  
4. Discussion 
This study was designed to examine the efficacy of a SASMP in people with COPD. 
We found that our intervention had a significant impact on self-care behavior, total activity 
count per wear time, and percent time spent in MVPA. Its effect on self-care behavior echos 
Zhou et al.‟s (2016) findings in their study of people with diabetes. The reason for such 
improvement, in part, is that participants in the experimental group were educated about 
disease management and self-care strategies for COPD, and our research team provided them 
with ongoing support and consistent reinforcement of that information by using the 
smartphone app. We also used motivational techniques to actively engage the participants in 
self-care behavior and provided timely feedback for the evaluation of symptoms and exercise 
data that was entered on the smartphone, including advice on behavioral changes. Our 
positive finding on self-care behavior was supported by the fact that physical activity, one of 
study‟s secondary outcomes, improved as a result of our intervention. The improvement of 
physical activity in our study is consistent with Demeyer et al.‟s (2017) findings. In our study, 
participants in the experimental group recorded 37 min a day of MVPA during the 6-month 
period, a 9.92 min increase from baseline. This achieved the goal for physical activity (at 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
23
least 150 min/week), which is recommended for older adults (Paterson & Warburton, 2010). 
Although physical activity was not our study‟s main focus, our group education and exercise 
sessions emphasized its importance and exercise in general for both groups. We suggested 
individualized goals for exercise and physical activity to each participant in the experimental 
group, based on our assessment of their exercise and physical activity levels during the group 
exercise session. We monitored their exercise behavior and level of physical activity, 
encouraged them to increase physical activity and decrease sedentary time, and provide 
feedback using convenient technology, which may have influenced their behavior change. It 
is likely that this improvement in physical activity was partially mediated by enhancing the 
participants‟ self-efficacy. However, participants in the experimental group did not reach the 
“somewhat active” threshold of 7500 steps/day by using our intervention (Tudor-Locke & 
Bassett, 2004). Thus, continuous efforts are needed to motivate people with COPD to be 
more active because an active lifestyle has been shown to have a significant relation to better 
health outcomes in this population (Garcia-Rio et al., 2012). Participants in the experimental 
group were also able to walk longer distances in the 6MWT after intervention than before, 
which showed a clinically meaningful effect (Puhan et al., 2008). This finding was expected 
because level of physical activity has been highly correlated with distance in the 6MWT (Lee 
et al., 2018; Venkata, DeDios, ZuWallack, & Lahiri, 2012). Overall, our SASMP seemed to 
be more effective than education and exercise alone in improving self-care behavior and 
physical activity. This favorable finding indicates that structured education and exercise alone 
are not sufficient to change health behavior in people with COPD.  
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study to examine the use of a 
smartphone app in a comprehensive self-management program for people with COPD. Past 
studies of COPD used apps to monitor symptoms or physical activity (Alwashmi et al., 2016). 
According to our findings, apps can be used to deliver comprehensive self-management for 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
24
people with COPD. Smartphone technology has superiority over other technologies because 
it allows for more frequent and interactive feedback, tailored text messages, and immediate 
access to social support (Pellegrini et al., 2012). Furthermore, smartphones are affordable, 
apps are inexpensive to use, and installation does not require a specialist. Whether older 
adults could use a smartphone app was an initial concern, but our participants had no 
difficulty, except two who experienced technical problems. Nonetheless, compliance by the 
experimental group was low. Although we had a minimum login requirement (at least 4 times 
a week), participants did not comply. However, our login frequency did not wane over time, 
which may explain our favorable findings. Both the experimental and control groups felt that 
the intervention had positive merit and they were quite satisfied with the results. This may be 
due in part to the four education and exercise sessions, which established a positive 
relationship with the research staff and other participants.  
 
Despite our positive findings, this study has some limitations. First, we did not 
measure outcomes at 1 month, after group education and exercise sessions ended, which may 
have given us a better understanding of the effect of our self-management program. Second, 
due to the nature of intervention, the interventionist and participants were not blinded to 
treatment allotment. The interventionist and outcome assessor were the same person, which 
could threaten internal validity. Third, we did not have a second control group. Future studies 
should replicate our research using three groups, including a second control group. Fourth, 
we only included people who already had a smartphone, which may have skewed the sample 
toward those of higher socioeconomic status. Finally, we did not include GOLD Stage 4, and 
the study took place in a metropolitan city, which may limit the study‟s external validity. 
5. Conclusion 
Our SASMP effected positive change in self-care behavior and physical activity in 
people with COPD. These findings further support the feasibility and efficacy of using a 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
25
smartphone app for this population. Further studies with larger sample sizes and another 
control group are needed to show its positive impact on clinically relevant outcomes. The 
SASMP can be used as an educational or exercise resource at home for patients with COPD 
and their family. It can be useful to patients who have limited access to a health care provider, 
do not have opportunities for pulmonary rehabilitation, or have frequent exacerbations. The 
SASMP can also be easily combined with a formal exercise training intervention or a 
pulmonary rehabilitation program focused on exercise to improve the self-management skills 
of patients with COPD.  
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Alberto, J. (1990). A test of a model of the relationships between time orientation, perception  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
26
of threat, hope, and self-care behavior of persons with chronic obstructive pulmonary  
 
disease (Doctoral dissertation). Indiana University, United States. Retrieved from  
 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 52, 08B. (University Microfilms International  
 
No AAC9202103). 
Alberto, J. (1993). The reliability and validity of the COPDSC: A tool that measures self-care  
 
behavior of persons with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Perspectives in  
 
Respiratory Nursing, 4(5), 1, 3-4. 
Alwashmi, M., Hawboldt, J., Davis, E., Marra, C., Gamble, J. M., & Abu Ashour, W. (2016).  
 
The effect of smartphone interventions on patients with chronic obstructive  
 
pulmonary disease exacerbations: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JMIR 
Mhealth and Uhealth, 4(3), e105. 
American Thoracic Society. (1995a). Standardization of spirometry, 1994 update. American  
 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 152, 1107-1136. 
American Thoracic Society. (1995b). Single-breath carbon monoxide diffusing capacity  
 
(transfer factor) Recommendations for a standard technique-1995 update. American  
 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 152, 2185-2198. 
ATS Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories.  
 
(2002). ATS statement: Guidelines for the six-minute walk test. American Journal of  
 
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 166(1), 111-117. 
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action; A social cognitive theory.  
 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman. 
Boulos, M. N., Wheeler, S., Tavares, C., & Jones, R. (2011). How smartphones are changing  
 
the face of mobile and participatory healthcare: An overview, with example from  
 
eCAALYX. Biomedical Engineering Online, 10, 24. 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
27
Bourbeau, J., Nault, D., & Dang-Tan, T. (2004). Self-management and behaviour  
 
modification in COPD. Patient Education and Counseling, 52(3), 271-277. 
Cannon, D., Buys, N., Sriram, K. B., Sharma, S., Morris, N., & Sun, J. (2016). The effects of  
 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease self-management interventions on  
 
improvement of quality of life in COPD patients: A meta-analysis. Respiratory  
 
Medicine, 121, 81-90. 
Davis, A. H., Carrieri-Kohlman, V., Janson, S. L., Gold, W. M., & Stulbarg, M. S. (2006).  
 
Effects of treatment on two types of self-efficacy in people with chronic obstructive  
 
pulmonary disease. Journal of Pain & Symptom Management, 32(1), 60-70. 
Demeyer, H., Louvaris, Z., Frei, A., Rabinovich, R. A., de Jong, C., Gimeno-Santos, E., …  
 
Troosters, T.; Mr Papp PROactive study group and the PROactive consortium.  
(2017). Physical activity is increased by a 12-week semiautomated telecoaching  
programme in patients with COPD: A multicentre randomised controlled trial.  
Thorax, 72(5), 415-423. 
Eakin, E. G., Resnikoff, P. M., Prewitt, L. M., Ries, A. L. & Kaplan, R. M. (1998). Validation  
 
of a new dyspnea measure: The UCSD shortness of breath questionnaire. University  
 
of California, San Diego. Chest, 113, 619-624. 
Effing, T. W., Bourbeau, J., Vercoulen, J., Apter, A. J., Coultas, D., Meek, P., … Palen, Jv.  
 
(2012). Self-management programmes for COPD: Moving forward. Chronic  
 
Respiratory Disease, 9(1), 27-35. 
Farmer, A., Williams, V., Velardo, C., Shah, S. A., Yu, L. M., Rutter, H., … Tarassenko, L.  
 
(2017). Self-management support using a digital health system compared with usual  
 
care for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Randomized controlled trial. Journal  
 
of Medical Internet Research, 19(5), e144. 
Finn, N. B., & Bria, W. F. (2009). Digital communication in medical practice. London, UK:
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
28
  Springer-Verlag London. 
Free, C., Phillips, G., Galli, L., Watson, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., … Haines, A. (2013). The  
effectiveness of mobile-health technology-based health behaviour change or disease 
management interventions for health care consumers: A systematic review. PLoS 
Medicine, 10(1), e1001362. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001362. 
Freedson, P. S., Melanson, E., & Sirard, J. (1998). Calibration of the computer science and  
 
applications, inc. accelerometer. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 30(5), 
 
777-781. 
Garcia-Rio, F., Rojo, B., Casitas, R., Lores, V., Madero, R., Romero, D., … Villasante, C.  
 
(2012). Prognostic value of the objective measurement of daily physical activity in  
 
patients with COPD. Chest, 142(2), 338-346. 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (2018). Global strategy for the  
 
diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  
Available at https://goldcopd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/GOLD-2018-v6.0-
FINAL-revised- 20-Nov_WMS.pdf 
Gregersen, T. L., Green, A., Frausing, E., Ringbæk, T., Brøndum, E., & Suppli Ulrik, C.  
 
(2016). Do telemedical interventions improve quality of life in patients with COPD?  
 
A systematic review. International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary  
 
Disease, 11, 809-822. 
Gunawardena, K. C., Jackson, R., Robinett, I., Dhaniska, L., Jayamanne, S., Kalpani, S., &  
 
Muthukuda, D. (2019). The Influence of the smart glucose manager mobile  
 
application on diabetes management. Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology,  
 
13(1), 75-81. 
Hwang, Y. I., Park, Y. B., & Yoo, K. H. (2017). Recent trends in the prevalence of chronic  
 
obstructive pulmonary disease in Korea. Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases,  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
29
 
80(3), 226-229. 
Kim, J., Kim, S., Kim, H. C., Kim, K. H., Yang, S. C., Lee, C. T., … Lee, K. (2012). Effects  
 
of consumer-centered u-health service for the knowledge, skill, and attitude of the  
 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Computers, Informatics,  
 
Nursing, 30(12), 661-671. 
Kim, Y. J., Rhee, S. Y., Byun, J. K., Park, S. Y., Hong, S. M., Chin, S. O., …Kim, Y. S.  
 
(2015). A smartphone application significantly improved diabetes self-care activities  
 
with high user satisfaction. Diabetes & Metabolism Journal, 39(3), 207-217. 
Kirwan, M., Vandelanotte, C., Fenning, A., & Duncan, M. J. (2013). Diabetes self- 
 
management smartphone application for adults with type 1 diabetes: Randomized  
 
controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(11), e235. 
Koff, P. B., Jones, R. H., Cashman, J. M., Voelkel, N. F., & Vandivier, R. W. (2009).  
 
Proactive integrated care improves quality of life in patients with COPD. European  
 
Respiratory Journal, 33(5), 1031-1038. 
Lee, H. (2018). Korea has highest smartphone ownership rate. Available at  
 
http://www.korea.net/NewsFocus/Sci-Tech/view?articleId=133014 
Lee, J. A., Choi, M., Lee, S. A., & Jiang, N. (2018). Effective behavioral intervention  
 
strategies using mobile health applications for chronic disease management: A  
 
systematic review. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 18(1), 12. 
Lee, J., Nguyen, H. Q., Jarrett, M. E., Mitchell, P. H., Pike, K. C., & Fan, V. S. (2018). Effect  
 
of symptoms on physical performance in COPD. Heart & Lung, 47(2), 149-156. 
Leidy, N. K., & Murray, L. T. (2013). Patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures for clinical  
 
trials of COPD: The EXACT and E-RS. COPD, 10(3), 393-398. 
Liang, L., Lin, Y., Yang, T., Zhang, H., Li, J., & Wang, C. (2014). Determinants of health- 
 
related quality of life worsening in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
30
 
disease at one year. Chinese Medical Journal, 127(1), 4-10. 
Licskai, C., Sands, T. W., & Ferrone, M. (2013). Development and pilot testing of a mobile  
 
health solution for asthma self-management: Asthma action plan smartphone  
 
application pilot study. Canadian Respiratory Journal, 20(4), 301-306. 
Lorig, K., Stewart, A., Ritter, P., González, V., Laurent, D., & Lynch, J. (1996). Outcome  
 
measures for health education and other health care interventions. Thousand Oaks,  
 
CA: Sage Publications. 
Lundell, S., Holmner, Å., Rehn, B., Nyberg, A., & Wadell, K. (2015). Telehealthcare in  
 
COPD: A systematic review and meta-analysis on physical outcomes and dyspnea.  
 
Respiratory Medicine, 109(1), 11-26. 
McHorney, C. A., Ware, J. E. Jr, Lu, J. F., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1994). The MOS 36-item  
 
short-from health survey (SF-36): III. Tests of data quality, scaling assumptions, and  
 
reliability across diverse patient groups. Medical Care, 32, 40-66. 
McHorney, C. A., Ware, J. E. Jr, & Raczek, A. E. (1993). The MOS 36-item short-from health  
 
survey (SF-36): II. Psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring physical  
 
and mental health constructs. Medical Care, 31, 247-263. 
McLean, S., Nurmatov, U., Liu, J. L., Pagliari, C., Car, J., & Sheikh, A. (2012).  
 
Telehealthcare for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Cochrane review and  
 
meta-analysis. The British Journal of General Practice, 62(604), e739-e749. 
McNair, D. M., Lorr, M., & Droppleman, L. F. (1992). POMS manual: Profile of mood states.  
 
San Diego: EdITS. 
Mohammadzadeh, N., & Safdari, R. (2014). Patient monitoring in mobile health:  
 
Opportunities and challenges. Medical Archives, 68(1), 57-60. 
Mosa, A. S., Yoo, I., & Sheets, L. (2012). A systematic review of healthcare applications for  
 
smartphones. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 12, 67. 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
31
Newham, J. J., Presseau, J., Heslop-Marshall, K., Russell, S., Ogunbayo, O. J., Netts, P., … 
Kaner, E. (2017). Features of self-management interventions for people with COPD  
associated with improved health-related quality of life and reduced emergency  
department visits: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of  
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 12, 1705-1720. 
Nguyen, H. Q., Carrieri-Kohlman, V., Rankin, S. H., Slaughter, R., & Stulbarg, M. S. (2005).  
 
Is internet-based support for dyspnea self-management in patients with chronic  
 
obstructive pulmonary disease possible? Results of a pilot study. Heart & Lung, 
34(1), 51-62. 
Nguyen, H. Q., Donesky, D., Reinke, L. F., Wolpin, S., Chyall, L., Benditt, J. O., … Carrieri- 
 
Kohlman, V. (2013). Internet-based dyspnea self-management support for patients  
 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Journal of Pain & Symptom  
 
Management, 46(1), 43-55. 
Nguyen, H. Q., Donesky-Cuenco, D., Wolpin, S., Reinke, L. F., Benditt, J. O., Paul, S. M., &  
 
Carrieri-Kohlman, V. (2008). Randomized controlled trial of an internet-based versus  
 
face-to-face dyspnea self-management program for patients with chronic obstructive  
 
pulmonary disease: Pilot study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 10(2), e9. 
Ong, S. W., Jassal, S. V., Miller, J. A., Porter, E. C., Cafazzo, J. A., Seto, E., … Logan, A. G.  
 
(2016). Integrating a smartphone-based self-management system into usual care of  
 
advanced CKD. Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 11(6),  
 
1054-1062. 
Park, S. K. (2017). Factors affecting self-care behavior in Koreans with COPD. Applied  
 
Nursing Research, 38, 29-37. 
Paterson, D. H., & Warburton, D. E. (2010). Physical activity and functional limitations in  
 
older adults: A systematic review related to Canada's physical activity guidelines.  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
32
 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 7, 38. 
Pellegrini, C. A., Duncan, J. M., Moller, A. C., Buscemi, J., Sularz, A., DeMott, A., … Spring  
 
B. (2012). A smartphone-supported weight loss program: Design of the ENGAGED  
 
randomized controlled trial. BMC Public Health, 12, 1041. 
Polisena, J., Tran, K., Cimon, K., Hutton, B., McGill, S., Palmer, K., & Scott, R. E. (2010).  
 
Home telehealth for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review and  
 
meta-analysis. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 16(3), 120-127. 
Puhan, M. A., Mador, M. J., Held, U., Goldstein, R., Guyatt, G. H., & Schünemann, H. J.  
 
(2008). Interpretation of treatment changes in 6-minute walk distance in patients with  
 
COPD. European Respiratory Journal, 32(3), 637-643. 
Rassouli, F., Boutellier, D., Duss, J., Huber, S., & Brutsche, M. H. (2018). Digitalizing  
 
multidisciplinary pulmonary rehabilitation in COPD with a smartphone application:  
 
An international observational pilot study. International Journal of Chronic  
 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 13, 3831-3836. 
Ritter, P. L., & Lorig, K. (2014). The English and Spanish self-efficacy to manage chronic  
 
disease scale measures were validated using multiple studies. Journal of Clinical  
 
Epidemiology, 67(11), 1265-1273. 
Sherbourne, C., & Stewart, A. L. (1991). The MOS social support survey. Social Science &  
 
Medicine, 32, 705-714. 
Spruit, M. A., & Singh, S. J. (2013). Maintenance programs after pulmonary rehabilitation:  
 
How may we advance this field? Chest, 144(4), 1091-1093. 
The Statistics Portal. (2018). Number of smartphone users in South Korea from 2015 to 2022  
 
(in millions). Available at https://www.statista.com/statistics/467171/forecast-of- 
 
smartphone-users-in-south-korea/ 
Troiano, R. P., Berrigan, D., Dodd, K. W., Mâsse, L. C., Tilert, T., & McDowell, M. (2008).  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
33
 
Physical activity in the United States measured by accelerometer. Medicine and  
 
Science in Sports and Exercise, 40(1), 181-188. 
Tudor-Locke, C., & Bassett, D. R. Jr. (2004). How many steps/day are enough? Preliminary  
 
pedometer indices for public health. Sports Medicine, 34(1), 1-8. 
Venkata, A., DeDios, A., ZuWallack, R., & Lahiri, B. (2012). Are depressive symptoms  
 
related to physical inactivity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Journal of  
 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation and Prevention, 32(6), 405-409. 
Wang, T., Tan, J. Y., Xiao, L. D., & Deng, R. (2017). Effectiveness of disease-specific self- 
 
management education on health outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive  
 
pulmonary disease: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Patient  
 
Education and Counseling, 100(8), 1432-1446. 
Wang, J., Wang, Y., Wei, C., Yao, N. A., Yuan, A., Shan, Y., & Yuan, C. (2014). Smartphone  
 
interventions for long-term health management of chronic diseases: An integrative  
 
review. Telemedicine Journal of E-Health, 20(6), 570-583. 
Wijkstra, P. J., TenVergert, E. M., Van Altena, R., Otten, V., Postma, D. S., Kraan, J., &  
 
Koëter, G. H. (1994). Reliability and validity of the chronic respiratory questionnaire 
(CRQ). Thorax, 49(5), 465-467. 
Zhou, W., Chen, M., Yuan, J., & Sun, Y. (2016). Welltang - a smart phone-based diabetes  
 
management application - improves blood glucose control in Chinese people with  
 
diabetes. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 116, 105-110.  
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           
App-based program in people with COPD               
 
34
Table 1; Components of intervention for experimental and control groups 
Components of 
intervention 
 
Experimental group 
 
Control group 
Education 
 Group education sessions (4, once a 
week) offered in the first month of 
the 6-month intervention. 
 Educational material installed in 
smartphone application.  
 Group education sessions (4, once a 
week) offered in the first month of the 
6-month intervention. 
Exercise 
 Group exercise sessions (4, once a 
week) offered in the first month of 
the 6-month intervention. 
 Exercise expert prescribed 
individualized exercises for each of 
participant.  
 Pamphlet of exercises provided. 
 Pedometer provided. 
 Exercise video clips installed in 
smartphone app. 
 Group exercise sessions (4, once a 
week) offered in first month of the 6-
month intervention. 
 Exercise expert prescribed 
individualized exercises for each of 
participants.  
 Pamphlet of exercises provided. 
Self-monitoring 
 Participants recorded time and type 
of exercise and step count from 
pedometer in smartphone app. 
 Participants recorded symptoms, 
bronchodilator use, and health care 
use due to exacerbations in 
smartphone app. 
 
Social support 
 Participants were encouraged to 
communicate with other participants 
and research team by text messages 
in smartphone app or call. 
 Research team called participants to 
check health status once a month over 
6 months.  
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
35
Table 2; Demographic and clinical characteristics of total sample and by groups  
 
Total sample  
(n=42) 
Experimental 
group 
(n=22, 
52.4%) 
Control group  
(n=20, 47.6%) 
Drop out 
(n=2) 
Comparison 
between 
experimental 
group 
& 
control group 
Comparison 
between 
total 
sample & drop 
out group 
 
Mean ± SD (range); Frequency (Percentage) 
 
t or χ2, p-value 
Age 
67.88 ± 10.49 
(45-87)  
70.45 ± 9.40 
65.06 ± 11.12 
68.50 ± 3.54 
-1.71, p=.10 
-0.08, p=.94 
Gender (male) 
33 (78.6%) 
19 (86.4%) 
14 (70.0%) 
2 (100.0%) 
1.67, p=.27 
0.54, p=1.00 
Education  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Middle high school 
& less 
18 (42.9%) 
9 (40.9%) 
9 (45.0%) 
2 (100.0%) 
 
 
        High 
school 
& 
higher 
24 (57.1%) 
13 (59.1%) 
11 (55.0%) 
0 (0.0%) 
0.07, p=1.00 
2.51, p=.20 
Income (monthly)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        <$1,000 
16 (38.1%) 
8 (36.4%) 
8 (44.4%) 
1 (50.0%) 
 
 
        ≥$1,000 
24 (57.1%) 
14 (63.6%) 
10 (55.6%) 
1 (50.0%) 
0.27, p=.75 
0.08, p=1.00 
Living situation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
36
         Alone 
2 (4.8%) 
2 (9.1%) 
0 (0%) 
0 (0.0%) 
 
 
         Married or Living 
with someone 
40 (95.2%) 
20 (90.9%) 
20 (100%) 
2 (100.0%) 
1.91, p=.49 
0.10, p=1.00 
Working 
14 (33.3%) 
5 (22.7%) 
9 (45.0%) 
0 (0.0%)  
2.34, p=.19 
0.98, p=1.00 
Pack years of smoking 
17.64 ± 16.39 
16.50 ± 14.43 
18.90 ± 18.61 
12.50 ± 10.61 
0.47, p=.64 
0.44, p=.67 
FEV1 % pred.  
65.02 ± 21.57 
61.00 ± 18.73 
69. 45 ± 24.02 
71.50 ± 51.28 
1.28, p=.21 
-0.39, p=.70 
FEV1/FVC ratio 
64.14 ± 19.28 
62.77 ± 20.79 
65.65 ± 17.88 
63.50 ± 33.23 
0.48, p=.64 
0.05, p=.96 
GOLD stage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Stage 1, 2 
33 (78.6%) 
17 (77.3%) 
16 (80%) 
1 (50.0%) 
 
 
        Stage 3 
9 (21.4%) 
5 (22.7%) 
4 (20%) 
1 (50.0%) 
0.05, p=1.00 
0.89, p=.41 
Duration of disease (years) 
6.93 ± 6.99  
(1-32) 
7.77 ± 6.63 
6.00 ± 7.42 
12.00 ± 7.07 
-0.82, p=.42 
-1.00, p=.32 
Comorbidities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
< 2 
12 (28.6%) 
 4 (18.2%) 
8 (40.0%) 
1 (50.0%) 
 
 
        ≥ 2 
30 (71.4%) 
 18 (81.8%) 
12 (60.0%) 
1 (50.0%) 
2.44, p=.18 
0.42, p=.51 
Hospitalization during last 
year due to exacerbation 
(yes) 
6 (14.3%) 
2 (9.1%) 
4 (20.0%) 
0 (0.0%) 
1.02, p=.40 
0.33, p=1.00 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
37
ED visits during last year 
due to exacerbation (yes) 
4 (9.5%) 
2 (9.1%) 
2 (10.0%) 
0 (0.0%) 
0.01, p=1.00 
0.21, p=1.00 
Education 
for 
symptom 
management 
3 (7.1%) 
1 (4.5%) 
2 (10.0%) 
0 (0.0%) 
0.47, p=.60 
0.15, p=1.00 
SD; standard deviation, FEV1; forced expiratory volume in 1 second, FVC; forced vital capacity, GOLD; global initiatives for chronic obstructive 
lung disease, ED; emergency department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
38
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
39
Table 3; Comparison of outcome variables between 2 groups  
 
 
Experimental group  
(n=22, 52.4%) 
Control group  
(n=20, 47.6%) 
Between 
group 
comparison 
 
Between 
group 
comparison 
of 
change 
score  
 
 
Mean ± SD; Frequency (Percentage) 
p-value 
p-value 
Self-care behavior 
Baseline 
112.91 ± 13.34 
106.05 ± 14.79 
.12 
 
 
6 months 
122.32 ± 12.23* 
106.70 ± 18.47 
.01 
.05 
Exercise capacity (6MWT distance in 
meter) 
Baseline 
378.32 ± 96.96 
398.10 ± 78.67 
.48 
 
 
6 months 
433.23 ± 107.23* 
437.60 ± 83.62 
.89 
.63 
Exercise (min/week) 
Baseline 
215.00 ± 225.51 
144.37 ± 129.06 
.35 
 
 
6 months 
267.73 ± 449.96 
162.50 ± 212.33 
.24 
.80 
Physical activity   
 
 
 
 
 
Total activity count/ wear time 
Baseline 
215.64 ± 103.16 
258.85 ± 105.73 
.19 
 
 
6 months 
275.09 ± 99.79* 
258.59 ± 111.47 
.62 
.01 
        Sedentary activity % time 
Baseline 
.79 ± .10 
.77 ± .08 
.39 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
40
 
6 months 
.75 ± .08 
.77 ± .08 
.38 
.07 
        LPA % time 
Baseline 
.18 ± .09 
.20 ± .06 
.49 
 
 
6 months 
.21 ± .08 
.19 ± .06 
.40 
.17 
        MVPA % time  
Baseline 
.03 ± .02 
.04 ± .02 
.35 
 
 
6 months 
.05 ± .03* 
.04 ± .03 
.70 
.04 
        Daily step count  
Baseline 
5223.68 ± 2899.61 
6756.26 ± 2978.77 
.10 
 
 
6 months 
6546.77 ± 2354.43* 
6890.39 ± 2967.73 
.68 
.06 
Symptom  
 
 
 
 
 
        Dyspnea from UCSD-SOB 
Baseline 
21.18 ± 16.05 
19.25 ± 13.83 
.68 
 
 
6 months 
21.45 ± 17.78 
19.70 ± 14.34 
.73 
.97 
        Tension-anxiety from POMS 
Baseline 
4.86 ± 2.64 
5.75 ± 4.29 
.42 
 
 
6 months 
5.23 ± 3.19 
5.80 ± 4.61 
.64 
.73 
        Depression from POMS 
Baseline 
3.55 ± 2.69 
5.20 ± 5.46 
.21 
 
 
6 months 
3.68 ± 3.29 
5.45 ± 6.89 
.29 
.91 
Health related quality of life 
 
 
 
 
 
        PCS 
Baseline 
43.43 ± 9.00 
46.36 ± 5.58 
.22 
 
 
6 months 
43.94 ± 8.97 
44.95 ± 5.95 
.67 
.36 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
41
MCS 
Baseline 
51.62 ± 8.71  
52.13 ± 8.49 
.85 
 
 
6 months 
50.10 ± 8.33 
49.03 ± 11.02 
.73 
.60 
Healthcare use due to exacerbation  
for 6 months 
 
 
 
 
 
ED use  
 
1 (4.5%) 
0 (0%) 
1.00 
 
Hospitalization  
 
2 (9.1%) 
2 (10.0%) 
1.00 
 
Outpatient clinics  
 
3 (13.6%) 
1 (5.0%) 
.61 
 
Self-efficacy 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMCD 
Baseline 
6.71 ± 1.93 
6.47 ± 1.64 
.66 
 
 
6 months 
6.89 ± 1.75 
6.69 ± 2.26 
.75 
.93 
Self-efficacy for managing 
dyspnea 
Baseline 
6.59 ± 2.21 
6.40 ± 2.10 
.78 
 
 
6 months 
6.73 ± 2.10 
6.85 ± 2.06 
.85 
.53 
Self-efficacy for managing 
exacerbation  
Baseline 
6.68 ± 1.94 
6.20 ± 2.24 
.46 
 
 
6 months 
6.95 ± 2.01 
6.75 ± 1.97 
.74 
.67 
Self-efficacy for maintaining 
Baseline 
7.45 ± 1.50 
6.90 ± 2.05 
.32 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
42
exercise 
 
6 months 
7.77 ± 1.31* 
6.75 ± 2.29 
.08 
.46 
Self-efficacy for increasing 
        physical activity 
Baseline 
6.91 ± 2.14 
6.90 ± 1.71 
.99 
 
 
6 months 
7.91 ± 1.66* 
6.75 ± 2.15 
.06 
.06 
Self-efficacy for decreasing  
sedentary time 
Baseline 
7.18 ± 1.76 
6.60 ± 2.09 
.18 
 
 
6 months 
7.73 ± 1.42* 
7.05 ± 1.76 
.11 
.86 
Perception of control 
Baseline 
4.40 ± .96 
4.33 ± 1.22 
.83 
 
 
6 months 
4.75 ± .91 
4.68 ± .97 
.80 
.99 
Social support 
Baseline 
2.72 ± .85 
2.53 ± .92 
.49 
 
 
6 months 
2.73 ± .88  
2.79 ± 1.21 
.85 
.34 
SD; standard deviation, 6MWT; 6 minute walk test, sedentary activity % time; time spent in sedentary activity (minutes/day)/daily wear time 
for accelerometer, LPA; light physical activity, LPA % time; time spent in LPA (minutes/day)/daily wear time for accelerometer, MVPA; 
moderate to vigorous physical activity, MVPA % time; time spent in MVPA (minutes/day)/daily wear time for accelerometer, UCSD-SOB; 
University of California, San Diego Shortness of Breath Questionnaire, POMS; Profile of Mood States-Short Form, PCS; physical component 
subscale, MCS; mental component subscale, ED; emergency department, SEMCD; self-efficacy for managing chronic diseases 6-item scale. 
*; p-value was less than .05 in comparison of variables between baseline and 6 month in each group.  
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
                                                                           App-based program in people with 
COPD               
 
43
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
App-based program in people with COPD  44 
 
 
Table 4; Usage statistics over 6 months in smartphone application in experimental group (n=22) 
Usage parameter 
Time 
Mean ± SD 
Frequency 
Symptom score entered (weekly) 
1 month 
3.47 ± 1.62 
 
2 month 
3.09 ± 1.27 
 
3 month 
3.10 ± 1.27 
 
4 month 
3.09 ± 1.28 
 
5 month 
3.32 ± 1.15 
 
6 month 
3.46 ± .90 
Exercise data entered (weekly) 
1 month 
3.44 ± 1.54 
 
2 month 
3.22 ± 1.41 
 
3 month 
3.09 ± 1.37 
 
4 month 
3.23 ± 1.45 
 
5 month 
3.36 ± 1.38 
 
6 month 
3.46 ± 1.17 
Symptom & healthcare use  
exception alerts 
Over 6 months 
75 
Reinforcement text messages 
Over 6 months 
499 
Reinforcement phone calls 
Over 6 months 
134 
SD; standard deviation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
App-based program in people with COPD  45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5; Satisfaction for program and support levels in 2 groups 
Items (possible score; 0-100) 
Experimental 
group (n=22) 
Control group  
(n=20) 
 
 
Mean ± SD 
Mean ± SD 
p-value 
Satisfaction for program 
94.55 ± 9.63 
89.50 ± 10.50 
.11 
Support for disease management 
95.91 ± 9.59 
91.00 ± 13.34 
.18 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
App-based program in people with COPD  46 
 
 
Support for symptom management  
95.00 ± 9.64 
91.00 ± 10.21 
.20 
Support 
for 
increasing 
physical 
activity and reducing sedentary time   
93.18 ± 12.87 
85.50 ± 13.95 
.07 
SD; standard deviation 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
App-based program in people with COPD  47 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlights 

Smartphone intervention is feasible for people with COPD. 

Structured education and exercise alone are not sufficient to change health 
behavior in people with COPD.  

Smartphone app-based self-management program can be used to effectively 
improve self-care behavior and physical activity in people with COPD. 
Journal Pre-proof

Journal Pre-proof
App-based program in people with COPD  48 
 
 
Figure 1; Main directory & subdirectory of „symptom record‟ and „exercise‟ in smartphone 
app-based self-management program 
Figure 2; Main directory & subdirectory of „education materials‟ & „communication board‟ 
in smartphone app-based self-management program 
Figure 3; Modified CONSORT diagram showing flow of final sample (n=42) 
Journal Pre-proof

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

