

A feasibility study of a mental health mobile app in 
the Dominican Republic: The untold story 

To cite this article: Susan Caplan, Angelina Sosa Lovera & Patricia Reyna Liberato (2018) 
A feasibility study of a mental health mobile app in the Dominican Republic: The untold story, 
International Journal of Mental Health, 47:4, 311-345, DOI: 10.1080/00207411.2018.1553486 





Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mimh20 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MENTAL HEALTH 
2018, VOL. 47, NO. 4, 311–345 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207411.2018.1553486 
A feasibility study of a mental health mobile app in the 
Dominican Republic: The untold story 

aDivision of Nursing Science, School of Nursing, Rutgers University, The State University of New 
Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA; bFaculty, Department of Psychology, Universidad Aut(cid:1)onoma de Santo 
Domingo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; cDirector of Faculty and Administrative Staff 
Training and Capacity Building, Universidad Aut(cid:1)onoma de Santo Domingo, Santo Domingo, 
Dominican Republic 
KEYWORDS 
Behavioral health; 
depression; feasibility; 
hispanics; latinos; LMIC; 
mHealth; mobile apps; 
primary care 

Mental illnesses are among the leading causes of years lived with disability; 
however, 80% of people with mental illness in Low and Middle Income 
countries (LMICs) are unable to access treatment (Whiteford et al., 2013). 
CONTACT Susan Caplan 
University, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA. 
(cid:1) 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 


ABSTRACT 
Mobile health (mHealth) interventions include mental health 
apps (MHapps). There are hundreds of MHapps, which have 
been touted as a means of revolutionizing mental health care 
delivery. In spite of the rosy outlook and promise of MHapps, 
there are challenges to implementation in Low and Middle 
Income Countries (LMICs). We report on several domains of 
implementation: acceptance, appropriateness, engagement, 
and work processes assessed in two samples of clinicians and 
patients designed to develop and test the feasibility of a 
Spanish language Cognitive Behavioral VoiceThreadVR app for 
Dominican primary care patients with depression. Results indi- 
cated that feasibility of our eMH intervention was compromised 
by appropriateness of the target audience and the eligibility 
criteria used, including language, age, access to phones, and 
access to the internet. Both participants and clinical providers 
had varying degrees of engagement in the MHapp. Clinical pro- 
viders had a desire for increased knowledge and capacity build- 
ing, but also unspoken expectations and misaligned incentives. 
For participants, there were logistical and emotional barriers to 
use, some of which could not be fully determined in this study 
due to a lack of feasibility in terms of a low retention rate. 
Corresponding to these issues, we identified four potential sol- 
utions: 1) understanding of characteristics of end-users; 2) 
engagement of key stakeholders; 3) working within the existing 
infrastructure; and 4) addressing the social determinants of 
health. Unforeseen strengths also emerged as a result of our 
investigations. The challenges encountered in this pilot study 
can be viewed as evidence of failure or part of the incremental 
steps necessary to build future success. 


Increasing income inequality worldwide and disparities in health care 
resources contribute to morbidity and poor health outcomes in LMICs. 
The ubiquity of cellular phones and their unobtrusiveness may provide a 
means of delivering mental health care that is more private and less stigma- 
tizing through mHealth. mHealth is a type of eHealth that the World 
Health Organization (WHO, 2011) defines as medical care or monitoring 
that 
is delivered through mobile devices (World Health Organization, 
2011). The WHO has found that mHealth interventions for chronic disease 
management are utilized in the majority of its member nations and have 
reached more 
(World Health 
than 31 million people worldwide 
Organization, 2011). There are various types of mHealth interventions 
including: interactive voice response (IVR), smartphone applications, short 
messaging service (SMS), and telephone-based peer 
(TBPS). 
eMental Health (eMH) is “the use of telecommunication and information 
technologies to deliver mental health services at a distance” (Vis et al., 
2018). eMH has been successfully used to deliver treatment, real-time mon- 
itoring, and symptom management, psychoeducation, screening, promotion 
of behavioral change, coaching, social support, and self-management for a 
wide variety of mental illnesses including anxiety, depression, post-trau- 
matic stress disorder, and borderline personality disorder (Donker et al., 
2013; Labrique, Vasudevan, Kochi, Fabricant, & Mehl, 2013; Wang et al., 
2014). Apps that deliver eMH interventions are referred to as mental health 
apps or MHapps. There are hundreds of MHapps available; however, few 
MHapps available for consumers incorporate evidenced-based features, 
such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), and few have evidence of 
effectiveness (Bakker, Kazantzis, Rickwood, & Rickard, 2016). 

There are 4.3 billion mobile subscribers and access to mobile phones glo- 
bally is 91% (Sourabh, 2013). mHealth has been touted as a means of revo- 
lutionizing health care delivery and “the capabilities of mobile technology 
are now central to global health thinking” (Mohammadi, 2015). In spite of 
the rosy outlook and promise of mHealth and eMH, in particular, there are 
challenges to implementation and translational research that need to be 
considered. These challenges relate to human factors, the infrastructure of 
health service delivery, and research capacity to evaluate technological 
innovations in the use of eMH. 

In Latin America, including the Dominican Republic (DR), wired networks 
and connectivity are rapidly expanding (The World Folio, 2013) and pene- 
tration has reached 112%, meaning some people have more than one phone 
(The World Folio, 2013). Unfortunately, technology is changing at a rate 


that often precedes research evidence, and there are only a few examples of 
concerted efforts in mHealth interventions. The importance of information 
technology in the region is being fostered by The Observatory for the 
Information Society in Latin America and the Caribbean (OSILAC) 
(United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America, 2013) and The 
Global Observatory for eHealth (GOe) (WHO, Global Observatory for 
eHealth. Atlas—eHealth country profiles based on the findings of 
the 
second global survey on eHealth, 2010), which are designed to monitor the 
growth of internet technology and raise awareness of the need for eHealth 
practices. The Ibero-American Network of Mobile Technology and Health 
was created to promote research and development of mHealth in Latin 
America. Results of their efforts were highlighted in the international work- 
shop RITGMOS 2015, and featured the use of mobile applications and 
instant messaging (SMS) as mHealth tools to benefit and improve the qual- 
ity of diagnosis, treatment and monitoring, self-care, and quality of life 
among the population of Latin America (Saigi-Rubio, Novillo-Ortiz, & 
Piette, 2017). Peru and Mexico were highlighted for their use of mHealth 
for treatment adherence, epidemiological surveillance, and chronic disease 
self-management (Ram(cid:1)ırez, Guillen, & Cifuentes, 2016; Richards, 2013; 
Ruiz, Proa~no, Ponce, & Curioso, 2015). However, in general, efforts to pro- 
mote the use of mHealth are in its infancy and mental health is underre- 
presented among mHealth strategies. In many Latin American countries, 
the lack of infrastructure, both physical and technological, presents a real 
barrier to the adoption and use of mHealth. In Colombia, there is a clear 
policy on eHealth and health service needs of the population; however, the 
potential use of technology is limited by poor coverage, few trained person- 
nel, and cost (Frenk, 2015). A survey of Latin American and Caribbean 
countries found that slightly more than half had an Information and 
Communication Technology policy, whereas very few, including the DR, 
had electronic health (eHealth) policies (Jimenez-Marroquin, Deber, & 
Jadad, 2014). This absence of a concerted government level investment in 
eHealth has resulted in limited outcomes and translational research. The 
quality of existing mHealth research in Latin America is limited by small 
sample sizes, lack of valid diagnostic measures, and insufficient safeguards 
for confidentiality, anonymity, and information security (Ram(cid:1)ırez et al., 
2016; Richards, 2013). 
Barriers to conducting eMH translational research in LMICs, including 
Latin America 
Results of some systematic reviews conducted in the United States and the- 
oretical articles describe a number of challenges to the development of an 
to MHapps. These 
evidence basis for mHealth apps that are relevant 


include Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulatory issues, Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) and privacy issues, 
integration with existing health systems, and financial sustainability (Terry, 
2015). These challenges, although noteworthy, are not easily amenable to 
change at the project level (WHO, 2015) and do not address the crux of 
the issues facing implementation of an MHapp in an LMIC (Amerson & 
Strang, 2015). Translational research is comprised of dissemination and 
Johnson, & Finch, 2016; Proctor et al., 2009). 
implementation (May, 
Dissemination of eMH has been successful in HICs given that stakeholders 
and policy makers support eMH health care delivery to expand access. The 
most frequently used evidenced-based eMH depression treatment is CBT 
(Cuijpers, Andersson, Donker, & van Straten, 2011). In the form of self- 
help web apps and mobile apps, studies have shown effectiveness in the 
treatment of mild to moderate depression in nonclinical 
settings 
(Andersson, Topooco, Havik, & Nordgreen, 2016; Sander, Rausch, & 
Baumeister, 2016; Wang et al., 2014), although implementation in the clin- 
ical setting is more challenging. 
Most eMH interventions are developed and tested in High Income coun- 
tries. Global research funding priorities are set by High Income Countries 
(HICs) and have favored communicable disease research in LMICs. 
Significantly less research funding has been dedicated to chronic disease 
and mental health services research (The Global Emergency Medicine 
Think Tank Clinical Research Working Group, 2017). The vast majority of 
research related to mHealth in LMICs, including Latin America, has been 
in the areas of behavioral change in infectious disease surveillance, and 
maternal and child health. mHealth interventions have also been used a 
platform to enhance workforce training and monitoring, track vital statis- 
tics, and as sensors and diagnostics (Bakker et al., 2016). 
Although the use of the internet, mobile phones, and the development of 
applications and online sources of 
information currently are in high 
demand in LMICs, little has been done to integrate these communication 
methods as tools for the dissemination of mental health interventions. 
Sociocultural norms influence attitudes towards health services, including 
how eMH solutions will be utilized (Dobson et al., 2017; O’Connor & 
O’Donoghue, 2015; The Global Emergency Medicine Think Tank Clinical 
Research Working Group, 2017). In Latin America and the Caribbean, 
societal stigma related to mental health creates a reluctance to seek out psy- 
chologists, or psychiatrists. Persons with mental health problems prefer, 
instead, the advice of family members or religious leaders when experienc- 
ing symptoms of emotional distress (Caplan et al., 2016). eMH can enable 
people to access services in their own environment, avoiding the stigma 
associated with disclosure of a mental health problem (Fraser & Blaya, 


2010; Pagalday-Olivares et al., 2017). However, stigma may be one of the 
reasons that research specific to MHapps and other eMH interventions is 
virtually nonexistent in Latin America. 
The Reach Effectiveness Adoption Implementation Maintenance (RE- 
AIM) (Glasgow, Vogt, & Boles, 1999) framework has been used to identify 
barriers and facilitators to eMH uptake in HICs (Donker et al., 2013), and 
these fall 
into several domains, as follows: acceptance, appropriateness, 
engagement, resources, work processes, and leadership. These issues are 
also very relevant to research related to eMH delivery in LMICs, but may 
be more clearly illustrated in a real world context. The objective of this 
implementation of MHapps 
manuscript 
research in an LMIC, the DR, and to provide some potential solutions. 



We report on the barriers to implementation of a proof of concept study 
designed to develop and test the feasibility of disseminating a culturally 
adapted 
self-help 
language Cognitive Behavioral 
Spanish 
VoiceThread mobile appVR 
(CBT-VT app) for Dominican primary care 
patients with depression. The application, El Buen Consejo Movil (EBCM) 
(the Sound Advice) was developed and piloted in three government-owned 
primary care clinics in Santo Domingo and Boca Chica, DR. We opted to 
not provide a phone to participants, because the provision of a smart 
phone (valued at $75 U.S. dollars) could be considered a coercion to par- 
ticipate in the research study. Thus, we provided an incentive of initially 
one month’s internet access or 4 gigabytes (valued at $17) with an add- 
itional month upon follow-up. Feasibility data were ascertained from two 
separate samples during 2016–2018. The study was approved by a 
University Institutional Review Board (IRB), the Research Department of 
the University Aut(cid:1)onoma de Santo Domingo, and the Ministry of Health 
in the DR. 



2. Assess the feasibility and acceptability of using EBCM. Feasibility 
included recruitment, adherence and retention, clinical relevance, and 
staff engagement. 
Study design. A mixed-method longitudinal design was used to evaluate 
the feasibility and acceptability of EBCM. We used an iterative design pro- 
the 
cess 




Accelerated Creation to Sustainment (ACTS) model (Mohr et al., 2017). 
This model avoids some of the pitfalls of translational research in the con- 
text of mHealth interventions. In the traditional model of translational 
research, an app is developed outside of and apart from the deployment 
setting, and is implemented in the real-world setting only when fully devel- 
oped. In the ACTS model, creation, development, 
implementation, and 
evaluation occur simultaneously and cyclically throughout the phases of 
Create, Trial, and Sustain (Mohr et al., 2017). Therefore, based on the ana- 
lysis of results from our first sample, we modified the sample, setting, inter- 
vention, and objectives for our second sample. We retained the objective of 
assessing the feasibility and acceptability of using EBCM. An additional 
objective for the second sample was to increase staff engagement and 
understanding of the intervention for future deployment in that setting. 
Subjects and Setting Sample 1. A convenience sample of 36 participants 
was recruited from two primary care sites. The sample size was based upon 
our a priori recruitment criteria of 60% of eligible participants recruited 
and consented. Using a sample size estimate based on confidence intervals 
of estimates (Hooper, 2019; Hertzog, 2008), with a sample size of 36, we 
would be able to estimate a recruitment rate of 60% to within a 95% confi- 
dence interval of þ/- 13%. We opted for this range because of the recom- 
mended sample size of less than 40 for feasibility of recruitment in pilot 
studies and a greater acceptability of wider confidence intervals (Hertzog, 
2008). The sites were selected based on where providers had received the 
WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) training in inte- 
grated behavioral health care. The goals of mhGAP were to increase access 
to health care for mental, neurological, and substance abuse disorders 
through integrated behavioral health care. Through mhGAP, primary care 
providers throughout the country were trained in identification and man- 
agement of common behavioral health disorders such as depression, 
dementia, epilepsy, and alcohol misuse, thus, primary care providers had a 
protocol 
for screening and treating Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) 
(World Health Organization, 2010). These primary care sites, known as 
Primary Attention Units (UNAPS), had been selected by the Office of the 
Minister of Mental Health and were located in the National District, specif- 
ically in Boca Chica, Santo Domingo, and Santo Domingo Este. 
Recruitment Sample 1. The PRIME-MD PHQ-9 was used to assess pres- 
ence of depressive symptoms (Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001). The 
PHQ-9 is a 9-item scale that assesses all DSM-V symptoms of depression 
during the past two weeks. It is a widely-used measure of depression sever- 
ity in primary care, that has been validated for Spanish-speaking popula- 
tions (Baca et al., 1999; Diez-Quevedo, Rangil, Sanchez-Planell, Kroenke, & 
Spitzer, 2001; Wulsin, Somoza, & Heck, 2002). The PHQ-9 was selected 


because the questions were similar to the depression screening questions 
used by mhGAP. After screening and scoring the PHQ-9, the participant 
was informed of the results of the screening, and the significance of the 
results, in a culturally appropriate manner. With the patient’s written con- 
sent, results were shared with the patient’s primary care physician. Patients 
who met inclusion criteria were invited to participate in the study of 
EBCM. The consent form was read aloud to participants and a formal writ- 
ten consent was obtained. The inclusion criteria was: age greater than or 
equal to 18, PHQ-9 (Kroenke, Spitzer & Williams, 2001) score indicative of 
depression by algorithm, and greater than or equal to 5 and less than 15 
(indicating mild to moderate depressive disorder) on a validated Spanish 
translation of the PHQ-9, access to a working mobile smart phone, receipt 
of primary care from the UNAP, able to speak and understand Spanish 
and read at a third grade level (for texting within the app). The exclusion 
critera was: age less than 18 years, PHQ-9 score not indicative of depres- 
sion by algorithm and less than 5; or greater than or equal to 15, a history 
of psychiatric hospitalization or bipolar disorder, severe mental disorder, 
actively suicidal, 
speech 
impairment that would preclude listening to and/or verbally responding to 
the app, non-Spanish speaking, a life expectancy of less than six months. 

Subjects and Setting Sample 2. Upon review and analysis of data from 
the first two sites and concerns over the absence of screening and a referral 
system for persons with mental health care needs, we opted for a third site 
where mhGAP was being implemented with greater fidelity and mental 
health professionals were present on-site. This UNAP was located in Santo 
Domingo Este. At this site, the research team presented the goals and 
objectives of the study to the entire clinical staff. In discussion of the pro- 
posed research, the Medical Director and Regional Health Director felt that 
ECBM might be appropriate for clinic staff. Moreover, to enhance staff 
engagement and understanding of 
the PI and Co- 
Investigators decided that the clinical staff should be given a trial period of 
the app to experience the intervention. We informed the staff that we 
wanted their feedback on the app’s perceived appropriateness for the target 
audience, the clinic’s patients. We also wanted to assess the potential for 
staff members to monitor the app and fully integrate the intervention 
within the daily work-flow of the clinic. 

Recruitment Sample 2. All clinical staff (n = 30; 5 nurses, 14 CHWs, 
and 9 doctors and 2 mental health providers) who were present in the 
clinic and available during the times the research team was present were 
invited to participate in the five-day trial of EBCM. Staff members who 
were willing, formally consented to study participation. The consent, con- 
included permission to complete a brief demographic 
ducted privately, 


questionnaire, and the PHQ-9, and to provide feedback and evaluation of 
the contents of the app. The inclusion criteria for staff was: age 18 and 
above, had worked at the primary site for a minimum of 6 months, and 
present at the clinic for a minimum of 15 hours per week. The exclusion 
criteria was: age under 18, plans to be away from the clinic for greater than 
one week, severe mental disorder, actively suicidal, cognitive impairment, 
hearing or speech impairment that would preclude listening to and/or ver- 
bally responding to the app. 
Intervention. After baseline data collection, participants were provided 
with prepaid internet access for one month and EBCM was downloaded to 
their phone. The intervention was based on the Spanish language depres- 
sion prevention course, “The Healthy Management of Reality,” an evi- 
dence-based CBT group therapy program developed by Mu~noz (2007). The 
language and contents of the course had been culturally modified for the 
Dominican population with ongoing collaboration with mental health pro- 
fessionals in the DR and the United States. Subsequently, the face-to-face 
program (Mu~noz, 2007) was modified for use in the app. Modifications 
were designed to compensate for the absence of therapist/patient live inter- 
action by incorporating daily salutations and dichos (short parables or 
instructive comments) in short one to two-minute audio commentaries. 
These modifications were piloted among a convenience sample of 24 inter- 
view participants (14 patients and 10 clinic staff in different capacities) in a 
primary care clinic in Santo Domingo, DR. 
EBCM was designed to be used as a stand-alone tool to provide psycho- 
education for depression or to augment treatment as usual (TAU). The 
contents of EBCM, delivered in two daily recorded messages, was not con- 
sidered to be psychotherapy, but rather guided self-help for depressive 
symptoms 
and negative mood states. EBCM was downloaded to 
VoiceThread’s cloud-based platform, a proprietary, secure mobile platform 
that facilitates multimodal communication among users (see Figure 1). 
Participants could respond to questions posed in the prerecorded psycho- 
educational strategies with a voice recording or text describing their 
thoughts, mood states, or perceptions or record a numerical value on the 
mood thermometer. Participants were assigned to groups of five or six 
and could read or listen to responses of other participants. All answers and 
participant responses were stored on the mobile phone. The recorded 
responses were accessed by the study team via their own password-pro- 
tected access to the participants’ 
individually assigned program. Since 
EBCM was not a free-standing app, but was downloaded to the VT plat- 
form, individuals did not receive tailored messages or strategies that were 
customized to individual responses. The five major parts to the EBCM con- 
sisted of psychoeducation and how to identify triggers for negative or 



positive moods and thoughts, daily self-monitoring of moods and thoughts, 
symptom management, and cognitive behavioral strategies using a tool-box 
approach (see Figure 2). 
Participants received an introductory session that explained basic usage 
of the app, including how to create a password for their app (and their 
phone, if not already password protected). To prevent unauthorized use of 
the app, we instructed participants to not share their passwords with any- 
one. Participants were given demonstrations to practice using the app. 
They created a pseudonym and recorded an introductory statement using 
their pseudonym that appeared within the app with the initials of the 
pseudonym. Knowledge of how to use the app was evidenced by a return 
demonstration of usage. 
Monitoring of response to treatment. Participants were monitored for 
adherence to treatment. The PI reviewed the responses to each session on a 
daily basis and offered each participant feedback based upon responses and 
improvement or worsening of mood scale. Participants who did not 
respond to the app by the third day received a text message reminder to 
encourage use of the app. 
Data Collection. Data collection for Sample 1 occurred at baseline, when 
semi-structured individual 
interviews were used to assess demographics, 
mental and physical health, and use of mental health care. Demographic 
items were selected based on a review of the literature pertaining to predic- 
tors of depression (Oslin et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2014). Participants were 
also asked to respond to questions about whether they owned a mobile 



phone, if it was a smart phone, and if they had experience using mobile 
apps. At the end of the four-week intervention, the PHQ-9 was adminis- 
tered. All three interviewers were Spanish speakers. Data collection for 
Sample 2 occurred at baseline and at the end of the five-day trial period 
of EBCM. 
Acceptability of the CBT-VT. Final feedback of the acceptability and 
feasibility of EBCM was based upon the open-ended questionnaire devel- 
oped by Ainsworth et al. (Ainsworth et al., 2013) and was administered 
in a face-to-face interview. Acceptability of the contents of EBCM was 
evaluated based upon open-ended and Likert 
in the 
domains of content, 
interaction with others, privacy, and 
confidentiality. Content questions included the degree to which recom- 
mended strategies could be used in daily living, a self-assessment of 
mood state after participating in the sessions, and confidence in being 
able to maintain the strategies. Technology questions were based upon 




ease of usage, comfort 
the app. 


In addition, within the app, every two days, we posed a short series of 
questions, “What was useful about today’s session,” “What was not useful,” 
and “How can we improve the session?” 
Clinical staff in Sample 2 were asked to comment on the quality and cul- 
tural appropriateness of the revised graphic images within the newly added 
animations, the perceived acceptability of the contents for patients, and if 
they could see themselves having a role in monitoring participants’ 
responses to the app. 
Evaluation of Implementation and Analysis of Processes. Our frame- 
work for analysis of processes related to implementation was based upon 
the determinants of practices relevant to implementing eMH in primary 
care identified by Vis et al. (2018) in their systematic review of eMH for 
mood disorders. These determinants included: “(1) acceptance of eMH by 
patients and staff, (2) appropriateness or clinical relevance of eMH, (3) 
engagement of participants [patients and staff] in implementing and deliv- 
ering eMH, (4) resources for implementing and delivering eMH, and (5) 
work processes in delivering eMH” (Vis et al., 2018). We used inductive 
analysis to ascertain how implementation and process outcomes fit within 
the 
Interview data were 
reviewed and systematically analyzed by the investigators (the first and 
second author) using qualitative descriptive techniques for thematic analysis 
(Braun & Clark, 2006). 

We used deductive analysis to identify a priori criteria of feasibility of 
implementation, based on the Cochran Criteria for bias in interventional 
studies (Editorial Board, Cochrane Back Review Group, 2009; Higgins & 
Green, 2011), and the researcher’s experiences recruiting in the primary 
care setting, including as follows: 
Recruitment. 60% of eligible participants recruited and consented. 
Retention/Attrition. Less than 25% attrition 

The first sample had a mean age of 36 and the majority of these partici- 
pants were women, 15 (83%), and from the DR, 14 (78%) (see Table 1). 
The other participants were from the United States and Venezuela. In this 
sample, 140 were screened for depression of whom 57 (41%) screened posi- 
tive for depression, 21 were ineligible to participate in the study, two 
(1.4%) due to age under 18, 11 (8%) were ineligible due to lack of a smart 
phone, and 8 (6%) due to severity of depression or suicidal ideation (see 
Figure 3). The absence of a smart phone was more likely to occur among 
participants from the clinic in Boca Chica. Of the 36 participants who met 


Table 1. Description of the Sample 1 (n ¼ 18). 
Variable 
Age (mean) 
Gender 
Male 
Female 

Dominican Republic 
Venezuela 
United States 

Yes 
No 

0–5 Years 
5–10 Years 
11–15 Years 
15–20 Years 
20þ Years 
Highest level of education 
Eighth grade or less 
Less than high school 
High school graduate 
Technical school/Some University 
College graduate 

Married or living with a partner 
Widowed/Separated/Divorced 
Single or never married 

Full-time 
Part-time 
Unemployed 
Student 
Disability 
Monthly income level (Dominican pesos) 
Less than $2,000 (US Dollars <$46)) 
$2,000–$8,999 (US Dollars $46–$209) 
$9,000–$17,999 (US Dollars $209–$363) 
More than $18,000 
Self-rated physical health 
Excellent 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 
Did not answer 

Excellent 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 
Did not answer 

Yes 
No 

Yes 
No 
N (%) 
36 
3 (17) 
15 (83) 
14 (78) 
3 (16) 
1 (6) 
9 (50) 
9 (50) 
3 (17) 
0 (0) 
1 (5) 
2 (11) 
12 (67) 
1 (5) 
3 (17) 
3 (17) 
7 (38) 
4 (22) 
11 (61) 
4 (22) 
3 (17) 
3 (17) 
7 (39) 
7 (39) 
0 (0) 
1 (5) 
2 (11) 
7 (39) 
5 (28) 
2 (11) 
4 (22) 
5 (28) 
6 (33) 
2 (11) 
1 (5) 
4 (22) 
6 (33) 
5 (28) 
2 (11) 
1 (5) 
2 (11) 
16 (89) 
2 (11) 
16 (89) 
inclusion criteria, eighteen (50%) completed baseline data, of whom nine 
(50%) used the app and 3 (33%) completed all four weeks of the interven- 
tion (see Figure 3). 



The second sample (clinic staff) had a mean age of 42 and all of the par- 
ticipants were from the DR (n = 21) (see Table 2). In this sample, 3 (14%) 
screened positive for depression. Seven people (33%) were ineligible to par- 
ticipate in the study; one person was ineligible due to lack of a cell phone, 
three people were ineligible due to lack of a smart phone, two people were 
ineligible due to lack of capacity on their phones, and one person was ineli- 
gible due to cognitive impairment (see Figure 4). For those participants 
who could not access the app on their phones or who did not view the 
entire program, the program was presented to them on a computer during 
the final individual and group interviews. We elicited feedback on the con- 
tent and appropriateness of EBCM for their patient population (n = 6). 

In response to our initial series of questions about phone usage, a large 
majority of the participants had cell phones, and 81% had smart phones. 
















































Table 2. Description of Sample 2 (n ¼ 21). 
Variable 
Age (mean) 
Gender 
Male 
Female 



Yes 
No 
Highest level of education 
Eighth grade or less 
Less than high school 
High school graduate 
Technical school/Some university 
College graduate 
Graduate school 

Married or living with a partner 
Widowed/Separated/Divorced 
Single or never married 

Full-time 
Part-time 
Occupation 
Physician 
Nurse 
Psychologist 
Health Worker 
Medical Supervisor 
Pharmacist 
Monthly income level (Dominican pesos) 
$2,000–$8,999 (US Dollars $46–$209) 
$9,000–$24,999 (US Dollars $209–$581) 
$25,000–$35,999 (US Dollars $518–$837) 
More than $36,000 
Self-rated physical health 
Excellent 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 

Excellent 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 

Positive 
Negative 

Yes 
No 

Yes 
No 

Yes 
No 
N (%) 
42 
3 (14) 
18 (86) 

14 (66) 
7 (33) 
1 (5) 
2 (9.5) 
1 (5) 
8 (38) 
2 (9.5) 
7 (33) 
14 (67) 
5 (24) 
2 (9.5) 
8 (38) 
13 (62) 
4 (19) 
4 (19) 
1 (5) 
9 (43) 
2 (9) 
1 (5) 
5 (24) 
4 (19) 
4 (19) 
1 (5) 
6 (29) 
7 (33) 
8 (38) 
9 (43) 
10 (47) 
1 (5) 
1 (5) 
3 (14) 
18 (86) 
2 (10) 
19 (90) 
20 (95) 
1 (5) 
18 (86) 
3 (14) 



Almost all reported interest in mobile application therapy due to its con- 
venience, privacy, and affordability, and most found the sample of sug- 
gested CBT strategies and “advice” to be relevant, comprehensible, and 
culturally appropriate. 

Clinicians and patient participants perceived that the app was clinically 
relevant and appropriate. When asked if the contents were useful or not 
son muy utiles,” 
useful, most participants 
responded that 
(“everything was very useful”) (male, Boca Chica). Clinicians felt that the 
information provided in the app and for potential users with depression 
was appropriate: “Sobre el contenido me parece bien porque ayuda a saber 
como manejarse” (“In respect to the content, it seemed to be good, because 














Used Application 
> 1 time 
7 (64%) 



















it helps to learn how to get along”) (female, community health worker 
(CHW), Santo Domingo Este). Nevertheless, the appropriateness of our 
eMH intervention was diminished as a result of the design of the study 
and the selection of the target population in Sample 1. These challenges 
included language barriers, 
to 
the internet. 




Language. Some participants in the clinic in Santo Domingo were ineli- 
gible because they did not speak Spanish. Although this clinic drew from a 
population residing in the nearby extremely impoverished neighborhood, 
we had not anticipated that the number of patients who did not speak 
Spanish would be so high. Many of the patients were from Haiti and 
unable to understand Spanish. The language of our app was in Spanish and 
there were insufficient budgetary resources for translation, validation, and 
creation of the app in Creole. 
Age. Our age eligibility criteria for use of the app were limited to adults, 
aged 18–64. This was due to the fact that our MHapp was based upon the 
“The Healthy Management of Reality,” a program developed for adults. 
There were also ethical and logistical barriers to conducting research with 
minors as participants, including the lack of access to child psychiatrists. 
Nevertheless, our primary care clinics primarily served young women of 
childbearing age who were seeking prenatal care or vaccinations for their 
children. This population was at high risk for post-partum depression, and 
many met all of the other eligibility requirements for the study. However, a 
number of these women were found to be ineligible because they were 
under the age of 18. 
Access to phones. Some potential participants did not have smart 
phones. Other participants shared their phones with their family members 
limiting regular access to the intervention and potentially, limiting the priv- 
acy of usage. Some participants only had access to the phone in their own 
homes. They did not carry their phone with them due to fear of theft, thus 
limiting access to the self-monitoring aspects of the CBT intervention. Of 
the participants who had access to smartphones, the majority had sufficient 
memory on their phones to be able to download the app, but some contin- 
ued to experience technical difficulties, such as forgetting their password, 
or subsequent damage to their phones. 
Access to the internet and technological literacy. Although most people 
had smartphones and access to WIFI in their own homes or at internet 
cafes, they did not use their phones to surf the internet; rather, the utility 
of internet connectivity was to enhance communication and social inter- 
action through WhatsApp and Facebook. Two of the participants who were 
provided the app, but did not use it, were participants who had limited 
technological literacy. 


Determinant 3. Engagement of participants and clinical staff in 
implementing and delivering eMH 
Both patient participants and clinical staff had various degrees of engage- 
in the MHapp for entirely different reasons. Clinical providers 
ment 
expressed a desire for increased knowledge and clinical capacity. In Sample 
2, the completion rate over a five-day period was 17% (2 out of 12). 
However, we were able to ascertain follow-up data from all but one of the 
clinicians. Among those who could access the app, the most common rea- 
sons cited for noncompletion were lack of time, technical difficulties, such 
as slowness of the internet and inability to download the videos, forgetting 
their log-in, and security features on the phone that prevented usage. In 
Sample 1, a barrier to staff engagement was unspoken expectations and 
misaligned incentives among the providers. 
Clinical staff-misaligned incentives. 
In the clinics selected by the 
Ministry of Health, the doctors who had been trained in mhGAP were 
informed of the study, had met with the PI and Co-Investigators and dis- 
cussed the goals of the program. During our presentation of the research 
project, we assessed the doctor’s willingness to participate in the implemen- 
tation of the research. Providers were informed that they would be respon- 
sible for screening and referring patients with elevated levels of depression, 
in accordance with their prior mhGAP training. The two providers in each 
of two sites stated that their motivation for participation was to potentially 
enhance identification of depression, increase access to care for patients 
with depression, and to increase staff capacity in understanding of depres- 
sion. Both providers were offered the opportunity to participate as Co- 
Investigators upon completion of the Human Subjects training, provided 
by the first author. The Principal Investigator (first author) had previously 
facilitated this training for Co-investigators and Research Assistants, who 
were compensated for the time dedicated to training. For one of the two 
doctors, a non-stated incentive for participation was the expectation of 
what she referred to as an “incentivo” or a personal direct payment for her- 
self and the clinic staff. This expectation was expressed as a demand for 
payment one day prior to commencement of the research and equal to 
approximately one month’s salary. Due to the fact that this physician had 
not completed Human Subjects training, we had not defined a research- 
specific role for her. Her role was consistent with usual clinical day-to-day 
responsibilities. To facilitate the implementation of the study, we created 
additional non-research responsibilities related to coordinating student 
learning experiences, and the physician was remunerated. 
Engagement of patient participants. Participants who used the app 
were engaged and reported that they found the advice helpful. Per com- 
ments within the app and one of the final interviews, EBCM offered good 


advice, reduced stress, and they felt comforted by knowing that other peo- 
ple were experiencing similar feelings. Both patient participants who com- 
pleted the final evaluations would recommend the app to other people. 
Within the app participants volunteered: “escucho sus consejos e aprendido 
mucho m(cid:1)as a yevar un estilo de vida m(cid:1)as relajado sin pensar mucho en 
cosas que no sean constructivas” (“I listen to the advice and I have learned 
a lot about how to have a more relaxed lifestyle without thinking too much 
about things that are not constructive”) (female, Santo Domingo). “Buen 
del temometro me siento bien. No estoy enfadada. Eso me ayuda esta mas 
trankila” (“Good, with the mood thermometer, I feel good. I’m not fed up. 
This helps me to be more at peace”) (female, Santo Domingo). 
Only one person expressed negative feelings about the app. During the 
final interview, she voiced her ambivalent feelings that although she liked 
the interaction with other people and she felt good knowing that other peo- 
ple were having similar experiences, she did not like to share her feelings in 
public. She did not fully understand the messages in terms of content and 
only found some of them to be useful, such as the breathing exercises. Her 
personal problems and difficulties at home continued. Moreover, although 
she did receive personal responses to her comments, she was looking for a 
greater level of tailored responses, rather than the initial prerecorded mes- 
sages that were directed at the entire group. She had really wanted individual 
psychotherapy and misunderstood the limitations of the app. 
At least five participants responded several times a week. However, most 
participants failed to use EBCM for the entire four-week duration (see 
Figure 3). In Sample 1, the completion rate for the entire four weeks was 
8.33 (3 out of 36), and a third of the participants in Sample 1 who had 
started using the app could not be reached for follow-up. There were 
numerous logistical and emotional barriers to use, some of which could 
not be fully determined in this study due to a low retention rate which did 
not meet our a priori criteria for retention (see Figure 3). When contacted 
by phone during the period of the intervention, a few participants stated 
that they were unable to complete the program due to difficult life circum- 
stances, 
issues, undocumented immigrant status, 
child care, or elder care responsibilities. One participant reported having 
used up the allotted month’s internet access in one week. Another partici- 
pant reported that he thought it would be more like the apps you get in 
the app store, with games and points. 


Work processes are the necessary tools and methods required to carry out 
and monitor the intervention. Challenges to the conduct of our study were 


in the areas of research design including: the time dedicated to consent and 
the need for multiple clinic visits to provide access to the app; and the lack 
of standardized measures to assess patient appropriateness for the interven- 
tion and monitor outcomes. 
Consenting and baseline data collection. In our first sample, many par- 
ticipants were lost during the process of reading aloud a twelve-page con- 
sent form, and baseline data collection. Per our University’s interpretation 
of IRB regulations, the consent form was required to provide sufficient 
detail about the contents of each instrument, the manner in which HIPPA 
would be adhered to (although HIPPA is not enacted in the DR) and sep- 
arate consent forms pertaining to HIPPA and permission to record the par- 
ticipant’s voice during the app usage. The process of reading aloud the 
consent form took over 30 minutes, which proved to be difficult for partici- 
pants who were interrupting their work day to attend the clinic. Therefore, 
some participants were given the consent form to read at a convenient 
time and were asked to return if interested. For participants who did 
return, the multi-step process of accessing the app store, obtaining a gmail 
account for access to the app, downloading the app, traveling to a local 
store to purchase the on-going internet access for use of the app, demon- 
strating the app, and ensuring knowledge of how to use the app was a very 
lengthy process which precluded full participation. 
Lack of standardized measures. During the initial screening process, the 
PHQ-9 served as the instrument to screen potential participants for depres- 
sion. The PHQ-9 was selected due to its ability to validly and reliably 
measure depression across cultures (Huang, Chung, Kroenke, Delucchi, & 
Spitzer, 2006). In a United States sample of primary care patients, which 
included Spanish speakers, there were a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity 
of 88% for major depression at a score of greater than or equal to 10 based 
on a structured clinical interview (Kroenke et al., 2001). Nevertheless, in 
the absence of a population-based validation of the PHQ-9 in the DR, and 
the lack of research capacity to conduct a structured clinical diagnostic 
interview for sensitivity and specificity analyses, we really could not be sure 
if the recommended cut-point of scores of 5, 10, and 15 referring to mild, 
moderate, and severe depression were valid in the DR. Participants may 
have been enrolled who did not have depression. In fact, a recent study of 
primary care patients in Spain suggests that 12 is a more valid cut-point 
for diagnosing depression than the usually recommended cut-point of 10 
(Munoz-Navarro, 2017). In conjunction with the medical provider at the 
site, we performed an extensive clinical interview with patients who indi- 
cated suicidal ideation or moderately severe to severe depression (scores of 
15 and above). Nevertheless, this clinical interview did not meet the gold 
standard of a structured clinical diagnostic interview, and it is possible that 


people with severe depression who should have been excluded from the 
study remained in the study. Lastly, in discussions with the co-investigators 
and medical providers, it was determined that the question regarding sui- 
cidal thoughts was not worded in the best manner to elicit an accurate 
response. Thus, the wording was subtly modified to add in a more cultur- 
ally acceptable “Are there times when you feel tired of living? Do you feel 
that everything would be better if you were not living?” rather than “Do 
you have thoughts that you would be better off dead?” 

A number of barriers were encountered that affected research implementa- 
tion including lack of research capacity and lack of government prioritiza- 
tion of integrated behavioral health care. 
Lack of research capacity. There are a limited number of mental health 
services researchers in the country. Most faculty with doctoral degrees are 
fully engaged in teaching and administration and most mental health pro- 
fessionals are not engaged in research. The lack of protected time for 
research that is characteristic of many institutions of higher education in 
the United States is even more pronounced in academia in LMICS. The 
IRB in our affiliated University was not fully functioning. Moreover, clini- 
cians in LMICs are not trained in research, nor provided incentives to con- 
duct research other than surveillance activities. Graduate students who 
were serving as Research Assistants had not had the opportunity to partici- 
pate in clinical trials and had minimal training to conduct qualitative inter- 
views, ensure fidelity to the intervention, and create plans for data 
management and analyses. 
Mental health services infrastructure. Government clinics were selected 
based upon their participation in mhGAP, and thus, the providers in the 
primary care clinics selected for this study were familiar with depression 
screening instruments and evaluation of depression. However, due to lim- 
ited resources, full 
implementation and outcomes evaluation of mhGAP 
had not been undertaken. Regular screening for depression was not occur- 
ring, and linkages for referrals to mental health providers had not been 
fully established at the onset of the program, but were developed as the 
program progressed. 
Our third clinical site, the UNAP in Santo Domingo Este, represented 
the ideal structure for integrated behavioral health. All of the staff had had 
mhGAP training, rather than one or two physicians (as was the case in the 
previous sites), so although depression screening was not taking place, there 
was greater mental health literacy among the clinic staff. Nevertheless, the 
integration of EBCM into the daily work flow of the clinic would prove to 


be difficult. As there was no routine screening process for mental health 
disorders, identifying those in need of interventions was based solely on 
clinical judgment and many patients had unaddressed mental health needs 
(according to the mental health providers). Moreover, in our meeting with 
clinical staff to establish a feasible workflow in terms of how patients using 
the MHapp could be monitored and who would be the best person to 
monitor the patients, the Medical Director volunteered that the CHWs had 
the most flexible schedules and could take on this task. However, our inter- 
views with the staff presented a differing viewpoint. When asked if it would 
be possible to dedicate 20 minutes a day to reading and responding to 
patients within the app the CHWs had the following comments: 
“Bueno, yo no tengo tiempo. No se los dem(cid:1)as” (“Well, I don’t have time. I don’t 
know about the rest”) (CHW). 
And nurses also: “Yo sal(cid:1)ı desde las 7 de ma~nana de mi casa” (I leave from my house 
at 7:00 in the morning) (Nurse). 
“Yo creo que eso depende de la disponibilidad de cada persona” (“It depends on the 
availability of each person” (CHW). 

Lessons learned from implementation of an MHapp in primary care in the 
DR are both positive and negative. The challenges encountered in these 
pilot studies can be viewed as evidence of failure or part of the incremental 
steps necessary to build future success. Corresponding to our determinants 
of practice outlined above: acceptance, appropriateness, engagement, work 
processes, and resources, we propose four key strategies to address the 
challenges to implementation of a technologically-based intervention in a 
middle-income country: 1) understanding of characteristics of end-users; 2) 
engagement of key stakeholders; 3) working within the existing infrastruc- 
ture to increase capacity and ensure effective work processes; 4) addressing 
the social determinants of health; and 5) building upon strengths. 

The lengthy process of app development can result in obsolescence of 
technological interventions before they are implemented in the real world 
setting. Therefore, understanding the end-user in terms of motivations, 
user characteristics and environment are critical. We utilized these princi- 
ples to assess potential usability and acceptance and developed a greater 
appreciation of sociocultural differences in population health needs and 
mHealth usage. We also recognized the necessity of including service users 


and caregivers in participatory research, planning, and policy making 
(Semrau et al., 2016). 
One of the notable characteristics of the end user we encountered was 
the youthfulness of the primary care population and child-bearing popula- 
tion relative to that of the United States. The DR has one of the highest 
rates of adolescent pregnancy in the Caribbean and globally (Pantaleon, 
2015). Adolescent mothers who are without resources and social support 
are at high risk for post-partum depression. MHapps that incorporate CBT 
methods are effective for this population (Kauer et al., 2012), and therefore, 
the age of eligibility for investigations of MHapps in countries with high 
rates of adolescent pregnancy should be lowered to include these potential 
participants. 

Strategies to enhance retention and adherence. The issues we encoun- 
tered in respect to retention and adherence are not unique to LMICs. In 
fact, studies conducted in HICs have shown a completion rate for internet 
treatment 
log-in rate of 10% 
low as 1% with an initial 
(Christensen et al., 2009). The science of persuasive system design provides 
an evidence basis for elements of mHealth interventions that 
increase 
(Kelders, Kok, Ossebaard, & Van Gemert-Pijnen, 2012). 
adherence 
Persuasive technology includes both human-computer interactions and 
computer-mediated communication (Kelders et al., 2012). Elements of per- 
suasive technology used to support behavior change can be grouped 
according to Primary Task Support, Dialogue Support (also referred to as 
Social Accountability), and Social Support (Mohr, Cuijpers, & Lehman, 
2011). Primary Task Support includes reducing complex tasks into simpli- 
fied behaviors and ensuring that participants are familiar with the language, 
concepts, and terms that are used in MHapps prior to deployment (Latif 
et al., 2017). 
Consistent with the findings in our research, due to global migration and 
ethnic diversity, language diversity has been identified as a key barrier in 
the use of MHapps in LMICs (Brian & Ben-Zeev, 2014). There are many 
countries that use multiple languages in the same conversation which 
requires that the user interface be designed accordingly (Chiu, Dimaras, 
Downie, & Gallie, 2015). Alternatively, imagery and graphics can be used 
to remedy low-literacy and language barriers (Medhi, Prasad, & Toyama, 
2007). Design recommendations to improve the usability for low-literacy 
populations and non-native speakers would include the provision of voice- 
based interfaces (e.g., spoken instructions and audio annotations), local lan- 
guage support, and the minimization of complex navigation and inputs 
(Medhi et al., 2011). 
Our use of existing software, VoiceThreadVR , allowed us to fully utilize 
the ACTS model and develop and evaluate the design of the app without 



concerns about the cost or time dedicated to modify an app specifically 
developed for this particular intervention. In our successive iterations of 
the design of EBCM, we employed another aspect of persuasive technology 
by targeting our messages and imagery to a Caribbean primary care popu- 
lation. Based on the characteristics of the sample ascertained in our first 
two clinics, we added animations that depicted younger women in domestic 
situations and service professions (see Figure 5). We also ascertained from 
feedback from participants that depression often manifests as anger, and 
can result in angry outbursts at children and loved ones. We utilized this 
feedback in the animations. However, when asked to react to the anima- 
tions, many people judged the actions of 
the mother with depression 
harshly. Participants felt that the degree of anger at a child who had not 
done anything wrong was not normal. However, one person suggested that 
this was not necessarily a person with depression, because she sees this 
behavior all the time. 
Social presence. Stand-alone apps for depression, anxiety, and other dis- 
orders are significantly more effective when used as guided self-help or 
monitored by a health-care professional, rather than when used independ- 
ently (Cuijpers, Donker, van Straten, Li, & Andersson, 2010). A provider’s 
recommendation to use an app enhances adherence to the app. Social pres- 
ence or the sense that there is a human interaction within the app may 
help avoid the high drop-out rates in eMH research within the primary 
care setting (Anderson et al., 2016). Nevertheless, MHapps are not a substi- 
tute for the sustained, trusting, and ongoing relationship that a patient has 
is therapeutic (Agius & 
with their provider, which in and of 



Stangeland, 2016). It is important that providers are aware of the effective- 
ness of the app and are part of an overall systematic plan to incorporate 
app usage into routine care. In our study, the absence of reinforcement of 
app usage by the primary care provider may have contributed to low reten- 
tion rates. Additionally, our Research Assistant for the first sample was 
responsible for conducting the final 
interviews. She joined us after the 
study had commenced and had not participated in the earlier recruitment 
and data collection. Therefore, she had not had the opportunity to person- 
ally meet the participants. Her relative lack of social presence may have 
contributed to the difficulties we encountered in follow-up and responsive- 
ness among the initial sample. In contrast, we saw the participants in the 
second sample on a daily basis and could trouble-shoot if they had not 
logged in and we set up the expectation that their feedback was important 
throughout our conversations. 
Engagement of Key Stakeholders. Ensuring patient, provider, and staff 
understanding, and buy-in of the new innovation is likely to increase 
uptake (Hall, Fottrell, Wilkinson, & Byass, 2014; Semrau et al., 2016). 
Engaging key stakeholders in critical components of design features can aid 
in dissemination. Our decision to allow the staff in Sample 2 to experience 
the MHapp, gain comfort in its use, and ascertain their opinions as to the 
apps’ clinical appropriateness facilitated buy-in and future deployment. A 
more challenging aspect of provider buy-in is the often tenuous alliance 
between researchers’ objectives and the clinic’s priorities. Our needs for 
data collection and exploration of clinic staff’s potential role in the dissem- 
ination and use of the app exposed work-flow barriers to real-world imple- 
mentation. Nevertheless, we also identified facilitators to implementation 
including the establishment of relationships with clinic staff and the provi- 
sion of hands-on experiences with EBCM, the proposed intervention. We 
also clearly discovered the need to assess incentives for participation. 
Realigned incentives. The reliance upon funding from HICs to fund 
research in LMICs is unavoidable and a necessary means to reduce global 
health care disparities (Bhutta, 2002). This unequal distribution of resources 
and power requires careful considerations of not only the ethical issues 
involved in the research, but an understanding of the perceptions of the 
collaborators and participants as to what constitutes equitable distribution 
of resources within the specific domains of the collaborators’ role in the 
project. A social justice perspective would seek to mitigate power differen- 
tials and argue for shared decision-making and distribution of research 
funding based upon mutually agreed upon contributions to the research. A 
medical provider could be considered to be assisting in the research by 
screening and providing access to the participants, who are patients. 
Nevertheless, the ethical issue of coercion of participants comes into play if 


the medical provider is receiving remuneration for recruitment of patients. 
Clearly, communication is crucial to ensuring that the research goals fit the 
priorities for the particular clinic, but more importantly that unspoken 
agendas and expectations are ascertained. A careful discussion of the med- 
ical providers’ perceived role in the research, desired contribution to the 
research, expectations of direct financial gain, and a resolution of perceived 
inequities in the distribution of resources are essential components to 
ensure the projects’ success. Situating the research within the existing infra- 
structure requires maximization of effective work processes. 
Working within the existing infrastructure to increase capacity and 
ensure effective work processes. Infrastructure resources consist of the 
availability and quality of office rooms, telecommunications equipment, 
computers, and the associated primary care processes and referral systems, 
and access to consults and secondary and tertiary levels of care (Donker 
et al., 2013). Integrated behavioral health care is an essential primary care 
process to facilitate the implementation of eMH. Integrated health care 
may include stepped care models based upon symptom presentation and 
patient needs, decision support for providers, co-location of behavioral 
health and physical health treatment and at a minimum, integrated fund- 
ing, and outcomes measurement (Hilty, Johnston, & McCarron, 2016). The 
use of mobile technology can enhance linkages between the health sector, 
community, the individual, or other institutions or resources, promoting 
the development of integrated primary care in LMICs. Integration eMH 
and MHapps may require modification of existing workflow to support the 
dissemination of the intervention. Task sharing can include non-mental 
health professionals delegated to the task of telephone or SMS monitoring 
of responses to treatment, which is a critical component to enhance treat- 
ment engagement and retention. To enhance sustainability, clearly defined 
roles for all members of the team, including a work-flow schema, are an 
essential aid to implementation (Mohr, Burns, Schueller, Clarke, & 
Klinkman, 2013). 
Recommendations for consenting and baseline data collection. We 
developed a multi-step process of dissemination of the intervention to 
enhance feasibility in the primary care setting. This encompassed modifica- 
tions to baseline data collection, down-loading the app, demonstrating use 
of the app and supplying internet access. 
Creating a consent process that effectively conveys the purpose and par- 
ticipation requirements of a research study to low-literacy populations in a 
culturally-sensitive manner 
is extremely challenging in global health 
research (Igoumenidis & Zyga, 2011). At the time of this study, the stand- 
ard IRB protocol required a consent to include a detailed description of the 
the 
study including funding, recruitment processes, eligibility criteria, 


contents of instruments, rationale for asking for participation, risks, bene- 
fits, and contact information. Amerson and Strang (2015) suggest that this 
consent process may not be the best method to ensure understanding 
because participants may find the process boring and burdensome. 
Therefore, they recommend that only the essential and most relevant infor- 
mation be included. The revised Common Rule, which goes into effect 
January 2019, includes changes to the requirements for informed consent. 
These changes will streamline the informed consent process for primarily 
educational and non-pharmaceutical interventions. 
A systematic and streamlined approach to data collection is essential to 
avoid drop-out at the pre-intervention stage of the study. Through trial 
and error, we developed a system for collecting baseline data and providing 
access to the app in the most efficient manner. We created a bilingual 
video of the protocol that could be disseminated to all research assistants 
to ensure fidelity to the intervention. 
Eligible participants who consented to be in the study had baseline data 
collected using the Qualtrics data collection system (Qualtrics LLC, 2002). 
We chose Qualtrix because it is one of the few web-based survey systems 
that can also be used off-line, which is critical in LMICs. Participants were 
assigned a participant identifier (e.g., CBTVT18218) and a pre-made corre- 
sponding email (e.g., CBT-VT1_8.2.18@gmail.com); this step was necessary 
for the deidentification of the participants while still ensuring a way of 
monitoring participants throughout the duration of the intervention. This 
step also expedited the process for participants who did not have email 
access or did not remember their login credentials for the sign-up process. 
After assigning a participant number with corresponding email, participants 
received the intervention platform via wireless downloading through their 
phone’s application marketplace (App Store or the Google Play Store). The 
V 
R was downloaded onto the smart phone device. 
application VoiceThread 
Participants logged onto the application through a pre-made account set up 
by the investigators; the login credentials corresponded to the participant 
number and a generic password was created in advance for efficiency. 
Ensuring confidentiality and privacy. Participants set up an online 
anonymous profile by accessing the “Profiles” and “Identities” tabs and chang- 
ing the assigned name to a preferred pseudonym; this step allowed the partici- 
pants to remain anonymous yet be able to exist as a user with a “name” on the 
application. The pseudonym was matched up confidentially to the participant 
number to monitor progress later in the intervention. The changes were saved 
and the participant was introduced to the features of the application. 
Increasing research capacity. Capacity building for policy makers, ser- 
vice users, and researchers is one of the most critical aspects in strengthen- 
ing mental health services. A needs assessment using a SWOT analysis 


(identification of strengths, weakness, opportunities, and threats) (Semrau 
et al., 2018) can help define a systematic coordinated approach to capacity 
building. Moreover, research activities need to be supported and valued by 
institutions to avoid the “brain drain” and migration of experienced 
researchers to HICs (Evans-Lacko et al., 2016). Clinical providers and 
graduate students have limited experience in designing research, collecting 
data, and analyzing results (The Global Emergency Medicine Think Tank 
Clinical Research Working Group, 2017). These processes can be facilitated 
through the unique features of eMH which permit data collection through 
surveys, and/or in-app questionnaires as well as biometric monitoring for 
real-time results. WHO has a number of manuals that provide detailed 
information on processes such as “Monitoring and Evaluating Digital 
Health Interventions” (World Health Organization, 2016). 

Enhancing research capacity requires a number of programmatic proc- 
esses including training and mentorship for all levels of research experi- 
ence, 
in capacity development, using multimodal 
communication strategies for distance learning and project implementation, 
and providing training in outcomes evaluation to clinical sites using a 
train-the-trainer approach for sustainability (Thornicroft, Cooper, Van 
Bortel, Kakuma, & Lund, 2012). The contents of trainings should be tail- 
ored to individual countries (Thornicroft et al., 2012). Most efforts to 
increase research capacity and strengthen provider knowledge of quality 
improvement strategies entail the provision of short courses and work- 
shops. The Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) in the eth- 
ical conduct of Human Subjects Research is free and can be offered as 
college level coursework in research or public health classes. For more 
advanced researchers, the United States National Institute of Health (NIH) 
offers a free in-depth course on how to conduct clinical research. The 
Introduction to the Principles and Practice of Clinical Research (IPPCR) 
focuses on biostatistical methods, study design, protocols, evaluation and 
quality assurance, and is appropriate for multidisciplinary health care pro- 
fessionals and researchers (NIH Clinical Center, 2018). 
The social determinants of health as it pertains to eMH. The social 
determinants of health as it pertains to eMH comprise the environment or 
conditions that affect health outcomes and decision making tasks in the use 
of eMH (O’Connor & O’Donoghue, 2015). The influence of a country’s 
context, contributions to health care, and income inequality have a major 
influence on the uptake and dissemination of mHealth interventions. For 
the effectiveness of mHealth, 
it is necessary to contextualize the socio- 
cultural and health realities, as well as the availability and access to 
information and communication technology (ICT), requirements in infra- 
financing, human resources, and the delimitation of ethical 
structure, 


principles and human rights in access to mental health care. The national 
health expenditure as a percent of GDP of 2.9 for the DR is one of the low- 
est in the region, and income inequalities are great (Moore, Carter, Nietert, 
& Stewart, 2011). Mental health is typically under-resourced in LMICS, and 
local or regional providers have little input into mental health services or 
policies which are allocated at a national level, often by administrators with 
limited knowledge 
(Alfonsson, Olsson, 
of mental health systems 
Linderman, Winnerhed, & Hursti, 2016). 
We found that both providers and patients were keenly aware of the socio- 
economic barriers to health and well-being. Nevertheless, it was often their 
conclusion that depression was solely a product of environmental stressors. 
The grinding poverty, experienced by undocumented immigrants from 
Venezuela, or young single mothers, rendered the CBT strategies of our 
MHapp an afterthought and almost irrelevant solution. Thus, it was import- 
ant to facilitate provider communication around depression and mental ill- 
ness using a language that resonated with both provider and patients. 
Limitations. Our findings of a lack of feasibility may have been limited by 
extraneous barriers to the completion of our study that confounded our 
results. As mentioned above, our limited research capacity meant that none 
of the authors had protected time to conduct the research, and all had other 
full-time responsibilities. This affected the length of time dedicated to data 
collection, and follow-up. Moreover, the lack of substantial funding for the 
study limited our ability to hire research assistants for significant periods of 
time to collect data in our absence. Although, Moore et al. (Alfonsson et al., 
2016) posit that inadequate funding can compromise a pilot study to such 
an extent that it should not be undertaken, this obfuscates the inherent 
biases and politics of funders in terms of who and what gets funded, and 
would eliminate potentially valuable insights gained by small-scale studies, 
as well as the opportunity to increase research capacity. While it is possible 
that increased time and money might have led to evidence of greater feasibil- 
ity, we feel confident that most of the identified barriers to the conduct of 
the research would have still been present to some degree, as these barriers 
represent systemic infrastructure and institutional 
issues. An absence of 
institutional research infrastructures, 
including IRBs and limited trained 
research personnel, lack of standardized databases, and data collection meth- 
in LMICs (The Global Emergency 
ods have affected research output 
Medicine Think Tank Clinical Research Working Group, 2017). 

The feasibility of mHealth interventions is effected by the inherent chal- 
lenges in the conduct of research studies in LMICs, including the failure to 


recognize local customs and host country context and to adapt research 
procedures to these circumstances, while maintaining translational research 
rigor (Amerson & Strang, 2015). Although many of the issues we presented 
in this manuscript are unique to LMICs, translation of evidenced-based 
eMH interventions remains challenging even in HICs. The low effectiveness 
of mHealth interventions in the clinical setting can be attributed to the lack 
of validity of research methods that isolate intervention development from 
the real world setting, use an asynchronous approach to design, evaluation 
and implementation; and focus on the technology to the exclusion of con- 
siderations for supportive accountability and the necessity for human pres- 
ence and support (Alfonsson et al., 2016; Hilty, Johnston, & McCarron, 
2016). The methodology used in this study starts with implementation in 
the real world setting, and, based on participant or end-user feedback, 
iteratively continues to redesign and improve upon core features of the 
technology and the deployment environment. The critical issues of reten- 
tion and adherence are problems encountered in well-funded, large scale 
trials in HICs (Eysenbach, 2005; Waller & Gilbody, 2009). For Mhapps tar- 
geted to populations with depression, adherence is compromised by the 
amotivational syndrome that is a characteristic of depression, irrespective 
of the nature of the intervention (Mohr et al., 2011). However, as seen in 
this study, the greatest barrier to eMH implementation is human factors, 
not technological ones (Luo, Hilty, Worley, & Yager, 2006). Although we 
encountered numerous challenges to our MHapp intervention, there were 
unanticipated benefits and a slow but steady march towards progress. We 
embarked on key processes identified in the literature (WHO, 2015) that 
laid the groundwork for incorporating cultural context in the intervention. 
We also developed strong collaborations which will enable us to sustain the 
intervention through the iterative process of refining our product and out- 
comes. We developed an ongoing and effective system of communication 
through WhatsApp, Free Conference Calls, and group meetings. Over time, 
we helped create liaisons between primary care providers and specialty 
mental health care which strengthened referral systems. Our coauthor 
recently completed a much needed epidemiological study of depression in 
primary care in the DR, and we have increased research capacity by train- 
ing students in the Ethical Conduct of Research and offering hands-on 
experience in the conduct of research. At a national level, the country’s 
the economy is rapidly growing, and 
health indicators are improving, 
extreme poverty is decreasing. Therefore, 
the climate is positive for 
eHealth growth. Although we reported on the difficulties of implementa- 
that 
tion of EBCM, 
further development 
a worth- 
while venture. 










Agius, M., & Stangeland, H. (2016). How does the internet influence the doctor–patient 
relationship? In D. Mucic & D. M. Hilty (Eds.), E-Mental health (pp. 251–258). Basel, 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing. 
Ainsworth, J., Palmier Claus, J. E., Machin, M., Barrowclough, C., Dunn, G., Rogers, A., & 
Lewis, S. (2013). A comparison of two delivery modalities of a mobile phone-based 
assessment for serious mental illness: Native smartphone application vs text-messaging 
only implementations. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(4), 43–55. doi:10.2196/ 
jmir.2328. 
Alfonsson, S., Olsson, E., Linderman, S., Winnerhed, S., & Hursti, T. (2016). Is online treat- 
ment adherence affected by presentation and therapist support? A randomized controlled 
trial. Computers in Human Behavior, 60, 550–558. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.01.035. 
Amerson, R. M., & Strang, C. W. (2015). Addressing the challenges of conducting research 
in developing countries. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 47(6), 584–591. doi:10.1111/ 
jnu.12171. 
Andersson, G., Topooco, N., Havik, O., & Nordgreen, T. (2016). Internet-supported versus 
Review of 
face-to-face 






Neurotherapeutics, 16(1), 55–60. doi:10.1586/14737175.2015.1125783. 
Baca, E., Saiz, J., Aguera, L., Caballero, L., Fernandez-Liria, A., Ramos, J., … Porras, A. 
(1999). Validaci(cid:1)on de la versi(cid:1)on espa~nola del PRIME-MD: Un procedimiento para el 
diagn(cid:1)ostico de trastornos mentales en atenci(cid:1)on primaria. Actas Espa~nolas de Psiquiatr(cid:1)ıa, 
27, 375–383. 
Bakker, D., Kazantzis, N., Rickwood, D., & Rickard, N. (2016). Mental health smartphone 
JMIR 
apps: Review and evidence-based recommendations for future developments. 
Mental Health, 3(1), e7. doi:10.2196/mental.4984. 
Bhutta, Z. (2002). Ethics in international health research: A perspective from the developing 
world. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 80(2), 114–120. doi:10.1590/S0042- 
96862002000200006. 


Brian, R. M., & Ben-Zeev, D. (2014). Mobile health (mHealth) for mental health in Asia: 
Objectives, strategies, and limitations. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 10, 96–100. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajp.2014.04.006. 
Caplan, S., Little, T. V., Reyna, P., Sosa Lovera, A., Garces-King, J., Queen, K., & Nahar, R. 
(2016). Mental Health Services in the Dominican Republic from the Perspective of 
Health Care Providers. Global Public Health, 13(7), 874–898. doi:10.1080/17441692. 
2016.1213308. 
Chiu, H. H., Dimaras, H., Downie, R., & Gallie, B. (2015). Breaking down barriers to com- 
municating complex retinoblastoma information: Can graphics be the solution? 
Canadian Journal of Ophthalmology, 50(3), 230–235. doi:10.1016/j.jcjo.2015.02.003. 


Christensen, H., Griffiths, K. M., & Farrer, L. (2009). Adherence in internet interventions 
for anxiety and depression. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11(2), e13. doi:10.2196/ 
jmir.1194. 
Cuijpers, P., Andersson, G., Donker, T., & van Straten, A. (2011). Psychological treatment 
of depression: Results of a series of meta-analyses. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 65(6), 
354–364. doi:10.3109/08039488.2011.596570. 
Cuijpers, P., Donker, T., van Straten, A., Li, J., & Andersson, G. (2010). Is guided self-help 
as effective as face-to-face psychotherapy for depression and anxiety disorders? A sys- 
tematic review and meta-analysis of comparative outcome studies. Psychological 
Medicine, 40(12), 1943–1957. doi:10.1017/S0033291710000772. 
Diez-Quevedo, C., Rangil, T., Sanchez-Planell, L., Kroenke, K., & Spitzer, R. L. (2001). 
Validation and utility of the Patient Health Questionnaire in diagnosing mental disorders 
in 1003 general hospital Spanish inpatients. Psychosomatic Medicine, 63(4), 679–686. doi: 
10.1097/00006842-200107000-00021. 
Dobson, R., Whittaker, R., Bartley, H., Connor, A., Chen, R., Ross, M., & McCool, J. 
(2017). Development of a Culturally Tailored Text Message Maternal Health Program: 
TextMATCH. JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth, 5(4), e49. doi:10.2196/mhealth.7205. 
Donker, T., Petrie, K., Proudfoot, J., Clarke, J., Birch, M., & Christensen, H. (2013). 
Smartphones for smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic review. 
Journal of Internet Research, 15(11), 239–251. doi:10.2196/jmir.2791 
Evans-Lacko, S., Ribeiro, W., Brietzke, E., Knapp, M., Mari, J., McDaid, D., … Wissow, L. 
(2016). Lean economies and innovation in mental health systems. Lancet (London, 
England), 387(10026), 1356–1358. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30090-3. 


Fraser, H. S., & Blaya, J. (2010). Implementing medical information systems in developing 
countries, what works and what doesn’t. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2010, 
232–236. 


Furlan, A. D., Pennick, V., Bombardier, C., & van Tulder, M., Editorial Board, Cochrane 
Back Review Group. (2009). Updated method guidelines for systematic reviews in the 
doi:10.1097/ 
Spine, 
Cochrane 
BRS.0b013e3181b1c99f. 





Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. (1999). Evaluating the public health impact of 
health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM framework. American Journal of Public 
Health, 89(9), 1322–1327. doi:10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1322. 
Global Observatory for eHealth. Atlas—eHealth country profiles based on the findings of 
the second global survey on eHealth. Geneva: World Health Organization; (2010). 
Available from: http://www.who.int/goe/publications/ehealth_series_vol1/en/index. 
Hall, C. S., Fottrell, E., Wilkinson, S., & Byass, P. (2014). Assessing the impact of mHealth 
interventions in low-and middle-income countries–what has been shown to work? 
Global Health Action, 7(1), 25606. doi:10.3402/gha.v7.25606. 


Higgins, J. P. T., & Green, S. (editors). (2011). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews 
of Interventions Version 5.1.0 [updated March 2011]. The Cochrane Collaboration. 
Available from http://handbook.cochrane.org. 


Hilty, D. M., Johnston, B., & McCarron, R. M. (2016). How e-mental health adds to trad- 
itional outpatient and newer models of integrated care for patients, providers, and sys- 
tems. In D. Mucic & D. M. Hilty (Eds.), E-Mental Health (pp. 129–149). Basel, 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing. 
Hooper, R. (2019). Justifying sample size for a feasibility study. Research Design Service 
London. National Institute for Health Research, Available at https://www.rds-london. 
nihr.ac.uk/resources/#statistics. 
Huang, F. Y., Chung, H., Kroenke, K., Delucchi, K. L., & Spitzer, R. L. (2006). Using the 
patient health questionnaire-9 to measure depression among racially and ethnically 
diverse primary care patients. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21(6), 547–552. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00409.x. 


Jimenez-Marroquin, M. C., Deber, R., & Jadad, A. R. (2014). Information and communica- 
tion technology (ICT) and eHealth policy in Latin America and the Caribbean: A review 
of national policies and assessment of socioeconomic context. The Revista Panamericana 
de Salud P(cid:1)ublica/Pan American Journal of Public Health (RPSP/PAJPH), 35(5–6), 
329–336. 
Kauer, S. D., Reid, S. C., Crooke, A. H., Khor, A., Hearps, S. J., Jorm, A. F., & Patton, G. 
(2012). Self-monitoring using mobile phones in the early stages of adolescent depression: 
Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14(3), e67. 
Kelders, S. M., Kok, R. N., Ossebaard, H. C., & Van Gemert-Pijnen, J. E. (2012). Persuasive 
system design does matter: A systematic review of adherence to web-based interventions. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14(6), e152. doi:10.2196/jmir.2104.PMID: 23151820 
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. W. (2001). The PHQ-9: Validity. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606–613. doi:10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x. 
Labrique, A. B., Vasudevan, L., Kochi, E., Fabricant, R., & Mehl, G. (2013). mHealth inno- 
vations as health system strengthening tools: 12 common applications and a visual 
framework. Global Health: Science and Practice, 1(2), 160–171. doi:10.9745/GHSP-D-13- 
00031. 
Latif, S., Rana, R., Qadir, J., Ali, A., Imran, M. A., & Younis, M. S. (2017). Mobile health in 
the developing world: Review of literature and lessons from a case study. IEEE Access, 5, 
11540–11556. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2710800. 
Levine, A. C., Barry, M. A., Agrawal, P., Duber, H. C., Chang, M. P., Mackey, J. M., & 
Hansoti, B., and The Global Emergency Medicine Think Tank Clinical Research 
Working Group, (2017). Global health and emergency care: Overcoming clinical research 
barriers. Academic Emergency Medicine, 24(4), 484–493. doi:10.1111/acem.13142. 
Luo, J. L., Hilty, D. M., Worley, L. L. M., & Yager, J. (2006). Considerations in change 
management related to technology. Academic Psychiatry, 30(6), 465–469. doi:10.1176/ 
appi.ap.30.6.465. 


Medhi, I., Patnaik, S., Brunskill, E., Gautama, S. N., Thies, W., & Toyama, K. (2011). 
Designing mobile interfaces for novice and low-literacy users. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction ( Interaction), 18(1), 1–28. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 
1959022.1959024 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/ … /ToCHI2711_ 
Medhi.pdf doi:10.1145/1959022.1959024. 


Medhi, I., Prasad, A., & Toyama, K. (2007). Optimal audio-visual representations for illiter- 
ate users of computers. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World 
Wide Web. ACM Banff, Alberta, Canada —, May 08 – 12, 873–882. 


Mohr, D. C., Burns, M. N., Schueller, S. M., Clarke, G., & Klinkman, M. (2013). Behavioral 
intervention technologies: Evidence review and recommendations for future research in 
mental 
doi:10.1016/ 
health. 
j.genhosppsych.2013.03.008. 




Mohr, D. C., Cuijpers, P., & Lehman, K. (2011). Supportive accountability: A model for 
providing human support to enhance adherence to eHealth interventions. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 13(1), e30. doi:10.2196/jmir.1602. 
Mohr, D. C., Ho, J., Duffecy, J., Baron, K. G., Lehman, K. A., & Jin, L. (2010). Perceived 
barriers to psychological treatments and their relationship to depression. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 66(4), 394–409. doi:10.1002/jclp.20659. 
Mohr, D. C., Lyon, A. R., Lattie, E. G., Reddy, M., & Schueller, S. M. (2017). Accelerating 
digital mental health research from early design and creation to successful implementa- 
tion and sustainment. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 19(5), e153. doi:10.2196/ 
jmir.7725. 
Moore, C. G., Carter, R. E., Nietert, P. J., & Stewart, P. W. (2011). Recommendations for 
planning pilot studies in clinical and translational research. Clinical and Translational 
Science, 4(5), 332–337. doi:10.1111/j.1752-8062.2011.00347.x. 
Mu~noz, R. F. (2007). The Depression Prevention Course. Spanish Version. Retrieved 
January 28, 2015, from Palo Alto University i4Health Website: https://www.i4health-pau. 
org/manuals-and-measures 
Munoz-Navarro, R. (2017). Utility of the PHQ-9 to identify major depressive disorder in 
adult patients in Spanish primary care centres. BMC Psychiatry, 17, 291. doi:10.1186/ 
s12888-017-1450-8. 
NIH Clinical Center. (2018). Introduction to the Principles and Practice of Clinical 
Research (IPPCR). Retrieved from https://clinicalcenter.nih.gov/training/training/ippcr1. 
html#ImportantDates 
O’Connor, Y., & O’Donoghue, J. (2015). Contextual barriers to mobile health technology in 
African Countries: A perspective piece. Journal of Mobile Technology in Medicine, 4(1), 
31–34. doi:10.7309/jmtm.4.1.7. 
Oslin, D. W., Datto, C. J., Kallan, M. J., Katz, I. R., Edell, W. S., & TenHave, T. (2002). 
Association between medical comorbidity and treatment outcomes in late-life depression. 
823–828. doi:10.1046/j.1532- 
Society, 
Journal 
5415.2002.50206.x. 



Pagalday-Olivares, P., Sj€oqvist, B. A., Adjordor-van de Beek, J., Abudey, S., Silberberg, 
A. R., & Buendia, R. (2017). Exploring the feasibility of eHealth solutions to decrease 
in maternal healthcare in remote communities of Ghana. BMC Medical 
delays 
Informatics and Decision Making, 17(1), 156. doi:10.1186/s12911-017-0552-z. 
Pantaleon, D. (2015). All tiene la mayor tasa de embarazos en adolescentes del mundo, 
despu(cid:1)es de (cid:1)Africa. Listin Diario, mi(cid:1)ercoles, 11 de marzo de 2015. Retrieved from: 
https://www.listindiario.com/la-republica/2015/03/11/359329/al-tiene-la-mayor-tasa-de- 
embarazos-en-adolescentes-del-mundo-despues-de-africa 
Proctor, E. K., Landsverk, J., Aarons, G., Chambers, D., Glisson, C., & Mittman, B. (2009). 
Implementation research in mental health services: An emerging science with conceptual, 


methodological, and training challenges. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and 
Mental Health Services Research, 36(1), 24–34. doi:10.1007/s10488-008-0197-4. 
Qualtrics, LLC. (2002). Provo Utah. https://www.qualtrics.com/ 
Ram(cid:1)ırez, L., Guillen, E., & Cifuentes, Y. (2016). Estrategia de validaci(cid:1)on para aplicaciones 


interventions. 
Universitas Psychologica, 12(2), 571–579. http://www.scielo.org.co/scielo.php?script=sci_ 
arttext&pid=S1657-92672013000200022&lng=en&tlng=en 
Ruiz, E. F., Proa~no, A., Ponce, O. J., & Curioso, W. H. (2015). Tecnolog(cid:1)ıas m(cid:1)oviles para la 
lecciones aprendidas. Revista Revista Peruana De Medicina 
salud p(cid:1)ublica en el Per(cid:1)u: 
Experimental Y Salud P(cid:1)ublica, 32(2), 364–372. doi:10.17843/rpmesp.2015.322.1634. 

J. D. (2017). CYTED-TIRMOS network: 
Towards the search for solutions to promote mobile health in Latin America. Pan 
American Journal of Public Health, 41, e33. 
Sander, L., Rausch, L., & Baumeister, H. (2016). Effectiveness of Internet-based interven- 
tions for the prevention of mental disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
JMIR Mental Health, 3(3), e38. doi:10.2196/mental.6061. 
Semrau, M., Alem, A., Abdulmalik, J., Docrat, S., Evans-Lacko, S., Gureje, O., … Hanlon, 
C. (2018). Developing capacity-building activities for mental health system strengthening 
in low- and middle-income countries for service users and caregivers, service planners, 
and researchers. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 27(01), 11–21. doi:10.1017/ 
S2045796017000452. 
Semrau, M., Lempp, H., Keynejad, R., Evans-Lacko, S., Mugisha, J., Raja, S., … Hanlon, C. 
(2016). Service user and caregiver involvement in mental health system strengthening in 
low- and middle-income countries: Systematic review. BMC Health Services Research, 16, 
79. doi:10.1186/s12913-016-1323-8. 
Sourabh, K. (2013). Global Mobile Penetration Reached 91 Percent in Q3 2012; 6.4 Billion 
Mobile Subscribers Worldwide. Ericsson Mobility Report 2012. Retrieved from http:// 
sourcedigit.com/1264-global-mobile-penetration-q3-2012/ 
Terry, N. P. (2015). Mobile health. Chest, 147(5), 1429–1434. doi:10.1378/chest.14-2459. 
The World Folio. (2013). “At the head and crossroads of Caribbean telecommunications.” 
Retrieved from http://www.theworldfolio.com/news/dominican-telecommunications-insti- 
tute-indotel-dominican-republic-n2147/2147/ 
Thornicroft, G., Cooper, S., Van Bortel, T., Kakuma, R., & Lund, C. (2012). Capacity build- 
ing in global mental health research. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 20(1), 13–24. doi: 
10.3109/10673229.2012.649117. 

(2013). About ECLAC 
[Internet]. Santiago: UN; c2013. Available from: http://www.eclac.org/cgi-bin/getprod. 
asp?xml=/noticias/paginas/4/43024/P43024. 
Vis, C., Mol, M., Kleiboer, A., B€uhrmann, L., Finch, T., Smit, J., & Riper, H. (2018). 
Improving implementation of eMental health for mood disorders in routine practice: 
Systematic review of barriers and facilitating factors. JMIR Mental Health, 5(1), e20. doi: 
10.2196/mental.9769. 
Waller, R., & Gilbody, S. (2009). Barriers to the uptake of computerized cognitive behav- 
the quantitative and qualitative evidence. 
ioural 

Psychological Medicine, 39(05), 705–712. doi:10.1017/S0033291708004224. 
Wang, J., Sareen, J., Patten, S., Bolton, J., Schmitz, N., & Birney, A. (2014). A prediction 
algorithm for first onset of major depression in the general population: Development 


and validation. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 68(5), 418–424. doi: 
10.1136/jech-2013-202845. 
Wang, J., Wang, Y., Wei, C., Yao, N., Yuan, A., Shan, Y., & Yuan, C. (2014). Smartphone 
interventions for long-term health management of chronic diseases: An integrative 
review. Telemedicine and e-Health, 20(6), 570–583. doi:10.1089/tmj.2013.0243. 
Whiteford, H. A., Degenhardt, L., Rehm, J., Baxter, A. J., Ferrari, A. J., Erskine, H. E., … 
Vos, T. (2013). Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disor- 
ders: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 382(9904), 
1575–1586. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61611-6. 


World Health Organization. (2011). mHealth: New horizons for health through mobile 
technologies: Second global survey on eHealth. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/goe/ 
publications/goe_mhealth_web.pd 




World Health Organization. (2016). Monitoring and evaluating digital health interventions: 
A practical guide to conducting research and assessment. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. 
World Health Organization and Pan American Health Organization (2008). WHO-AIMS 
report on mental health systems in Central America and Dominican Republic. Retrieved 
from http://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/WHO-AIMS/en/ 
Wulsin, L., Somoza, E., & Heck, J. (2002). The feasibility of using the Spanish PHQ-9 to 
screen for depression in primary care in Honduras. Primary Care Companion to the 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 4(5), 191–195. 
