
The Relationship Among Screen Use, Sleep, and Emotional/ 
Behavioral Difficulties in Preschool Children with 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
Jiayong Lin,* Iliana Magiati,* Shi Hui Rachel Chiong,* Swati Singhal,† Natasha Riard,† 
Isabel Hui-Xuan Ng,‡ Falk Muller-Riemenschneider,§ Chui Mae Wong† 
ABSTRACT: Objective: Despite evidence that excessive screen use may contribute to negative health, de- 
velopmental, emotional, and behavioral outcomes, more children are engaging in increasing amounts of 
screen-related activities. For children with neurodevelopmental conditions, increased screen use could ex- 
acerbate emotional/behavioral difficulties (EBDs) by interfering with sleep quantity and quality. Aims: This 
study examined the possible mediating role of sleep in the relationship between screen use and EBDs in 
preschool children with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) clinically referred to a child development 
center in Singapore. Methods: A screen use questionnaire developed for the purposes of the present study, 
the Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire, and the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire were completed 
by 367 caregivers of 2- to 5-year-old children with NDDs (39.5% autism spectrum disorder; 36.8% speech- 
language disorders; 23.7% others). Results: Average daily screen use duration was 3.98 hours, with 93.9% 
exceeding 1 hour of screen time daily. 57.7% of children had screen devices in their bedrooms, while 52% 
commenced screen use at the age of 18 months or earlier. Sleep problems fully mediated the relationship 
between the number of bedroom screen devices and children’s EBDs, as well as between the age of first 
screen use and EBDs, but not between hours of screen use and EBDs. Controlling for age, developmental 
level, and family income, children who started using screens earlier than 18 months and who had screen 
devices in their bedrooms had significantly more sleep problems and EBDs than those without. Conclusion: 
Children with neurodevelopmental conditions may have more difficulties disengaging from screen devices in 
their bedrooms, and an earlier age of screen exposure may contribute to more chronic disruption of sleep. 
(J Dev Behav Pediatr 40:519–529, 2019) Index terms: screen use, sleep, emotional/ behavioral difficulties, preschool children, neurodevelopmental disorder 
or condition. 

cluding televisions, video games consoles, computers, 
tablets, and smartphones. Increasingly more children are 
engaging with screen devices for longer periods and 
starting at younger ages. In the United States, daily 
screen time (i.e., duration of screen use) of children aged 
8 years and younger had increased from 1 hour 
55 minutes in 2013 to 2 hours 19 minutes in 20171; 
screen time also increased with age from 42 minutes in 
children younger than 2 years to 2 hours 39 minutes in 2- 
to 4-year-old children and subsequently to 2 hours 
56 minutes in children aged 5 to 8 years.1 
From the *Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singa- 
pore; †Department of Child Development, KK Women’s and Children’s Hos- 
pital, Singapore; ‡Department of Paediatrics, Cambridge University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom; §Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 


This seeks to inform that the appended paper represents an original contribution. 
It has not been previously published and is currently not being considered for 
publication elsewhere. 


The American Academy of Pediatrics recommended 
in a policy statement2 to avoid screen use in children 
younger than 18 months; for parents of 18 to 24 month 
old children to engage in screen use jointly with their 
children; and limited independent screen use up to 1 
hour per day for children older than 2 years. Although 
there may be some educational and socioemotional 
benefits 
from selected screen use on child de- 
velopment,3 increased screen use and the presence of 
bedroom screen devices have been associated with de- 
creased sleep duration,4 even in infants.5 Furthermore, 
several, mostly, cross-sectional studies have reported 
consistent associations between early and sustained in- 
creased screen use, poorer language and cognitive de- 
velopment,6 and more emotional/behavioral difficulties 
(EBDs) in typically developing children worldwide.7,8 
Increased screen use has also been associated with 
overall poorer family functioning and poorer maternal 
well-being, possibly related to lower quality parent-child 
interactions and displacement of other activities that may 
better promote emotional-behavioral well-being, which 
may over time foster reliance on screen use as a daily 
habit to occupy children during daily routines.9,10 Con- 
versely, caregivers of children with preexisting EBDs 



may rely on screen devices as a calming tool when 
children are upset, thereby over time displacing the de- 
velopment of the child’s internal self-regulation mecha- 
nisms, 
in turn increasing screen use over time and 
perpetuating difficulties with emotional/behavioral 
regulation.10 
Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
and Screen Use 
Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) in the Di- 
agnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, Fifth 
Editior11 
include intellectual disability (ID), global 
developmental delay (GDD), speech and language dis- 
orders (SLs), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), and specific 
learning disorders (LDs). 
Lo12 conducted a retrospective analysis of more than 
56,000 US school-aged children and adolescents with 
and without NDDs using data extracted from the 2007 
National Survey of Children’s Health. Compared with 
typically developing children, children with NDDs (ASD, 
ADHD, GDD, and LD) in this study had higher daily av- 
erage screen times, although ADHD was reported to be 
the main NDD impacting screen time behavior. Consid- 
ering how children with NDDs are at overall higher risk 
for poorer developmental outcomes, it is possible that 
increased screen use may further exacerbate these. 
Currently, research is scarce in this population, and 
findings are mixed, making it premature to draw any 
firm causal links. Most research to date has been pub- 
lished in relation to children with ASD and ADHD,13,14 
with very few, if any, to our knowledge, studies in chil- 
dren with other NDDs. Compared with typically de- 
veloping children, children with ASD have more 
compulsive Internet and video game use and more dif- 
ficulties disengaging from screen use, possibly due to the 
repetitive and restricted nature of the screen content; 
they also present with more inattention and are more 
negatively impacted by screen use in their social, edu- 
cational, and family life.15 At the same time, other studies 
have suggested that screen devices can be useful as en- 
abling tools of communication and support in teaching 
activities of daily living, vocational/employment, 
lan- 
guage, and promoting communication and social skills in 
people with ID and ASD.16 
Screen Use and Sleep in Children With 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
In typically developing children, one possible mech- 
anism through which screen use may exert negative 
effects is by affecting their sleep: by quantitatively dis- 
placing sleep or activities related to good sleep hygiene 
and/or by qualitatively disrupting sleep through physio- 
logical arousal, suppressing melatonin production,17 or 
delaying circadian rhythm.18 One review19 explains that 
children’s sleep disturbances can contribute to problems 
function, 
of executive function, hyperactivity, social 
conduct, mood, and anxiety. Many of these outcomes 
have also been associated with excessive screen use and 
may suggest overlapping pathways in how screen use 
and sleep may affect children. 
Sleep problems are often much more common and 
impairing among children with NDDs than among their 
typically developing peers, whereas the presence of 
bedroom screen devices has been associated with 
shorter sleep duration among children with ASD and 
ADHD, possibly attributed to more trouble disengaging 
from screen devices; greater susceptibility to lit screens 
disrupting their melatonin levels; and/or greater sus- 
ceptibility to screen arousal and insomnia due to their 
higher risk for autonomic hyperarousal.13 Further anal- 
yses of screen use specifically by children with ASD ap- 
pear to suggest that it may matter less whether bedroom 
screen devices are present or not but what was more 
important was whether screen use was carried out dur- 
ing preparation to bedtime routines; in particular, violent 
content prior to bedtime was significantly associated 
with delayed sleep onset in a study of 101 young people 
with ASD aged 6 to 14 years in the United States using 
caregiver report.14 
Does Sleep Mediate the Relationship Between Screen 
Use and Emotional/Behavioral Difficulties in Children 
With Neurodevelopmental Disorder? 
The consistent relationships found across different 
studies between screen use, sleep, and EBDs in both 
neurotypical children and children with NDDs point to- 
ward a possible mediating role of sleep. Supporting this, 
laboratory-controlled and cross-sectional studies of typi- 
cally developing children and adolescents have found 
reduced sleep and poorer sleep quality to mediate the 
influence of screen time on attention problems, physical 
aggression, and emotional and somatic problems.20,21 
Considering how children with NDDs are already at 
an elevated risk for EBDs in addition to sleep problems, 
when screen time disrupts sleep, these difficulties may 
be exacerbated. In an effort to manage some of the 
challenges of caring for a child with NDDs, caregivers 
may also resort to more screen use to soothe or engage 
their child, further interfering with the child’s sleep and 
development in a negative developmental trajectory.22 
The Present Study: Rationale, Aims, and Research 
Questions 
There are currently several gaps and limitations in the 
existing literature. First, studies are often limited to 
specific NDD subgroups, particularly ASD and ADHD, 
while underrepresenting other groups; to date, very few 
studies have examined factors implicated in screen use 
and child outcomes in preschool children with neuro- 
developmental concerns presenting to routine de- 
velopmental pediatric clinic settings.23 Second, research 
has largely been limited to examining screen time, when 
other aspects of screen use (i.e., settings, age of onset) 
also need to be considered. Finally, to our knowledge, no 



studies have yet examined the mediating relationship 
between screen use, emotional/behavioral problems, 
and sleep in young children with NDD. 
Singapore is one of the most tech-savvy countries 
worldwide. Singaporean children aged 0 to 6 years are 
reported to spend an average of 2.5 hours daily on 
television and an additional 1.6 hours online,24 while 
more than half of Singaporean children aged 2 years and 
younger (n 5 388; 53.5%) engage in daily screen use for 
60–80 minutes.25 
The present study sought to address some of the 
above limitations in the existing literature by exploring 
screen use, sleep, and EBDs in a large sample of pre- 
school children routinely presenting to a developmental 
pediatric clinic. Pragmatically too, this study did not 
want to exclude any particular NDD diagnostic group 
from the diverse range of clinical cases typically seen in 
such settings, particularly because non-ASD, SL, and 
ADHD groups are already underrepresented in the liter- 
ature on screen use. The following hypotheses were 
examined: 
1. Increased screen use (defined as average daily 
screen time, age of first screen exposure, or the 
number of bedroom screen devices) will be associ- 
ated with poorer sleep quantity and quality and 
more caregiver-reported EBDs. 
2. Sleep quantity and/or quality will mediate the rela- 
tionship between screen use (screen time, age of 
first screen exposure, or the number of bedroom 
devices) and EBDs. 
METHODS 
Participants 
Setting 
Participants were recruited among caregivers attend- 
ing appointments for their child at the Department of 
Child Development (DCD), KK Women’s and Children’s 
Hospital (KKH), Singapore, which sees the majority of 
children aged 1 to 6 years 
referred for neuro- 
developmental concerns in Singapore yearly. Children 
are referred to the DCD by family physicians or primary 
care pediatricians from both public and private health 
care sectors. (children in Singapore start formal school- 
ing at 7 years; should they be referred for assessment 
after they have started school, they would be seen in 
a different health care organization and clinic for young 
people of 7 to 18 years of age). At each child’s first visit 
to the DCD, a detailed developmental history, physical 
examination, and developmental screening assessment 
using the Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third Edition 
(ASQ-326), is conducted by a multidisciplinary team of 
qualified doctors, nurses, and associate psychologists or 
allied professionals. Further formal psychological or 
speech and language/occupational therapy assessments 
would usually then be conducted for those children with 
suspected autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disabil- 
ity, or language disorders as recommended. Diagnoses 
are made using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for 
Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria, taking all 
the assessment information gathered into consideration. 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Children younger than 6 years, who were Singapor- 
ean citizens or permanent residents, and had obtained 
a clinical diagnosis of a DSM-5 neurodevelopmental dis- 
order (NDD) were included in this study. The children 
were all assessed and diagnosed by qualified DCD-KKH 
pediatricians, with 172 (46.9%) having completed addi- 
tional standardized and/or clinical assessments by psy- 
chologists, 
or 
occupational therapists as part of standard clinical care at 
the time of data collection. Diagnostic NDD information 
and previous assessment results were extracted from 
children’s case files. There were no exclusion criteria 
pertaining 
verbal 
functioning. 








Participant Characteristics 
The final sample included 367 children, most of 
whom were Singaporean ethnically Chinese, male, En- 
glish speaking, and from middle and upper middle class 
married families (Table 1). 
Procedure 
Ethics 
Ethics approval was granted by the SingHealth Cen- 
(Reference 


tralised 
2015/2459). 
Recruitment 
From July 2015 to July 2016, caregivers who attended 
appointments with their child at the DCD-KKH were 
recruited by the first and third authors who approached 
the caregivers to inform them about the study, answer 
any questions they had, and provide them with a partic- 
ipant information sheet and consent form. Of 500 par- 
ticipants 
or withdrew 
25 
participation, and 108 did not meet study inclusion cri- 
teria (11 were aged 61 years, 1 was nonresident, and 96 
had no NDD diagnosis); therefore, the final sample size 
was 367. 


Data Collection 
Once information about the study was shared and 
signed consent obtained, caregivers were given the 
questionnaires to complete during their appointment 
waiting time or at home, to then be returned to the re- 
search team by post in addressed and stamped envelopes 
provided. 

Demographics 
Parents provided information on core child and family 
including ethnicity, 
characteristics and demographics, 
family income, and diagnosis. 
Developmental Performance Screen 
Routinely administered at the child’s first visit to the 
DCD-KKH, the ASQ-3 is a tool designed to screen the 





Female 
Ethnicity,b n (%) 




Others 
ASQ-3-z, mean (SD) 















F(2,104) 5 4.32; p 5 0.02*; h2 5 
0.077. Others . ASD; others . SL 
F(2,104) 5 0.05; p 5 0.96; h2 5 0.001 














































$5001–$10,000 
.$10,000 






































Questionnaire 3 standardized scores; 21 5 nonclinical; 21 to 22 5 borderline impairment; 22 5 clinical 
impairment; *p , 0.05; **p , .01; ***p , 0.001; values in bold are statistically significant. aGroup differences were examined using 
multivariate analyses of variance. bThe ethnic distribution in the sample is generally representative of the overall Singapore ethnic distribution: Chinese, 74.3%, Malay, 13.3%, Indian, 9.1%, and others, 3.2% (Department of Statistics Singapore, 2016). 
cMedian monthly family income in Singapore in 2016 is S$8,846 (Singapore Statistics, 2016). ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ASQ-3-z, Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third Edition, z-score; Others, other neurodevelopmental disorders; SL, speech 
and language disorders. 
developmental performance of young children aged 1 to 
60 months. It is a 30-item parent-reported age-grouped 
questionnaire with good test-retest reliability (r 50.75– 
0.82), internal consistency ranging from a 5 0.51 to 
0.87, and very good sensitivity (86.1%) and specificity 
(85.6%) in identifying children with developmental de- 
lay. Raw scores for each domain were standardized into 
z scores and averaged to give an ASQ-3 average z score 
(ASQ-3-z); 38.4% (n 5 113) of the sample had clinical 
levels of developmental delay, 35.1% (n 5 103) had 
borderline developmental delay, and the remaining 
26.5% (n 5 81) were developmentally normal. 
Screen Use and Correlates 
These were measured by a questionnaire developed 
for the purposes of this study comprising 31 items, in- 
cluding questions on the number of bedroom screen 
devices, age of first screen exposure (in months), and 
weekday and weekend screen times of the child and the 
parent across multiple devices (television, computers, 
game consoles, mobile devices), which were used to 
calculate an average daily screen time (in hours) as 
consistent with the previous literature (after summing 
screen times across all devices, averaging was done by 
multiplying weekday screen time by 5, multiplying 
weekend screen time by 2, summing them together, and 
dividing by 7).13,25 The questionnaire was adapted from 
a previous version used by Goh et al.25 in a Singapore 
study on sociodemographic, home environment, and 
parental influences on screen viewing in children youn- 
ger than 2 years. 
Sleep Quantity and Quality 
The Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ27) 
was used. Average daily sleep duration was calculated 
from the CSHQ fields of the child’s sleep, wake, and nap 
for weekdays and weekends. The CSHQ also 
times, 
includes 
sleep problems 
(i.e., quality) that make up a total CSHQ total score 
(range, 31–97; there are 2 items scored on 0, 1, 2, 
whereas the remaining 31 items are scored on 1, 2, 3). 
The CSHQ showed adequate internal consistency in both 
a community sample (a 5 0.68) and clinical sample (a 5 
reliability (r 5 0.62–0.79), 
0.78), good test-retest 





specificity (0.72), and sensitivity (0.80) in identifying 
sleep disorders in school-aged children.27 Normative 
comparisons can also be made with an earlier study on 
372 
preschool 
children.28 



Emotional/Behavioral Difficulties 
Caregivers completed the age-appropriate version of 
the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ29) (for 
2–4 years or for 4–17 years). Both comprise 25 items and 
make up a total difficulties index raw score (range, 0–40; 
higher scores 5 more difficulties). It has adequate in- 
ternal consistency (a 5 0.73) and discriminates well 
between psychiatric and nonpsychiatric samples (speci- 
ficity, 0.95; sensitivity, 0.6329). 

Missing Data and Erroneous Responses 
Missing data were replaced with the mean of the 
subscale only if there was no more than 1 missing item 
(in 28 cases [7.6%] for SDQ subscales; 55 cases [15.0%] 
for CSHQ subscales). Multiple responses to a single 
question were removed and treated as missing data.- 
Extreme and/or erroneous entries were treated as miss- 
ing data: screen time duration entries exceeding 14.8 
hours per day [Accounts for the sample’s awake dura- 
tion; 24 hours – 11.34 (sample’s mean sleep duration) 1 
2*1.07 (SD) 5 14.8; 3 cases; 0.8%]; as well as sleep du- 
ration entries exceeding 14.1 hours or below 7.5 hours 
per day [Derived from a previous study on Singaporean 
preschool children's sleep (Aishworiya et al., 2012); 10.8 
hours (mean sleep duration) 1 3*1.1 (SD) 5 7.5 to 
14.1 hours; 32 cases; 8.7%] Missing data (including 
errors) were most apparent in summary measures of the 
number of bedroom screen devices (n 5 147; 40.1%), 
average daily screen time (n 5 89; 24.3%), and average 
daily sleep duration (n 5 72; 19.6%) because these could 
not be calculated if their component items had missing 
values (analyses using subscale scores with fewer miss- 
ing data were also carried out, but results and patterns of 
significant/nonsignificant findings and strengths were 
similar; hence, using summary scores was adopted and 
presented in this article). 
Data Analytic Plans 
The study sought to examine screen use, sleep, and 
emotional/behavioral difficulties (EBDs) in children with 
NDDs referred to the developmental pediatric clinic. To 
investigate the sample as a whole, differences between 
the NDD subgroups were first explored with multivari- 
ate analyses of variance, and those variables were con- 
trolled for 
in subsequent analyses (see preliminary 
analyses in Results). Correlational analyses examined the 
relationship between screen use, sleep, and EBD varia- 
bles; both composite and subscale variables were ex- 
plored. Using Process macro (model 4) in SPSS, we then 
aimed to address the mediation hypotheses that 
in- 
creased screen use (predictor) contributed to more EBDs 
(outcome) through more sleep problems (mediator). A 
bootstrap analysis of 5000 samples (i.e., to derive un- 
biased estimate of confidence interval through approxi- 
mating distribution) was used to derive the indirect 
effect of the mediator. Because of the large number of 
analyses and the relatively large sample size, effect sizes 
are reported and guided the interpretation of 
the 
findings. 
RESULTS 
Preliminary Analyses 
Descriptive Statistics 
Most participants (93.9%) exceeded the 1 hour of 
average daily screen time recommended by the Ameri- 
can Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) (Table 2). Just under 
60% had 1 or more bedroom screen devices, whereas 
more than half were exposed to screens at the age of 18 
months or earlier (Table 2). 
On the Children’s 
Sleep Habits Questionnaire 
(CSHQ), caregivers reported average daily sleep dura- 
tion of 11.34 hours including naps, and almost half of 
the children were cosleeping in the same bed as their 
parents or siblings (Table 2). The sample had a mean 
total CSHQ sleep problems score of 45.7 (out of 97), 
with 72.3% exceeding the cutoff score of 41, indicating 
elevated sleep problems. On the Strengths and Diffi- 
culties Questionnaire (SDQ), participants 
reported 
a mean total SDQ emotional/behavioral difficulties 
(EBDs) score of 13.91 (out of 40), with 59.9% scoring 
above the cutoff score of 13 for clinically elevated 
EBDs. In this study, Cronbach’s alpha values of the total 
CSHQ and SDQ score items were 0.76 and 0.73, re- 
indicating acceptable internal consistency 
spectively, 
for the use of the total scores. 



Multivariate analyses of variance using Pillai’s Trace 
examined child/demographic characteristics, screen 
use, 
and EBDs between the 3 neuro- 
developmental disorder (NDD) diagnostic subgroups 
in the sample [autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (n 5 
145; 39.5%), speech and language disorders (SL) (n 5 
135; 36.7%), and “others” (n 5 87; 23.7%) including 
global developmental delay, learning disorders, motor 
disorders, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, in- 
tellectual disability, and multiple NDD]. There was 
a significant difference, F (26,186) 5 1.69 (p 5 0.025; 
h2 5 0.19; Table 1). Univariate tests showed group 
differences in Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third 
Edition (ASQ-3) z-scores (ASQ-3-z) [F (2,104) 5 13.61; 
p , 0.001; h2 5 0.21; ASD subgroup had lower 
functioning than the other 2 groups] and age [F 
(2,104) 5 4.32; p 5 0.016; h2 5 0.08; “Others” sub- 
group was older than ASD and SL participants] with 
large and medium effect sizes, respectively (Table 1). 
There were no significant group differences in screen 
use, sleep, or EBDs (h2 5 0.002–0.055, all small effect 
sizes). Subsequent analyses therefore controlled for 
NDD diagnostic subgroup, ASQ-3-z, and age. 















Video/handheld games 
Average screen time .1 hr, n (%) 




































































































Night (excludes nap) 
Average sleep ,10 hrs, n (%) 










































F (2,104) 5 0.59; p 5 
0.56; h2 5 0.011 
F (2,104) 5 0.25; p 5 
0.78; h2 5 0.005 
F (2,104) 5 1.99, p 5 
0.14, h2 5 0.037 
F (2,104) 5 3.03; p 5 
0.053; h2 5 0.055 
F (2,104) 5 1.25; p 5 
0.29; h2 5 0.023 
F (2,104) 5 0.11; p 5 
0.90; h2 5 0.002 
F (2,104) 5 0.90; p 5 
0.41; h2 5 0.017 
aGroup differences were examined using multivariate analyses of variance. bPrevalence of sleep problems refer to CSHQ total scores above recommended cutoff of 41 (Owens, Spirito, & McGuinn, 2000). cPrevalence of EBD refers to SDQ total scores 13 
and above (Goodman, 1997). ASD, autism spectrum disorder; CSHQ, Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire; EBD, emotional/behavioral difficulties; Others, other neurodevelopmental disorders; SDQ, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire; SL, speech 
and language disorders. 



Significant associations were found between child- 
ren’s lower ASQ-3-z, younger age, lower family monthly 
income, and higher parental average daily screen time 
with increased children’s screen use, poorer sleep qual- 
ity, and more EBDs, with small to medium effect sizes 
(Table 3); hence, these variables were also controlled for 
in the main analyses. 


Adjusting for children’s NDD diagnostic subgroup, 
ASQ-3-z, age, family income, and parents’ average daily 
screen time, more bedroom screen devices and earlier 
age of first screen exposure, respectively, were both 
associated with poorer caregiver-reported sleep quality 
and higher EBDs total scores with small effect sizes 





































20.182** 
0.006 




20.301*** 
,0.001 












20.243*** 
,0.001 




20.112* 
0.039 












20.250*** 
,0.001 
20.129* 
0.015 
20.240** 
,0.001 


20.120* 
0.025 















(Table 4). Average daily screen time was not associated 
with sleep quantity, sleep quality, or EBD and therefore 
was not examined further as a predictor in the sub- 
sequent mediation analyses (see also Discussion for more 
on data relating to duration of screen use obtained in this 
study). More EBDs were associated with reduced sleep 
quality and quantity with small effect sizes. There were 
no significant differences in analyses using the EBD 
subscales (externalizing vs internalizing factor subscale 
scores) as outcome variables, so the EBD total score 
analyses are reported here. 
Exploring Sleep Problems as a Mediator Between 
Screen Use and Emotional/Behavioral Difficulties 


Adjusting for children’s NDD diagnostic subgroup, 
ASQ-3-z, age, family income, and parents’ average daily 
screen time, there was a full mediation effect (Fig. 1). 
The indirect effect of total CSHQ score was significant, 
with a small effect size (k2 5 0.080; SE 5 0.037; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.018–0.160). Approximately 
13% of variance in total SDQ score was accounted for by 
the predictors examined (R2 5 0.13; F (6,143) 5 3.71; 
p 5 0.002). The relationship between higher number of 
bedroom screen devices and more EBDs was fully 
explained by increased sleep problems in this sample. 
Age of First Screen Exposure, Sleep Problems, 

Adjusting for children’s NDD diagnostic subgroup, 
ASQ-3-z, age, family income, and parents’ average daily 
screen time, a full mediation effect was found (Fig. 2). 
The indirect effect of total CSHQ score was significant, 
with a small effect size (k2 5 20.055; SE 5 0.024; 95% 
CI, 20.107 to 20.014). These results indicated that the 
relationship between children’s age of first screen ex- 
posure and caregiver-reported EBDs was fully explained 
by sleep problems, with the model explaining a rela- 
tively small 10% of the variance in total SDQ scores (R2 5 
0.10; F (6,235) 5 4.14; p , 0.001). 
The same mediation analyses were performed sepa- 
rately by individual NDD diagnostic subgroups and also 
with EBD internalizing and externalizing subscales as the 
outcome variables. However, there were no significant 
findings. 

Additional analyses explored differences between 
those who deviated from both AAP recommendations 
(having 1 or more bedroom screen device and age of 
first screen exposure under 18 months; n 5 70) com- 
pared with those who adhered to 1 or both recom- 
mendations (no bedroom screen device and/or first 
screen exposure after 18 months; n 5 147). Controlling 
for NDD diagnostic subgroup, ASQ-3-z, age, family in- 
come, and parents’ average daily screen time, multivari- 
ate 
showed significant 
differences between the 2 groups, F (2,141) 5 5.51 (p 5 
0.005; h2 5 0.072) with a medium effect size. Further 
univariate tests found that those who deviated from both 
recommendations had higher total CSHQ sleep problem 
scores [F(1,142) 5 8.64; p 5 0.004; h2 5 0.057] and 
more caregiver-reported EBD problems (higher SDQ 
scores; [F(1,142) 5 6.05; p 5 0.015; h2 5 0.041]), 





Table 4. Partial Correlations Between Screen Use, Sleep, and EBDs, Controlling for NDD Diagnostic Group, ASQ-3-z, Age, Family Income, and Parents’ 
Daily Average Screen Time 





























20.155* 
0.010 

20.157* 
0.010 










20.137* 
0.038 

0.350*** 
,0.001 




*p , 0.05; **p , 0.01; ***p , 0.001; values in bold are statistically significant. ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ASQ-3-z, Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third Edition, z-score; CSHQ, Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire; EBD, emotional/behavioral 
difficulties; SDQ, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire. 
compared with those who adhered to 1 or both rec- 
ommendations, both differences being of small ef- 
fect size. 

To the authors’ knowledge, the current study is one of 
the only few to explore the possible mediating role of 
sleep problems in the relationship between the number 
of bedroom devices, age of first screen exposure, and 
emotional/behavioral difficulties (EBDs) in preschool 
children with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) 
presenting to a developmental pediatric clinic. At the 
same time, considering the elevated risk of sleep and 
EBDs in children with NDDs, even the small effect size 
relationships found may be clinically relevant for psy- 
choeducation, prevention, and intervention efforts. 

The majority of children with NDDs in this study 
considerably exceeded American Academy of Pediat- 
rics (AAP) recommended screen time limits of 1 hour 
per day, and more than half were first exposed to 
screens at the age of 18 months and younger and had at 
least 1 screen device in their bedrooms. Although this 
is comparable to the general Singaporean preschool 
population,24,25 it is higher than reported international 
rates of screen use among preschool children and by 
children with NDDs in the United States.1,12 
Consistent with the current literature, the present 
study also found a relationship between higher screen 
use and lower family income. This has been attributed to 
several factors, including parents having reduced alter- 
native resources and limited knowledge of the potential 
impact of screen use,23 and this higher screen use by 
preschoolers from lower-income families has also been 
associated with poorer self-regulatory behaviors.30 The 
other inverse relationship between average daily screen 
time and Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third Edition 
(ASQ-3)-z scores suggests that the use of screen devices 
may be accentuated among children with lower de- 
velopmental functioning.22 

The current study adds to the literature on children 
with NDDs by suggesting that bedroom screen devices 
may be associated with more EBDs indirectly through 
affecting children’s sleep. One explanation is that chil- 
dren with NDDs may have more difficulty disengaging 
from screen devices compared with typically developing 
children; hence, the continued presence of these devices 
may signal possible reengagement and maintain elevated 
arousal, which interferes with sleep.18 
Regression coefficients of the relationship between the number of bedroom screen devices and EBD, mediated by sleep problems. Covariates 
Figure 1. 
controlled for are diagnostic group, ASQ-3-z, age, family income, and parents’ average daily screen time. *p ,0.05; **p ,0.01; ***p ,0.001; values in 
bold are statistically significant. 



Regression coefficients of relationship between the age of first screen exposure and EBD, mediated by sleep problems. EBD, emotional/ 
Figure 2. 
behavioral difficulties. Covariates controlled for are diagnostic group, ASQ-3-z, age, family income, and parents’ average daily screen time. *p ,0.05; 
**p ,0.01; ***p ,0.001; values in bold are statistically significant. ASQ-3-z, Ages and Stages Questionnaires, Third Edition, z-score; CSHQ, Children's 
Sleep Habits Questionnaire; EBD, emotional/behavioral difficulties; SDQ, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire; SE, standard error. 
Another possibility is that children’s sleep may be af- 
fected by lights and sounds emitted from incoming 
messages, e-mails, calls, and app notifications31 because 
half have at least 1 mobile device in the bedroom where 
the child sleeps, and a substantial proportion cosleep 
with their parents or older siblings (a culturally common 
sleeping practice) who may engage with these devices. 
Supporting this, studies on adults found a high preva- 
lence of engagement with or being woken up by mobile 
devices after lights out, which predicted poorer sleep 
quality, more fatigue, and higher insomnia.32 Other 
possible explanations include light or electromagnetic 
emission from mobile devices altering sleep architecture 
and delayed melatonin production, which children with 
NDDs may be particularly vulnerable to.17 

Earlier screen use has been posited to be associated 
with higher EBDs possibly because infants tend to have 
less mature self-regulation and may present with more 
self-regulatory problems than older children, increasing 
parental stress and thereby reliance on screen use.9 The 
present study also suggests that earlier screen exposure 
may affect EBDs indirectly through affecting sleep. Given 
that children with NDDs are at a higher risk for sleep 
problems, earlier screen exposure may precipitate sleep 
problems sooner and cascade down a negative trajectory 
in emotional/behavioral development over time.33 In 
particular, the present study found sleep problems but 
not daily sleep duration to mediate the relationship be- 
tween age of 
first screen exposure and emotional/ 
behavioral problems, suggesting that the qualitative dis- 
ruption of sleep may be more important than the quan- 
titative displacement of sleep. 

Study strengths include the use of developmental func- 
tioning screening, sleep and EBD measures with good 
psychometric properties, the large sample size and high 
participation rates of invited participants, and diversity and 
representativeness of 
the sample recruited from De- 
partment of Child Development-KK Women’s and Child- 
ren’s Hospital, which sees the largest number of children 
referred for developmental concerns in Singapore. This 
study also expands screen use operationalization by ex- 
amining other screen variables besides screen time, such as 
bedroom screen devices and age of first screen exposure. 
At the same time, the study’s findings should be inter- 
preted in light of its limitations. First, its cross-sectional 
design limits the ability to draw directional/causal con- 
nections between screen use, sleep, and EBDs. Other 
studies have suggested bidirectional relationships.34 A 
longitudinal design will allow better interpretation of 
effects over time and impact on developmental trajecto- 
ries, and hence a short-term follow-up study is currently 
underway. Second, the study relied on parent-reported 
measures, which may be subject to demand character- 
istics, reporting subjectivity or errors, and/or missing data. 
The measures used were screening tools, and there were 
no direct assessments of actual screen time, sleep dura- 
tion, or behavior. The relatively large amount of missing 
data in the composite measures of screen time and sleep 
duration is largely likely due to ambiguous interpretation 
of the question item “single weekday/weekend” to denote 
1 day (and not 5 days or 2 days, respectively); this may to 
some extent also explain the nonsignificant associations 
between screen time and EBDs, contrary to what other 
studies found.18 Third, 
the ASQ-3 was designed as 
identifying de- 
categorically 
for 
screening tool 
a 
velopmental delay, but for the study’s purposes, raw 
scores were standardized to make a continuous scale for 
more fidelity in the degree of developmental delay. Ide- 
ally, a developmental assessment scale could be used, 
such as the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler De- 
velopment (Bayley-III) or Vineland Adaptive Behavior 
Scales (Vineland-3), but this was not part of the clinic’s 
routine administration and not feasible within the scope, 
timeframe, and resources of the present study. Although 
participants were diagnosed clinically by a multidisciplin- 
ary team using evidence-based clinical diagnostic methods 
and tools, these diagnoses were not additionally con- 
firmed by the research team. Other factors, such as pa- 
rental depression, were also not included. 

For Research 
Future studies may utilize more objective measures such 
as electronic monitoring for screen use and actigraphy for 
sleep, corroborated with informant reports, although these 
studies may pragmatically be smaller in sample size. 



The proposed mediation models explained 9% to 13% 
of variance in EBDs in children with NDDs. This points 
toward other possible variables being implicated in ad- 
dition to the ones studied here. For example, parental 
depression may be implicated. Other possible mediating 
processes are also likely implicated, for example, screen 
use interfering with parent-child interactions or displac- 
ing social relationships,35 which may consequently affect 
the child’s emotional/behavioral functioning, and these 
would be important to investigate in future studies. 
A recent study on parental mobile technology use 
highlighted that parents of young children experience 
conflicts within themselves about screen use for work or 
family purposes yet recognize that too much screen use 
can disrupt family routines and induce stress.36 It may be 
useful to investigate how this internal conflict and stress 
experienced by parents around screen use may affect 
parent-child interactions and EBD in children. 
For Policy and Practice 
This study’s cross-sectional findings in a multiethnic 
Asian sample of children with NDDs provide some support 
for AAP’s recommendations to keep children’s bedrooms 
to encourage caregivers in 
free from screen devices, 
cosleeping cultures to reduce and avoid screen use in 
bedtime routines and while their children are sleeping, and 
to discourage screen use before 18 months of age. This 
could pave the way for psychoeducation as part of routine 
pediatric clinic visits, parenting classes, school curriculum, 
and hospital- or government-endorsed policies regarding 
healthier screen use, particularly in groups at a higher risk 
for excessive screen use, such as in children with NDDs. 


Media Use by Kids Age Zero to Eight. New York: Common Sense 
Media Inc.; 2017. 


3. Rasmussen EE, Shafer A, Colwell MJ, et al. Relation between active 
mediation, exposure to Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood, and US 
preschoolers’ social andemotional development. J Child Media. 
2016;10:443–461. 

bedroom television, and sleep duration from infancy to mid- 
childhood. Pediatrics. 2014;133:e1163–71. 

Evening media exposure reduces night-time sleep. Acta Paediatr. 
2015;104:306–312. 
6. Schmidt ME, Rich M, Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Television viewing in 
infancy and child cognition at 3 years of age in a US cohort. 
Pediatrics. 2009;123:e370–e375. 

electronic media and emotional and behavioural problems in late 
childhood. Acad Pediatr. 2017;17:620–624. 

between early childhood television exposure and academic, 
psychosocial, and physical well-being by middle childhood. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164:425–431. 
9. Pempek TA, McDaniel BT. Young children’s tablet use and associations 
with maternal well-being. J Child Fam Stud. 2016;25:2636–2647. 
10. Radesky JS, Peacock-Chambers E, Zuckerman B, et al. Use of mobile 
technology to calm upset children: associations with social- 
emotional development. JAMA Pediatr. 2016;170:397–399. 
11. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association; 2013. 
12. Lo CB. The Effects of Family and Social Engagement on the 
Screen Time of Youth with Developmental Disabilities: A 
Dissertation. University of Massachusetts Medical School: GSBS 
Dissertations and Theses. 2013. Available at: http://escholarship. 
umassmed.edu/gsbs_diss/658. Accessed February 12, 2019. 
13. Engelhardt CR, Mazurek MO, Sohl K. Media use and sleep among 
boys with autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, or typical 
development. Pediatrics. 2013;132:1081–1089. 
14. Mazurek MO, Engelhardt CR, Hilgard J, et al. Bedtime electronic 
media use and sleep in children with autism spectrum disroder. 
J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2016;37:525–531. 
15. Mazurek MO, Wenstrup C. Television, video game and social media 
use among children with ASD and typically developing siblings. 
J Autism Dev Disord. 2013;43:1258–1271. 

to assist with life skills/independence of students with 
moderate/severe intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum 
disorders: considerations for the future of school psychology. 
Psychol Sch. 2013;50:259–271. 

exposure to television screen with children’s urinary melatonin 
excretion? Neuroendocrinol Lett. 2006;27:73–80. 
18. Cain N, Gradisar M. Electronic media use and sleep in school-aged 
children and adolescents: a review. Sleep Med. 2010;11:735–742. 
19. Blunden SL. Behavioural sleep disorders across the developmental 
age span: an overview of causes, consequences and treatment 
modalities. Psychology. 2012;3:249–256. 
20. Wolfe J, Kar K, Perry A, et al. Single night video-game use leads to 
sleep loss and attention deficits in older adolescents. J Adolesc. 
2014;37:1003–1009. 
21. Adams SK, Kisler TS. Sleep quality as a mediator between 
technology-related sleep quality, depression, and anxiety. 
Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2013;16:25–30. 
22. Radesky JS, Silverstein M, Zuckerman B, et al. Infant self-regulation 
and early childhood media exposure. Pediatrics. 2014;133:e1172–8. 
23. Duch H, Fisher EM, Ensari I, et al. Screen time use in children under 
3 years old: a systematic review of correlates. Int J Behav Nutr 
Phys Act. 2013;10:102. 

Consumer Experience Study 2014. Singapore: Media Development 
Authority of Singapore; 2015. 

environment and parental influences on total and device-specific 
screen viewing in children aged 2 years and below: an 
observational study.BMJ Open. 2016;6:e009113. 


27. Owens JA, Spirito A, McGuinn M. The Children’s Sleep Habits 
Questionnaire (CSHQ): psychometric properties of a survey 
instrument for school-aged children. Sleep. 2000;23:1043–1051. 
28. Aishworiya R, Chan P, Kiing J, et al. Sleep behaviour in a sample of 
preschool children in Singapore. Ann Acad Med Singap. 2012;41: 
99–104. 
29. Goodman R, Ford T, Simmons H, et al. Using the Strengths and 
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) to screen for child psychiatric 
disorders in a community sample. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2003;15: 
166–172. 
30. Munzer TG, Miller AL, Peterson KE, et al. Media exposure in low- 
income preschool-aged children is associated with multiple 
measures of self-regulatory behaviour. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2018; 
39:303–309. 



31. Garrison MM, Liekweg K, Christakis DA. Media use and child sleep: 
the impact of content, timing, and environment. Pediatrics. 2011; 
128:29–35. 


33. Wiggs L, France K. Behavioural treatments for sleep problems in 
children and adolescents with physical illness, psychological 
problems or intellectual disabilities. Sleep Med Rev. 2000;4:299– 
314. 

sleep duration and screen time in early childhood. Pediatrics. 
2014;168:465–470. 
35. MacMullin JA, Lunsky Y, Weiss JA. Plugged in: electronics use in 
youth and young adults with autism spectrum disorder. Autism. 
2016;20:45–54. 
36. Radesky JS, Kistin C, Eisenberg S, et al. Parent perspectives on their 
mobile technology use: the excitement and exhaustion of parenting 
while connected. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2016;37:694–701. 




Ordinary Magic: Resilience in Development 
Ann S. Masten. Ordinary Magic: Resilience in Development. The Guilford Press, New York, NY, 2015, 370 pp, 
paperback, $26.35. 
In Ordinary Magic, Dr. Masten 
describes the history, progress, and cur- 
rent state of research on resilience in 
children and youth. Her target audience 
includes established and burgeoning 
resilience scholars, as well as pro- 
fessionals in related fields of science, 
education, medicine, and social science. 
Dr. Masten begins part I with a con- 
ceptual overview by introducing the 
topic and defining terminology, review- 
ing the history of resilience science, and 
describing resilience models. In part II, 
she transitions to studies of individual 
resilience, including a longitudinal study 
assessing resilience in a community 
sample, research exploring resilience in 
homeless children, and studies of resil- 
ience during mass trauma, such as war, 
terrorism, and disasters. Part III segues to 
adaptive and protective systems in resil- 
ience. Dr. Masten first elucidates the 
protective factors that have been con- 
sistently identified across studies. She 
then summarizes the research on neu- 
robiology of adaptive systems, including 
attachment, adaptive thinking and prob- 
lem solving, executive function and self- 
regulation, stress regulation and coping, 
and reward systems. Dr. Masten moves 
on in the final chapters of part III to 
describe resilience in the context of 
families, schools, and culture. 
Part IV is entitled “Moving Forward: 
Implications for Action and Future Re- 
search.” In this section, Dr. Masten puts 
forth what she describes as “a resil- 
ience framework for action,” which 
includes the following 5 components: 
mission, models, measures, methods, and 
multilevel/multidisciplinary 
approaches. 
She highlights each component, focusing 
on including strengths and positive aspects 

in models, tracking the positive outcomes, 
preventing 
increasing 
risk/adversity, 
resources, mobilizing adaptive systems, 
and involving multiple disciplines at 
multiple levels. In the final chapter of 
part IV, Dr. Masten summarizes the book 
and expands upon her key conclusions. 
including a 
few scattered typos, this text successfully 
provides a comprehensive overview of 
resilience in child development. Empha- 
sizing that resiliency is not a trait in itself 
and that it can vary over time and under 
different circumstances, Dr. Masten tack- 
les the interesting idea that certain attrib- 
utes are both protective of and threatening 
to resilience. For example, she describes 
more advanced cognitive skills as being 
both protective (by improving problem- 
solving abilities) and threatening (by 
increasing a person’s awareness of danger, 
which can lead to increased stress). Read- 
ers with interest in child development will 
appreciate the developmental approach 
Dr. Masten takes in this book. She suggests 
that the timing of exposures to extreme 
stressors with respect to developmental 
levels of the child is critical and consider- 
ably affects the manifestation of resilience, 
particularly during “windows of opportu- 
nity for change.” 
One of the primary strengths of Or- 
dinary Magic is the range of perspectives 
from which resilience is considered. In 
addition to resilience researchers, 
this 
book holds appeal for a variety of other 
professionals. Chapters are segmented by 
theme, allowing readers to choose the 
sections that are most applicable to their 
school admin- 
interests. Teachers or 
istrators, 
find the 
for example, might 
chapter “Resilience in the Context of 
Schools” illuminating. Social workers or 
case managers who work with homeless 
children might gravitate toward the 
chapter on resilience in homeless children 
and youth. For those interested in health 
implications, she briefly touches on pos- 
sible stress-related health consequences of 
resiliency in the final chapter, although 
she could have devoted more space to 
this topic and to her interpretation. The 
“Conclusions 
and Future Directions” 
chapter provides a succinct summary of 
the research and lessons learned for the 
general reader. 
Dr. Masten does acknowledge limits 
of the field, including differing opinions 
among researchers on how to define and 
measure resilience. She concludes by 
emphasizing the importance of using the 
knowledge gained through resilience 
research to help promote resilience in 
children in a world in which there are 
growing concerns about economic, en- 
vironmental, and health crises across 
many sectors. Her final note is positive, 
highlighting opportunities 
to foster 
resilience in young children that can 
then lead to better outcomes for gen- 
erations 
to come. Overall, Ordinary 
Magic is informative, well considered in 
its breadth, and thought provoking. 
Disclosure: The author declares no con- 
flict of interest. 


Hannah T. Perrin, MD 
Division of Developmental-Behavioral 
Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Palo Alto, CA 

