The association between autistic traits and excessive smartphone 
use in Chinese college students: The chain mediating roles of 
social interaction anxiety and loneliness 
Minghui Lu a, Feifan Pang b, Rong Wang a, Yong Liu a, Tianyu Peng a,* 
a Special Education Department, School of Education, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China 
b Department of Special Education and Counselling, The Education University of Hong Kong, Tai Po, Hong Kong 


Keywords: 
Autistic traits 
Social interaction anxiety 
Loneliness 
Excessive smartphone use 
College students 

This study draws upon a large sample of Chinese college students to examine the chain mediating 
roles of social interaction anxiety and loneliness in the relation between autistic traits and 
excessive smartphone use. To test our hypothesis that social interaction anxiety and loneliness 
mediate the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use, we recruited a sample 
of 1103 college students and asked them to complete an assessment that measured the degrees of 
autistic traits, social interaction anxiety, loneliness, and excessive smartphone use. The results 
showed significant correlations among these variables. More autistic traits, which are correlated 
with higher levels of social interaction anxiety and higher levels of loneliness, were found to be 
associated with excessive smartphone use. In conclusion, this study highlights the need for 
screening for excessive smartphone use among college students who demonstrate autistic traits. 
Social interaction anxiety and loneliness show great potential in screening for excessive smart- 
phone use among college students with high levels of autistic traits. We discuss the practical 
implications of the findings and directions for future study. 
In recent years, along with the rapid development of communications and information technologies, smartphone penetration and 
usage has been increasing in young people, particularly college students (Huang et al., 2020). Smartphones offer extended functions 
and a wide range of applications including three important types: interpersonal communication, entertainment, and information 
seeking (Jiang & Zhao, 2016). In China, smartphones play an important role in daily life, but the use and addiction process of 
smartphones vary according to the users’ needs and desires. Some individuals use their smartphones for routine activities, such as 
making payments, distance learning, or sending and receiving work emails, and these activities might be associated with few negative 
effects. However, some people are addicted to the entertainment and social features of their smartphones, such as social networking, 
short videos, and mobile games, even develop a pathological dependence on their smartphones (Olson et al., 2022). Researchers 
widely agree that excessive smartphone use is defined as extreme cognitive, emotional, and behavioral smartphone involvement 




https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2022.104369 
Received 20 November 2021; Received in revised form 4 October 2022; Accepted 18 October 2022 

Available online 26 October 2022 
0891-4222/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 




(Hefner et al., 2019), exhibiting addictive symptoms and signs of deficient self-regulation, such as preoccupation and an inability to 
control cravings (Bian & Leung, 2015). Researchers have previously found that more excessive smartphone use may negatively in- 
fluence the mental health and well-being of young people, as it is associated with poorer sleep quality, higher perceived stress, 
increased anxiety, and increased odds of depression (Liu et al., 2022). In addition to these psychological consequences, excessive 
smartphone use can potentially impair cognitive functioning, as it is correlated with the impairment of specific attention domains, such 
as focused attention and divided attention, and changes in social cognition (Wacks & Weinstein, 2021). Thus, to improve college 
students’ mental health and well-being, it is important to improve our understanding of the mechanisms by which excessive smart- 
phone use develops. 

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a set of neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by challenges in communication and 
limited social interaction and repetitive patterns of behavior, activity, or interest (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Autistic 
traits are assumed to be distributed continuously throughout the general population (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001; De Groot & Van Strien, 
2017). Higher levels of autistic traits are associated with increased sensitivity, attention to detail, and intense focus on specific tasks, 
but also poorer affect recognition, impaired social interactions, decreased fantasy life, and poorer communication skills (Mandy et al., 
2018; Zhao et al., 2019). Studies have found that autistic traits are positively correlated with social interaction anxiety and loneliness 
among adolescents and young adults (Lei & Russell, 2021; Schiltz et al., 2021). Higher levels of autistic traits were associated with 
more mental health problems (e.g., anxiety and loneliness) in college student samples (Stice & Lavner, 2019; Yang et al., 2021). 
Previous studies have demonstrated that individuals with more autistic traits may be more likely to use smartphone excessively due 
to their deficits in social communication and difficulties in building and maintaining real-life relationships (Concerto et al., 2021). In 
fact, smartphone and online communication may represent a more accessible way for individuals with high levels of autistic traits to 
communicate with other people because the internet diminishes the constraints that they experience in offline interactions (Finke- 
nauer et al., 2012). Furthermore, according to the compensatory internet use theory, individuals with low psychological well-being 
might rely on their smartphones to reduce the complexity of their social environment and create the opportunity for more pro- 
tected interactions (Kardefelt-Winther, 2014). Although smartphones may be attractive and helpful mediums for individuals with high 
levels of autistic traits, it is important to closely monitor excessive smartphone use and its potentially addictive properties to ensure 
that smartphone use does not have many negative effects on the individual’s offline social relationships (Kerkhof et al., 2011). 
There may be an association between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. Furthermore, higher levels of autistic traits may 
create the conditions that develop more excessive smartphone use by affecting psychological well-being (McCarthy et al., 2020). 
Although several studies have tested the link between autistic traits and internet addiction using adult and adolescent samples (Chen 
et al., 2015; Concerto et al., 2021), few studies have investigated the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. 
This study thus examined whether social interaction anxiety and loneliness serially mediate the association between autistic traits and 
excessive smartphone use among Chinese college students. 

Social interaction anxiety refers to the persistent fear of situations involving social interaction, social performance, or social sit- 
uations in which there is the potential for negative evaluation by others (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Socially anxious 
individuals may have a social interaction deficit and use inefficient coping mechanisms (e.g., excessive smartphone use) (Konan & 
Celik, 2019). Studies have shown that higher levels of autistic traits are associated with heightened social interaction anxiety (Dickter 
et al., 2018; Lei & Russell, 2021). Individuals with higher degrees of autistic traits seem likely lack not only social skills and social 
knowledge, but lack the initiative to engage in interpersonal interaction (Baiano et al., 2021), which may be associated with psy- 
chological distress and higher levels of social interaction anxiety (Rosbrook & Whittingham, 2010). This suggests that the presence of 
multiple autistic traits may be associated with increased social interaction anxiety (Yang et al., 2021). 
Furthermore, previous studies have found that individuals with increased social interaction anxiety often have more excessive 
smartphone use (Turgeman et al., 2020). Compared to interacting in real life, individuals with higher levels of social interaction 
anxiety may tend to have a perceived need for smartphone use, which fulfills the need to interact in a less direct way (Lee et al., 2014). 
Individuals who are socially self-conscious may seek pseudo-social connections through their devices. This behavior may be correlated 
with heavy smartphone use and technological dependency (Wang, 2017), which is likely to decrease the individual’s anxiety during 
interactions with others because it provides opportunities to think more about every reply in a conversation (Konan & Celik, 2019). 
Thus, this study hypothesized that social interaction anxiety plays a mediating role in the relation between autistic traits and excessive 
smartphone use. In addition to social interaction anxiety, loneliness may play an important mediating role in the relation between 
autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. This is further discussed below. 

Loneliness is defined as a subjective discrepancy between the social connections one desires and those that are available (Ernst 
et al., 2021). It has been observed that higher levels of autistic traits are related to higher levels of loneliness (Schiltz et al., 2021). This 
can probably be explained by the fact that individuals with more autistic traits may have poorer social cognition, information pro- 
cessing, and social interaction abilities (Mandy et al., 2018), which makes it difficult for them to form relationships and positions them 



on the social perimeter. One study found that individuals with more autistic traits had fewer friends and shorter friendships and were 
more likely to feel lonely (Stice & Lavner, 2019). Individuals with autistic traits may also be reluctant to reveal their true feelings, and 
they may pay more attention to themselves while interacting with others (Lee & Ko, 2018). This supports the idea of a close relation 
between autistic traits and loneliness. 
In addition, there may be an association between loneliness and excessive smartphone use. It has been reported that aversive 
feelings associated with loneliness motivate individuals to reconnect with other people (Cacioppo et al., 2015). In other words, lonely 
individuals are aware of their unmet social needs, difficulties in interacting, and less satisfying relationships (Kornienko et al., 2020), 
and they use various approaches to cope with this situation. Given the risk of offline social withdrawal, lonely individuals frequently 
use non-face-to-face social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, and WeChat) and entertainment apps (e.g., TikTok and YouTube) on their 
smartphones to relieve stress and renew their social connections (Li et al., 2021). Substantial research has documented that the higher 
the level of loneliness in an individual, the more likely the individual is to indulge in entertaining smartphone use (Cheng et al., 2021; 
Kayis et al., 2021). Therefore, loneliness may be another mediator in the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. 

It has been shown that higher social interaction anxiety is associated with increased levels of loneliness (Kealy et al., 2021). The 
cognitive behavioral model of social interaction anxiety proposes that individuals’ attention to evaluation from others is one of the 
main causes of social interaction anxiety. Accordingly, individuals with higher levels of social interaction anxiety are more likely to 
fear negative evaluation from those with whom they interact (Fungi et al., 2017). Such a negative expectancy bias interferes with 
individuals’ attempts to interact with others, which may detrimentally affect their ability to engage in appropriate social interaction, 
which may in turn elevate their experience of loneliness (Liu et al., 2020). A recent study empirically demonstrated that social 
interaction anxiety plays a unique role in the onset and maintenance of loneliness (Lim et al., 2016). 
Therefore, individuals with higher autistic traits may have more social interaction anxiety, which could be associated to greater 
loneliness, in turn relating to the tendency to engage in excessive smartphone use. In other words, together, social interaction anxiety 
and loneliness serially mediate the association between college students’ autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. 

This study explored the mechanism underlying the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use according to 
compensatory internet use theory (Kardefelt-Winther, 2014). This theory posits that negative life situations may motivate individuals 
to go online to mitigate their negative emotions, and frames internet use as a coping strategy to compensate for the things that in- 
dividuals might lack in real life. Individuals with higher levels of autistic traits, who are more likely to lack social stimulation and social 
skills, may feel uncomfortable communicating face-to-face with others, which may make them feel anxious in social situations (Baiano 
et al., 2021). This may be associated with feelings of loneliness and isolation (Stice & Lavner, 2019). Accordingly, to cope with negative 
emotions and stress, individuals experiencing social interaction anxiety and loneliness may resort to increased smartphone use as a 
coping mechanism, either for increased comfort when socializing or for entertainment. Social interaction anxiety and loneliness have 
already been shown to positively associate with the extent to which individuals report using their smartphones to regulate and 
compensate for their social fears (Jin & Park, 2013; Shepherd & Edelmann, 2005). Based on compensatory internet use theory, we 
proposed that the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use would be serially mediated by social interaction 
anxiety and loneliness. The hypothesized model is shown in Fig. 1. 


We conducted a cross-sectional survey in Guangdong province in southern China from November 2020 to January 2021. The 
researchers contacted local college students who did not have formal diagnoses of ASD or other medical conditions. Eligible partic- 
ipants were given a description of the study and asked whether they would be willing to participate. After providing their informed 
consent, the participants were asked to complete an anonymous self-report questionnaire to provide demographic information and 
data on their autistic traits, social interaction anxiety, loneliness, and excessive smartphone use. The recruitment and data collection 





The initial sample included 1377 participants. We excluded all questionnaires with missing construct-level data. Questionnaires 
that take less than 300 s to answer are exclusive. The final sample included 1075 valid questionnaires. Of the respondents, 303 were 
males and 772 were females. Their average age was 39.71 years, and the age range was 18–26 years (please note that 15 participants 
did not report their age). The breakdown by area of study was as follows: 493 were humanities students, 162 were social sciences 
students, and 420 were science and engineering students. All participants were intellectually able adults with a long-term residence in 
China. Detailed information on the sample is shown in Table 1. 





The Autism-Spectrum Quotient is a self-administered questionnaire developed by Baron-Cohen et al. (2001). The scale has five 
dimensions: social skill, attention switching, attention to detail, communication, and imagination. The items are scored 0 or 1, with the 
total score ranging from 0 to 50. Every response that is characteristic of autism scored 1 if the respondent responds “definitely agree” or 
“slightly agree” and 0 if the respondent chooses “definitely disagree” or “slightly disagree”. Higher scores indicate higher levels of 
autistic traits (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). An example item is “I find social situations easy.” This scale has demonstrated good reliability 
and validity in Chinese student samples (Zhang et al., 2016). For the current study, the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was .661. 

The short form of the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS-6) is a self-report measure of the severity of underlying social inter- 
action anxiety (Peters et al., 2012) consisting of six statements. Respondents rate how characteristic of themselves the statements are 
using a five-point scale, which ranges from 0 (i.e., not at all characteristic or true of me) to 4 (i.e., extremely characteristic or true of 
me). Higher scores indicate greater social interaction anxiety. An example item is “I have difficulty talking with other people.” It has a 
similar structure to the original form, and has good aggregation validity and reliability validity (Peters et al., 2012). This scale 
demonstrated good reliability and validity in Chinese student samples (Wang et al., 2018). For the current study, the Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficient was 0.789. 

The ULS-8 Loneliness Scale was developed by Hays & DiMatteo (1987). It includes eight items, with six positive sequence entries 
and two reverse-scored items. Each item is rated on a four-point scale, ranging from “never” to “always”, with higher total scores 
indicating greater loneliness. An example item is “I feel isolation from others.” This scale has demonstrated good reliability and validity 
in Chinese student samples (Xu et al., 2018). For the current study, the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was .722. 

The SAS-SV was developed by Kwon et al. (2013). It consists of 10 symptoms of excessive smartphone use. Each item is rated on a 
six-point Likert-type self-report scale, where 1 represents “strongly disagree” and 6 represents “strongly agree”. Higher scores indicate 
greater levels of excessive smartphone use. An example item is “Missing planned work due to smartphone use.” And we changed item 8 
of the original SAS-SV, “Constantly check your smartphone so as not to miss other people’s conversations on Twitter or Facebook” by 
replacing “Twitter or Facebook” with “WeChat, Weibo or QQ”, as these are more relevant to the study population. The Chinese version 
of SAS-SV demonstrated good reliability and validity (Cheung et al., 2019). For the current study, the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was 
.889. 
Table 1 
Demographic information. 

Age (M ± SD) 
Gender 
Male 
Female 
Subjects 
Humanities 
Sociology 
Polytechnic 
Only-child status 
Yes 
No 



303 (28.29 %) 
772 (71.71 %) 
493 (45.92 %) 
162 (15.12 %) 
420 (38.96 %) 
305 (28.48 %) 
770 (71.52 %) 

Grade 
freshman 
sophomore 
junior 
senior 
Regularity of exercise 
never 
once a week or less 
two to four times a week 
five to seven times a week 

236 (21.89 %) 
366 (33.95 %) 
280 (25.97 %) 
193 (18.18 %) 
73 (6.86 %) 
467 (43.41 %) 
436 (40.54 %) 
99 (9.18 %) 




Common method bias was assessed using Harman’s single factor test and was indicated as a concern if one factor explained more 
than 50 % of the total variance. Pearson correlations were then calculated to detect the initial bivariate relations between the variables. 
The bias-corrected percentile bootstrap method was used to test the hypothesized chain mediation model. The chain mediation model 
(Model 6, the Process Macro; Hayes, 2013) was implemented with 5000 bootstrap samples and 95 % corrected confidence intervals 
(CIs). Autistic traits was the independent variable (X), excessive smartphone use was the dependent variable (Y), social interaction 
anxiety was the first order mediator (M1), and loneliness was the second order mediator (M2). The demographic variables (gender, age) 
that were significantly correlated with any key variable served as covariates in the mediation analysis. The paths and their notations 
were as follows: a1, effect of X on M1; a2, effect of X on M2; a3, effect of M1 on M2; b1, effect of M1 on Y; b2, effect of M2 on Y; c, total 
effect of X on Y; c’, direct effect of X on Y while controlling for the effect of M1 and M2; ab, total indirect effect; a1b1, indirect effect of X 
on Y through M1; a2b2, indirect effect of X on Y through M2; a1a3b2, indirect effect of X on Y through M1 and M2. The effect was 
considered significant when 95 % of the CIs did not contain zero. All analyzes were performed using SPSS software and the PROCESS 
macro. 


Common variance analysis was applied to the four questionnaires through factor analysis. The chi-square statistic of Bartlett’s test 
of sphericity was significant. The results indicated that 18 factors had an eigenvalue higher than one; the first factor explained only 
11.14 % of the total variance, which is less than the 40 % required by the critical standard (Podsakoff et al., 2003). This demonstrated 
that the questionnaires used in the current study had no significant common method biases. 

The means and standard deviations for each variable and the correlations among them are presented in Table 2. 
Autistic traits were significantly and positively correlated with social interaction anxiety, loneliness, and excessive smartphone use. 
Additionally, loneliness was significantly positively correlated with excessive smartphone use. The correlation between gender and 
smartphone use was also significant. 

Fig. 3 presents the overall path coefficients of the mediation analysis. In the total effect model, autistic traits had a significant effect 
on excessive smartphone use (c = 0.127, p < .001, see Fig. 2). When social interaction anxiety and loneliness were included, the effect 
of autistic traits on excessive smartphone use was not significant (c’ = (cid:0) 0.010, p = .757), while autistic traits had significant effects 
on social interaction anxiety (a1 = .357, p < .001) and loneliness (a2 = .134, p < .001). The effect of social interaction anxiety on 
loneliness was also significant (a3 = .354, p < .001). Similarly, social interaction anxiety had a significant effect on excessive 
smartphone use (b1 = .249, p < .001). Loneliness also had a significant effect on excessive smartphone use (b2 = .184, p < .001). The 
total indirect effect was significant (ab = 0.1366, 95 % CIs [0.1040,0.1700], see Table 3), accounting for 61.42 % of the total effect of 
autistic traits on excessive smartphone use. The indirect effect of autistic traits through social interaction anxiety and loneliness was 
also significant (a1a3b2 = 0.0233, 95 % CIs [0.0135,0.0341]), accounting for 10.52 % of the total effect of autistic traits on excessive 
smartphone use. The relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use was mediated by social interaction anxiety (a1b1 
= 0.0886, 95 % CIs [0.0588,0.1199]), which accounted for 39.83 % of the total effect of autistic traits on excessive smartphone use. 
The relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use was also mediated by loneliness (a2b2 = 0.0247, 95 % CIs 
[0.0120,0.0398]), which accounted for 11.11 % of the total effect of autistic traits on excessive smartphone use. 


Table 2 
Descriptive statistics and correlation matrix of all variables. 

1. Autistic traits 
2. Social interaction anxiety 
3. Loneliness 
4. Excessive smartphone use 
Note. N = 1075. 
** p < .01. 

22.290 
10.316 
18.800 
36.073 

5.685 
3.700 
3.996 
9.952 

1 
0.348** 
0.258** 
0.130** 


1 
0.393** 
0.319** 
1 
0.294** 







Table 3 
Chain mediation analysis results. 
c 
c’ 
ab 
a1b1 
a2b2 
a1a3b2 
Autistic traits → excessive smartphone use (total effect) 
Autistic traits → excessive smartphone use (direct effect) 
Total indirect effect 
Autistic traits → social interaction anxiety → excessive smartphone use 
Autistic traits → loneliness → excessive smartphone use 
Autistic traits → social interaction anxiety → loneliness → excessive smartphone use 
0.2224 
-0.0167 
0.1366 
0.0886 
0.0247 
0.0233 
0.0530 
0.0539 
0.0168 
0.0154 
0.0072 
0.0052 


0.1184 
-0.1225 
0.1040 
0.0588 
0.0120 
0.0135 
0.3263 
0.0891 
0.1700 
0.1199 
0.0398 
0.0344 



social interaction anxiety, loneliness, and excessive smartphone use. In addition, the results of the model showed that social interaction 
anxiety and loneliness played a chain-mediating role in the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use in college 
students. Therefore, this study investigated the overuse of smartphones by individuals with high levels of autistic traits by focusing on 
social interaction anxiety and loneliness. 

The overall mean score for autistic traits in our study was 22.29. This is slightly higher than the scores reported in previous studies 
of other Asian countries: 21.65 for Malaysia and 21.22 for India (Carruthers et al., 2018; Freeth et al., 2013). The data were collected 
through self-report scales during the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have influenced the students’ subjective experience (Wu et al., 
2021). We collected the data during the 2020 autumn semester, when all of the Chinese students had gone back to college for in-person 
classes after the long pandemic lockdown, and during online classes of the spring semester. These behaviors were associated with 
higher scores for unfamiliarity with social skills and communication. In line with previous studies, there was no significant gender 
difference in the overall mean autistic traits score (Yu et al., 2020). The correlation analyses support the significant relations between 
the main study variables. The results show that autistic traits indirectly encourage excessive smartphone use via three pathways: social 
interaction anxiety, loneliness, and the chain mediating effect of social interaction anxiety and loneliness. 

First, social interaction anxiety was shown to be an important mediator in the relation between autistic traits and college students’ 
propensity for excessive smartphone use. This result is consistent with previous studies (Dickter et al., 2018; Turgeman et al., 2020). 
Although individuals with high levels of autistic traits may try hard to create a positive impression on others during social interactions, 
they often lack confidence in their presentation skills and familiarity with social situations, which can make them prone to getting 
stuck on negative self-referential cognitions, in turn increasing the possibility of developing social interaction anxiety (Baiano et al., 
2021). Increased social interaction anxiety may bring a sense of shame related to their functional and emotional problems in social 
situations (Kanne et al., 2009), and such negative feelings may be associated with an avoidance of real-time relationships (Wood & 
Gadow, 2010) and a preference for participating in social life in a non-face-to-face way via smartphones (Lee et al., 2014). Hence, it is 
reasonable to conclude that college students with higher levels of autistic traits are more likely to overuse smartphones because of 
increased social interaction anxiety. 
Second, the results showed that loneliness mediated the association between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use in college 
students. More autistic traits are related to higher levels of loneliness, which is consistent with the results of previous research (Schiltz 



et al., 2021). The finding can be explained by the poorer social skills and attention switching ability in students with higher levels of 
autistic traits, which may negatively influence the quality of social interaction and subsequently develop a heightened sense of social 
discomfort (Bolis et al., 2021). This can be correlated with decreased opportunities for social connections and increase the perception 
of loneliness (Kall et al., 2020). Additionally, the mediating effect was consistent with previous studies that have suggested a positive 
relation between loneliness and excessive smartphone use (Cheng et al., 2021; Kayis et al., 2021). Many individuals choose to use their 
smartphones to satisfy their interpersonal communication and social interaction needs (Stice & Lavner, 2019). Due to the versatility 
and accessibility of smartphones (Salehan & Negahban, 2013), individuals with heightened loneliness may not be able to disengage 
from their smartphones in the long run and may therefore be more likely to use their smartphones excessively (Khang et al., 2013). In 
addition, the relation between loneliness and excessive smartphone use identified in this study may have been affected by the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and the results may thus have been overestimated. COVID-19 isolation restrictions have led to individuals 
involuntarily spending more time alone, and they may have experienced other maladjusted behaviors (e.g., excessive smartphone use) 
related to their efforts to decrease their loneliness. Students use their smartphones frequently not only for distance learning but also to 
make up for the loss of interpersonal intimacy and to cope with loneliness (Kayis et al., 2021). 
Third, this study found that social interaction anxiety and loneliness play a chain-mediating role in the association between autistic 
traits and excessive smartphone use in college students. Previous research has found that socially anxious individuals are at increased 
risk of loneliness (Kealy et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2016). Individuals with heightened social interaction anxiety may have more diffi- 
culties with interpersonal relationships, as it is difficult for them to interact directly with people face to face (Sigurvinsdottir et al., 
2021). Individuals with higher autistic traits describe themselves as being perceived as impolite by others and as having difficulties 
with long face-to-face conversations (Zhang et al., 2021), which might be related to more social interaction anxiety. Harboring 
negative beliefs about themselves and finding social environments difficult, they may experience greater avoidance and loneliness 
(Baytemir & Yildz, 2017). Individuals with greater social interaction anxiety and loneliness may therefore be more likely to view 
smartphones as enabling communication without interacting directly with others. This practice might have some initial positive effects 
(as a first solution to enable communication; Kardefelt-Winther, 2014), but later, if they live their lives via their smartphones, they may 
experience the pronounced negative effects of excessive smartphone use (Liu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). Thus, the path from 
social interaction anxiety to loneliness is an important catalyst for the effects of autistic traits on excessive smartphone use among 
college students. 

The present study is an important step in understanding the link between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use among 
college students, as well as the underlying chain mediating mechanisms of this association. Previous researchers have attached 
importance to establishing tools and protocols that can accurately identify autistic traits (Daniels et al., 2014). To achieve this, an 
assessment mechanism for autistic traits in schools should be introduced in a timely manner along with corresponding services from 
professional psychologists. In conjunction, higher education institutions should provide effective support, such as promoting an in- 
clusive culture in the classroom and increasing specific or individualized academic support for students with high levels of autistic 
traits (Davis et al., 2021). This study demonstrates that it is necessary to pay attention to and reduce excessive smartphone use among 
individuals with high levels of autistic traits to enhance meaningful and healthy behaviors that promote the development of social 
relationships and well-being (Bae, 2019). Focus should be placed on five domains of intervention: involuntary restriction, 
self-awareness and self-control, school factors, peer support, and professional services (Chun, 2018). Such strategies constitute an 
important step toward conceptualizing effective interventions. 
This study also underscores the importance of social interaction anxiety and loneliness. Cognitive behavioral therapy is recom- 
mended for social interaction anxiety in the context of autism (Spain et al., 2018), as it shows efficacy in improving core social deficits 
such as a lack of sociability and the expression and interaction of autistic traits. More naturalistic forms of behavioral interventions that 
aim to increase social communication skills have been found to be effective at indirectly reducing symptoms of social interaction 
anxiety in autistic individuals (Lei et al., 2017). In addition, loneliness can be ameliorated by social interaction (Perese & Wolf, 2005). 
It is suggested that periodic collective counseling and collective activities (e.g., workshops, support groups) be provided, especially for 
college freshmen who are suffering a decline in family communication and support. These activities can facilitate positive interactions 
among students and help them remain in positive interpersonal relationships (Tian et al., 2019). 

Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the results of this study. First, this study only recruited college students 
in China. Second, the data used in this study were cross-sectional and could only reveal a correlation between autistic traits and 
excessive smartphone use in students, not a causal relation. Further research and experiments are needed to verify causality using 
longitudinal or experimental studies. Finally, the effect of autistic traits on excessive smartphone use may also be accounted for by 
other factors, such as emotion regulation and school connectedness. Future research should consider examining the chain mediating 
effect of factors other than social interaction anxiety and loneliness in the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone 
use. 




This study investigated the overuse of smartphones by individuals with high levels of autistic traits focusing on social interaction 
anxiety and loneliness. The findings of the study indicate that social interaction anxiety and loneliness have a chain-mediating effect in 
the relation between autistic traits and excessive smartphone use. This research provides a new potential perspective to screen for 
excessive smartphone use in individuals with high levels of autistic traits. 

ML and TP conceived of the study, participated in its design and coordination and drafted the manuscript; FP and RW participated 
in interpretation of the data, performed the statistical analysis, and provided critical revisions; YL participated in data collection and 
provided critical revisions All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 




All the authors of this article have no conflict of interest. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in 
accordance with the ethical standards of Guangzhou University and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or 
comparable ethical standards. This article does not contain any studies with animals performed by any of the authors. Informed 
consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. 





We thank all the families that participated in this study. This work was supported by 2021 Teaching Reform Project of Guangzhou 
University and grant from the National Educational Science Program of China: “Peer Relationship of Children with ASD: Characteristic, 
Influence Mechanism and Intervention” (Grant no. CBA190245). 

Individuals with more autistic traits may be more likely to use smartphone excessively. However, few studies have explored the 
effects of psychosocial factors on excessive smartphone use in individuals with high levels of autistic traits. This study explored the 
mechanism underlying the relations between autistic traits, social interaction anxiety, loneliness, and excessive smartphone use. Social 
interaction anxiety and loneliness were found to play a chain-mediating role in the association between autistic traits and excessive 
smartphone use. The research provides a new potential perspective to screen for excessive smartphone use in individuals with high 
levels of autistic traits. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Bae, S. (2019). The relationship between smartphone use for communication, social capital, and subjective well-being in Korean adolescents: Verification using 

Baiano, C., Raimo, G., Zappullo, I., Cecere, R., Rauso, B., Positano, M., Conson, M., Aversana, L. D., Di Rosa, A., Esposito, G., Milo, R., Polito, F., Raimondo, C., & 
Turco, A. (2021). Anxiety sensitivity domains are differently affected by social and non-social autistic traits. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorder, 52(8), 
3486–3495. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-021-05228-w 

functioning autism, males and females, scientists and mathematicians. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31(1), 5–17. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 
1005653411471 

















Cheung, T., Lee, R. L. T., Tse, A. C. Y., Do, C. W., So, B. C. L., Szeto, G. P. Y., & Lee, P. H. (2019). Psychometric properties and demographic correlates of the 
smartphone addiction scale-short version among Chinese children and adolescents in Hong Kong. Cyberpsychology Behavior and Social Networking, 22(11), 
714–723. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2019.0325 



symptoms predict the severity of internet gaming disorder in an Italian adult population. Brain Sciences, 11(6), Article 774. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
brainsci11060774 
Daniels, A. M., Halladay, A. K., Shih, A., Elder, L. M., & Dawson, G. (2014). Approaches to enhancing the early detection of autism spectrum disorders: A systematic 
review of the literature. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(2), 141–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2013.11.002 
Davis, M. T., Watts, G. W., & Lopez, E. J. (2021). A systematic review of firsthand experiences and supports for students with autism spectrum disorder in higher 













Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression-based approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Hays, R. D., & DiMatteo, M. R. (1987). A short-form measure of loneliness. Journal of Personality Assessment, 51(1), 69–81. https://doi.org/10.1207/ 









































Liu, S., Zou, S., Zhang, D., Wang, X., & Wu, X. (2022). Problematic internet use and academic engagement during the Covid-19 lockdown: The indirect effects of 
depression, anxiety, and insomnia in early, middle, and late adolescence. Journal of Affective Disorders, 309, 9–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.04.043 














(SPS) using nonparametric item response theory: The SIAS-6 and the SPS-6. Psychological Assessment, 24(1), 66–76. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024544 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and 

















Turgeman, L., Hefner, I., Bazon, M., Yehoshua, O., & Weinstein, A. (2020). Studies on the relationship between social anxiety and excessive smartphone use and on the 
effects of abstinence and sensation seeking on excessive smartphone use. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(4), Article 1262. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17041262 












Yang, T., Liu, J., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Q., Shangguan, L., Li, Z., Luo, X., & Gong, J. (2021). Coping style predicts sense of security and mediates the relationship between 
autistic traits and social anxiety: Moderation by a polymorphism of the FKBP5 gene. Behavioural Brain Research, 404, Article 113142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbr.2021.113142 












