Amaç: Bu çalışmanın amacı, ilk defa Otizm Spektrum 
Bozukluğu (OSB) tanısı alan çocukların ekran kullanım 
özelliklerini ve ebeveynlerin bu çocuklarıyla ilgili ilk 
endişelerinin zamanı ve içeriğini araştırmaktır. Yöntem: 
Çalışmaya 57 OSB’li çocuk ve 63 sağlıklı gelişim gösteren 
çocuk alındı. Ebeveynlerin başvuru sırasındaki endişeleri 
ve çocukların elektronik alet kullanımı ile ilgili bilgiler 
ailelerden alındı. Çocukluk Otizmi Derecelendirme Ölçeği 
ve Otizm Davranış Kontrol Listesi klinisyen tarafından 
otizm belirtilerini değerlendirmek için uygulandı. Ayrıca 
çocukların genel gelişim düzeylerini saptamak amacıyla 
Ankara Gelişim ve Tarama Envanteri uygulandı. 
Bulgular: OSB genellikle 36. ayda teşhis edildi ve bu 
çocukların ebeveynlerinin resmi tanı konmadan 14 ay 
önce çocuklarının gelişimsel özellikleri ile ilgili yolunda 
gitmeyen bir şey olduğundan şüphe ettiği belirlendi. 
OSB’li çocukların elektronik alet kullanım yaşı daha küçük 
ve ekran kullanım süresi de daha yüksekti. Ayrıca en sık 
iletişim 
klinisyene 
yönlendirildiği saptandı. Sonuç: Bulgularımız OSB’li 
çocukların sorunlu elektronik kullanımına daha yatkın 
olabileceğini göstermektedir. Elektronik aletlerin daha 
erken yaşta kullanılmaya başlanması sosyo-duygusal 
süreçleri olumsuz etkileyebilir. Klinisyenler bu çocuklarda 
ekran kullanımı özelliklerini değerlendirmelidirler. Son 
olarak, ebeveynlerin OSB’nin erken tanınması için 
endişelerini klinisyenlere bildirmeleri konusunda teşvik 
edilmesi oldukça önemlidir. 




Objective: Aim of this study was to explore the screen 
characteristics of children who have been newly diag- 
nosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and context 
of initial concerns of parents at the time of the first diag- 
nosis. Method: Fifty-seven ASD and 63 typically devel- 
oping children were included. Data retrieved from fami- 
lies such as concerns at the time of referal and character- 
istics that comprised use of electronics were recorded. 
The Childhood Autism Rating Scale and Autism Behavior 
Checklist was administered by the clinician to evaluate 
the symptom severity of ASD. Furthermore, the Ankara 
Development and Screening Inventory were applied to 
the children to evaluate the general developmental level. 
Results: ASD was generally diagnosed around 36th 
month and parents of these children were found to have 
suspected of something going wrong regarding deve- 
lopmental characteristics of their children approximately 
14 months prior formal diagnosis. Age at index use of 
electronics was smaller and screen time was higher in 
children with ASD. It has also been found that families 
most frequently were referred to the clinician due to 
problems in communication. Discussion: Our findings 
suggest children with ASD might be more prone to prob- 
lematic use of electronics. Smaller index age for initiating 
use of electronic devices might predominantly affect 
socioemotional processes negatively. The clinicians 
should evaluate screen characteristics in these children. 
Lastly, It is important to encourage parents to report 
concerns to clinicians for early detection of ASD. 

Screen time characteristics and early-term 
parental concerns of children newly diag- 
nosed with autism spectrum disorder 
İlk defa otizm spektrum bozukluğu tanısı alan çocuklarda ekran kullanım 
özellikleri ve ebeveynlerin erken dönem endişeleri 




Murat Eyüboğlu1, Damla Eyüboğlu1 
1Assoc. Prof., Eskisehir Osmangazi Unversity Faculty of Medicine Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Turkey 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3278-0374-https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6042-7768 



 

Many children diagnosed with ASD spend signifi- 
cant amounts of their time in activities related to 
the video games and that involve screen use (9,10). 
Parents have also indicated that these children 
have prolonged screen use, which also includes 
playing games, compared to time spent for other 
leisure time activities (10). Parents of boys with 
ASD reported that their sons spent more time play- 
ing video games per day (on average 2.1 h/day) 
than typically developing boys (on average 
1.2h/day) did (11). Individuals with ASD may be 
particularly prone to problematic electronic use, 
and studies have also shown that problematic elec- 
tronic use is associated with social, behavioral, and 
academic challenges (12). In additon, higher screen 
time may results diminished parent-child interac- 
tion which is very important for cognitive and lan- 
guage development in the early period of life. 
Hermawati et al. showed that more than half of 
children (66.6%) had no parents-child interaction 
during the screen exposure. Increased screen usage 
has also possible impact on spending less time in 
dailiy activities which may better advance in emo- 
tional-behavioral areas for children with ASD (13). 
Moreover, parents of children who have emotional 
and behavioral difficulties may use screen device as 
a calming tool when their children are upset (14). 
This may be one of the maintaining factor for diffi- 
culties with emotional/behavioral regulation in 
children with ASD who have already prone to 
develop behavioral-emotional problems (14). 
Therefore, it is important to know the nature and 
effect of using electronic devices in children with 
ASD, in order to develop intervention strategies 
towards relevant emerging behavioral and emo- 
tional problems. 
Our current knowledge shows that the most effec- 
tive treatment of this disorder is the behavior-based 
intervention programs (15,16). Therefore, early 
detection of autism is crucial to provide early inter- 
vention. Increasing knowledge and awareness of 
parents, teachers, and physicans on autism in 
recent years, and the well- known notion that early 
treatment bearing better outcome might have con- 
tributed to the increase in early diagnosis of autism 
(17). However, the age at diagnosis has not 
decreased uniformly for all children, and the stud- 
ies have shown that sex, ethnicity, access to health 
care, and symptom severity were factors found to 
be associated with age at diagnosis (18,19). 
Although early diagnosis has not been maintained 
for most cases, parents might suspect possible 
developmental differences of their children 
throughout infancy and early childhood. It has 
been shown that 76.2% of parents were concerned 
about their children's developmental process, 
before the age of 3 (20). De Giacorno and 
Fombonne reported that mean age of children with 
ASD, when their parents first had suspicions 
regarding their children’s development was 19 
months, and mean age of the child when they 
sought help for the first time was 24 months (21). 
In another study, it was reported that mean age of 
children when parents had their initial concerns 
was 1.5 years for children diagnosed with Asperger 
Disorder, and help was sought approximately at the 
age of 3.5 years, and the children were diagnosed at 
11 years (22). Findings indicate that parents report 


Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodeve- 
lopmental disorder that occurs in the early deve- 
lopmental period of life and characterized by 
deficits in social communication and interaction, 
along with limited, repetitive behavior or interests 
(1). The disorder predominantly presenting in male 
gender by four times (2) and affecting one in every 
59 children (3). It is now largely believed that ASD 
manifests itself based on coexisting genetic and 
environmental factors of vulnerability. 
Nowadays, screen based electronic devices have 
progressively become an integral part in the daily 
life and age at onset of screen use tends to decrease 
gradually. Therefore, children and adolescents 
spend considerable amounts of their time, using 
electronic devices, social media, and playing video 
games. In this context, interest in the electronic use 
of children diagnosed with ASD has also increased. 
Even electronics devices may be useful in learning 
context, excessice exposure to screen may have 
adverse effect on children (4). Direct exposure to 
screen impact development of behavior (5), lan- 
guage (6), cognition (7) and attention (8) in child- 
ren. These influences could be severe in children 
with ASD who have already difficulties in commu- 
nication and social process (1). 

 
Screen time characteristics and early-term parental concerns 
of children newly diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder 
who had agreed to participate in the study. The 
information obtained from families such as 
parental concerns and screen use characteristics 
were recorded to the checklist by physcian during 
the interwiev. Parents were asked to report the 
screen characteristics of children for the last 
month. Questions about screen characteristics and 
early concerns were asked by physican to the par- 
ents according and recorded. In the form, frequen- 
cy of screen using were coded as “less than one 
hour”, “1-2 hour”, “2-4 hour” and “more than 4 
hours” a day. Parents were also asked about the ini- 
tial time for using electronics and whether the 
usage of screen affected their children. According 
to the answers related to affected areas, we classi- 
fied the answers into the following groups: commu- 
nication, social/emotional, behavioral problems 
and hyperactivity. Childhood Autism Rating Scale 
(CARS) and Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) 
were administered by the clinician, to evaluate 
autism-related symptom severity of children with 
ASD. Furthermore, Ankara Development and 
Screening Inventory (ADSI) was applied to all chil- 
dren, in order to determine their development lev- 
els. Ethical approval was granted by the local ethics 
committee of the Eskisehir Osmangazi University 
(date: 07/01/2020, number:2019-417). 
Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS): CARS is a 
scale consisting of 15 items that was developed to 
rate autism severity (27). The scale is mainly used 
in the assessment of children with autism and in 
differentiating the disorder from other develop- 
mental disorders. Turkish validity and reliability 
studies of the scale have been performed, and cut- 
off score was found to be 30 in (28). 
Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC): ABC is a scale 
consisting of 57 items that describe symptoms asso- 
ciated with autism as well as more general behavior 
problems often seen in children with autism (29). 
Scores of the scale range from 0 to 159 points (the 
higher the score, the more severe symptoms). The 
Turkish validity and reliability of scale was per- 
formed (30). 




significantly earlier and more concerns about their 
child's, compared to parents of children with other 
developmental disabilities (23-25). In addition to 
these, it would also be important to identify what 
types of early-on concerns were the most common 
ones among parents of children with ASD. Howlin 
and Moore showed, majority of parents stated that 
their first concerns were about language delay, fol- 
lowed by social abnormalities, and behavioral prob- 
lems (26). 
In summary, previous findings have provided the 
importance of early detection and problematic 
electronics using in children with ASD. In the pre- 
sent study, we aimed to explore screen use charac- 
teristics, age at diagnosis, time and type of initial 
parental concerns of children with ASD, and to 
compare these variables with those of typically 
developing peers. Based on previous research, we 
hypothesized that individuals with ASD would 
begin using electronics at an earlier age, have pro- 
longed times of electronics use. We have also 
hypothesized that parents of these children would 
be more likely to report negatively impacts of elec- 
tronic use on their children's life, compared to par- 
ents of typically developing children. 


A total of 57 children with ASD (47 boys, 10 girls) 
who were diagnosed for the first time and 63 typi- 
cally developing (TD) were included in this cross- 
sectional study between January 2020 and March 
2020. Children with ASD were selected from pedi- 
atric psychiatry outpatient clinic and diagnosed by 
an experienced child and adolescent psychiatrist, 
based on DSM 5 diagnostic criteria, and diagnostic 
confirmation was made by another child psychia- 
trist, who was experienced in the relevant field. The 
typically developing children were selected from 
pediatric outpatient unit who had no history of 
physical or developmental disabilities. In determin- 
ing process, one family rejected to participate to 
the study owing to child’s agitation during the inter- 
view. 


The mean age of ASD and TD children were found 
to be 35.5±10 months and 36±9 months, respec- 
tively. Groups did not differ by age (p>0.05). The 
number of boys in the ASD group was higher com- 
pared to the TD group (Table 1). There were no 
significant differences between the two groups by 
the number of siblings, parental ages, father and 
mother's ages at pregnancy, and family income 
(Table 1). When parental education levels were 
examined, no difference was found regarding edu- 
cation level of fathers, while significant difference 
regarding education level of mothers was observed. 
There was also no significant differences in family 
income. Demographic variables were presented in 
Table 1. 
In ASD group, 5 (8.7%) children were diagnosed 
with epilepsy upon being evaluated by a child neu- 
rologist. Fifty-five (96.5%) children with ASD had 
a history of language delay. According to the 
results of ADSI applied to children with ASD, the 
mean general development and social skill levels 
Family income 
TL,median(min-max) 
* Mann Whitney U test; ** Student’s t -test; *** Chi-square test; TL: Turkish lira. 
 

It is an inventory that evaluates development and 
skills of preschool children, in line with the infor- 
mation obtained from the caregiver. In this inven- 
tory of 154 items, questions are answered as 
"yes/no/do not know". Five different scores includ- 
ing the total development score and the language- 
cognitive, fine motor, gross motor and social skill- 
self care scores representing different areas of 
development are obtained, as a result of the appli- 
cation (31). 

Data were analyzed using Statistical Package for 
Social Sciences (SPSS) for Windows version 23.0. 
The continous variables were presented as 
mean±standard deviation, and categorical vari- 
ables were presented as percentage and numbers. 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to evaluate dis- 
tribution of numeric variables. According to the 
distribution of variables, Student's t test or Mann- 
Whitney U test were conducted in order to exami- 
ne group differences (ASD vs. TD). Chi-square 
analyses and Fisher's exact tests were performed 
for dichotomous variables. Bivariate analyses were 
applied to assess level of relationship between 
numeric variables.The value of statistical signifi- 
Table 1. Demographic variables 




 TD 
(n=63) 
36.0 (21-55) 


 ASD 
(n=57) 
36.0 (20-66) 










10 (17.5%) 
2.0 (1-7) 
6 (10.5%) 
31 (54.4%) 
9 (15.8%) 
11 (19.3%) 
2 (4.2%) 
22 (38.6%) 

29 (46%) 
3.0–(1-7) 
4 (6.3%) 
20 (31.7%) 
20 (31.7%) 
19 (30.2%) 
0 (0%) 
24 (38.1%) 
17 (29.8%) 
18 (31.6%) 
2000(500-10000) 
16 (25.4%) 
23 (36.5%) 
2500(500- 
10000) 












Illiterate 
Primary 
education 
High school 
University 
Illiterate 
Primary 
education 
High school 
University 
Age 
month,median(min-max) 
Age of parental first concern 
month,mean(SD) 
Maternal age at pregnancy 
year,mean(SD) 
Paternal age at pregnancy 
year, median(min-max) 
Gender 
n (%) 
Number of siblings 
median(min-max) 
Mothers’ education 
n (%) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Screen time characteristics and early-term parental concerns 
of children newly diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder 
Mean age of children when the parents initial con- 
cerns were apparent was determined to be 21.5±8 
months. The age of ASD children in study entry 
was 35.5 months, so there was a period of approxi- 
mately 14 months between the emergence of first 
concerns and being diagnosed with ASD. Most 
common reasons for referral to the clinician were 
symptoms 
communication and 
to 
social/emotional domains. Features of parental 
concerns were presented in Table 3. 

We used bivariate analyses to examine the relation- 
ship between autism severity, daily screen time, age 
at diagnosis and age of the child at the time of first 
parental concerns. While autism severity was signif- 
icantly negative correlated with age at the time of 
first concerns, contrary to our hypothesis, no signi- 
ficant correlation was found between daily screen 
time and age at diagnosis (Table 4). Additionally, 
we found significant positive correlation between 
developmental delay and age at diagnosis in chil- 
dren with ASD. Table 4 presented relevant statistics 
of aforementioned correlations. 

were 22.5±6 months and 20±7 months, respective- 
ly. All children with ASD also had comorbid deve- 
lopmental delay. Mean CARS score of children 
with ASD was 40±3.5. According to the scoring 
standards of CARS, 11 (19%) children had mild to 
moderate autism (CARS score between 30-36.5) 
and 46 (81%) exhibited severe autism (CARS score 
above 37). The mean score of ABC was found to 
be 87±26. Additionally, there were 8 (14%) child- 
ren diagnosed with ASD among the 1st and 2nd 
degree relatives of the children with ASD. Only 
one of the children in TD group had an individual 
diagnosed with ASD, among their close relatives. 

We examined daily screen (such as TV, phone, 
tablet, computer) use characteristics of all partici- 
pating children within last month. Children with 
ASD had longer screen time per day, and had start- 
ed to use electronics at an earlier age, compared to 
TD children (Table 3). Furthermore, majority of 
the families in ASD group stated that using elec- 
tronics affected their children negatively, especially 
in the social/emotional context, along with domains 
that involve communication, behavioral problems 
and motor activity (Table 2). 
Age of the child and type of initial parental con- 
cerns 
Table 2. Screen Use Characteristics of Children 








TD 
(n=63) 
20 (31.7%) 
34 (54%) 
8 (12.7%) 
1 (1.6%) 
18.0 (12-36) 
SD 
(n=57) 
5 (8.8%) 
14 (24.6%) 
14 (24.6%) 
24 (42.1%) 
12.0 (2-24) 






< 1 hour 
1-2 hours 
2-4 hours 
> 4 hours 







Social/emotional 
Behavioral problems 
Hyperactivity 
Other 
19 (44.2%) 
11 (25.5%) 
2 (4.7%) 
1 (2.3%) 
2 (5.6%) 
11 (30.5%) 
6 (16.6%) 
15 (41.7%) 
Daily screen time 
n (%) 
Age at onset of 
electronics use 
month, median(min- 
max) 
Negative impact of 
using electronics on 
children daily life 
n (%) 
Behavioral areas that 
were reported to have 
been affected by 
screentime 
n (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
study conducted with 91 ASD adolescents, average 
time of daily computer use was 4.9 hours (33). In 
another study, parents of typically developing chil- 
dren reported that their children spent approxi- 
mately 1.2 hours on playing video games, per day 
(11). Additionally, it was stated that children with 
ASD spent less time in social media or interactive 
social games, and prefered to play computer games 
and watch television (34). It is not surprising that 
children with ASD are expected to have more non- 
social use of electronic by staying away from face- 
to-face interaction, compatible with the core symp- 
toms of ASD. Furthermore, use of electronics 
among children with ASD, might be a way to pro- 
vide a break for their caregivers. It is a well known 
fact that children with ASD have higher odds of 
hyperactive, impulsive and dysregulated behavior 
(35), and use of electronic devices and screen time 
might be a less consuming and easier way of con- 
trolling children for their caregivers. Moreover, the 
present study may indicates that parents at the 
times use electronics devices want to have free 
time, or take care of needs of their family. In docu- 
menting children’s screen characteristics family- 
level variables are also important. We found the 
lower levels of maternal education in children with 
ASD. This may be one of the factor that direct 
to use electronics devices. 
these children 



tronics use, age and type of parental first concerns 
of children, that had newly been diagnosed with 
ASD, and their differences when compared with 
typically developing children. To summarize, we 
have found that children with ASD had prolonged 
screen time and were inclined to start using elec- 
tronics at an earlier age compared to their healthy 
counterparts. We have also found that mean age of 
children with ASD at the time of diagnosis was 35.5 
months, parents were concerned about their chil- 
dren's development approximately 14 months 
their children would be diagnosed. 
before 
Developmental delay was also a reason that moti- 
vated families of children with ASD to seek help 
from a medical professional. 
Recently, growing concern about effect of pro- 
longed electronics use on both children with ASD 
and TD has emerged. In our study, we found that 
children with ASD were exposed to electronic 
devices at an earlier age, and had longer daily 
screen time compared to typically developing 
peers. About 40% of the children with ASD had a 
total screen time for approximately 4 hours and 
above per day. This usage of screen exceeded the 
American Academy of Pediatrics’ (AAP) recom- 
mendation (32) for screen use in children. In a 
Speech delay, receptive/expressive language problems 
Emotional response, interests, peer relationships 
Speech delay, receptive/expressive language problems + 
Emotional response, interests, peer relationships 
Concerns about cognitive abilities, developmental delay 
Walking, gross motor skills 
Increased motor activity at all times, running 

n (%) 
22 (38.6%) 
17 (29.8%) 
 9 (15.8%) 
4 (7%) 
4 (7%) 
1 (1.8%) 
Referral to 
clinician 
n (%) 
21 (36.8%) 
19 (33.3%) 
15 (26.3%) 
- 
1 (1.8%) 
1 (1.8%) 
Communication 
Social/Emotional 
Communication + 
Social/Emotional 
Cognitive 
Motor 
Hyperactivity 

 
 
 

Age at 
diagnosis 
Age at initial 
concerns of 
parents 
Daily screen 
time 
General 
developmental 
level 



 1 
0.56** 
Age at diagnosis 
Age at the time of 
first parental 
concerns 
Daily screen time 
General 
developmental level 
(months) 
-0.36** 
CARS 
-0.16 
ABC 
**p< .01; *p< .05, CARS; Childhood Autism Rating Scale, ABC; Autism Behavior Checklist 
-0.56** 
-0.73 
-0.07 
 0.77** 
0.34* 
0.36** 
-0.06 
0.40* 
 1 
-0.05 
-0.16 
 0.23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
0.54** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Screen time characteristics and early-term parental concerns 
of children newly diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder 
Early identification of ASD has become more 
important with increasing evidence that demon- 
strates positive outcomes of early behavioral inter- 
ventions in afflicted children (39). Early recogni- 
tion of atypical developmental features by parents 
has also been found to associate with early diagno- 
sis of autism (20,40). In our study, we found that 
mean age of the children at the time of first 
parental concerns about their children's develop- 
ment had emerged, was 21.5 months. In previous 
studies that explored the same context, discrepant 
results were found, such as 19, 15 and 14 months, 
respectively (21, 41, 42). Increasing awareness of 
parents regarding their children's development, 
might possibly account for the earlier ages at when 
the disorder would be suspected of. The age of the 
children at the time of first parental concern in our 
study seems a little bit higher, compared to the 
results reported by previous studies. We think this 
difference might be associated with lower levels of 
maternal education in our ASD group. Such inter- 
pretation might have grounds, as supported by the 
study that reported increased awareness of moth- 
ers on children's development, as education level 
increased (43). Additionally, cultural differences 
may impact the perception of symptoms of ASD 
and parents' concerns may vary according to cul- 
ture (44). Even there is no study investigating the 
cultural differences in Turkish population, this dif- 
ferences may be also a factor that caused a little 
elongation of the time for parental first concerns. 
Turkish parents may not sufficiently aware about 
the early developmental steps of their children and 
this finding emphasizes the important of increasing 
autism awareness once again. 
It was reported that within the early developmental 
period, communication impairments and language 
delay were the most commonly reported initial 
parental concerns of children with ASD (21,23,41). 
These aforementioned concerns were followed by 
impairments in social skills (41, 45). In the present 
study, initial concerns of parents to children with 
ASD were communication problems and social 
impairments; and they most frequently were 
referred to the clinician due to problems in com- 
munication, especially speech delay. Consistent 
with the results of previous studies, we have found 

Competible with our finding it was shown that liv- 
ing with parents who have less education was asso- 
ciated with more screen time in ASD children (36). 
Another important aspect of the present study is 
possible difficulties in parent-child interaction in 
the early period of life. Due to the nature of disor- 
der, parents may are unsure of how to connect with 
their infants and toddler, therefore they may let 
their children to use screen as a copy mechanism. 
In our study, children with ASD mostly use elec- 
tronics devices alone. This is also diminished the 
quality of relationship with ASD children and 
decrease the duraion of caregiver-child reciprocal 
interaction. Therefore, it should be kept in mind 
that the negative impact of screen use, especially in 
children with ASD might be overlooked by their 
families. Our findings suggest that children with 
ASD might be more prone to problematic electron- 
ics use, because of their individual characteristics 
and nature of disorder. Because, as we know 
restricted interests and repetitive behaviors may 
increase the risk for problematic screen usage. 
Additionally, deficits in impulse control and 
response inhibition in ASD (37), might contribute 
to the predisposition these children for developing 
problematic electronics use. All aside, probably the 
most important point is overly- prolonged screen 
time exposure might further impair these childrens' 
interaction within social contexts and experiences 
with their peers. In line with the aforementioned 
statement, parents in our study have also reported 
use of electronics had the most negative impact on 
socio-emotional areas. Problematic internet and 
video game use have also shown to be associated 
with inattention and impulsivity (38). In one study, 
a relationship was reported between online gaming 
and oppositional behavior, among children with 
ASD (11). In general, evidence suggest that prob- 
lematic electronics use is associated with social, 
behavioral, and academic difficulties (12). This 
would mean that the risk has increased a little more 
for those who were already prone to develop 
behavioral and emotional problems, due to the 
nature of the disorder. Moreover, excessive use of 
electronics might also affect families who would be 
already under stress because of the challenging 
nature of the disorder, much more negatively. 
Therefore, families and clinicians need to be aware 
of their children's use of electronics and inititate 
and employ required interventions, without allow- 


our results related to high frequency of screen time 
in ASD children. Future researches is essential in 
order to inform the parents how to use of electronic 
devices properly to possible improvements on func- 
tional outcomes in children with ASD. 
In conclusion, we have found that children with 
ASD were diagnosed when they were at approxi- 
mately 36 months old, parental concerns about 
their children's developmental steps emerged 14 
months prior to formal diagnosis, children with 
ASD had more electronics use than their healthy 
peers, even before they were formally diagnosed 
with the disorder, they had met electronic devices 
at an earlier age, and their parents reported elec- 
tronics use had specifically had a negative impact 
on the social-emotional area. In addition, children 
with ASD may be at higher risk of exceeding the 
AAP total screen recommendation. It was consid- 
ered that electronics use starting at such an early 
age posed a risk for children with ASD. Further 
studies are required for families and clinicians to 
develop strategies for coping with this problem. 
The results of the present study highlight the clini- 
cal importance of examining electronics using pat- 
tern and need for increased awareness of problem- 
atic electronics use for individuals with ASD. In 
addition, subsequent researches should also focus 
on identifying factors that affect age of children at 
the time first parental concerns emerged, and 
improved techniques and methods to adopt, for 
earlier detection of the disorder. Further experi- 
mental and longitudinal researches may help to 
improve our knowledge about etiology, early detec- 
tion and effect of electronic in ASD. 
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they 
have no conflict of interest 
orrespondence address: Assoc. Prof. Murat Eyuboglu, 
Eskisehir Osmangazi Unversity Faculty of Medicine 
Department of Child And Adolescent Psychiatry, Turkey 
murateyuboglu@hotmail.com 



that social impairments and related symptoms con- 
stituted the second area of parental concerns. 
Although early identification of ASD is encour- 
aged, a significant time between age of children at 
first parental concerns and the age at diagnosis of 
ASD were consistently reported, via previous stud- 
ies. Howlin and Asgharian reported that average 
age at initial parental concern was 18 months of age 
for autism, whereas the diagnostic confirmation of 
the disorder was prolonged to 66 months (22). In a 
population based study, it was shown that there was 
a delay of 20-60 months between initial parental 
suspicions and the time of clinical diagnosis (46). In 
another study, it was reported that there was a peri- 
od of 13 months between the initial clinical assess- 
ment of the child and the time of formal diagnosis 
(19). In our study, the time between initial parental 
concerns and the time of ASD diagnosis, was 14 
months. Positive history for language and develop- 
mental delay in all children with ASD from our 
sample might have affected the time in between 
and caused an earlier detection through referal. 
Supporting this finding, a significant relationship 
was also found between general developmental 
level and age at diagnosis, suggesting that comor- 
bid developmental delay could have an impact on 
earlier referal or application to a medical profes- 
sional. 

Several limitations should be considered when 
interpreting our results. Although CARS and ABC 
were used to evaluate autism severity, no standard- 
ized diagnostic tool was used for the diagnosis of 
ASD. It should be noted that our study largely 
relied on parental reports for all measured. This is 
also increased the possibility of bias. Our small 
sample size would constitute one of the main limi- 
tations of the study and the cross-sectional design 
of the study also does not allow to generalize our 
results. Finally, the use of alternative measures of 
screen 
be helpful. 
Additionally, studies investigated screen character- 
istics by gender differences in children with ASD 
showed that being male is associated with higher 
levels of screen time and may exhibited higher rates 
of problematic electronics use than girls (12). In 
our study, due to nature of the disorder there were 
more males in case group, and this may effect the 


Screen time characteristics and early-term parental concerns 
of children newly diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder 
16. Linstead E, Dixon D, French R, Granpeesheh D, Adams H, 
German R, Powell A, Stevens E, Tarbox J, Kornack. Intensity 
and learning outcomes in the treatment of children with autism 
spectrum disorder. Behav Modif 2016:41;229-252. 
17. Fountain C, King MD, Bearman PS. Age of diagnosis for 
autism: individual and community factors across 10 birth 
cohorts. J Epidemiol Community Health 2011;65:503-510 
18. Shattuck PT, Durkin M, Maenner M, Newschaffer C, 
Mandell DS, Wiggins L, Lee LC, Rice C, Giarelli E, Kirby R, 
Baio J, Pinto-Martin J, Cuniff C. Timing of identification among 
children with an autism spectrum disorder: findings from a pop- 
ulation-based surveillance study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 2009;48(5):474-483 
19. Wiggins LD, Baio J, Rice C. Examination of the time 
between first evaluation and first autism spectrum diagnosis in a 
population-based sample. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2006:27(2 
Suppl);79-87 
20. Kishore MT, Basu A. Early concerns of mothers of children 
later diagnosed with autism: Implications for early identifica- 
tion. Res Autism Spectr Disord 2011:5;157-163 
21. De Giacomo A, Fombonne E. Parental recognition of devel- 
opmental abnormalities in autism. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
1998;7;131-136. 
22. Howlin P, Asgharian A. The diagnosis of autism and 
Asperger syndrome: findings from a survey of 770 families. Dev 
Med Child Neurol 1999:41); 834-839. 
23. Kozlowski AM, Matson JL, Horovitz M, Worley JA, Neal D. 
Parents' first concerns of their child's development in toddlers 
with autism spectrum disorders. Dev Neurorehabil 2011:14;72- 
78 
24. Ozonoff S, Young GS, Steinfeld MB, Hill MM, Cook I, 
Hutman T, Macari S, Rogers SJ, Sigman M. How early do parent 
concerns predict later autism diagnosis?. J Dev Behav Pediatr 
2009:30;367-375. 
25. Zuckerman KE, Lindly OJ, Sinche BK. Parental concerns, 
provider response, and timeliness of autism spectrum disorder 
diagnosis. J Pediatr 2015:166;1431-1439. 
26. Howlin P, Moore A. Diagnosis in Autism:A Survey of Over 
1200 Patients in the UK. Autism 1997:1;135-162. 
27. Schopler E, Reichler RJ, Rochen Renner B. The Child hood 
Autism Rating Scale (CARS) (11th. ed.): Western Psychological 
Services, 2007. 
28. Gassaloglu SI, Baykara B, Avcil S, Demiral Y. Validity and 
Reliability Analysis of Turkish Version of Childhood Autism 
Rating Scale. Turk Psikiyatri Derg 2016:27;266-274 
29. Krug DA, Arick JR, Almond PJ. Autism behavior checklist. 
Austin, TX: PRO-ED, 1980. 
30. Irmak TY, Sutcu S, Aydın A, Sorias O. An investigation of 
validity and reliability of autism behavior checklist (ABC). 
Turkish Journal of Child and Adolescent Mental Health 
2007:14: 13-23 



1. American Psychological Association (APA). Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM 5, Washington, 
DC: Author; 2013. 
2. Loomes R, Hull L, Mandy WPL. What Is the Male-to- 
Female Ratio in Autism Spectrum Disorder? A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 2017;56:466-74. 
3. Baio J, Wiggins L, Christensen DL, Maenner MJ, Daniels J, 
Warren Z, Kurzius-Spencer M, Zahorodny W, Robinson 
Rosenberg C, White T, Durkin MS, Imm P, Nikolaou L, Yeargin- 
Allsopp M, Lee LC, Harrington R, Lopez M, Fitzgerald RT, 
Hewitt A, Pettygrove S, Constantino JN, Vehorn A, Shenouda J, 
Hall-Lande J, Van Naarden Braun K, Dowling NF. Prevalence 
of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children Aged 8 Years - 
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 
Sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveill Summ 2018:67;1-23. 
4. Krupa M, Boominathan P, Ramanan PV, Sebastian S. 
Relationship between screen time and mother-child reciprocal 
interaction in typically developing children and children with 
autism spectrum disorders. Indian J Pediatr 2019:86:394. 
5. Ozmert E, Toyran M, Yurdakök K. Behavioral correlates of 
television viewing in primary school children evaluated by the 
child behavior checklist. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
2002:156:910-914. 
6. Chonchiaiya W, Pruksananonda C. Television viewing associ- 
ates with delayed language development. Acta Paediatr 
2008:97:977-982. 
7. Zimmerman FJ, Christakis D.A. Children's television viewing 
and cognitive outcomes: a longitudinal analysis of national data. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2005:159:619-25. 
8. Christakis DA, Zimmerman FJ, DiGiuseppe DL, McCarty 
CA. Early television exposure and subsequent attentional prob- 
lems in children. Pediatrics 2004:113:708-713. 
9. Mineo BA, Ziegler W, Gill S, Salkin D. Engagement with 
electronic screen media among students with autism spectrum 
disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 2009:39;172-187. 
10. Shane HC, Albert PD. Electronic screen media for persons 
with autism spectrum disorders: results of a survey. J Autism 
Dev Disord 2008:38;1499-1508. 
11. Mazurek MO, Engelhardt CR. Video game use in boys with 
autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, or typical development. 
Pediatrics 2013:132;260-266 
12. MacMullin JA, Lunsky Y, Weiss JA. Plugged in: Electronics 
use in youth and young adults with autism spectrum disorder. 
Autism 2016:20;45-54 
13. Hermawati D, Rahmadi FA, Sumekar TA, Winarni TI. Early 
electronic screen exposure and autistic-like symptoms. 
Intractable Rare Dis Res 2018:7;69-71. 
14. Radesky JS, Peacock-Chambers E, Zuckerman B, Silverstein 
M. Use of mobile technology to calm upset children: associa- 
tions with social-emotional development. JAMA Pediatr 
2016:170:397-399. 
15. Matson JL, Mahan S, LoVullo SV. Parent training:A review 
of methods for children with developmental disabilities. Res 


45. Hess CR, Landa RJ. Predictive and concurrent validity of 
parent concern about young children at risk for autism. J Autism 
Dev Disord 2012:42;575-584 
46. Sivberg B. Parents' detection of early signs in their children 
having an autistic spectrum disorder. J Pediatr Nurs 
2003:18;433-439. 



32. American Academy of Peaidtric Council on 
Communications and Media. (2016). Media and Young Minds. 
Pediatrics, 138(5):e20162591. 
33. Kuo MH, Orsmond GI, Coster WJ, Cohn ES. Media use 
among adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Autism 
2014:18;914-923 
34. Mazurek MO, Wenstrup C. Television, video game and 
social media use among children with ASD and typically devel- 
oping siblings. J Autism Dev Disord 2013:43;1258-1271 
35. Burt KB, Obradovic' J, Long JD, Masten AS. The interplay 
of social competence and psychopathology over 20 years: 
Testing 
transactional and cascade models. Child Dev 
2008:79;359-374. 
36. Anand D, Krosnick JA. Demographic predictors of media 
use among infants, toddlers and preschoolers. Am Behav Sci 
2005;48:539–561 
37. Corbett BA, Constantine LJ, Hendren R, Rocke D, Ozonoff 
S. Examining executive functioning in children with autism spec- 
trum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and typi- 
cal development. Psychiatry Res 2009:166;210-22. 
38. Rehbein F, Kleimann M, Mossle T. Prevalence and risk fac- 
tors of video game dependency in adolescence: results of a 
German nationwide survey. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw 
2010:13;269-277. 
39. Zwaigenbaum L, Bauman ML, Choueiri R, Fein D, Kasari 
C, Pierce K, Stone WL, Yirmiya N, Estes A, Hansen RL, 
McPartland JC, Natowicz MR, Buie T, Carter A, Davis PA, 
Granpeesheh D, Mailloux Z, Newschaffer C, Robins D, Smith 
Roley S, Wagner S, Wetherby A. Early Identification and 
Interventions for Autism Spectrum Disorder: Executive 
Summary. Pediatrics 2015:136(Suppl)1;1-9 
40. Zwaigenbaum L, Bauman ML, Choueiri R, Kasari C, Carter 
A, Granpeesheh D, Mailloux Z, Smith Roley S, Wagner S, Fein 
D, Pierce K, Buie T, Davis PA, Newschaffer C, Robins D, 
Wetherby A, Stone WL, Yirmiya N, Estes A, Hansen RL, 
McPartland JC, Natowicz MR. Early Intervention for Children 
With Autism Spectrum Disorder Under 3 Years of Age: 
Recommendations for Practice and Research. Pediatrics 
2015:136(Suppl 1);60-81 
41. Chawarska K, Paul R, Klin A, Hannigen S, Dichtel LE, 
Volkmar F. Parental recognition of developmental problems in 
toddlers with autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 
2007:37:62-72 
42. Matheis M, Matson JL, Burns C1, Jiang X, Peters WJ, 
Moore M, de Back KA, Estabillo J. Factors related to parental 
age of first concern in toddlers with autism spectrum disorder. 
Dev Neurorehabil 2017:20;228-235. 
43. Reich S. What do mothers know? Maternal knowledge of 
child development. Infant Ment Health J 2005:26;143-156 
44. Matson JL, Matheis M, Burns CO, Esposito G, Venuti P, 
Pisula E, Misiak A, Kalyva E, Tsakiris V, Kamio Y, Ishitobi M, 
Goldin RL. Examining cross-cultural differences in autism spec- 
trum disorder: A multinational comparison from Greece, Italy, 
Japan, Poland, and the United States. Eur Psychiatry 
2017:42;70-76. 

