Article 
Associations between Symptom Severity of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder and Screen Time among Toddlers Aged 16 to 
36 Months 



Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran 19839-69411, Iran 
2 Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children’s Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 




Health, University of Basel, 4002 Basel, Switzerland 
Sleep Disorders Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah 67158-47141, Iran 
Substance Abuse Prevention Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah 67158-47141, Iran 
School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 14166-34793, Iran 




Abstract: There is growing evidence that prevalence rates of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are 
increasing. A number of factors appear to contribute to this increase, including excessive screen 
time. Screen time seems to be linked to the severity of the symptoms of ASD. Given this, the aim 
of the present cross-sectional study was to investigate the association between early screen time 
and ASD symptoms severity in the ﬁrst 36 months of life. To this end, sixty-eight Iranian toddlers 
(mean age: 27.09 months; 22.1% females) with ASD were recruited. Parents completed the modiﬁed 
checklist for autism in toddlers (M-CHAT), the Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS-R), and a 
lifestyle checklist. Next, parents rated children’s daily exposure to content speciﬁcally designed 
(foreground media) and not speciﬁcally designed (background media) for children, along with 
their daily exposure to social interaction. Per day, toddlers spent 5.12 h (±3.77) with foreground 
media, 3.72 h (±3.57) with background media, and 2.89 h (±2.74) in interaction with other people 
(parents). To test the hypotheses, we performed a series of Pearson’s correlations and multiple 
regression analyses. Toddlers’ higher severity scores for ASD symptoms were associated with longer 
foreground (r = 0.234, p = 0.001) and longer background (r = 0.180, p = 0.012) media duration, and 
with shorter duration of interaction with others (r = 0.192, p = 0.009). Toddlers spending 1 h more 
in foreground screen time and background screen time have 0.38 and 0.29 more units in the ASD 
symptom severity scale, respectively, while toddlers spending 1 h more in social interactions have 
0.42 fewer units in the ASD symptom severity scale. The screen time and interaction duration are 
related to ASD symptoms severity of toddlers. The cross-sectional study design precludes causal 
associations, although bi-directional relationships appear plausible. 






















Compared to other neurodevelopmental disorders, the prevalence rates of autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) has increased within the last two decades [1], with a rise of up 
to 500% from 1992 to about 2000 [2]. According to the Salari and Rasoulpoor [3] study, 
the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders has increased worldwide. Nevertheless, 
the prevalence of ASD differs by country due to differences in awareness levels, cultural 
differences in how children’s behavior is interpreted, variability in screening tools, the 

behavioral 
sciences 





lack of culture-sensitive diagnostic tools, the evaluation year, and the sample and study 
populations. Currently, one out of 54 children appears to show symptoms of ASD [4]. 
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the increased prevalence rates, such as 
expanded diagnostic criteria, increased awareness of ASD, earlier diagnosis, recognition 
that ASD is a lifelong condition, and alterations in lifestyle [5–7] (see also further details 
below). Further, descriptively, as the prevalence of ASD has increased, the exposure of 
young children to digital devices (smartphones, tablets, televisions, etc.) has increased in 
parallel [8,9]. It has been reported that parental screen time, parental attitudes, parents’ 
workload, and having a television in the bedroom, as well as the availability of digital 
devices, are the most important factors inﬂuencing children’s screen time [10,11]. 

Associations between ASD and television viewing were further investigated. To illus- 
trate, Waldman and Nicholson [12] concluded that early childhood television viewing was 
an important trigger for autism; about 38% of ASD diagnoses appeared to be attributable 
to an excess of television watching. Similarly, Hermawati and Rahmadi [13] observed 
a statistical association between early electronic screen exposure and autistic-like behav- 
iors (e.g., language delay, short attention span, and hyperactivity) in nine children aged 
44 to 78 months. A similar pattern of association was further observed in a child aged 
5 years [14]. In a further cross-sectional study Hefﬂer and Sienko [15] investigated the 
associations between early life social and digital media experiences and the development 
of autism spectrum disorder-like symptoms. Hefﬂer and Sienko [15] found that, among 
12-month-old toddlers, the combination of increased exposure to television or video or both 
and shorter caregiver-child interactive play duration were signiﬁcantly associated with 
more signiﬁcant ASD-like symptoms, but not with the risk of ASD. Chen and Strodl [16] 
investigated in their cross-sectional study the relationship between early electronic screen 
exposure and autistic-like behaviors among 29,461 preschoolers aged 0–36 months and 
observed that a longer screen time per day was associated with autistic-like behaviors at 
preschool age. Dong and Wang [17] examined the association between screen time and 
ASD symptoms in children with ASD. Results showed that a longer screen time correlated 
with a higher ASD severity and with limited language abilities. The causal associations 
between screen time and the development of ASD at three years was further investigated 
among a large cohort of 84,030 children [18], with the ﬁnding that a longer screen time 
at the age of one year predicted symptoms of ASD at the age of 3 among boys, but not 
among girls. 



First, over-engagement with screen-based media may cause social isolation and depri- 
vation [19–22]. In this view, there is evidence that restricted environments and experiences 
and early social isolation can cause autism symptoms and repetitive behaviors. To illustrate, 
children growing up in institutions were at increased risk for “quasi-autistic” patterns of 
behavior [23,24], also labelled post-institutional autistic syndrome (PIAS) [25]. Furthermore, 
Pouretemad and Sadeghi [26] deﬁned Post-Digital Nanning Autism Syndrome (PDNAS) as 
a condition in which young children develop subclinical autism symptoms due to excessive 
exposure to digital devices (for more than half of their waking hours). The researchers 
hypothesized that PDNAS is a new subtype of ASD caused by and associated with the 
children’s lifestyle and excessive screen time at an early age. In this case, it is assumed 
that young children’s autism symptoms are probably causally associated with the early 
excessive exposure to digital devices. Previous studies have indicated that social interaction 
is very important for toddlers with autism [27]. According to Sadeghi and Pouretemad [28], 
parent–child interactions decreased children’s autism symptoms and repetitive behaviors 
and normalized their electrophysiological characteristics. It seems that the increase in social 


interactions leads to the development of neural circuits of social behaviors and, as a result, 
this reduces the severity of autism symptoms. In the Dawson [29] model, early behavioral 
intervention that leads to adaptive interactions between the child and its environment 
reduces autism symptoms. 
Second, a prolonged screen time may contribute to non-social neural circuits formation 
during critical periods of brain development and neuroplasticity, and a prolonged screen 
time may inhibit the development of neuronal social networks [15,30,31]. In accordance 
with this theoretical framework, excessively watching television appeared to unfavor- 
ably impact on the typical development of the visual cortex, hypothalamus/septum, and 
sensorimotor structures in children [32]. 
Third, interventional studies indicated that reducing young children’s screen time and 
promoting social interaction reduced autism severity and normalized brain electrophysio- 
logical patterns in children with ASD-like symptoms [28,33–35]. 
Fourth, while these theories indicated that excessive screen time appeared to be 
causally associated with higher symptoms of ASD, an inverse direction of inﬂuence is also 
highly conceivable; children, at a very early age, with socioemotional deﬁcits appeared to 
be more likely to prefer screens to social interactions [36–38]. Indeed, among six-month-old 
toddlers, the diagnosis of ASD was associated with earlier and more intensive preference 
for and use of screens [39]. 




Seventh, and last, longer screen time was associated with higher sleep issues and 
feeding problems in young children with ASD [42]; in such cases, longer screen time 
exposure may be understood as a coping strategy. 

As described above, research on the associations between screen time exposure and 
symptom severity of ASD has mainly assessed children of school age and adolescents. 
In contrast, such research is scarce among toddlers with ASD. Given this, the present 
study was the ﬁrst to examine the relationship between screen time and the severity 
of ASD symptoms, before a toddler was formally diagnosed with ASD and before any 
standardized treatment intervention was implemented. Further, while previous research 
showed that background and foreground media have different effects among typically 
developing young children, such as reducing attention control [43], decreased inhibitory 
control [44], reduced cognitive ﬂexibility [45], and decreased their ability to process verbal 
information [46], such ﬁne-grained research on the association between background and 
foreground media and ASD among toddlers has received less attention so far. Note that the 
term ‘foreground programs’ refers to content speciﬁcally designed for children to actively 
draw their attention. Unlike foreground programs, ‘background programs’ refers to the 
situation where an older family member chooses a program that is not explicitly designed 
for children, or when the TV is left on but does not explicitly elicit the child’s attention [47]. 
With this background in mind, the following four hypotheses and one research ques- 



Second, based on research other than in toddlers with ASD [33,47–50], we hypothe- 
sized that a longer exposure to screen time was associated with a shorter duration of social 
interactions. 
Third, based on research other than in toddlers with ASD [51–53], we hypothesized 
that a higher symptom severity was associated with a lower duration of social interactions. 
Fourth, based on research other than in toddlers with ASD [43–46], we hypothesized 



The research question investigated the relationship between duration of foreground 
screens exposure, background screens exposure, and exposure to social interaction and 
toddlers’ symptom severity. 
The present results have the potential to further understand the associations within 
a ﬁne-grained analysis of screen exposure, social interaction, and symptom severity in 
toddlers, before a formally diagnosis of ASD and before starting a standardized treat- 
ment intervention. 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Participants and Procedure 
Parents of toddlers aged 16 to 36 months with a suspected diagnosis of ASD and 
referred to Tehran Autism Center (Tehran, Iran) between February 2021 and September 2022 
were approached to participate in the present study. Eligible parents were fully informed 
about the aims of the study and the secure and anonymous data handling. Thereafter, 
parents signed a written informed consent form. Parents completed a booklet of questions 
covering sociodemographic information and their toddlers’ behavior (see details below). 
Next, experts in ASD performed a formal diagnosis based on the DSM-5 criteria [54]. The 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-ﬁfth edition (DSM-5) is a guide to 
mental health and brain-related conditions and disorders, written, edited, reviewed, and 
published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA). The Ethics Committee of the 
Shahid Beheshti University (Tehran, Iran: code: SBU.ICBS 96/1020) approved the study, 
which was conducted following the seventh and current revision [55] of the Declaration of 
Helsinki. Inclusion criteria were as follows: 1. Toddlers under 36 months of age. 2. Both 
parents’ age was 18 years or older. 3. Parents expressed concerns that their toddler showed 
abnormal behavior and interactions. 4. Based on the DSM-5 criteria for ASD [54], a toddler 
was identiﬁed to suffer from ASD. 5. Parents signed a written informed consent form. 
6. Children did not have genetic syndromes or somatic comorbidities such as hearing and 
visual deﬁcits. 

All toddlers were evaluated by an ASD specialist with a Ph.D. in clinical psychology 
and at least one assistant (with at least a master’s degree in clinical psychology). The 
diagnosis was made based on informed clinical judgment, following interaction with the 
child, formal testing, and review of parent reports and records. Diagnoses were based on 
DSM-5 guidelines. Formal testing lasted between 90 and 120 min. Parents needed between 
30 to 45 min to complete the questionnaires (see below). 
2.3. Measures 
2.3.1. Sociodemographic Information 
Parents reported their age (years), the number of children in the same family house- 
hold, their highest educational level (high school; undergraduate; master degree; PhD/MD), 
and their current working status (working: yes vs. no). Parents reported their toddler’s age 
(months) and gender (male; female). 

To assess toddlers’ symptom severity of ASD, parents completed the Farsi version [56] 
of the Modiﬁed Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT); M-CHAT [57] consists of 
23 yes/no items. The M-CHAT is a simple measure to screen for toddlers’ symptoms of 
ASD between 16 and 30 months of age. Robins and Fein [57] present M-CHAT for clinical 
and research purposes. Higher scores indicate greater symptoms of ASD in the child. 
Validity and reliability of M-CHAT have been examined in Iranian children [56,58,59]. In 
this study, the internal consistency of the M-CHAT was demonstrated by a Cronbach’s 
alpha score of 0.78. 



To assess toddlers’ repetitive behavior, parents completed the Farsi version [60,61] of 
Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS-R) [62]: This scale is a 43-item parent rating scale 
that measures six dimensions of repetitive behavior (stereotyped behavior, self-injurious 
behavior, compulsive behavior, ritualistic behavior, sameness behavior, and restricted 
behavior). A higher score on RBS-R means repetitive behaviors are more severe. Lam and 
Aman [63] showed construct validity of subscales from 0.68 to 0.98 and internal consistency 
of subscales from 0.78 to 0.91. Most of these descriptions were reproduced from our 
previous studies using a similar scale [28,35,64]. The RBS-R has already been validated 
in the Iranian population [60,61]. In this study, the internal consistency of the RBS-R was 
demonstrated by Cronbach’s alpha scores for the subscales of between 0.76 and 0.88. 

To assess the children’s screen time and communication duration, we compiled a 
checklist in which parents had to estimate the child’s screen time, interaction, and sleep. 
With this checklist, we measured the amount of children’s sleep, waking time, screen time, 
and interactions during a day. We calculated the average hours of children’s foreground 
and background screen time and communication. The total screen time was calculated by 
summing the foreground and background screen times. In addition, in this checklist, we 
collected demographic information about families and children. Most of the mothers, who 
are the main caregivers of children, were not working and were at home for the whole 
week. For this reason, we did not separate the weekdays and weekends in terms of the 
amount of screen time and interactions. 

First, to test the four hypotheses, we performed a series of Pearson’s correlations to 
investigate the associations between the toddlers’ age, scores for autism spectrum, repetitive 
behavior, screen time (foreground, background, total screen time) and the duration of 
interaction. 
Second, to answer the research question, that is, to predict toddlers’ symptoms of 
ASD, multiple regression analyses were performed with toddlers’ symptoms of ASD as the 
dependent variable, and screen time (foreground, background, total time) and interaction 
duration as predictors. Following others [65,66], preliminary conditions to perform a 
multiple regression analysis were generally met, and as the sample size (n = 68) not very 
close to 100, the number of predictors × 10 should not be greater than sample size (here: 
4 × 10 = 40 < 68); predictors should sufﬁciently explain the dependent variable (Rs and 
R2(cid:48)s); and the Durbin Watson (DW) coefﬁcient should be between 1.5 and 2.5, indicating 
that the residuals of the predictors were independent of each other (DW = 1.59). Last, the 
variance inﬂation factors (VIF) to test multicollinearity should be 1 < VIF < 10. In our model, 
the VIF was 3.09. 


3. Results 
3.1. General Sociodemographic Information 
Table 1 provides a descriptive statistical overview of the sociodemographic infor- 
mation. More than half of the parents had undergraduate degrees. The fathers were all 
employed, whereas the mothers were mostly housewives (86.8%). Most families only had 
one child (69.1%). 


































































































3.2. Correlations between Toddlers’ Scores for ASD and Repetitive Behaviors and Their Screen Time 
and Communication Duration 
Table 2 provides a descriptive statistical overview and an overview of the Pearson’s 
correlation coefﬁcients between toddlers’ symptoms of ASD and screen time (foreground, 
background, total screen time), and interaction time with others. 
Abbreviations: M-C, M-CHAT; SB, Stereotyped behaviors; SIB, Self-injurious behaviors; RB, Ritualistic behaviors; 
SAB, Sameness behaviors; REB, Restricted behaviors; CB, Compulsive behaviors; RBT, Repetitive behaviors total 
score. * Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level; ** Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level; M, Mean; SD, 
Standard deviation. 
Toddlers’ higher symptoms of ASD were associated with higher foreground and 
background screen time and lower interaction duration. Toddlers’ higher foreground screen 
time was associated with their higher sameness and restricted behaviors. Toddlers’ higher 
background screen time was associated with their higher ritualistic and sameness behaviors. 
Additionally, toddlers’ higher repetitive behaviors (all subscales) were associated with a 
lower interaction duration. 

To predict toddlers’ symptoms of ASD, a multiple regression analysis was performed 
with toddlers’ symptoms of ASD and their’ screen time and interaction duration as predic- 
tors. Table 3 provides the statistical overview. 



Table 2. Overview of correlational computations (Pearson’s correlations) between toddlers’ symptoms 
of ASD and screen time (n = 68). 




























































































































































































































































































































A toddler’s higher foreground, background, and total screen time, and a toddler’s 
lower interaction duration, predicted a toddler’s higher symptoms of ASD. When the 
amount of foreground screen time is increased by one hour, toddlers have 0.38 more units 
on the ASD symptoms severity scale. In addition, toddlers spending 1 h more in foreground 
screen time have 0.38 and 0.30 more units in sameness behaviors and restricted behaviors 
subscales of the RBS-R, respectively. In addition, ASD symptoms severity scores in toddlers 
increase by 0.29 units when background screen time is increased by 1 h. Toddlers spending 
1 h more in background screen time have 0.30 and 0.41 more units in ritualistic behaviors 
and sameness behaviors subscales of the RBS-R, respectively. Furthermore, for 1 h decrease 
in the toddlers’ interaction duration, the toddlers’ ASD symptoms severity, stereotyped 
behaviors, self-injurious behaviors, sameness behaviors, compulsive behaviors and RBS-R 
total scores increased by 0.42, 0.49, 0.29, 0.30, 0.28, and 0.36 units, respectively. 

The aim of the present study was to investigate the associations between screen time 
and interaction duration of toddlers with ASD and their ASD symptom severity. The key 
ﬁndings were that toddlers’ higher symptoms of ASD were associated with their higher 
screen time duration and lower interaction duration. As such, the present results add 
to the current literature in the following four ways: First, among toddlers aged about 
27 months, both a higher foreground and background screen time was associated with 
higher parent-rated symptoms of ASD. Second, and complementarily, a higher foreground 
and background screen time and higher parent-rated symptoms of ASD were associated 
with a shorter duration of social interactions. Third, a longer foreground and background 
screen time, and a shorter social interactional time, independently predicted parent-rated 


toddlers’ symptom severity of ASD. Fourth, and most importantly, it appears that such 
unfavorable patterns of associations were already observable among toddlers with a mean 
age of about 27 months. 



Results showed a positive association of foreground, background, and total screen 
time with toddlers’ ASD symptoms severity. These correlations are consistent with our ﬁrst 
hypothesis that a longer exposure to screen time is strongly associated with a higher ASD 
symptom severity. Furthermore, toddlers’ higher foreground screen time was associated 
with their higher sameness and restricted behaviors. Toddlers’ higher background screen 
time was associated with their higher ritualistic and sameness behaviors. These results 
are consistent with the results of Chen and Strodl [16], Dong and Wang [17] and Kushima 
and Kojima [18], which showed that a longer screen time was associated with higher 
ASD symptoms severity. To explain such a pattern of results, we rely on the theoretical 
framework of Hefﬂer and Oestreicher [30], as follows: a prolonged screen time may 
contribute to ASD through the formation of non-social neural circuits during critical periods 
of brain development and neuroplasticity [15,30,31]. In addition to theories suggesting 
that prolonged exposure to digital devices can trigger ASD symptoms, theories in which 
the relationship is reversed may also explain this ﬁnding. For instance, Tamana and 
Ezeugwu [38], Montes [37], Tamana and Ezeugwu [38], and Tandon and Sasser [36] showed 
that very young children with socioemotional deﬁcits appeared to be more likely to prefer 
screens to social interactions. Furthermore, Chonchaiya and Nuntnarumit [39] found 
among six-month-old toddlers that the diagnosis of ASD was associated with earlier and 
more intensive preference for and use of screens. 

Our second hypothesis was that a longer exposure to screen time was associated 
with a shorter duration of social interactions, and our data did conﬁrm this assumption. 
Results showed that higher foreground and background screen time duration was strongly 
associated with lower interaction duration. The results are in line with previous studies 
in children, which reported that the more time children spent watching television, the 
less time they spent with others [22]. These ﬁndings can be explained by the fact that 
screen time usually replaces children’s social interactions and activities [49,50]. Further, the 
present ﬁndings are consistent with the theory that over-engagement with screen-based 
media may cause social isolation and deprivation [19–22]. 

Results showed that a higher symptom severity of ASD was associated with a shorter 
duration of social interactions. This conﬁrms our third hypothesis, that the severity of ASD 
symptoms was associated with a shorter duration of social interactions [51–53]. Further, it 
appears plausible that a two-way relationship between the degree of interaction and the 
severity of autism symptoms should be considered. A child with ASD exhibits signiﬁcant 
weaknesses in basic communication skills such as eye contact and joint attention. When a 
child scores high in ASD symptoms, other persons might be less likely to communicate with 
him or her. On the other hand, when parents score low in skills or time to communicate 
with their children, the child’s symptoms might become more pronounced [51,52]. 
The social motivation theory in autism [67] may further help to the explain the present 
pattern of results. The social motivation theory argues that children with ASD ﬁnd social 
stimuli less rewarding than do children with typical development [68–70]. Based on 
this theory, children with ASD are less likely at an early age to pay attention to social 
information, such as faces and gaze directions, thereby limiting opportunities for social 
learning (e.g., less joint attention, collaborative play, fewer friendships), thus blunting 


social skill development [70]. In line with our ﬁndings, Chawarska and Macari [71] have 
shown that the attention of infants with ASD was more focused on background objects 
than on people. Furthermore, our results have a number of similarities with previous 
ﬁndings that indicated that encouraging young children’s social interaction reduced autism 
severity and normalized brain electrophysiological patterns in children with ASD-like 
symptoms [28,33,34]. 

With the fourth hypothesis we assumed that foreground and background screen 
time impacted differently on toddlers’ symptom severity, and our data did conﬁrm this. 
Results showed that there were signiﬁcant correlations between foreground screen time 
(r = 0.38) and background screen time (r = 0.29), with severity of ASD, and with a stronger 
relationship with ASD severity for foreground screen time than background screen time. As 
such, the present pattern of results is in line with what has been observed elsewhere [43–46]. 
To explain such a pattern of results, previous research has suggested that the effects of 
digital devices on young children’s cognitive and psychosocial development may vary, 
depending on whether digital devices were used in the foreground or background [72]. 
From this perspective, a number of studies among typically developing infants and children 
have shown that foreground exposure negatively impacted on attention, cognitive abilities, 
and language skills [73–75], whereas background exposure negatively impacted on parent– 
child interactions, and the quantity and quality of play [49,50,76,77]. Foreground screens 
seem to have a greater “barrier effect” between a parent and a child, and such a barrier 
effect may result in higher scores for autism symptoms. The screen time ‘barrier effect’ 
means that a child’s exposure to screens appears to reduce the quality and quantity of 
parent–child communication [78]. 

With the research question, we investigated the relationship between foreground 
screens exposure, background screens exposure, exposure to social interaction and a tod- 
dler’s ASD symptom severity. Results showed that foreground screen time, background 
screen time, total screens time, and social interaction duration predicted a child’s ASD 
severity. This pattern of results in in line with studies that showed that prolonged screen 
time in children with autism spectrum disorders negatively impacted on the development 
of children’s communication and social skills [17]. Such results further evidence that the 
environment has a signiﬁcant effect on the clinical symptoms of children with ASD, in that 
a prolonged screen time appears to have an adverse effect on children’s social interaction 
and behavior regulation. Following Yousef and Eapen [79], a longer screen time was related 
to children’s higher degree of autism-like symptoms, and such a relationship was more 
apparent among younger children and those with more screen time. This is in line with 
our ﬁndings. 
To explain such a pattern of results, the quality of the present data do not allow a 
conclusive neuronal, psychological or social-interactional answer. However, we advance 
the following ﬁve assumptions: 
First, ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder and, during the early stages after birth, 
the brain develops rapidly and is inﬂuenced both by internal neuronal developmental 
processes [80–83] and by external, and thus environmental, stimuli [84–86]. As a result, 
we hypothesize that the brain maturation of a child with ASD exposed to prolonged 
and excessive screen time might be slowed down in terms of less grey and white matter 
and ramiﬁcation, fewer dendritic spikes, disrupted myelination, and higher levels of 
local functional connectivity and dysmaturation of interconnected regions responsible for 
processing higher-order social information. 
Second, in contrast and in addition to the above mentioned assumptions and evidence, 
studies have shown that children with ASD may also intuitively and deliberately use 
screens as a coping strategy for their impulse control and response inhibition [40]. Nally 


and Houlton [87] investigated parental perceptions of television and video use of children 
with ASD. Their study found that TV was used to distract children with ASD and minimize 
behavioral outbursts. Lane and Radesky [88] assumed that children with ASD were 
experiencing more screen time, both because of the children’s social communication deﬁcits, 
and because the content of children’s programs were more predictable; here, we note 
that individuals with ASD prefer precise anticipation, that is, the absence of unexpected 
changes, to unpredictability. In the similar vein, Thompson and Christakis [41] suggested 
that children with ASD may also use screen time to regulate their behavior. 
The third assumption is that parents of children with ASD might expose their children 
to more screen time as a parent coping strategy to handle their children’s challenging social 
and interactional behavior. 
The fourth assumption is that the child’s inherent neuronal development, the quantity 
and quality of external stimuli, the child’s coping preferences, and parents’ parenting styles 
and coping preferences do interact, so to increase the child’s ASD symptom severity. Again, 
the quality of the present data do not allow us to conﬁrm such an assumption of interaction. 
The ﬁfth, last and, again, admittedly highly speculative assumption is that latent, 
unassessed and thus unknown factors may moderate the association between screen time 
exposure and a child’s ASD symptom severity. 

In spite of the novelty of the combination of predictors and sample group age, the 
following limitations need to be considered. First, the sample itself might be considered 
small, which can result in a low level of statistical power. However, our data convincingly 
demonstrated strong correlations between screen time and interaction duration among 
toddlers with ASD, thus 68 parents of toddlers with ASD constituted a homogeneous and 
reliable sample. Second, measurement issues must be addressed. To assess the child’s 
screen time and communication, we used a parent-rated, self-report lifestyle checklist; by 
their nature, subjective ratings might be biased. This holds particularly true as parents were 
fully informed about the purpose of the study, and such information might have triggered 
social desirability biases in the completion of the checklists. Third, clinical and psychiatric 
evaluations of parents’ and toddlers’ psychiatric concerns might have improved the quality 
of the data and the reliability of the pattern of results. Fourth, in this study screen time was 
measured overall. To measure screen time, it is better to distinguish between the type of 
device and the day of the week. This will help us better understand how digital devices 
affect autism symptoms. The ﬁfth limitation relates to the toddlers’ age. The subjects we 
studied were very young. Often, autism diagnoses at this age are provisional and can be 
changed. Therefore, generalizing ﬁndings to other age groups should be performed with 
caution. Sixth, as comprehensively discussed above, the cross-sectional nature of the study 
design precludes causal interpretations. Given this, we propose that future studies should 
use longitudinal and interventional designs. 

It can be concluded that, in toddlers, a higher level of foreground and background 
screen time is associated with symptoms of ASD and repetitive behaviors. Furthermore, a 
higher foreground and background screen time, as well as higher parent-rated symptoms of 
ASD, are associated with a shorter time of social interaction. It is conceivable that neuronal 
developmental characteristics, a child’s preferences for objects, a child’s preference for 
non-social coping styles, and parents’ parenting and coping styles with the social behavior 
of a child with ASD might independently and reciprocally increase a child’s ASD symptom 
severity. The exposure of young children to excessive screen time, regardless of the type of 
media, is a serious educational mistake. Parents often allow their children long screen time 
while they do various household chores, which may inhibit children’s social development. 
Toddler caregivers should manage screen time and provide natural opportunities for 
toddlers to develop their social skills and communication abilities. 


Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.S., H.R.P. and R.S.B.; methodology, S.S.; software, S.S.; 
validation, S.S. and S.B.; formal analysis, S.S.; data curation, S.S.; writing—original draft preparation, 
S.S.; writing—review and editing, S.S. and S.B.; funding acquisition, S.S. All authors have read and 
agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: The authors would like to thank the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) for funding 
this work, through grant no. 98018213. 
Institutional Review Board Statement: The Ethics Committee of the Shahid Beheshti University 
(Tehran, Iran: code: SBU.ICBS 96/1020) approved the study. 





1. 
2. 

Kirk, S.; Gallagher, J.J.; Coleman, M.R. Educating Exceptional Children, 14th ed.; Cengage: Belmont, CA, USA, 2015. 
Volkmar, F.R.; Paul, R.; Klin, A.; Cohen, D.J. Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Assessment, Interventions, 
and Policy; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007. 
Salari, N.; Rasoulpoor, S.; Shohaimi, S.; Jafarpour, S.; Abdoli, N.; Khaledi-Paveh, B.; Mohammadi, M. The global prevalence of 
autism spectrum disorder: A comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis. Ital. J. Pediatr. 2022, 48, 1–16. [CrossRef] 
[PubMed] 
4. Maenner, M.J.; Shaw, K.A.; Baio, J. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years—Autism and de- 
velopmental disabilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States. MMWR Surveill. Summ. 2020, 69, 1–12. [CrossRef] 
[PubMed] 





418–425. [CrossRef] 
Qiu, S.; Lu, Y.; Li, Y.; Shi, J.; Cui, H.; Gu, Y.; Li, Y.; Zhong, W.; Zhu, X.; Liu, Y.; et al. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder in 
Asia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res. 2019, 284, 112679. [CrossRef] 
Chiarotti, F.; Venerosi, A. Epidemiology of Autism Spectrum Disorders: A Review of Worldwide Prevalence Estimates Since 2014. 
Brain Sci. 2020, 10, 274. [CrossRef] 
Chang, H.Y.; Park, E.-J.; Yoo, H.-J.; Lee, J.W.; Shin, Y. Electronic Media Exposure and Use among Toddlers. Psychiatry Investig. 
2018, 15, 568–573. [CrossRef] 
Kabali, H.K.; Irigoyen, M.M.; Nunez-Davis, R.; Budacki, J.G.; Mohanty, S.H.; Leister, K.P.; Bonner, R.L., Jr. Exposure and Use of 
Mobile Media Devices by Young Children. Pediatrics 2015, 136, 1044–1050. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 


A cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health 2012, 12, 539. [CrossRef] 
Shalani, B.; Azadfallah, P.; Farahani, H. Correlates of Screen Time in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review Study. 
J. Mod. Rehabil. 2021, 15, 187–208. [CrossRef] 






15. Hefﬂer, K.; Sienko, D.M.; Subedi, K.; McCann, K.A.; Bennett, D.S. Association of Early-Life Social and Digital Media Experiences 
with Development of Autism Spectrum Disorder–Like Symptoms. JAMA Pediatr. 2020, 174, 690–696. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
16. Chen, J.-Y.; Strodl, E.; Huang, L.-H.; Chen, Y.-J.; Yang, G.-Y.; Chen, W.-Q. Early Electronic Screen Exposure and Autistic-Like 
Behaviors among Preschoolers: The Mediating Role of Caregiver-Child Interaction, Sleep Duration and Outdoor Activities. 
Children 2020, 7, 200. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 


18. Kushima, M.; Kojima, R.; Shinohara, R.; Horiuchi, S.; Otawa, S.; Ooka, T.; Akiyama, Y.; Miyake, K.; Yokomichi, H.; 
Yamagata, Z.; et al. Association Between Screen Time Exposure in Children at 1 Year of Age and Autism Spectrum Disorder at 
3 Years of Age: The Japan Environment and Children’s Study. JAMA Pediatr. 2022, 176, 384–391. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Stiglic, N.; Viner, R.M. Effects of screentime on the health and well-being of children and adolescents: A systematic review of 
reviews. BMJ Open 2019, 9, e023191. [CrossRef] 





21. Ray, M.; Jat, K.R. Effect of electronic media on children. Indian Pediatr. 2010, 47, 561–568. [CrossRef] 
22. Bickham, D.S.; Rich, M. Is television viewing associated with social isolation?: Roles of exposure time, viewing context, and 

23. Rutter, M.; Andersen-Wood, L.; Beckett, C.; Bredenkamp, D.; Castle, J.; Groothues, C.; Kreppner, J.; Keaveney, L.; Lord, C.; 
O’Connor, T.G. Quasi-autistic patterns following severe early global privation. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry Allied Discip. 1999, 40, 
537–549. [CrossRef] 
24. Rutter, M.; Kreppner, J.; Croft, C.; Murin, M.; Colvert, E.; Beckett, C.; Castle, J.; Sonuga-Barke, E. Early adolescent outcomes of 
institutionally deprived and non-deprived adoptees. III. Quasi-autism. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 2007, 48, 1200–1207. [CrossRef] 
[PubMed] 



26. Pouretemad, H.R.; Sadeghi, S.; Badv, R.S.; Brand, S. Differentiating Post–Digital Nannying Autism Syndrome from Autism 
Spectrum Disorders in Young Children: A Comparative Cross-Sectional Study. J. Clin. Med. 2022, 11, 6786. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R. Let’s be Ready: COVID-19 Related Restrictions Can Lead to an Outbreak of Social-Communication 
Problems in Children. Iran. J. Psychiatry 2022, 17, 356. [CrossRef] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.; Khosrowabadi, R.; Fathabadi, J.; Nikbakht, S. Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence for 
parent training in young children with autism symptoms and excessive screen-time. Asian J. Psychiatry 2019, 45, 7–12. [CrossRef] 
29. Dawson, G. Early behavioral intervention, brain plasticity, and the prevention of autism spectrum disorder. Dev. Psychopathol. 




networks. Med. Hypotheses 2016, 91, 114–122. [CrossRef] 
Slobodin, O.; Hefﬂer, K.F.; Davidovitch, M. Screen Media and Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Literature Review. J. Dev. 
Behav. Pediatr. 2019, 40, 303–311. [CrossRef] 

32. Takeuchi, H.; Taki, Y.; Hashizume, H.; Asano, K.; Asano, M.; Sassa, Y.; Yokota, S.; Kotozaki, Y.; Nouchi, R.; Kawashima, R. The 
Impact of Television Viewing on Brain Structures: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analyses. Cereb. Cortex 2013, 25, 1188–1197. 
[CrossRef] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R.; Khosrowabadi, R.; Fathabadi, J.; Nikbakht, S. Parent–child interaction effects on autism symptoms 
and EEG relative power in young children with excessive screen-time. Early Child Dev. Care 2019, 191, 827–836. [CrossRef] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R.; Khosrowabadi, R.; Fathabadi, J.; Nikbakht, S. Effects of parent–child interaction training on 
children who are excessively exposed to digital devices: A pilot study. Int. J. Psychiatry Med. 2019, 54, 408–423. [CrossRef] 
[PubMed] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R.; Shalani, B. Internet-based versus face-to-face intervention training for parents of young children 
with excessive screen-time and autism spectrum disorder–like symptoms: A comparative study. Int. J. Dev. Disabil. 2021, 68, 
744–755. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 






38. Tamana, S.K.; Ezeugwu, V.; Chikuma, J.; Lefebvre, D.L.; Azad, M.B.; Moraes, T.J.; Subbarao, P.; Becker, A.B.; Turvey, S.E.; 
Sears, M.R.; et al. Screen-time is associated with inattention problems in preschoolers: Results from the CHILD birth cohort study. 
PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0213995. [CrossRef] 






Less Than 3 Years of Age. Pediatrics 2005, 116, 851–856. [CrossRef] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.; Shervin, R. Screen-Time Predicts Sleep and Feeding Problems in Young Children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder Symptoms Under the Age of Three. J. Appl. Psychol. 2021, 15, 73–94. [CrossRef] 
















Interaction. Child Dev. 2009, 80, 1350–1359. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Schmidt, M.E.; Pempek, T.A.; Kirkorian, H.L.; Lund, A.F.; Anderson, D.R. The Effects of Background Television on the Toy Play 
Behavior of Very Young Children. Child Dev. 2008, 79, 1137–1151. [CrossRef] 


52. Hobson, J.A.; Tarver, L.; Beurkens, N.M.; Hobson, R.P. The Relation between Severity of Autism and Caregiver-Child Interaction: 
A Study in the Context of Relationship Development Intervention. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 2015, 44, 745–755. [CrossRef] 
53. Bentenuto, A.; Perzolli, S.; de Falco, S.; Venuti, P. The emotional availability in mother-child and father-child interactions in 





human subjects. JAMA 2013, 310, 2191–2194. [CrossRef] 
Samadi, S.A.; McConkey, R. Screening for Autism in Iranian Preschoolers: Contrasting M-CHAT and a Scale Developed in Iran. 
J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2015, 45, 2908–2916. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 

57. Robins, D.L.; Fein, D.; Barton, M.L.; Green, J.A. The Modiﬁed Checklist for Autism in Toddlers: An Initial Study Investigating the 
Early Detection of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2001, 31, 131–144. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R. Cognitive predictors of behavioral inﬂexibility in young children with autism spectrum disorder 
symptoms. Adv. Cogn. Sci. 2022, 23, 117–129. 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R.; Brand, S. Cognitive control and cognitive ﬂexibility predict severity of depressive symptoms in 
parents of toddlers with autism spectrum disorder. Curr. Psychol. 2022, 1–8. [CrossRef] 









Disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2006, 37, 855–866. [CrossRef] 
Sadeghi, S.; Pouretemad, H.R. Executive functions predict restricted and repetitive behaviors in toddlers under 36 months old 
with autism spectrum disorder. Infant Behav. Dev. 2022, 67, 101721. [CrossRef] 
65. Hair, J.F.; Black, W.C.; Babin, B.J.; Anderson, R.E. Multivariate Data Analysis, 7th ed.; Pearson Education Limited: Essex, UK, 2014. 
66. Brosius, F. SPSS: Umfassendes Handbuch zu Statistik und Datenanalyse-Comprehensive Textbook for Statistics and Data Analysis; Mitp 





[CrossRef] 
Schultz, R.T.; Gauthier, I.; Klin, A.; Fulbright, R.K.; Anderson, A.W.; Volkmar, F.; Skudlarski, P.; Lacadie, C.; Cohen, D.J.; Gore, J.C. 
Abnormal ventral temporal cortical activity during face discrimination among individuals with autism and Asperger syndrome. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2000, 57, 331–340. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 














76. Christakis, D.A.; Gilkerson, J.; Richards, J.A.; Zimmerman, F.J.; Garrison, M.M.; Xu, D.; Gray, S.; Yapanel, U. Audible television 
and decreased adult words, infant vocalizations, and conversational turns: A population-based study. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 
2009, 163, 554–558. [CrossRef] 
77. Mendelsohn, A.L.; Berkule, S.B.; Tomopoulos, S.; Tamis-LeMonda, C.S.; Huberman, H.S.; Alvir, J.; Dreyer, B.P. Infant Television 
and Video Exposure Associated with Limited Parent-Child Verbal Interactions in Low Socioeconomic Status Households. Arch. 
Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 2008, 162, 411–417. [CrossRef] 




children in the United Arab Emirates. Int. J. Psychiatry Clin. Pr. 2014, 18, 203–207. [CrossRef] 
Sajdel-Sulkowska, E.M.; Makowska-Zubrycka, M.; Czarzasta, K.; Kasarello, K.; Aggarwal, V.; Bialy, M.; Szczepanska-Sadowska, E.; 
Cudnoch-Jedrzejewska, A. Common Genetic Variants Link the Abnormalities in the Gut-Brain Axis in Prematurity and Autism. 
Cerebellum 2018, 18, 255–265. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 


82. Ciarrusta, J.; O’Muircheartaigh, J.; Dimitrova, R.; Batalle, D.; Cordero-Grande, L.; Price, A.; Hughes, E.; Steinweg, J.; Kangas, J.; 
Perry, E.; et al. Social Brain Functional Maturation in Newborn Infants with and Without a Family History of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder. JAMA Netw. Open 2019, 2, e191868. [CrossRef] 




novo genetic mutations that contribute to the disorder? Med. Hypotheses 2010, 74, 102–106. [CrossRef] 
Sealey, L.; Hughes, B.; Sriskanda, A.; Guest, J.; Gibson, A.; Johnson-Williams, L.; Pace, D.; Bagasra, O. Environmental factors in 
the development of autism spectrum disorders. Environ. Int. 2016, 88, 288–298. [CrossRef] 
86. Hertz-Picciotto, I.; Croen, L.A.; Hansen, R.L.; Jones, C.R.; Van De Water, J.; Pessah, I.N. The CHARGE Study: An Epidemiologic 
Investigation of Genetic and Environmental Factors Contributing to Autism. Environ. Health Perspect. 2006, 114, 1119–1125. 
[CrossRef] 




Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual 
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to 
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content. 
