

Published Online 
March 8, 2010 
DOI:10.1016/S0140- 
6736(10)60142-0 


Perinatal Care Project, Diabetic 
Association of Bangladesh, 
Shahbagh, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
(Prof K Azad FRCPCH, B Banerjee, 
S Shaha, K Khan, A R Rego, 
S Barua); University College 
London Centre for 
International Health and 
Development, Institute of 
Child Health (S Barnett PhD, 
A Prost PhD, 
Prof A Costello FRCP), and 
Clinical Operational Research 
Unit (C Pagel PhD), University 
College London, London, UK; 
Women and Children First, 
London, UK (D Flatman MSc); 
Health Foundation, London, 
UK (D Flatman); and Centre for 
Child and Adolescent Health, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, 
UK (M Ellis PhD) 
Correspondence to: 
Prof Kishwar Azad, Perinatal Care 
Project, Diabetic Association of 
Bangladesh (BADAS), 
BIRDEM-122 Kazi Nazrul Islam 
Avenue, Shahbagh, Dhaka-1000, 
Bangladesh 
pcp@dab-bd.org 
Eﬀ ect of scaling up women’s groups on birth outcomes in 
three rural districts in Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised 
controlled trial 
Kishwar Azad, Sarah Barnett, Biplob Banerjee, Sanjit Shaha, Kasmin Khan, Arati Roselyn Rego, Shampa Barua, Dorothy Flatman, Christina Pagel, 
Audrey Prost, Matthew Ellis, Anthony Costello 
Summary 
Background Two recent trials have shown that women’s groups can reduce neonatal mortality in poor communities. 
We assessed the eﬀ ectiveness of a scaled-up development programme with women’s groups to address maternal and 
neonatal care in three rural districts of Bangladesh. 
Methods 18 clusters (with a mean population of 27 953 [SD 5953]) in three districts were randomly assigned to either 
intervention or control (nine clusters each) by use of stratiﬁ ed randomisation. For each district, cluster names were 
written on pieces of paper, which were folded and placed in a bottle. The ﬁ rst three cluster names drawn from the 
bottle were allocated to the intervention group and the remaining three to control. All clusters received health services 
strengthening and basic training of traditional birth attendants. In intervention clusters, a facilitator convened 
18 groups every month to support participatory action and learning for women, and to develop and implement 
strategies to address maternal and neonatal health problems. Women were eligible to participate if they were aged 
15–49 years, residing in the project area, and had given birth during the study period (Feb 1, 2005, to Dec 31, 2007). 
Neither study investigators nor participants were masked to treatment assignment. In a population of 229 195 people 
(intervention clusters only), 162 women’s groups provided coverage of one group per 1414 population. The primary 
outcome was neonatal mortality rate (NMR). Analysis was by intention to treat. This trial is registered as an 
International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number ISRCTN54792066. 
Findings We monitored outcomes for 36 113 births (intervention clusters, n=17 514; control clusters, n=18 599) in a 
population of 503 163 over 3 years. From 2005 to 2007, there were 570 neonatal deaths in the intervention clusters and 
656 in the control clusters. Cluster-level mean NMR (adjusted for stratiﬁ cation and clustering) was 33·9 deaths per 
1000 livebirths in the intervention clusters compared with 36·5 per 1000 in the control clusters (risk ratio 0·93, 
95% CI 0·80–1·09). 
Interpretation For participatory women’s groups to have a signiﬁ cant eﬀ ect on neonatal mortality in rural Bangladesh, 
detailed attention to programme design and contextual factors, enhanced population coverage, and increased 
enrolment of newly pregnant women might be needed. 
Funding Women and Children First, the UK Big Lottery Fund, Saving Newborn Lives, and the UK Department for 
International Development. 
Introduction 
An estimated 3·7 million neonatal deaths occur 
worldwide every year,1 98% of which are in developing 
countries. In Bangladesh, the neonatal mortality rate 
(NMR) declined from 63 per 1000 livebirths in 1985–89 to 
34 per 1000 in 2002–06.2–4 A recent survey showed that 
around 85% of births occur at home.5 Since around 45% 
of deaths in children under 5 years of age in Bangladesh 
occur in the ﬁ rst month of life, further progress in 
reducing neonatal mortality is essential to achieve 
Millennium Development Goal 4 (to reduce child 
mortality by two-thirds by 2015).6 This progress would 
require community-based interventions to improve the 
supply and demand for maternal and neonatal care. 
We tested a low-cost, participatory, community-based 
approach to improving birth outcomes in rural areas in 
two cluster-randomised controlled trials: the ﬁ rst in 
Makwanpur, Nepal (2001–03),7 and the second in 
Jharkhand and Orissa, India (2005–08).8 Participatory 
women’s groups reduced neonatal mortality by 30% in 
Nepal over years 2 and 3 and by 32% in rural India over 
the 3-year study period. We also assessed a similar 
approach in a larger population within three rural 
districts of Bangladesh.9 We recruited local female peer 
facilitators who undertook twice as many meetings than 
did facilitators in the Nepal trial (18 vs nine) and covered 
a population two to ﬁ ve times larger. We also introduced 
a key informant system to monitor maternal and 
neonatal mortality rates with detailed interviews or 
verbal autopsies for all births, neonatal deaths, and 
maternal deaths.10 Our aim was to test the generalisability 
and scalability of this community-based participatory 
approach with women’s groups. A cluster-randomised 
design was used in the trial because the women’s group 



Women were eligible to participate in the study if they 
were aged 15–49 years, residing in the project area, and 
had given birth during the study period (Feb 1, 2005, to 
Dec 31, 2007). The study population was an open cohort— 
ie, women could enter the study at any time during the 
trial period if they had given birth. Data was obtained for 
all eligible women throughout the study period. 


intervention was implemented at a community rather 
than individual level. 
Methods 
Study design, location, and population 
We assessed two interventions in the same study area 
using a factorial design against a common background of 
health services strengthening: ﬁ rst, a community-based 
intervention with participatory women’s groups to 
improve maternal and neonatal health outcomes; second, 
an intervention that involved training traditional birth 
attendants in bag-valve-mask resuscitation of neonates 
with symptoms of birth asphyxia. 
Three districts, Bogra, Faridpur, and Moulavibazar, 
were selected by use of purposive sampling from three 
diﬀ erent divisions in Bangladesh on the basis of the 
districts having active Diabetic Association of Bangladesh 
(BADAS) oﬃ ces (webappendix p 1). Within these 
districts, subdistricts (upazilas) and unions (the lowest- 
level administrative units in rural Bangladesh) were also 
purposefully sampled by use of recommendations from 
BADAS representatives, the main criteria being perceived 
limited access to perinatal health care in those unions, 
and a feasible travelling distance from BADAS district 
headquarters. 
We approached community leaders and obtained their 
permission 
the 
to establish women’s groups 
intervention clusters in 2004. 451 community orientation 
meetings were undertaken with the chairmen and 
members of union councils and community members. 
The team also undertook 451 village mapping exercises 
to identify the location of health facilities and social and 
religious meeting places. 



the ethics 
committees of BADAS and the University College 
London Institute of Child Health. Women who chose to 
participate in the study during the baseline survey and 
the period of prospective surveillance gave verbal consent 
and were free to decline an interview at any time. 
Randomisation and masking 
Each district constituted one stratum and each union a 
cluster (see webappendix p 2). 18 unions (six per district) 
were selected. The total population within these 
18 unions was 503 163 people, with union sizes ranging 
from 15 441 to 35 110. Unions were randomly allocated to 
either intervention or control groups by district in the 
presence of four project staﬀ (including the project 
director and project manager) and 
two external 
individuals (Nazmun Nahar, Department of Paediatrics, 
Dhaka Medical College, Dhaka, and Azad Khan, BADAS, 
Dhaka). For each district, cluster names were written on 
pieces of paper, which were folded and placed in a bottle. 
The ﬁ rst three cluster names drawn from the bottle 
were allocated to the women’s group intervention and 
the remaining three to control. The project manager 
drew the papers from the bottle. The allocation sequence 
was decided upon by the project team before drawing 
the papers and was based on clusters rather than 
individuals. Clusters had been pre-identiﬁ ed by the 
team on the basis of previously mentioned criteria. 
The control clusters included three tea garden estates 
that had substantially worse health and socioeconomic 
indicators than did the rest of the study area. In these 
areas, surveillance started 
late because of entry 
restrictions. We did not know about the entry diﬃ culties 
and high mortality rates before the recruitment and 
allocation of clusters and therefore did not exclude these 
areas before allocation. Additionally, about 10% of 
mothers in our study area were temporary residents and 
mainly came into the cluster areas to give birth, since the 
tradition is for women to go to their mothers’ home just 
before delivery. These temporary residents were not 
exposed to the women’s group intervention, and often 
had returned to their marital homes outside the study 
area before the post-natal interview. 
In a second-level randomisation, the randomised 
clusters were further randomly assigned by the same 
method to traditional birth attendant intervention or 
control groups. Of the nine women’s group intervention 
clusters, ﬁ ve became 
traditional birth attendant 
intervention clusters and four became controls. The nine 
women’s group control clusters were randomised so that 


Discuss strategies to address problems 
and plan involvement of community 

Phase 2 
Plan strategies 
Phase 3 
Put strategies into practice 
Phase 4 
Assess eﬀect 

Phase 1 
Identify and prioritise diﬃculties 
Introduce 
project 
Why 
mothers 
and babies 
die 
Problems 
during 
pregnancy 
Problems 
during 
delivery 
Problems 
after 
delivery 
Problems 
for 
newborn 
baby 
Plan 
community 
visit 
Share 
community 
views 

Figure 2: Trial proﬁ le 
ITT=intention to treat. 
services. Activities undertaken in both intervention and 
control clusters focused on improving referral systems, 
links between the community and health services and 
between diﬀ erent levels of health services, eﬃ cient use 
of available resources, basic and refresher clinical 
training relating to essential neonatal and maternal care, 
in addition 
information, education, and com- 
munication materials. The training was provided to 
doctors, nurses, and paramedical staﬀ working at district, 
upazila, and union levels. This training consisted mainly 
of refreshing knowledge about antenatal, natal, and 
postnatal care, recognition of danger signs in the mother 
and newborn baby, essential care of the newborn baby, 
the ﬁ ve cleans (clean delivery surface, clean perineum, 

four received the traditional birth attendant intervention 
and ﬁ ve became controls. Overall, for this second-level 
randomisation, there were nine traditional birth attendant 
intervention groups 
clusters 
(webappendix p 2). 


The randomisation process was done before the 
collection and analysis of baseline data, and none of the 
staﬀ attending the randomisation process had any previous 
knowledge of the health and socioeconomic status of the 
chosen union clusters. Neither the study investigators nor 
the participants were masked to group allocation. 
Women’s group intervention 
Women’s group facilitators visited every tenth household 
within the intervention clusters and invited married 
women of reproductive age to join the groups. The 
groups initially only included women of reproductive age 
but others joined later because group members requested 
that mothers-in-law, adolescents, and other women 
should also attend. 
Women’s groups were facilitated by a local female peer 
facilitator who acted as a catalyst for community 
mobilisation. Every facilitator was responsible for 
18 groups. Facilitators received ﬁ ve training sessions that 
covered participatory modes of communication and 
maternal and neonatal health issues. The role of the 
facilitator was to activate and strengthen groups, to 
support them in identifying and prioritising maternal 
and neonatal problems, to help to identify possible 
strategies, and to support the planning, implementation, 
and monitoring of strategies in the community. Locally 
recruited supervisors supported facilitators in preparing 
for meetings and liaising with community leaders. 
Groups took part in a participatory learning and action 
cycle consisting of 
(ﬁ gure 1 and 
webappendix p 3). Control and intervention clusters all 
received health services strengthening and basic training 
of traditional birth attendants. 

Traditional birth attendant intervention 
In clusters assigned to the traditional birth attendant 
intervention, 482 attendants were given basic training in 
undertaking clean and safe deliveries, providing safe 
delivery kits, recognising danger signs in mothers and 
infants, making emergency preparedness plans, 
accompanying women to facilities, and undertaking 
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. They also received 
additional training in neonatal resuscitation with bag- 
valve-mask. A pre-test and post-test questionnaire was 
done for every traditional birth attendant at the start and 
end of the initial training session and at subsequent 
training sessions. Control clusters were given basic 
training but no training in bag-valve-mask resuscitation. 
Health service inputs 
The project did not have resources to improve service 
delivery intensively at all levels of government health 





Included in mortality subgroup 
analysis 

15 695 births (348 twins, 
6 triplets) 
15 153 livebirths 
542 stillbirths 
515 neonatal deaths 
55 maternal deaths 
Included in mortality subgroup 
analysis 

15 257 births (310 twins, 
9 triplets) 
14 736 livebirths 
521 stillbirths 
557 neonatal deaths 
32 maternal deaths 
Excluded from secondary 
outcome analyses 
0 clusters 
Temporary residents 
1819 births 
 46 stillbirths 
55 neonatal deaths 
8 maternal deaths 
Excluded from secondary 
outcome analyses 
0 clusters 
Temporary residents 
1977 births 
 60 stillbirths 
44 neonatal deaths 
3 maternal deaths 
Tea garden residents 
1365 births 
 51 stillbirths 
55 neonatal deaths 
20 943 births identiﬁed 
17 514 (84%) mothers 

Analysed for mortality 
outcomes (ITT population) 


16 926 livebirths 
588 stillbirths 
570 neonatal deaths 
63 maternal deaths 
22 774 births identiﬁed 
18 599 (82%) mothers 

Analysed for mortality 
outcomes (ITT population) 

18 599 births (356 twins, 
9 triplets) 
17 967 livebirths 
632 stillbirths 
656 neonatal deaths 
35 maternal deaths 

intervention 
9 clusters received the 


control 
9 clusters received 

 
 
delivery kits (soap, a blade, gauze, polythene, and a 
thread), and safer motherhood. 

clean hands of attendant, clean blade to cut cord, clean 
umbilical stump without anything applied to it), safe 
Surveillance 
A prospective monitoring system was developed to record 
all births and their outcomes within the 18 control and 
intervention clusters during the project. The system was 
similar to the one implemented in the India trial and 
consisted of two stages (webappendix p 4).10 First, 
traditional birth attendants (ie, key informants) in the 
study area identiﬁ ed all births, irrespective of whether 
they attended them, and deaths in all women during 
pregnancy or up to 6 weeks after delivery. Each traditional 
birth attendant was responsible for about 200 households, 
and was paid an incentive of 60 Taka (US$0·87 on June 8, 
2009) for each accurate identiﬁ cation. Surveillance 
monitors met with traditional birth attendants once a 
month to gather the information. Second, when births 
were identiﬁ ed, women were interviewed once 6 weeks 
after delivery. Interviewers veriﬁ ed the births and deaths 
identiﬁ ed by key 
informants and completed a 
questionnaire that covered background characteristics 
and the antenatal, delivery, and postpartum periods. All 
eligible women identiﬁ ed were also asked if they could 
identify any other pregnant women. In the event of a 
stillbirth or neonatal death, a verbal autopsy was done 
with the mother. In the event of a maternal death up to 
6 weeks after delivery, a verbal autopsy was done with a 
close friend or relative. Surveillance started in August, 
2004, and covered all clusters by January, 2005. 
Primary and secondary outcomes 
The primary outcome of the women’s group study was 
NMR (deaths in the ﬁrst 28 days per 1000 livebirths). 
Secondary outcomes were maternal deaths (death of a 
pregnant woman or within 42 days of cessation of 
pregnancy from any cause related to the pregnancy or its 
management, but not from accidental causes), stillbirths 
(fetal death after 28 weeks of gestation but before delivery 
of the baby’s head), uptake of antenatal and delivery 
services, home-care practices during and after delivery, 
infant morbidity, health-care seeking behaviour (seeking 
care for any maternal or newborn illness or complication), 
perinatal mortality, and early and late NMR. We used the 
International Classiﬁ cation of Diseases version 9 
deﬁ nition of stillbirth because it was appropriate for this 
setting.11 
The primary outcome of the traditional birth attendant 
study was early NMR. This outcome is presented in this 
report, but a more detailed analysis of the intervention 
will be reported in a separate publication. Early neonatal 
deaths refer to deaths within 6 completed days after 
birth and late neonatal deaths from 7–28 completed days 
after birth. Miscarriage was deﬁ ned as cessation of a 
presumptive pregnancy before 28 weeks of gestation. 
Perinatal death describes either a stillbirth or an early 
neonatal death. We obtained background demographic 







Data are number or number (%). 6389 mothers were interviewed, 3213 from intervention unions and 3176 from 
control unions. NGO=non-governmental organisation. TBA=traditional birth attendant. *Baseline mortality rates 
were lower than expected when compared with district and national estimates. Unlike the trial data, the baseline 
mortality estimates were based on retrospective recall rather than prospective identiﬁ cation of births and deaths, 
which might account for under-reporting. †Well made by driving a tube into the earth to a stratum that bears water. 
‡NGO membership is deﬁ ned as belonging to a microcredit or savings organisation. §Home deliveries only. 


























Own one of almyrah (wardrobe), radio or tape recorder, sewing 
machine, or bicycle 























































































and socioeconomic information to investigate cluster 
comparability. 
Quality control of data 
Data were double-entered in an electronic database. 
Quality checks were undertaken by district-based 
surveillance 
supervisors who manually checked 
information provided by the traditional birth attendants 
and monitors. The ﬁ eld surveillance manager, data 
input oﬃ cer, and data manager undertook manual and 
systematic data checks. Additionally, we cross-checked 
a subsample of our data with government records. 
Statistical analysis 
We undertook a cross-sectional baseline survey for the 
women’s group study from January to March, 2003, in 
more than 6000 mothers who had delivered a baby 
within the past year, to obtain data for household and 
demographic characteristics, in addition to data for 
pregnancy, delivery, and neonatal outcomes. Details of 
the sampling method used for this survey have been 
published elsewhere.9 The baseline survey was 
undertaken to gather data for neonatal care practices 
and behaviour, but not to provide precise NMRs in view 
of its limited sample size. We based our original sample 
size calculations on the national estimate of neonatal 
mortality from Bangladesh Demographic and Health 
Survey data from 2004, which gave a value of 41 deaths 
per 1000 livebirths for the 1999–2003 period. With an 
estimated 1600 livebirths per cluster over 3 years, a 
k value of 0·3, and a baseline NMR of 41 deaths per 
1000 livebirths, the study had a power of 56% to detect a 
30% reduction in NMR at the 95% signiﬁ cance level. 
After the end of the trial, we undertook a retrospective 
calculation to understand whether our inability to detect 
an eﬀ ect of the intervention could be caused by a lack of 
power. From our study data, the harmonic mean of the 
number of recorded livebirths per cluster over the study 
period was 1467 (range 1081–2708). The stratum-average 
intracluster correlation coeﬃ cient was 0·00056, 
corresponding to a between-cluster coeﬃ cient (k) of 
0·12 with the observed NMR in the control groups of 
38 deaths per 1000 livebirths.12 On the assumption of a 
baseline NMR of 38 deaths per 1000 livebirths, the study 
had a power of 88% to detect a reduction in neonatal 
mortality of 25% at the 95% signiﬁ cance level. 
We did not expect the intervention to have adverse 
eﬀ ects at cluster or participant level and therefore did not 
have any stopping rules. A preliminary analysis was 
undertaken in July, 2008, and ﬁndings were presented to 
an independent data safety monitoring board. The board 
recommended a ﬁ nal analysis of data for all births in the 
study area between Feb 1, 2005, and Dec 31, 2007. 
Analysis was by intention to treat (ITT) at cluster and 
participant levels. Temporary and tea garden residents 
were included in the analysis for mortality outcomes. 
However, they were excluded from analyses for secondary 
outcomes since they were unlikely to have been exposed 
to the intervention. 
We compared NMRs, stillbirth rates, and maternal 
mortality ratios between control and intervention groups 
by use of stratiﬁ ed cluster-level analysis because of the 
small number of clusters in each group. These analyses 
involved calculating risk ratios for each stratum and then 













































Early NMR per 1000 
livebirths (0–6 days) 
Perinatal mortality rate per 
1000 births 


























































































Late NMR per 1000 livebirths 
(7–28 days) 









Maternal mortality ratio per 
100 000 livebirths 










an overall weighted mean of these, testing the null 
hypothesis that the true overall risk ratio is 1 by use of a 
stratiﬁ ed t test.13 We noted baseline diﬀ erences in 
maternal education, maternal age, and household assets 
between intervention and control clusters: mothers in 
the intervention clusters were slightly younger, less 
educated, and had fewer household assets. We adjusted 
for these covariates by use of the two-stage method 
described by Hayes and co-workers13 for cluster-level 
analysis. First, a logistic regression model was ﬁ tted to 
the individual-level data, which incorporated the stratum, 
maternal age, education, and household assets, but 
excluded any information about trial group. The resulting 
regression model was used to calculate ratio residuals for 
each cluster, which were then used in place of cluster- 
level observations for a stratiﬁ ed t test described above 
for unadjusted analysis. Results are presented as risk 
ratios with 95% CIs. 
In the assessment of the traditional birth attendant 
intervention, only home deliveries were included in the 
analysis. Analysis was at cluster level and adjusted for 
stratiﬁ cation as described for the women’s group 
assessment, but in this analysis the strata were clusters 
in which 
intervention was 
implemented, and clusters in which no women’s groups 
were implemented. We undertook tests to check for 
interactions between the traditional birth attendant and 
women’s group interventions and did not ﬁ nd any. We 
therefore analysed the women’s group data as if from a 
single trial with two groups. 

This study is registered as an International Standard 
Randomised Controlled Trial, number ISRCTN54792066. 
Role of the funding source 
The sponsors of the study had no role in study design, 
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. Representatives from the Big Lottery 
Fund and Saving Newborn Lives visited the project during 
the trial implementation. All authors had access to all the 
data in the study. KA and AC had ﬁ nal responsibility for 
the decision to submit for publication. 
Results 
Figure 2 shows the trial proﬁ le. The estimated population 
size was 503 163 people. All nine selected clusters had 
the intervention. All women’s groups had ﬁ nished their 
ﬁ 
 rst meeting by September, 2004. The traditional birth 
attendant intervention started in March, 2005, with all 
attendants completing their training in May, 2005. We 
monitored births and deaths in the study area between 
Feb 1, 2005, and Dec 31, 2007. Interviews were completed 
for 17 514 births in the intervention clusters and for 
18 599 births in control clusters (including temporary 
and tea garden residents). These data correspond with 
84% of 20 943 births registered by key informants in 
intervention areas and 82% of 22 774 births in control 
areas (ﬁ gure 2). The main reason for failure to interview 
was maternal migration. 
Table 1 shows baseline characteristics of intervention 
and control clusters gathered in a retrospective survey. 
6389 mothers were interviewed, 3213 from intervention 
unions and 3176 from control unions. The number of 
mothers to be interviewed in each union was weighted 
according to the total union population based on the 1991 
Bangladesh census.14 Women who had delivered a baby 
within the past 12 months were selected for interview by 
use of random sampling. We noted diﬀ erences in 
maternal education, maternal age, and household assets 
between intervention and control unions, with a greater 
proportion of mothers in the intervention unions with no 
education and no household assets. Mothers 
in 
intervention unions were also more likely to be younger 
than mothers in control unions. Further results from this 
survey are reported elsewhere.9 
In a total population of 229 195 people in the nine 
clusters, 162 women’s groups provided a coverage of one 
group per 1414 population. In 2007, 2363 (9%) women of 
reproductive age in the intervention clusters (n=27 614) 
were group members. Almost half 
the members 
(1158 women, 49%) were between 25 years and 34 years 
old with fewer (378 women, 16%) younger members 
(<24 years old). The groups held meetings once a month 
and completed a cycle of 20 meetings. The mean 




Intervention 
cluster 
Control 
cluster 
Unadjusted* risk 
ratio (95% CI) 
Intervention 
cluster 
Control 
cluster 
Unadjusted risk 
ratio* (95% CI) 
Adjusted risk ratio† 
(95% CI) 
























Data are mean rate. NMR=neonatal mortality rate. *Adjusted for stratiﬁ cation and clustering only. †Adjusted for stratiﬁ cation, clustering, maternal age (continuous), 
maternal education (categorical 1–5), and having no household assets. 

















Maternal mortality ratio per 
100 000 livebirths 








Figure 3: Mean overall neonatal mortality rates in intervention and control 
clusters by year (2005–07) 
Boxes include lower and upper quartiles, the lines within boxes represent the 
median, and the error lines represent the range. 
through meetings with group representatives. These 
strategies changed over time and varied between groups. 
In clusters in which selected traditional birth attendants 
were trained in bag-valve-mask resuscitation, there were 
12 519 home births, of which 8618 were attended by any 
traditional birth attendant and 2792 by a traditional birth 
attendant trained in bag-valve-mask resuscitation. In the 
control clusters, there were 13 195 home births, of which 
9171 were attended by any traditional birth attendant and 
2536 by a traditional birth attendant trained in mouth-to- 
mouth resuscitation. Mean early NMRs did not diﬀ er 
signiﬁ cantly between clusters in which traditional birth 
attendants 
bag-valve-mask 
training 
resuscitation (25·4 deaths per 1000 livebirths) and control 
clusters (26·5 deaths per 1000 livebirths). The risk ratio 
for early neonatal death was 0·95 (95% CI 0·75–1·21). A 
more detailed assessment of this intervention will be 
reported in a separate publication. We did not ﬁ nd any 
interactions between the traditional birth attendant and 
women’s group interventions. 


Discussion 
Our study shows that participatory women’s groups did 
not signiﬁ cantly reduce neonatal mortality in poor rural 
populations of Bangladesh. This ﬁ nding contrasts with 
the large reductions in mortality reported in other trials 
undertaken in Nepal and India.7,8 This trial monitored 
birth outcomes in a large population and had fewer 
clusters than did previous trials; however, the intracluster 
correlation coeﬃ cient was small, thus our inability to 
detect a diﬀ erence in NMR between intervention and 
control clusters cannot be attributed to lack of power. 
Although neonatal mortality was lower in the intervention 
clusters than in the control clusters over the 3 years of 
the trial, there was also a decline in neonatal mortality in 
the control clusters over time. This ﬁ nding might reﬂ ect 
underlying secular trends in mortality seen in other parts 
of Bangladesh, and merits further investigation.15,16 
attendance during the ﬁ rst ten meetings was 73% 
(1735 women) of registered members. Only 477 (3%) of 
15 695 women who gave birth and were interviewed 
during the study period reported attending a group. 
Unadjusted NMRs per 1000 livebirths were 30·6 in 2005, 
36·1 in 2006, and 33·6 in 2007 in the intervention clusters 
(including all residents), and 41·1, 37·5, and 32·4 in the 
control clusters, respectively (table 2). The risk ratio for 
neonatal mortality, taking into account clustering and 
stratiﬁ cation, for the 3-year period was 0·93 (95% CI 
0·80–1·09; table 3). The diﬀ erence in maternal mortality 
ratio between intervention and control clusters was based 
on fairly small numbers of deaths but reached signiﬁ cance 
when temporary and tea garden residents were included in 
the analysis (table 3). Although this ﬁ nding is of concern, 
46 of the 55 maternal deaths in the intervention clusters 
(excluding tea garden or temporary residents) were to 
women who had neither heard of nor attended groups and 
there were no maternal deaths in members of women’s 
groups, which suggests that the intervention did not have a 
direct adverse eﬀ ect. Additionally, maternal mortality was a 
secondary outcome of the study and the sample size only 
gave us power to detect large diﬀ erences. 
In intervention clusters, neonatal mortality increased 
during year 2 then stabilised in year 3. In control 
clusters, neonatal mortality decreased over 
time, 
although the diﬀ erences were not signiﬁ cant (ﬁ gure 3). 
Stillbirth rates did not diﬀ er between intervention and 
control clusters. 
No signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences were noted in most home- 
care practices or health-care-seeking behaviours between 
intervention and control clusters (table 4). However, we 
did see higher frequencies of delayed bathing and 
exclusive breastfeeding in the intervention clusters than 
in the control clusters. The proportion of institutional 
deliveries was slightly higher in control clusters than in 
intervention clusters, which might have contributed to 
the diﬀ erence noted in maternal mortality. 
To further examine the eﬀ ect of the women’s group 
intervention, we compared birth outcomes and selected 
home-care and health-care-seeking practices in women’s 
in the 
group members and non-group members 
intervention clusters 
(webappendix pp 5–6). The 
proportion of women with hygienic delivery practices 
was higher in group members than in non-group 
members. Additionally, group members were more likely 
to avoid bathing in the ﬁ rst 24 h and to undertake 
exclusive breastfeeding for the ﬁ rst 6 weeks than were 
non-group members. 
Data from our process assessment showed that the 
three main strategies implemented by women’s groups 
were the creation of emergency funds managed by the 
groups, the raising of awareness of maternal and 
newborn health issues during meetings and in the 
community by use of materials provided by the groups 
(such as picture cards and ﬂ ipcharts), and the fostering 
of eﬀ ective communication with health-care providers 



2006 
Year 


2006 
Year 









Maternal mortality was higher in intervention clusters 
than in control clusters during the 3 years of the trial. 
This diﬀ erence only reached signiﬁ cance when tea 
garden and temporary residents were included in the 
analysis. There are no obvious population, health service, 
or other contextual factors to explain this ﬁ nding, and 
there is no evidence that women’s groups discouraged 
use of health services. Also, there were no deaths in 
mothers who attended women’s groups. We do not wish 
to over-interpret diﬀ erences in maternal mortality rates 
on the basis of low numbers of maternal deaths. The 
eﬀ ects of women’s group membership on maternal 
mortality might become evident with meta-analysis of 
several trials. 
Despite the absence of a signiﬁ cant eﬀ ect of women’s 
groups on neonatal mortality, process data suggested that 
good perinatal practices in intervention clusters were 
slightly better than they were in control clusters, such as 
use of a safe delivery kit, exclusive breastfeeding for the 
ﬁ 
 rst 6 weeks, and avoidance of early bathing. Nonetheless, 
none of these ﬁ ndings were signiﬁ cant, and the 
continuing second phase trial, in which women’s group 
to one group per 
increased 
coverage has been 
400 population, should clarify questions about any 
signiﬁ cant eﬀ ects of women’s groups on maternal 
mortality or perinatal care practices. 
We believe that the lack of eﬀ ect of the intervention in 
this setting was caused by three main factors. First, the 
population coverage of women’s groups (one group per 
1414 population) was less than a third of the coverage 
achieved in the India trial (one group per 468 population)8 
and less than half that in the Nepal trial (one group per 
756 population).7 Findings from these three trials suggest 
that population coverage and the proportion of newly 
in groups might need 
pregnant women enrolled 
threshold levels to have an eﬀ ect on birth outcomes 
(perhaps of the order of one group per 450–750 population, 
and between 30% and 50% of newly pregnant women 
attending groups, respectively). The enrolment of newly 
pregnant women is likely to be a key determinant of the 
eﬀ ectiveness of women’s groups. 
Second, we believe that the quality of the intervention 
might have been aﬀ ected by several factors related to the 
size of the study. The total population covered by the 
project was much larger than that covered in the Nepal or 
India trials, but facilitators in our study had to coordinate 
more groups than did those in other trials. The project 
had diﬃ culties in retaining facilitators and supervisors, 
which might have led to disruptions in meetings and 
reduced support for community mobilisation. Facilitators 
also had an increased workload, since they arranged 
18 meetings per month compared with nine per month in 
the trial in Nepal. Although the support structure and ratio 
of supervisors to facilitators in this study were similar to 
those in Nepal and India, in practice coordinators often 
lived further away from women’s group facilitators than 
did those in other sites, and they were not able to provide 
refresher training and continuing support to facilitators. 
Facilitators’ use of participatory techniques to stimulate 
community mobilisation 
this 
is 
intervention and lack of support for facilitators might have 
damaged the quality of the intervention. 

Third, local contextual factors could have had a role: 
adverse climatic conditions aﬀ ected the facilitators’ ability 
to travel to meetings and one of the intervention unions 
in Faridpur was entirely ﬂ ooded in 2007. Additionally, 
there are signs that gender-based barriers were strong in 
some of the intervention unions, and might have 
prevented some women from joining groups, seeking 
care, or from implementing strategies if they had joined 
a group. For example, some women reported facing 
problems when asking for their husbands’ or in-laws’ 
permission to join a group. Other women’s groups linked 
to non-governmental organisations (NGOs) operated in 
our study area, and women were regularly asked to 
participate in NGO activities for which they could receive 
ﬁ 
 nancial incentives. Women might therefore have been 
deterred from investing time in women’s group meetings 
for which no incentives were oﬀ ered. Despite these 
problems, all 162 groups continued to meet after the end 
of the programme’s cycle. 


Intervention 
cluster 
Control 
cluster 
Unadjusted risk 
ratio* (95% CI) 
Adjusted risk 
ratio† (95% CI) 
































Attended by formal provider 
(doctor or nurse) 















Any of three infant illnesses (cough, 
fever, diarrhoea) 
Health-care-seeking behaviour in 
event of infant illness 
Exclusive breastfeeding for ﬁ rst 
6 weeks 












Data are %. Percentages based on cluster means. ANC=antenatal clinic. *Adjusted for clustering and stratiﬁ cation only. 
†Adjusted for clustering, stratiﬁ cation, maternal education, maternal age, and having no household assets. ‡Excludes 
births to tea garden and temporary residents; includes births between Feb 1, 2005, and Dec 31, 2007. 





























Contributors 
All the authors contributed to the design of the study and criticised 
drafts of the report. KA, SB, and AC were responsible for the conception 
and overall supervision of the trial. KA and her team managed the 
project, data collection, data entry, and administration with assistance 
from BB and SS. SB, ME, and AC were technical advisers to the study. 
AC, KA, and SB helped design the original trial protocol. SB designed 
the data collection methods and epidemiological surveillance system. 
AP, CP, and SB undertook the quantitative analysis. AC, AP, SB, and 
KA wrote the ﬁ rst draft of the report and were responsible for 
subsequent collation of inputs and redrafting. KA and AC are guarantors 
for the report. 
Conﬂ icts of interest 
We declare that we have no conﬂ icts of interest. 
Acknowledgments 
This study was funded by Women and Children First, the UK Big Lottery 
Fund, Saving Newborn Lives, and the UK Department for International 
Development. We thank all the mothers and relatives who gave their 
time to be interviewed. We would also like to thank the staﬀ of the 
perinatal care project, in particular Golam Azam, 
Rezaul Alam Chowdhury, Beni Madhab Chakrabarty, and 
Mubinul Karim (district managers for Faridpur, Bogra, and 
Moulavibazar, respectively), Nasim Mahmud Bhuiyan, Rashedul Islam, 
Mahbubul Haque, Liakat Ali Miah, Apurbo Kumar Bala, 
Rahat Alam Chowdhury (monitoring coordinators), 
Manaj Kumar Biswas, Minara Begum Mina, Roksana Akter, 
Asma Khanum, Silvia Gini Karmaker, Shomola Rani Das, Eitu Rani Das 
(women’s group coordinators). We would like to thank all the women’s 
group facilitators and monitors. We thank members of the trial steering 
group, A K Azad Khan, Nazmun Nahar, Bhuiyan, T A Chowdhury, 
Laila Arjumand Banu, and Md Shahidullah Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib. 
We also thank Sam Richmond (chair), Shams El Arifeen, and 
Shamsun Nahar for joining the data safety and monitoring board. 
We thank David Osrin, Prasanta Tripathy, Laila Younes, Tasmin Nahar, 
Bedowra Haq, and Ruth Duebbert for their comments on this report. 
We also wish to thank anonymous reviewers for suggestions that greatly 
enhanced the reporting of this study. We acknowledge the important 
contribution of M Kamruzzaman who was the project manager at the 
start of the study, and sadly died in 2003. 
References 
1 WHO. Neonatal and perinatal mortality: country, regional and global 
estimates 2006. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2006/ 
9241563206_eng.pdf (accessed Feb 26, 2010). 

www.searo.who.int/LinkFiles/WHO_Country_Cooperation_ 
Strategy_-_Bangladesh_country_health.pdf (accessed Feb 20, 2010). 
3 WHO. Country proﬁ le on reproductive health in Bangladesh. 2003. 
http://www.searo.who.int/LinkFiles/Reporductive_Health_Proﬁ le_ 
chp-bangladesh.pdf (accessed Feb 19, 2010). 
4 Mercer A, Haseen F, Huq NL, Uddin N, Hossain Khan M, Larson CP. 
Risk factors for neonatal mortality in rural areas of Bangladesh served 
by a large NGO programme. Health Policy Plan 2006; 21: 432–43. 
5 National Institute of Population Research and Training. Bangladesh 
demographic and health survey 2007. Dhaka: National Institute of 
Population Research and Training, 2007. 

Development Goals. Mid-term Bangladesh progress report 2007. 
http://www.un.org.bd/pub/MDG%20Mid-term%20Progress%20 
Report2007.pdf (accessed Feb 20, 2010). 

7 Manandhar DS, Osrin D, Shrestha BP, et al. Eﬀ ect of a participatory 
intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes in Nepal: 
cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 364: 970–09. 
Tripathy, P, Nair N, Barnett S, et al. Eﬀ ect of a participatory 
intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes and maternal 
depression in Jharkhand and Orissa, India: cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2010; published online March 8. 
DOI:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62042-0. 
Barnett S, Azad, K, Barua, S, et al. Maternal and newborn-care 
practices during pregnancy, childbirth, and the postnatal period: 
a comparison in three rural districts in Bangladesh. 
J Health Popul Nutr 2006; 24: 394–402. 

The purposive selection of districts and upazilas, and 
the stratiﬁ cation of sampling, together with the restricted 
number of clusters, might have limited the eﬀ ectiveness 
of randomisation procedures. The participatory approach 
assessed in this study contrasts with health-worker-led 
interventions tested in other recent trials of community- 
based newborn care.17,18 In Bangladesh, the Projahnmo 
trial18 compared home care, consisting of multiple 
community health worker visits to pregnant mothers, 
with a community mobilisation group and a control 
group. The results showed no overall signiﬁ cant 
diﬀ erences between groups in NMR over the 3 years of 
the trial, but there was a 34% reduction in NMR in the 
ﬁ 
 nal 6 months of the trial in the home-care group. 
However, the community mobilisation approach used in 
the Projahnmo trial was not participatory and was less 
intensive than the approaches used in the Nepal, Indian, 
and Bangladesh Perinatal Care Project trials. In the 
Projahnmo 
female 
community health worker was responsible for a 
population of 18 000 people, which was divided so that 
each geographical area of about 225 people was visited 
once every 4 months; the male community health workers 
visited each area every 10 months. Just as we propose for 
this trial with women’s groups, we do not believe that 
this level of coverage and intensity is suﬃ cient to bring 
about behaviour change and reduction in mortality. 

Few government programmes have managed to provide 
multiple prenatal or postnatal home visits to mothers 
and infants when scaled up.19 By contrast, women’s 
groups, if scaled to an adequate coverage, have the 
potential to reach the poorest people and bring about 
substantial health and non-health beneﬁ ts. Nonetheless, 
a women’s group approach requires adequate human 
resources support for community mobilisation and 
appropriate coverage. The threshold coverage or dose 
eﬀ ect for the women’s group intervention needs to be 
established for future scale-up programmes. This 
threshold coverage raises an important new research and 
policy question: would scaling up the coverage of 
women’s groups in Bangladesh achieve the same eﬀ ect 
on mortality as did the intervention in India and Nepal, 
or is the absence of eﬀ ect caused by other delivery and 
social context barriers? We are currently assessing the 
eﬀ ect of more intensive scale-up of women’s groups in 
the intervention clusters to increase population coverage 
and membership of pregnant women to levels similar to 
those reported in the trial in India. Additionally, we are 
improving support for facilitators and implementing 
strategies to counter gender-based barriers, such as the 
involvement of men and religious leaders. We are closely 
monitoring contextual factors that might aﬀ ect the 
delivery of the intervention through a detailed process 
assessment. The results of this assessment will establish 
whether the success of women’s groups is dependent on 
population coverage, or whether speciﬁ c contextual and 
delivery factors reduce their eﬀ ectiveness. 





A prospective key informant surveillance system to measure 
maternal mortality—ﬁ ndings from indigenous populations in 
Jharkhand and Orissa, India. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2008; 8: 6. 
Ronsmans C. Determinants of reduction in maternal mortality in 
Matlab, Bangladesh: a 30-year cohort study. Lancet 2007; 
370: 1320–28. 




analysis of community intervention trials. J Clin Epidemiol 1996; 
49: 435–39. 
13 Hayes R, Moulton LH, Morgan BJT, Keiding N, Van der Heliden, 
Speed T. Cluster randomised controlled trials. New York, NY: 
Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 2009. 

http://www.census.gov/ipc/prod/ppt/Bangladesh93.pdf (accessed 
Feb 20, 2010). 
15 Ronsmans C, Chowdhury ME, Alam N, Koblinsky M, El Arifeen S. 
Trends in stillbirths, early and late neonatal mortality in rural 
Bangladesh: the role of public health interventions. 
Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2008; 22: 269–79. 
behaviour change management on neonatal mortality in Shivgarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, India: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2008; 372: 1151–62. 

Study Group. Eﬀ ect of community-based newborn-care intervention 
package implemented through two service-delivery strategies in 
Sylhet district, Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2008; 371: 1936–44. 
19 Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, et al. Achieving child survival 
goals: potential contribution of community health workers. Lancet 
2007; 369: 2121–31. 


