Europe PMC Funders Group 
Author Manuscript 
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 14. 


Effect of women’s groups and volunteer peer counselling on 
rates of mortality, morbidity, and health behaviours in mothers 
and children in rural Malawi (MaiMwana): a factorial, cluster- 
randomised controlled trial 
Sonia Lewycka, PhD, 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
Charles Mwansambo, FRCPCH, 
Government of Malawi, Ministry of Health, Lilongwe, Malawi 
Mikey Rosato, PhD, 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
Peter Kazembe, FRCPCH, 
Baylor College of Medicine Children’s Foundation, Lilongwe, Malawi 
Tambosi Phiri, MSc, 
MaiMwana Project, Mchinji, Malawi 
Andrew Mganga, BSc, 
MaiMwana Project, Mchinji, Malawi 
Hilda Chapota, ENM, 
MaiMwana Project, Mchinji, Malawi 
Florida Malamba, Dip, 
MaiMwana Project, Mchinji, Malawi 
Esther Kainja, ENM, 
MaiMwana Project, Mchinji, Malawi 
Prof. Marie-Louise Newell, PhD, 
Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa 

*Correspondence to: Prof Anthony Costello, Institute for Global Health, University College London, 30 Guilford Street, London 
WC1N 1EH, UK anthony.costello@ucl.ac.uk. 
Contributors: All authors contributed to the design of the study and critically revised the report for content. CM, PK, SL, MR, and 
AC were responsible for the conception and overall supervision of the trial. CM and TP managed the project, data gathering and entry, 
and administration, with assistance from EK, HC, and AM. DO, M-LN, and AC were technical advisers for the study. JS-W 
supervised the cost-effectiveness analysis. GG gathered the cost and utilisation data and assisted A-MP-B in the cost-effectiveness 
analysis. SL, AC, CM, PK, and M-LN helped design the original trial protocol. SL designed the methods for data gathering and 
epidemiological surveillance system. MR and FM provided technical advice and supervised the women’s group intervention. SV, EK, 
and HC provided technical advice and supervised the peer counselling intervention. SL did the quantitative analysis. AC, SL, CM, 
MR, TP, A-MP-B, HC, and EK wrote the first draft of the report and were responsible for subsequent collation of inputs and 
redrafting. CM and AC are guarantors for the report. GG and JS-W designed, gathered, and analysed the economic data. 







Health Economics and Financing Programme, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 
London, UK 
Anni-Maria Pulkki-Brännström, PhD, 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
Jolene Skordis-Worrall, PhD, 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
Stefania Vergnano, MRCPCH, 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
David Osrin, PhD, and 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 
Prof. Anthony Costello, FMedSci 
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK 

Background—Women’s groups and health education by peer counsellors can improve the 
health of mothers and children. We assessed their effects on mortality and breastfeeding rates in 
rural Malawi. 
Methods—We did a 2×2 factorial, cluster-randomised trial in 185 888 people in Mchinji district. 
48 equal-sized clusters were randomly allocated to four groups with a computer-generated number 
sequence. 24 facilitators guided groups through a community action cycle to tackle maternal and 
child health problems. 72 trained volunteer peer counsellors made home visits at five timepoints 
during pregnancy and after birth to support breastfeeding and infant care. Primary outcomes for 
the women’s group intervention were maternal, perinatal, neonatal, and infant mortality rates 
(MMR, PMR, NMR, and IMR, respectively); and for the peer counselling were IMR and 
exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) rates. Analysis was by intention to treat. The trial is registered as 
ISRCTN06477126. 
Findings—We monitored outcomes of 26 262 births between 2005 and 2009. In a factorial 
model adjusted only for clustering and the volunteer peer counselling intervention, in women’s 
group areas, for years 2 and 3, we noted non-significant decreases in NMR (odds ratio 0·93, 0·64– 
1·35) and MMR (0·54, 0·28–1·04). After adjustment for parity, socioeconomic quintile, and 
baseline measures, effects were larger for NMR (0·85, 0·59–1·22) and MMR (0·48, 0·26–0·91). 
Because of the interaction between the two interventions, a stratified analysis was done. For 
women’s groups, in adjusted analyses, MMR fell by 74% (0·26, 0·10–0·70), and NMR by 41% 
(0·59, 0·40–0·86) in areas with no peer counsellors, but there was no effect in areas with 
counsellors (1·09, 0·40–2·98, and 1·38, 0·75–2·54). Factorial analysis for the peer counselling 
intervention for years 1–3 showed a fall in IMR of 18% (0·82, 0·67–1·00) and an improvement in 
EBF rates (2·42, 1·48–3·96). The results of the stratified, adjusted analysis showed a 36% 
reduction in IMR (0·64, 0·48–0·85) but no effect on EBF (1·18, 0·63–2·25) in areas without 
women’s groups, and in areas with women’s groups there was no effect on IMR (1·05, 0·82–1·36) 
and an increase in EBF (5·02, 2·67–9·44) . The cost of women’s groups was US$114 per year of 
life lost (YLL) averted and that of peer counsellors was $33 per YLL averted, using stratified data 
from single intervention comparisons. 
Interpretation—Community mobilisation through women’s groups and volunteer peer 
counsellor health education are methods to improve maternal and child health outcomes in poor 
rural populations in Africa. 
Funding—Saving Newborn Lives, UK Department for International Development, and 
Wellcome Trust. 




Worldwide, the mortality rate in children younger than 5 years is still unacceptably high at 
7·7 million to 8·8 million per year, and includes 3·6 million deaths in newborn babies.1,2 In 
Malawi, the mortality rate in children younger than 5 years during 2005–10 was 112 per 
1000 livebirths, of which 30% were neonates.1,3 In south Asia, community mobilisation 
through women’s groups reduced the rate of neonatal mortality, probably through improved 
solidarity, decision making, preventive care, care-seeking, and health-service 
accountability.4,5 
Exclusive breastfeeding helps development of the immune system,6 improves survival of 
children born to HIV-infected mothers,7 and reduces the risk of mother-to-child 
transmission (MTCT) of HIV compared with mixed feeding.7,8 The findings from 
systematic reviews9,10 suggest that peer advice and support for mothers improve hygiene, 
recognition of illness in infants, and breastfeeding. Evidence that exclusive breastfeeding as 
a result of peer counselling leads to a reduction in the mortality rate is scarce. The results of 
research suggest that peer counselling increases the rates of breastfeeding and reduces those 
of diarrhoea, with little effect on mortality rates.11–17 According to the findings of a 
Cochrane review,10 further trials are needed to assess the cost-effectiveness of lay and 
professional support for breastfeeding. 
Most births in African countries occur at home, especially in rural areas, and many deaths in 
infants might be prevented if mothers are given advice about feeding, infant care, danger 
signs, MTCT, HIV testing and treatment, and care-seeking. In Africa, no trials of 
community mobilisation through women’s groups, and only one trial of counselling for 
exclusive breastfeeding, have been done to assess effects on child mortality. The effects of 
community mobilisation through women’s groups, and health education through female 
volunteer peer counsellors on rates of infant care, feeding, morbidity, and mortality were 
assessed in the MaiMwana Project, a collaboration between the Malawi Ministry of Health 
and University College London, London, UK. 



90% of Malawi’s population live on less than US$2 a day.18 Mchinji district, in the central 
region, has a population of 455 000, of which 90% live in rural areas and are dependent on 
subsistence farming.19 In 2006, 99% of women in this district attended antenatal care at least 
once during pregnancy and 58% delivered at a health facility.20 Health care is provided by 
one district hospital, four rural hospitals, nine health centres, and private clinics. Quality is 
compromised by a severe shortage of personnel, low morale, and irregular drug supplies. 
A cohort of 43 719 women of childbearing age was defined in 2004 during a baseline 
household survey. All women aged 10–49 years who consented to participate were enrolled. 
Cohort members were entered in an open master list to which new participants were added if 
they moved into the study area. Women’s migrations within and outside the study area were 
recorded to allow for both intention-to-treat and per-protocol analyses.21 Women who had 
terminal family planning procedures were enumerated but excluded from the final sample. 
They were not excluded from participating in the interventions. 
The study was approved by the Malawi National Health Sciences Research Committee in 
January, 2003, and the ethics committee of the University College London Institute of Child 
Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK. 



Written consent for the random allocation of interventions to communities was obtained 
from the district commissioner, district health officer, and leaders of participating 
communities. Most women enrolled were not literate, and verbal consent was obtained for 
each data gathering episode after explaining the purpose of the visit. Women were free to 
decline to be interviewed at any time. 

We did a cluster-randomised controlled trial using a 2×2 factorial design to assess the effects 
of two interventions on specific outcome indicators. The study design has been described in 
detail elsewhere.21 48 clusters were defined on the basis of census enumeration areas 
(appendix p 1). Each cluster had a population of about 3000 people, with a surrounding 
buffer area to reduce contamination between intervention and control areas; villages in the 
buffer area were excluded. Clusters of villages, rather than individual villages, were used as 
the unit of randomisation to further reduce rates of travel across cluster boundaries and the 
possibility of contamination. The urban district administrative centre was excluded. 
The 48 clusters were allocated randomly to one of four groups (appendix p 1). 12 were 
allocated to the women’s group and volunteer peer counselling, 12 women’s group only, 12 
volunteer peer counselling only, and 12 no intervention. SL and DO allocated clusters with a 
random number sequence generated in Stata (version 7.0). Neither was involved in the 
implementation of the interventions. Although the interventions made masking of allocation 
impossible at the participant level, allocation was masked for data analysis. Data were 
gathered independently of programme implementation and could not be used to inform the 
implementation of the interventions, and thus bias them. 
From December, 2004, to December, 2010, each cohort member was visited once a month 
by a cluster enumerator and data were gathered; the interventions are still in progress, with 
data (not related to this trial) being gathered. All pregnancies, births, and neonatal, infant, 
and maternal deaths were identified, and surviving mothers and infants were followed up to 
1 year. Trained interviewers administered questionnaires about the demographic 
characteristics, maternity history, care and care-seeking, and maternal and infant morbidity 
at 1 month and 6 months after delivery. Feeding practices were ascertained through 24 h and 
7 day recall at both interviews. Deaths were verified by a supervisor, through a verbal 
autopsy interview 2–6 weeks later. When respondents were temporarily unavailable, they 
were followed up by the interviewers until an outcome was ascertained. If respondents were 
permanently unavailable, information about dates and timings of events was sought from 
other community members. 


From May, 2005, 207 women’s groups were established. Each was supported by a cluster 
facilitator through a community mobilisation action cycle of 20 meetings in four phases 
(appendix p 2), adapted from cycles used in Bolivia and Nepal.4,22–24 Facilitators (n=24) 
were local women aged 20–49 years, literate and with at least one child, selected from the 
community. They were trained over 11 days, with refresher training every 4 months. The 
facilitators were paid a salary, and given a bicycle, T-shirt, umbrella, field bag, and 
monitoring forms. They were supported by four supervisors who visited them at least twice 
a month, observed meetings, and provided training and feedback. The facilitators used a 
manual to implement the cycle, with participatory rural appraisal methods and picture cards 
of maternal and newborn health problems to guide discussion. Through the four phases of 
the cycle, members identified and prioritised maternal and child health problems, identified 
strategies to implement, planned and implemented them, and assessed them and made plans 



for the future. Criteria for membership were decided by the groups. Initially restricted to 
women (phases 1 and 2), membership was expanded to include men (phase 3). More than 12 
000 people attended at least once. 

From December, 2004, 72 female volunteer peer counsellors (two to four per cluster) 
implemented the intervention.25 Counsellors were selected with communities, and were 
literate women aged 23–50 years with breastfeeding experience. They identified pregnant 
women and made five home visits during and after pregnancy: in the third trimester, in the 
week after birth, and at 1 month, 3 months, and 5 months (appendix p 3). They provided 
health education about exclusive breastfeeding, infant care, immunisations, prevention of 
MTCT (PMTCT), and family planning. They also supported women with breast problems 
and raised awareness of timely care-seeking. Counsellors used an intervention manual 
describing visit content, and a simple picture book (adapted from manuals published by 
WHO,26 Save the Children,27 and Linkages28). They were given an initial 5 day and annual 
refresher training, and attended monthly meetings. They were also given a bicycle, meeting 
allowances, registers, calendars, and supervision forms. Peer counsellors lived in the same 
communities, so informal contacts to make arrangements for visits were common. Because 
the content was time dependent (eg, birth preparedness, immunisations, and weaning), 
counsellors stopped trying to arrange missed counselling visits after the appropriate time had 
elapsed, but would still attempt to make the next scheduled visit. No prespecified number of 
attempted visits were made before giving up. Counsellors only stopped attempting meetings 
if a woman expressed a lack of interest or refused. If a woman was not identified during 
pregnancy, counsellors would try to enrol her after delivery to attend the remaining four 
visits. Reasons for missed visits or discontinued counselling were recorded in their register. 
To promote sustainability, planning, and management, the Mchinji district health office was 
involved. Counsellors were supervised by 24 government health surveillance assistants, who 
visited quarterly, documenting progress, achievements, and challenges, and by three 
MaiMwana officers. Health surveillance assistants received initial and yearly refresher 
training, attended monthly and quarterly meetings, and were given calendars and a 
supervisory checklist. 

All study clusters benefited from strengthening of health services. Health workers from 
every facility were trained in essential newborn care, lifesaving skills and safe motherhood, 
and discussed the MaiMwana interventions. Bulb syringes, resuscitation tables, ambubags, 
artery forceps, cord clamps, and sphygmomanometers were donated by University College 
London and UNICEF to all facilities. MaiMwana project and district health staff, with 
funding from UNICEF, introduced PMTCT to the district in 2005 and all health facilities 
were covered by 2008. 

Primary outcomes were maternal, perinatal, neonatal, and infant mortality rates (MMR, 
PMR, NMR, and IMR, respectively) for the clusters assigned to the women’s group 
intervention; and IMR and rates of exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) in the first 6 months for 
those assigned to the volunteer peer counselling intervention (panel 1). PMR was reported as 
deaths per 1000 births (perinatal), NMR and IMR were reported as deaths per 1000 
livebirths, and MMR was reported as deaths per 100 000 livebirths. 
Secondary outcomes for the women’s group intervention were maternal and infant 
morbidity, skilled antenatal, delivery, and postnatal care, tetanus toxoid immunisation, use 



of malaria prophylaxis, insecticide-treated bednets during pregnancy, and PMTCT services, 
infant immunisations, early EBF, and reduced use of prelacteal feeds. For the volunteer peer 
counselling intervention, neonatal mortality and infant morbidity rates were secondary 
outcomes, and caretaker practices included duration of EBF, time to initiating breastfeeding, 
use of prelacteal feeds, time to weaning, management of breast problems, and family 
planning uptake, including condom use. We excluded dietary recall data if they were 
incomplete or gathered more than 2 weeks after expected interview dates. Care-seeking 
behaviour included awareness and use of PMTCT and HIV testing services and uptake of 
immunisations (three doses of pentavalent immunisation and four doses of polio vaccine by 
6 months). Birth preparedness was a prespecified outcome assessed indirectly through 
reported hand washing or use of gloves at delivery and early wrapping of the newborn baby. 
Use of nevirapine, expressing breastmilk, and infant growth were also prespecified, but data 
for these outcomes were gathered through different systems and will be investigated in 
future analyses. Uptake of antenatal, skilled delivery, and postnatal care were included as 
post-hoc outcomes because they were promoted by peer counsellors. Data for recognition of 
danger signs, though this was a prespecified secondary outcome for both interventions, were 
not gathered because showing participants pictures of major danger signs and asking for 
responses for each would have substantially lengthened the interview. 

The main analyses were factorial analyses, for comparison of the 24 clusters given the 
women’s group intervention (ie, alone or with volunteer peer counselling) with 24 control 
clusters (ie, volunteer peer counselling only or no intervention), and the 24 clusters given 
volunteer peer counselling (ie, alone or with the women’s group intervention) with 24 
control clusters (ie, women’s group alone or no intervention). The volunteer peer 
counselling intervention was established more rapidly than was the women’s group 
intervention, so the interventions were assessed over different time frames (appendix p 4). 
After exclusion of the baseline and establishment periods, the study ran from Feb 1, 2006, to 
Jan 31, 2009, for the women’s group intervention and July 1, 2005, to June 30, 2008, for the 
volunteer peer counselling intervention. 
We did not expect the interventions to have adverse effects at cluster or participant level, 
and did not institute stopping rules. In October, 2008, we presented preliminary findings to 
an independent data monitoring committee,29 which recommended further data gathering for 
1 year, and consideration of the delays in the first year of the women’s group intervention. 
The committee under took a final review of the volunteer peer counselling intervention in 
August, 2009, and of the women’s group intervention in March, 2010. 
The trial was planned for 3 years, and was powered for an analysis of birth outcomes over 2 
years, allowing 1 year for the women’s group intervention to be established.21 We assumed 
a between-cluster coefficient of variation (k) of 0·15–0·30, and about 240 births per cluster 
in 2 years. A sample size of 24 clusters per comparison group would detect a 47–50% 
reduction in MMR, 28–33% reduction in PMR, 31–36% reduction in NMR, and 21–28% 
reduction in IMR between intervention and control areas at 80% power and 5% significance 
level (assuming baseline mortality rates of 984 per 100 000 livebirths, 34 per 1000 births, 27 
per 1000 livebirths, and 76 per 1000 livebirths, respectively).30 At the same power and 
significance levels, it would detect a 16–30% increase in EBF, assuming baseline levels of 
28%.30 
Analysis was by intention to treat at cluster and participant levels. Data were excluded from 
analyses when dates of birth or death were not known. We tested the intervention effect on 
primary and secondary outcomes on the basis of previously agreed hypotheses. We used 
multivariate logistic regression with random effects on individual-level data in Stata (version 



11.0). Main analyses were factorial and adjusted for clustering, stratification by the other 
intervention, and socioeconomic and demographic variables. Analyses were adjusted for 
baseline differences in the women’s group intervention, but not in the volunteer peer 
counselling intervention because this intervention had already started during the 6 month 
inception and therefore there was a risk of masking early effects. Analysis of year 2 and 3 
outcomes was planned because of the potential for delayed effects of the women’s group 
intervention.4,5,31 Treatment group analysis was prespecified to investigate any interaction 
between the interventions, and inter action terms were included in factorial models to assess 
the strength of interaction. 

Costs were calculated from July, 2004, to January, 2009, separately for women’s groups, 
peer counselling, health-service strengthening, monitoring and evaluation, and process 
evaluation. Joint costs were shared. Costs from July, to December, 2004, and costs incurred 
later on that were necessary for implementation, were classified as start-up and running 
costs (appendix p 4). Costs were estimated from the perspective of a provider in Malawi 
Kwacha, inflated to 2010 values with the Malawian consumer price index,32 and converted 
to US$ on July 2, 2010. Capital costs were converted to yearly costs, assuming constant 
linear depreciation. Residual assets were deducted from programme costs based on resale 
value on Jan 31, 2009. 
Costs were gathered through project accounting systems, vehicle log-books, and time- 
allocation interviews. Resource use was assessed retrospectively. Donated resources and 
other items not captured in the accounting ledger were valued on the basis of best alternative 
use. Volunteer time was not valued at minimum wage because volunteers received financial 
allowances and goods, and volunteer work did not replace regular employment. Incremental 
cost-effectiveness was measured in relation to a do-nothing alternative. Results were 
calculated as the years of life lost (YLL) component of disability-adjusted life-years 
(DALYs) with 3% dis counting and no age weights. Deaths averted were calculated by 
subtracting actual from expected numbers and, for infant deaths, by multiplying the 
difference by the ratio of livebirths (n=9120) to births followed up to 1 year (n=7541). 
Expected deaths were calculated by use of adjusted odds ratios (ORs) from the stratified 
analyses to control for individual-level con founding. Maternal YLL averted were calculated 
from a mean age at death of 28 years. 


The funders had no role in the design of the study, data gathering, analysis, interpretation, or 
writing up of the findings. SL and AC had full access to all the data and AC had final 
responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. 

The figure shows the trial profile; 48 clusters were randomly assigned equally to 
interventions—women’s group plus volunteer peer counselling, women’s group only, 
volunteer peer counselling only, or no intervention. The mean population per cluster was 
3873 (range 3083–4933). Intervention implementation started before the trial periods began. 
The volunteer peer counselling intervention began on Dec 1, 2004, and the women’s group 
intervention on May 1, 2005. We took the 6 months’ inception, Jan 1, to June 30, 2005, as a 
baseline for the women’s group intervention, and an establishment period for the volunteer 
peer counselling intervention. Table 1 shows the characteristics of women and pregnancies 



in intervention groups in this period. Women in the four groups were similar in age, 
education, and marital status, with small differences in religious and tribal affiliations 
between groups, fewer farmers in areas with volunteer peer counselling only, and more 
primigravidae in areas with women’s group intervention only. The 24 clusters with 
volunteer peer counselling had higher uptake of skilled antenatal, delivery, and postnatal 
care, HIV testing, and exclusive breastfeeding, compared with clusters without peer 
counselling during this period, and lower frequencies of perceived maternal and neonatal 
problems, suggesting early intervention effects, though newborn care practices—early 
wrapping and initiation of breastfeeding—were lower (table 1). The opposite was true for 
areas with the women’s group intervention—lower delivery and postnatal care, and highest 
perceived maternal problems than in control areas—though early wrapping and 
breastfeeding were better (table 1). Clusters with only the women’s group intervention had 
the lowest uptake of antenatal and postnatal care and HIV testing, and higher perceived 
maternal problems (table 1). Exclusive breastfeeding was highest in areas with both 
interventions, suggesting early effects of volunteer peer counselling (and not an interaction 
because the women’s group intervention had not begun; table 1). 
Four women’s group facilitators dropped out during the trial and were replaced. Over 3 
years in intervention areas, data for coverage were provided by 7815 mothers at 1 month 
after delivery. 4167 (53%) of these mothers had ever attended a women’s group. 2457 
(59%) of 4167 had attended groups one to five times, 1267 (30%) six to ten times, and 443 
(11%) more than ten times. There was one women’s group per 105 women aged 15–49 
years and per 440 population. 
Eight volunteer counsellors and six health surveillance assistants dropped out during the trial 
and were replaced. Over 3 years in intervention areas, data for coverage were provided by 
8112 mothers at 1 month after delivery, and 4447 (55%) of these said they had received 
counselling (8612 individual visits). Reports at 6 months after delivery were available for 
5513 mothers in intervention areas, and 3582 (65%) of these were given counselling (8715 
visits). There was one volunteer counsellor per 305 women aged 15–49 years and per 1291 
population. 
Table 2 summarises the numbers of births and deaths in each group. Mortality rates were 
higher in the women’s group (with or without volunteer peer counselling) than in the non- 
women’s group (volunteer peer counselling only or no intervention) clusters at inception, 
and highest in clusters given both interventions (women’s group plus volunteer peer 
counselling). PMR, NMR, and IMR fell consistently over 3 years in areas given the 
women’s group intervention with or without volunteer peer counselling; MMR also fell, 
with the largest reductions in years 2 and 3 (table 2). Non-women’s group clusters did not 
show a similar pattern (table 2). Generally, IMR was lower in clusters assigned to volunteer 
peer counselling (alone or with women’s groups) than in those assigned to non-volunteer 
peer counselling (women’s groups or no intervention) and was lowest in volunteer peer 
counselling only clusters throughout the study. 
Table 3 summarises the analyses of the primary outcomes for the women’s group 
intervention. There was no difference between women’s group and no women’s group 
intervention clusters in a factorial model adjusted only for clustering and the presence of 
volunteer peer counselling intervention. Adjustment for cluster-level baseline values, 
socioeconomic quintile, and parity lowered the ORs. For years 2 and 3, after exclusion of 
data from the first year (establishment) of the trial, MMR was reduced by 52% (adjusted OR 
0·48, 95% CI 0·26–0·91; table 3). Inclusion of interaction terms in models showed highly 
significant interactions between the two interventions for almost all primary outcomes, and 
stratified analyses were done. Strong effects were noted in areas without peer counsellors, 



with reductions of 33% in PMR, 41% in NMR, 28% in IMR, and 74% in MMR in years 2 
and 3 (table 3). No effects were noted in areas with peer counsellors. k for NMR was 0·38 
for all clusters and 0·28 for control clusters only, corresponding with intracluster correlation 
coefficients of 0·00376 and 0·00237, respectively. 
Analysis of secondary outcomes, after adjustment for cluster-level baseline values, 
socioeconomic quintile, and parity, showed a 50% increase in uptake of antenatal care, and a 
30% reduction in births attended by traditional birth attendants (table 4). Exclusive 
breastfeeding showed an increase of 74% and complete immunisation at 6 months showed a 
greater than 2·5 times increase (table 4). 
For the primary outcomes with the volunteer peer counselling intervention, we noted an 
18% reduction in IMR compared with control areas during the 3 years of the trial after 
adjustment for stratification and clustering (table 3). This effect was not significant after 
adjustment for socioeconomic quintile and parity, and the effect size was not increased when 
the first year was excluded (table 3). Stratified analysis showed large effects on IMR in 
areas without women’s groups (adjusted OR 0·64, 0·48–0·85), but no effect in areas with 
women’s groups. k for IMR was 0·26 for all clusters and 0·14 for control clusters, 
corresponding with intracluster correlation coefficients of 0·00385 and 0·00120, 
respectively. Improvements were also noted in exclusive breastfeeding rates (tables 3 and 4); 
however, stratified analysis showed that these effects were not significant in areas without 
women’s groups. k for exclusive breastfeeding was 0·91 for all clusters and 0·62 for control 
clusters only (intracluster correlation coefficients 0·14703 and 0·04263, respectively). 
Analysis of secondary outcomes for the peer counselling intervention, after adjustment for 
socioeconomic quintile and parity, showed much lower use of prelacteal feeds, shorter mean 
time to first breastfeed, and higher mean age of starting porridge (the main complimentary 
feed; table 4). Immunisation rates were already high in all study areas at inception, and 
though coverage was generally higher in peer counselling areas during the study, only the 
effect on BCG was significant (table 4), and the number of infants fully vaccinated for 
poliomyelitis was lower. Reported breastfeeding problems and associated care-seeking did 
not differ between control and intervention groups, but reported infant cough, fever, or 
diarrhoea was 42% lower in intervention areas (table 4). 
No differences were noted in use of family planning, or other antenatal, delivery, and 
postnatal care-seeking (table 4). Uptake of HIV testing was much higher in all areas than it 
was at inception, but there was no difference between volunteer peer counselling and control 
areas during the study (table 4). 
The presence of both interventions in a cluster improved coverage, with 2192 (57%) of 3874 
women with available attendance data having ever attended a women’s group by 1 month 
post partum, compared with 1975 (50%) of 3941 in clusters with women’s group only. 2552 
(63%) of 4055 women with available visit data had ever been visited by a peer counsellor in 
areas with both interventions, compared with 1895 (47%) of 4057 in areas with only 
volunteer peer counselling. Despite this, the effects on mortality rates were lower than in 
areas with one intervention. 
Comparisons were made between control areas and the three intervention groups (table 3). 
Striking effects were noted on MMR with women’s groups only, and on IMR with volunteer 
peer counselling only in years 1–3. Table 2 shows that IMR remained the lowest in peer 
counselling only areas throughout the study. Outcomes in years 2 and 3 showed striking 
effects on all mortality rates in areas with women’s group intervention only (table 3). With 
the exception of MMR, adjusted ORs in areas with both interventions were near to 1·00 
(table 3). All interaction effects were significant, except for MMR and NMR for model 2, 



years 1–3, though these treatment group effects showed a similar pattern (table 3). 
Treatment group analysis of EBF showed much higher rates in double intervention areas 
than in control areas, and non-significant effects in areas with either intervention alone 
(table 3). This pattern was the same as at inception, before the women’s groups had started, 
and could not have been due to interaction (table 1). 
Significant interactions were not noted for secondary outcomes, though treatment group 
analysis showed larger effects in areas with both interventions. Adjusted (for clustering, 
stratification, socioeconomic quintile, parity, and baseline values) ORs for skilled birth 
attendance were 1·36 (0·89–2·06) for areas with both interventions, 1·21 (0·80–1·83) for 
women’s group only, and 1·10 (0·72–1·67) for volunteer peer counselling only. 
The total economic cost of the women’s group intervention was $698 459. The cost of the 
volunteer peer counselling intervention was $263 544. In years 2–3, 48·4 maternal deaths 
and 157·5 infant deaths were averted by the women’s group intervention. In years 1–3, 
258·5 infant deaths were averted by the volunteer peer counselling intervention. The cost of 
the women’s groups was $114 per YLL averted (infant and maternal deaths), and was of 
similar magnitude to other studies.4,5 The average cost of volunteer peer counselling was 
$33 per YLL averted. 
The mean costs per year were $16·6 per infant (women’s group), $6·3 per infant (volunteer 
peer counselling), and $5·6 per woman of childbearing age (women’s group). Health service 
strengthening added $1·6 and monitoring and assessment $5·4 per woman of childbearing 
age. $601 019 (86%) of the cost of the women’s group and $205 446 (78%) of the cost of 
the volunteer peer counselling group were for implementation. 

Our results suggest that, in rural Malawi, a women’s group intervention mobilising 
communities for improved maternal and child health reduced MMR (74%), PMR (33%), 
NMR (41%), and IMR (28%) in years 2 and 3, in adjusted, stratified models in areas without 
a peer counselling intervention, but had no effects in areas with peer counselling. In areas 
without women’s groups, where volunteer peer counsellors advised mothers about feeding 
and infant care, IMR fell by 36% (table 3), and overall infant morbidity by 42% (table 4). 
EBF rates increased more than two times, but after stratification the effect was only 
significant in areas with women’s group intervention. Both interventions were highly cost 
effective, averting 1 YLL for less than the per head gross domestic product of Malawi.33 
Despite the lower than expected coverage and attendance, the effect of both interventions 
was impressive. Increasing coverage would have increased costs, making the interventions 
difficult to implement on a larger scale. Secondary outcomes suggested changes toward 
improved care and care-seeking behaviour, though few indicators showed conclusive 
effects. Reductions in morbidity and mortality rates might have been due to small changes in 
many behaviours (panel 2).34 
Our study had some limitations. Although surveillance of births and deaths was prospective 
and quality controlled, errors probably arose in ascertainment and classification of 
outcomes. Delays in implementation of activities by the women’s groups in year 1 diluted 
the effects noted overall. Breastfeeding status was ascertained by use of self-report at two 
timepoints, raising the possibility of misclassification. The low exclusive breastfeeding 
proportion (14%) compared with Malawi Demographic and Health Survey estimates 
(28%),30 suggests it was not over-reported. Losses to follow-up for breastfeeding outcomes 
are largely explained by the exclusion of incomplete or delayed dietary recall data. Because 
women knew their intervention allocation, behavioural answers were open to best behaviour 



bias. However, corresponding reductions in mortality outcomes suggest that changes in 
behaviour were real. 
The factorial design introduced the possibility of interaction between the two interventions, 
confirmed by the analyses. The greater effect on mortality rates seen in single intervention 
areas than in those with both was noteworthy. One explanation might be negative synergy, 
where both interventions might have been saving the same lives, thus restricting the 
potential for combined effect. Another explanation is that combined delivery led to reduced 
efficiency, but this was not supported by improved coverage in areas with both 
interventions. Furthermore, outcomes such as EBF and skilled birth attendance were greater 
in areas with both interventions. For EBF, this apparent interaction existed at inception, 
before the women’s group intervention started, suggesting that areas with both interventions 
differed in ways that were not compensated for by the adjusted analyses. They were either 
more urbanised, making interventions less easy to implement, or more remote from health 
facilities. They had higher IMR, NMR, and PMR at inception, but improved more than areas 
with no intervention during the study period (table 2). 
Our results, though complicated by the factorial design and baseline imbalances after 
randomisation, confirm the findings from women’s group trials in south Asia that reductions 
in mortality rates result from mobilisation of women and communities.4,5 Of particular note 
is the effect on MMR, also noted in the Makwanpur trial,4 but in this case a specified 
primary outcome. Previous trials of breastfeeding counselling showed variable effects in 
sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere.7,10,20 The contribution of improvements in feeding to 
infant survival in rural Malawi is plausible, but difficult to ascertain in this study. We did 
not see changes in individual home-care practices or uptake of routine primary care 
interventions, although 22 of 26 process variables were better in areas with volunteer peer 
counsellors. Infant morbidity rate from cough, fever, and diarrhoea was lower in these areas, 
and better recognition of illness and timely care-seeking might have contributed to a 
reduction in IMR. 
Our study is the first trial of women’s groups and volunteer peer counsellors in a rural 
African population and showed substantial effect on MMR, NMR, and IMR. The 
interventions were uncomplicated and inexpensive, and could achieve further savings at 
scale. Counsellors were supervised through the government public health system, and 
women’s groups linked to government health surveillance assistants during strategy 
implementation, so both could be scaled up and sustained through these systems. Slow 
progress towards Millennium Development Goal 4 in Africa, and a lack of community trials 
with population mortality rates as outcomes, means that women’s groups and peer 
counsellors deserve serious policy consideration for scale-up. 



Trial funding was provided mainly by Saving Newborn Lives with later contributions from the UK Department for 
International Development, Wellcome Trust, Institute of Child Health, and UNICEF Malawi. We thank the Malawi 
Ministry of Health, Mchinji District Hospital, Mchinji district assembly and traditional leaders, MaiMwana 
women’s group facilitators, volunteer counsellors, participating community members, and all field stafffor their 
contributions to this study. 




1. Rajaratnam JK, Marcus JR, Flaxman AD, et al. Neonatal, postneonatal, childhood, and under-5 
mortality for 187 countries, 1970–2010: a systematic analysis of progress towards Millennium 
Development Goal 4. Lancet. 2010; 375:1988–2008. [PubMed: 20546887] 

WHO and UNICEF. Global, regional, and national causes of child mortality in 2008: a systematic 
analysis. Lancet. 2010; 375:1969–87. [PubMed: 20466419] 


4. Manandhar DS, Osrin D, Shrestha BP, et al. members of the MIRA Makwanpur trial team. Effect of 
a participatory intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes in Nepal: cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2004; 364:970–79. [PubMed: 15364188] 
5. Tripathy P, Nair N, Barnett S, et al. Effect of a participatory intervention with women’s groups on 
birth outcomes and maternal depression in Jharkhand and Orissa, India: a cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2010; 375:1182–92. [PubMed: 20207411] 



positive mothers and their children in sub-Saharan Africa. Bull World Health Organ. 2006; 84:546– 
54. [PubMed: 16878228] 


9. Lewin S, Munabi-Babigumira S, Glenton C, et al. Lay health workers in primary and community 
health care for maternal and child health and the management of infectious diseases. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2010; 3:CD004015. [PubMed: 20238326] 


11. Arifeen SE, Hoque DME, Akter T, et al. Effect of the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness 
strategy on childhood mortality and nutrition in a rural area in Bangladesh: a cluster randomised 
trial. Lancet. 2009; 374:393–403. [PubMed: 19647607] 

breastfeeding on diarrhoeal illness and growth: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2003; 
361:1418–23. [PubMed: 12727395] 

exclusive breastfeeding practices in Dhaka, Bangladesh: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2000; 356:1643–47. [PubMed: 11089824] 



counselling to promote breastfeeding in the northeast of Brazil: a randomized clinical trial. Acta 
Paediatr. 2005; 94:741–46. [PubMed: 16188778] 
16. Jakobsen MS, Sodemann M, Biai S, Nielsen J, Aaby P. Promotion of exclusive breastfeeding is not 
likely to be cost effective in West Africa. A randomized intervention study from Guinea-Bissau. 
Acta Paediatr. 2008; 97:68–75. 

breastfeeding promotion by peer counsellors in sub-Saharan Africa (PROMISE-EBF): a cluster- 
randomised trial. Lancet. 2011; 378:420–27. [PubMed: 21752462] 










community effectiveness of two interventions in rural Malawi to improve health care and to reduce 
maternal, newborn and infant mortality. Trials. 2010 published online Sept 17. DOI: 
10.1186/1745-6215-11-88. 
22. Grabman, LH.; Seoane, G.; Davenport, C. The Warmi Project: a participatory approach to improve 
maternal and neonatal health. An implementor's manual. John Snow International; MotherCare 
Project; Save the Children; Westport: 2002. 

mobilisation intervention to improve mother and child health and reduce mortality in rural Malawi. 
Malawi Med J. 2010; 22:112–19. [PubMed: 21977831] 

MaiMwana women’s groups. Malawi: 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcCAwLleFx4 
[Accessed Jan 21, 2013] 
25. Rosato, M.; Lewycka, S.; Mwansambo, C., et al. [Accessed Jan 21, 2013] Volunteer infant feeding 
and care counsellors: a health education intervention to improve mother and child health and 
reduce mortality in rural Malawi. http://www.medcol.mw/mmj/?p=1098 
26. Recommended feeding and dietary practices to improve infant and maternal nutrition. Linkages; 
1999. http://www.linkagesproject.org/media/publications/Technical%20Reports/recfeeding.pdf 
[Accessed May 1, 2013] 
27. WHO. UNICEF. [Accessed May 1, 2013] Breastfeeding counselling: a training course. Director’s 
guide, trainer’s guide, participants’ manual. 1993. http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/ 
documents/who_cdr_93_3/en/ 

Children Federation; Washington, DC: 2004. http://fmp.ueh.edu.ht/PDF/ 
Care_of_Newborn_SNL.pdf [Accessed May 1, 2013] 





three rural districts in Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010; 375:1193– 
202. [PubMed: 20207412] 


33. Sachs, J. Macroeconomics and health: investing in health for economic development. Report of the 
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. World Health Organization; Geneva: 2001. p. 
1-210. 

implications for child-survival strategies: evidence from national surveys. Lancet. 2005; 
366:1460–66. [PubMed: 16243091] 










Perinatal death: stillbirth after 28 weeks of gestation, or death of a liveborn 
infant within 7 completed days of birth 


Late neonatal death: death arising after 7 days but within 28 completed days of 
birth 

• Maternal death: death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of cessation 
of the pregnancy from any cause related to the pregnancy or its management, 
but not from accidental causes 

Exclusive breastfeeding: infants receiving only breastmilk and no prelacteal 
feeds or other liquids or solids except for vitamins, minerals, or medicines 





We searched PubMed and the Cochrane Library for relevant papers published from Jan 1, 
2000, to Dec 31, 2011. We also searched key internet sites, including those of UNICEF, 
WHO, and the World Bank. Search terms were “community participation”, “community 
mobilisation”, “newborn mortality”, “maternal mortality”, “breastfeeding”, and “peer 
counsellor”. Searches were restricted to reports published in English. We assessed the 
quality of the evidence by critically reviewing the methods used in each study and 
focusing on randomised controlled trials. 

The results from our study add to existing evidence because we report, as far as we know, 
the first population-based trial of a community action cycle for birth outcomes in an 
African country led by a participatory women’s group, and the first trial of the effect of a 
volunteer peer counselling intervention on infant mortality rates. We compared our 
results with those of other studies with similar methods that have been done mainly in 
south Asian countries. Our findings allow us to draw firmer conclusions that women’s 
groups with a community action cycle are a generalisable method for improving survival 
of newborn babies and mothers in poor rural communities. The work with volunteer 
counsellors takes forward the evidence that community peer education on infant care and 
feeding not only improves feeding behaviours but also might have a direct effect on 
infant mortality. Demand-side interventions are a crucial, yet neglected, component of 
strategies to improve maternal and child health and to achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals. 


Figure. Trial profile 
Data correspond to study period for the women’s group intervention because intervention 
study periods overlap; 26 262 births were followed up (analysis dataset). 
*Pregnancies reported in monthly registers but not followed up with an interview could also 
include women who moved away permanently, declined, or were temporarily out of the 
cluster, reporting errors, or some missed interviews; some pregnancies might have resulted 
in miscarriage, but the miscarriage was not reported. 



Characteristics of identified pregnancies in intervention groups during the inception 
period 




Women’s 
group + 
volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(A) 
Women’s 
group 
only (B) 
Volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
only (C) 

No 
women’s 
group (C 
+D) 
Volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(A+C) 
No 
volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(B+D) 



















































































































































































































 Divorced, widowed, 
 or other 
































































































 Any antenatal care at a 
 health facility 










 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





Women’s 
group + 
volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(A) 
Women’s 
group 
only (B) 
Volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
only (C) 

No 
women’s 
group (C 
+D) 
Volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(A+C) 
No 
volunteer 
peer 
counselling 
(B+D) 
 Any HIV testing at 
 antenatal care visit 




















 delivery, or postnatal 
 maternal problem 
































 Attendant washed 
 hands or wore gloves 



















 Baby wrapped within 
 30 min of birth 
 Postnatal care at a 
 health facility 
























Infant received polio 
immunisation 
























 problem (cough, fever, 
 or diarrhoea) 
 Breastfed infants at age 
 1 month 
 Breastfeeding initiated 
 within 1 h of birth 






























 breastfed to age 
 6 months 









Data are number (%), unless otherwise indicated. Missing data differ for each variable and are not included in the table. Percentages are calculated 
from available data for each variable. 

Temporary work—usually labouring work or farming for different employers on an occasional and ad-hoc basis, so individual receives a fixed 
amount for completion of the job. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








 
 
 
 
 
 




















 
 
 
 







 









Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 


































































 MMR (no peer 
counselling) 



















 PMR (no peer 
counselling) 



















 NMR (no peer 
counselling) 





























































 EBF (no women’s 
group)† 




















 Women’s group plus 
peer counselling 




























 Women’s group plus 
peer counselling 

































 
 
 
 
 
 







Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI) 

 Women’s group plus 
peer counselling 
























 Women’s group plus 
peer counselling 




























 Women’s group plus 
peer counselling 



























Data are n/N (rate), unless otherwise indicated. 95% CIs were not adjusted. MMR=maternal mortality ratio per 100 000 livebirths. PMR=perinatal 
mortality rate per 1000 births. NMR=neonatal mortality rate per 1000 livebirths. IMR=infant mortality rate per 1000 livebirths. EBF=exclusive 
breastfeeding rate per 100 livebirths. Model 1 data were adjusted for clustering and stratification by the other intervention. Model 2 data were 
adjusted as in model 1, and for cluster-level baseline values, socioeconomic quintile, and parity. 



Adjusted for stratification, clustering, socioeconomic quintile, and parity, but not for baseline values, because these could reflect early effects of 
the volunteer peer counselling intervention. 

Study years used for this analysis were for the women’s group intervention, so that both interventions were active during the period analysed, 
because the women’s group intervention was still in its set-up phase during year 1 of the volunteer peer counselling intervention. 




Secondary outcomes in intervention and control clusters for the two interventions 
(women’s groups and volunteer peer counselling) 



























































 Any perceived antenatal, delivery, or postnatal maternal 
problem 















































Infants with follow-up data about vaccinations received by 
age 6 months 


Infant received BCG, four doses of oral polio, and three 
doses of diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus vaccines by age 
6 months 
 































 Ever used modern method (pill, norplant, depo, condom, 
loop, 



















 
 
 
















 Any perceived antenatal, delivery, or postnatal maternal 
problem 






































































pertussis, 
b) dose by age 6 months 






pertussis, 
b) doses by age 6 months 




















−37·7 (−67·5 to −7·9) 
§ 


















Data are number (%) or adjusted odds ratio (95% CI), unless otherwise indicated. Model 1 data were adjusted for clustering and stratification by 
the other intervention. Model 2 data: as model 1, with adjustment for socioeconomic quintile and parity. Women’s group analyses were adjusted 
for cluster-level baseline values due to imbalance at baseline. Volunteer peer counselling analyses were not adjusted for baseline values as the 
intervention had already started. Denominators used for calculating percentages do not include missing data, which differ for each variable. p 
values for secondary outcomes were not corrected for multiple testing, and exact significance levels should be interpreted with caution. Care 
practices and care-seeking behaviour were secondary outcomes for the peer counselling intervention, but antenatal care, health facility delivery, 
type of birth attendant, and postnatal care were not directly prespecified and were analysed post hoc. 

A woman received two or three doses of tetanus toxoid vaccine during her current pregnancy or a complete course of five immunisations during 
her lifetime. 

Only data for study period for women’s group intervention used because models 1 and 2 failed to run with the data for the study period for the 
volunteer peer counselling as a result of numerical overflow. 





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
