

Published Online 
March 8, 2010 
DOI:10.1016/S0140- 
6736(09)62042-0 


Ekjut, Chakradharpur, 
Jharkhand, India 
(P Tripathy MSc, N Nair MBBS, 
R Mahapatra MSc, Sh Rath MA, 
Su Rath MA, R Gope PGDRD, 
D Mahto DCHM, R Sinha); 
University College London 
Centre for International Health 
and Development, Institute of 
Child Health, University College 
London, London, UK 
(S Barnett PhD, A Prost PhD, 
Prof A Costello FRCP); Eﬀ ective 
Intervention, Centre for 
Economic Performance, 
London School of Economics 
and Political Science, London, 
UK (R Lakshminarayana DNB); 
London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK 
(J Borghi PhD, Prof V Patel PhD); 
Sangath, 841/1 Alto Porvorim, 
Goa, India (Prof V Patel); and 
Clinical Operational Research 
Unit, University College 
London, London, UK 
(C Pagel PhD) 
Correspondence to: 
Dr Prasanta Tripathy, Ekjut, Ward 
Number 17, Plot 556B, Potka, 
Po-Chakradharpur, District West 
Singhbhum, Jharkhand, 833102, 
India 
prasanta.ekjut@gmail.com 
Eﬀ ect of a participatory intervention with women’s groups 
on birth outcomes and maternal depression in Jharkhand 
and Orissa, India: a cluster-randomised controlled trial 
Prasanta Tripathy, Nirmala Nair, Sarah Barnett, Rajendra Mahapatra, Josephine Borghi, Shibanand Rath, Suchitra Rath, Rajkumar Gope, 
Dipnath Mahto, Rajesh Sinha, Rashmi Lakshminarayana, Vikram Patel, Christina Pagel, Audrey Prost, Anthony Costello 
Summary 
Background Community mobilisation through participatory women’s groups might improve birth outcomes in poor 
rural communities. We therefore assessed this approach in a largely tribal and rural population in three districts in 
eastern India. 
Methods From 36 clusters in Jharkhand and Orissa, with an estimated population of 228 186, we assigned 18 clusters 
to intervention or control using stratiﬁ ed randomisation. Women were eligible to participate if they were aged 
15–49 years, residing in the project area, and had given birth during the study. In intervention clusters, a facilitator 
convened 13 groups every month to support participatory action and learning for women, and facilitated the 
development and implementation of strategies to address maternal and newborn health problems. The primary 
outcomes were reductions in neonatal mortality rate (NMR) and maternal depression scores. Analysis was by intention 
is registered as an International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number 
to treat. This trial 
ISRCTN21817853. 
Findings After baseline surveillance of 4692 births, we monitored outcomes for 19 030 births during 3 years (2005–08). 
NMRs per 1000 were 55·6, 37·1, and 36·3 during the ﬁ rst, second, and third years, respectively, in intervention 
clusters, and 53·4, 59·6, and 64·3, respectively, in control clusters. NMR was 32% lower in intervention clusters 
adjusted for clustering, stratiﬁ cation, and baseline diﬀ erences (odds ratio 0·68, 95% CI 0·59–0·78) during the 3 years, 
and 45% lower in years 2 and 3 (0·55, 0·46–0·66). Although we did not note a signiﬁ cant eﬀ ect on maternal depression 
overall, reduction in moderate depression was 57% in year 3 (0·43, 0·23–0·80). 
Interpretation This intervention could be used with or as a potential alternative to health-worker-led interventions, 
and presents new opportunities for policy makers to improve maternal and newborn health outcomes in poor 
populations. 
Funding Health Foundation, UK Department for International Development, Wellcome Trust, and the Big Lottery 
Fund (UK). 
Introduction 
Every year, an estimated 3·7 million children worldwide 
die in the ﬁ rst month of life.1,2 Global progress in 
reduction of maternal and child mortality rates is 
insuﬃ cient—only 16 of 68 countries are on track to 
achieve Millennium Development Goal 4 (reduction of 
mortality rate in children <5 years by two-thirds between 
1990–2015).3 India accounts for 20% of maternal deaths 
worldwide, 21% of all child (<5 years) deaths, and 25% of 
all neonatal deaths.4 Urgent eﬀ orts are needed to reduce 
these mortality rates quickly through cost-eﬀ ective and 
scalable interventions. 
Large improvements were noted in birth outcomes in a 
poor rural population in Makwanpur, Nepal, after a low- 
cost, potentially sustainable, and scalable participatory 
intervention with women’s groups.5 Newborn mortality 
rates were 30% lower in intervention areas than in control 
areas (odds ratio 0·70, 95% CI 0·53–0·94).5 Local female 
facilitators assisted women’s groups every month to 
consider the causes and underlying problems leading to 
maternal and newborn deaths, develop practical strategies 
with community leaders and men, and implement and 
assess the outcomes of these strategies. This community- 
action cycle, adapted from a programme developed in 
Bolivia, created health and non-health beneﬁ ts at low 
cost.6 
Maternal depression is an increasing public health 
concern in low-income countries because of its high 
prevalence and wide-ranging implications for the health 
of the mother and infant.7 Delivery of appropriate 
interventions to prevent or treat maternal depression 
through health workers is a major challenge in countries 
with under-resourced health systems, and community 
groups assisted by non-health-care workers might have 
some advantage in helping the poorest women.8 
Jharkhand and Orissa are two of the poorest states in 
eastern India. About 40% of their total combined 
population lives below the poverty line.9 The average life 
expectancy among women in both states is about 60 years, 
and an estimated 63% are illiterate.10 Neonatal mortality 





with existing groups from a basket. The ﬁ rst four clusters 
were allocated to the intervention group, the rest to the 
control group. This process was repeated for clusters 
without women’s groups and in the other two districts in 
the presence of external observers (ﬁ gure 2). We chose 
this method because of simplicity and visibility, which 
were necessary to convince local communities that the 
process was transparent. Because of the nature of the 
intervention, neither the intervention team nor the 
participants were masked to group assignment during 
the trial. 
rate (NMR) per 1000 livebirths is 49 in Jharkhand and 45 
in Orissa, and maternal mortality ratio per 100 000 
livebirths is 371 and 358, respectively.11,12 These are 
disproportionately higher than India’s national estimates 
of 39 per 1000 for NMR and 301 per 100 000 for maternal 
mortality ratio.11,12 
More than 20% of Jharkhand and Orissa’s population is 
aﬃ liated with Scheduled Tribes (or Adivasi—ie, indigenous 
groups), and about 12% with scheduled castes.13 Despite 
calls for inclusive development, Adivasi communities 
remain underserved—their employment rate is roughly 
half that of non-indigenous people, and nearly a third of 
Adivasi children in Jharkhand and Orissa do not receive 
primary education.12,13 Indigenous communities also have 
higher mortality rates and poorer access to health services 
than do the non-indigenous populations.14 
We hypothesised that a participatory intervention with 
women’s groups could reduce neonatal mortality by at 
least 25% in underserved tribal communities of eastern 
India, and improve home-care practices and health- 
seeking behaviour of pregnant and postnatal women, 
and their family members; and that the women’s group 
intervention could reduce maternal depression in the 
intervention areas by 30%. 
Methods 
Study location and population 
Our study was done in three contiguous districts of 
Jharkhand and Orissa—Saraikela Kharswan, West 
Singhbhum, and Keonjhar (ﬁ gure 1). The proportion of 
Adivasis within the study clusters was 58–70%. Eligible 
participants were women aged 15–49 years, residing in 
the project area, and who had given birth during the 
study (July 31, 2005, to July 30, 2008). The study 
population was an open cohort—ie, women could enter 
the study at any time during the trial period if they had 
given birth. Women who chose to participate gave their 
consent (written or left-thumb print) and were free to 
decline an interview at any time. Women who were 
identiﬁ ed by interviewers as having symptoms of 
severe depression were referred to the nearest tertiary 
mental health centre at Ranchi. Ethical approval was 
obtained from an independent ethical committee in 
Jamshedpur, India. 
Randomisation 
We identiﬁ ed 12 rural clusters per district, with a mean 
population of 6338 per cluster (range 3605–7467). The 
estimated population in these 36 clusters was 228 186 (on 
the basis of the 2001 Indian census projections).15 In 
18 clusters, existing women’s groups were involved in 
savings and credit activities (seven in West Singhbhum, 
three in Saraikela Kharswan, and eight in Keonjhar). In 
the ﬁ rst district 
(West Singhbhum), an external 
observer from a partner non-governmental organisation 
(Professional Assistance for Development Action) drew 
folded papers with numbers corresponding to clusters 









Intervention clusters 
Control clusters 


Saraikela 
Kharswan 



2 allocated to intervention 
2 allocated to control 
West Singhbum district 
12 clusters 
Saraikela district 
12 clusters 
Keonjhar district 
12 clusters 

5 allocated to intervention 
4 allocated to control 

2 allocated to intervention 
3 allocated to control 

women’s groups 
4 allocated to intervention 
4 allocated to control 

women’s groups 
1 allocated to intervention 
2 allocated to control 

women’s groups 
4 allocated to intervention 
3 allocated to control 



In September, 2004, we met with gram sabhas (village 
councils), headmen, and representatives from panchayats 
(elected representatives for basic governance) in the three 
districts. These representatives granted permission to 
start surveillance of births and deaths, and to work with 
women’s groups. 
Surveillance 
A surveillance system with key 
informants was 
established in the three districts. Figure 3 shows this 
system, and Barnett and colleagues16 describe it in detail. 
One key informant, usually a traditional birth attendant 
or active village member, was responsible for about 
250 households, and reported any births, maternal or 
newborn deaths, and deaths in women of reproductive 

age every month within their allocated area. The key 
informant met with an interviewer once a month who 
veriﬁ ed births and interviewed all identiﬁ ed mothers to 
gather 
their sociodemographic 
characteristics, pregnancy, delivery, and postnatal period 
through a structured questionnaire about 6 weeks after 
delivery. As additional checks for the identiﬁ cation 
stage, all women identiﬁ ed were asked to locate any 
others of reproductive age who had recently given birth 
or died in the study area. Every district had 12 
interviewers, one interviewer supervisor, and a district 
manager. The monitoring manager supervised ﬁ eld- 
based activities in all three districts and data entry at the 
head oﬃ ce. The intervention and surveillance teams 
were partitioned—interviewers and facilitators belonged 
to diﬀ erent villages, their training was done separately, 
and they had review meetings on separate days. 
In the event of a stillbirth or neonatal death (panel 1), 
the interviewer administered a questionnaire and did a 
verbal autopsy with the mother and other individuals 
present at the time of death; the verbal autopsy included 
free text in which the mother was asked to narrate the 
details of events leading to the death of the neonate. For 
the 
deaths among women of reproductive age, 
interviewer spoke to family members to ascertain the 
age of the woman, cause of death, and whether she was 
pregnant or had recently given birth. In the event of a 
maternal death, the monitoring supervisors, initially 
accompanied by a physician, did verbal autopsies with a 
relative who was present at the time of the death. 
Supervisors completed a standard questionnaire with 
free text for elaboration of the sequence of events before 
the death. Verbal autopsies for maternal deaths were 
done by a physician (n=11), interviewer supervisor 
(n=96), or district manager (n=2). 
Maternal depression was included as a trial outcome in 
the second year of the study because of delays in 
identiﬁ cation of a contextually appropriate scale. We used 
the Kessler-10 item scale (K10), a questionnaire for the 
detection of common mental disorders in community 
settings, that has been used in India and World Mental 
Health Surveys.18–20 A psychiatrist (RL) did three training 
sessions of 2 days each for groups of 12–15 interviewers 
that consisted of administration of the K10 questionnaire, 
aspects of understanding depression and body language, 
association between physical health and mental health, 
active listening skills, and conﬁ dentiality. 
Clusters and coverage of women’s groups 
In the 18 intervention clusters, we used a participatory 
action cycle with 172 existing groups and created an 
additional 72 groups. Coverage of Ekjut groups was one 
group per 468 population. In year 1, 546 (18%) of 3119 
newly pregnant women attended the groups, rising to 
1718 (55%) of 3126 in year 3. We recorded 111 006 group 
attendances over 3 years. 74 715 (67%) of these were from 
married women of reproductive age, 15 030 (14%) from 


Late maternal 
deaths 
Interviewer interviews family member 
regarding mother’s background characteristics, 
antepartum, intrapartum and post-partum 
information 6 weeks after delivery 







Neonatal 
deaths 
Maternal 
deaths 
Pregnancy- 
related deaths 




• Miscarriage: cessation of a presumptive pregnancy before 
22 weeks of gestation before delivery of the baby’s head17 






• Perinatal death: a stillbirth or an early neonatal death 
• Maternal death: death of a woman while pregnant or 
within 42 days of cessation of pregnancy from any cause 
related to the pregnancy or its management, but not 
from accidental causes 


Figure 5: Women’s group meeting in Jharkhand, India 
Individuals in the photo provided permission (written or thumb print) for publication of image. 
Primary and secondary outcomes 
The primary outcomes were reductions in NMR and 
maternal depression scores. Secondary outcomes were 
stillbirths, maternal and perinatal deaths, uptake of 
antenatal and delivery services, home-care practices 
during and after delivery, and health-care-seeking 
behaviour (seeking care from qualiﬁ ed providers in the 
adolescent girls, 10 452 (9%) from men, and 10 809 (10%) 
from elderly women. 


Women’s group intervention 
Every group met monthly for a total of 20 meetings, 
and a local woman, selected on the basis of criteria 
(including speaking the local language and having the 
ability 
the 
to meetings) 
community, facilitated the meetings. After a 7-day 
residential training course to review the cycle’s 
contents, and to practice participatory communication 
techniques, facilitators were given support through 
fortnightly meetings with district 
coordinators. 
Facilitators coordinated an average of 13 meetings every 
month with as many groups. 

Groups took part in a participatory learning and action 
cycle (ﬁ gure 4). Community members who were not 
regular group members were also encouraged to 
participate in discussions. Information about clean 
delivery practices and care-seeking behaviour was shared 
through stories and games, rather than presented as key 
messages. By discussion of case studies imparted 
through contextually appropriate stories, group members 
identiﬁ ed and prioritised maternal and newborn health 
problems in the community, collectively selected relevant 
strategies to address these problems, implemented the 
strategies, and assessed the results. Although some 
strategies were common, each group was free to 
implement its own combination of strategies. The 
intervention team adapted facilitation materials from 
the study in Makwanpur, Nepal, to guide the meetings.5 
Groups used methods such as picture-card games, role 
play, and story-telling to help discussions about the 
causes and eﬀ ects of typical problems in mothers and 
infants, and devised strategies for prevention, home- 
care support, and consultations (ﬁ gure 5). 
Health-service inputs 
We formed health committees in all intervention and 
control clusters so that community members would have 
the opportunity to express their opinions about the 
design and management of local health services. About 
ten village representatives within every cluster met once 
every 2 months and used a structured action cycle to 
discuss maternal and newborn health entitlement issues. 
As a result, committee members became more 
knowledgable about the government health system and 
assisted with the formation of village health committees 
as part of the National Rural Health Mission programme.21 
In addition to the creation of cluster-level health 
committees, we provided workshops for appreciative 
inquiry with frontline government health staﬀ from 
seven clusters per district in Jharkhand.22 Participants 
assessed the programme qualitatively at the end of every 
training session. We expected that any improvement in 
performance or service quality would be equal in 
intervention and control clusters. 


V 
i 
s 
i 
t 
 co 
 


V isit 
m 
c o 


Community 
meeting 2 
Community 
meeting 1 



A 
s 
s 
e 
s 
s 
i 
ng 
Phase 4 
Assess eﬀect 
 
Pro gress 
Monitoring 
g 
n 
i 
m 
i 
T 
Phase 3 
Put strategies 
into practice 

L e a r n i n g 
c l e 
a 



 


a 
r 
r 
i 
e 
r 
s 


s 
t 
r 
a 
t 
e 
g 
i 
e 
s 

Phase 2 
Plan strategies 


 
 
 
s 
e 
c 
i 
t 
c 
a 
r 
p 
t 
n 
e 
r 
r 
u 
C 
 


dentify m aternal 
proble m s 
w 
e 
n tif y n 
m s 
e 
b le 
p r o 
s e p r o b l e m s 
P r 







Phase 1 
Identify and 
prioritise 
diﬃculties 
 
 
allow analysis of possible seasonal variations in NMR. 
The committee undertook a ﬁ nal review of the data in 
December, 2008. 
Our prospective surveillance from Nov 21, 2004, to 
July 30, 2005, showed a baseline NMR of 58 per 
1000 livebirths (261 deaths per 4509 livebirths) and 
maternal mortality ratio of 510 per 100 000 (23 deaths 
per 4509 livebirths). The trial was planned for 3 years 
and was originally powered, like the Makwanpur trial,5 
for a 2-year analysis of birth outcomes, after allowing a 
period of up to 1 year for the women’s groups to be 
established and for pregnant women to be given the 
intervention. We assumed a between-cluster correlation 
coeﬃ cient of variation (k) of 0·15–0·25, and about 
324 births per cluster during 2 years. On the basis of 
10% loss to follow-up, a sample size of 18 clusters per 
group resulted in 64–81% power to detect a 25% reduction 
in NMR. With an estimated baseline prevalence of 15% 
and k of 0·3, the study had 79–81% power to detect a 
30% reduction in maternal depression over 1 year. We 
used data for recorded births during the study to 
estimate that the study had a power of 92% to detect a 
25% reduction in NMR. 
Analysis was by intention to treat at cluster and 
participant levels. We excluded data from mothers who 
migrated out of the region and their infants from 
intention-to-treat analyses since many of these women 
probably came into the clusters at the time of delivery 
and would therefore not have been exposed to the 
intervention in pregnancy. We aimed to do the tests of 
signiﬁ cance for our primary and secondary outcomes on 
the basis of previously agreed hypotheses about the likely 
eﬀ ect of the intervention. For comparison of mortality 
outcome, we used multivariate logistic regression with 
random eﬀ ects on individual-level data in Stata (version 
10.0).23 We compared secondary 
indicators using 
generalised estimating equations models with semirobust 
SEs at the cluster level.23 Generalised estimating equations 
models were used for secondary indicators and categorical 
scores of maternal depression because these outcomes 
had high intracluster correlation coeﬃ cients (>0·30). We 
compared K10 scores grouped in three categories 
(none/mild, moderate, or severe) during years 2 and 3 of 
the trial. This method was chosen in favour of linear 
regression to address the data’s strong positive skewness. 
We adjusted for stratiﬁ cation by including strata as 
variables in the regression analyses, and for multiple 
hypothesis testing by adjusting the p values for the 
primary outcomes using the Holm correction in the 
results tables. We did not adjust for clustering at the level 
of the mother. All results are presented as odds ratios 
with 95% CIs. 
Cost-eﬀ ectiveness analysis 
We used a similar method of cost-eﬀ ectiveness analysis 
as used by Borghi and colleagues.24 Costs were estimated 
at 2007 prices, and were calculated separately for the 


antenatal, delivery, and postnatal period, for checkups 
and problems). 
Quality control of data 
Data were double-entered in an electronic database. 
Surveillance supervisors manually checked information 
provided by key informants and interviewers. The ﬁ eld 
surveillance manager, data input oﬃ cer, and data 
manager undertook manual and systematic data 
checks. 
Statistical analysis 
We did not expect the intervention to have adverse 
eﬀ ects at cluster or participant level, and therefore did 
not have any rules for stopping the intervention. In 
December, 2007, we presented ﬁ ndings 
from a 
preliminary analysis to an independent data safety 
committee. After an interim analysis in 2007, the 
committee recommended that the trial continue for a 
total of 3 years to enable comparison with the 
Makwanpur study,5 in which the eﬀ ect was measured 
from 9 months after the beginning of the intervention 
to allow exposure to the women’s groups in pregnancy. 
The data safety committee also noted that 3 years would 


8980 livebirths 
280 stillbirths 
531 neonatal deaths 





18 clusters allocated to intervention 
(9 with existing women’s groups) 




9469 livebirths 
301 stillbirths 

 18 clusters not given intervention 
9260 births (115 pairs of twins) 

0 clusters 
2 mothers refused interview 

Migrated 
84 births (9 neonatal deaths, 3 stillbirths) 
81 mothers (0 maternal deaths) 
xcluded from adjusted analyses 
Migrated 
171 births (13 neonatal deaths, 10 stillbirths) 
167 mothers (0 maternal deaths) 
0 clusters 
2 mothers refused interview 

18 clusters 
8662 mothers 
9686 births 
397 neonatal deaths 
298 stillbirths 
Analysed for depression outcome 
(years 2 and 3, excluding maternal deaths) 
6452 mothers 

18 clusters 
8125 mothers 
9089 births 
518 neonatal deaths 
270 stillbirths 
Analysed for depression outcome 
(years 2 and 3, excluding maternal deaths) 
5979 mothers 

After year 1, NMRs were considerably lower in the 
intervention clusters than in the control clusters (ﬁ gure 7). 
In the third year of the study, NMR was almost half in the 
intervention clusters compared with the control clusters 
(odds ratio 0·53, 95% CI 0·41–0·68, adjusted for 
clustering and stratiﬁ cation only), much larger than the 
 ndings of the Makwanpur trial in Nepal.5 Figure 8 shows 
ﬁ 
the cluster-level changes in NMR between baseline and 
women’s group intervention and activities for health- 
service strengthening. These were the ﬁ nancial and 
economic costs of setting up the intervention, and 
running costs during the trial. Costs were estimated 
from the perspective of a provider to give an indication 
of the potential costs of replication for the government 
and 
interested agencies, and discounted at 3%. 
Incremental cost eﬀ ectiveness was measured in relation 
to a do-nothing alternative. 
This study is registered as an International Standard 
Randomised Controlled Trial, number ISRCTN21817853. 
Role of the funding source 
The funders had no role in the design of the study, data 
collection, data analysis, interpretation, or writing up of 
the ﬁ ndings, although they made a site visit early in the 
study implementation. The corresponding author had 
access to all the data and had ﬁ nal responsibility for the 
decision to submit for publication. 
Results 
Figure 6 shows the trial proﬁ le. All 18 selected clusters 
had the intervention. Loss to follow-up after birth as a 
result of migration or refusal of interview was 86 (<1%) 
of 9770 women in intervention clusters and 173 (2%) of 
9260 in control clusters. In the study areas, 5661 (37%) of 
15 118 home deliveries were by a relative, friend, or 
neighbour, 5368 (36%) by traditional birth attendants, 
and 1913 (13%) by husbands. 
Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics of identiﬁ ed 
births during 9 months of data gathering from Nov 21, 
2004, to July 30, 2005. Numbers of births were similar in 
intervention and control clusters, but diﬀ erences were 
noted in household assets, maternal education, literacy, 
and tribal membership, with women in the intervention 
clusters being generally poorer and more disadvantaged 
than those in the control clusters (table 1). 
NMRs unadjusted for clustering decreased from year 1 
to year 3 in the intervention clusters compared with an 
increase in the control clusters (table 2). 
We noted a 32% reduction in NMR during the 3-year 
for clustering, 
trial when data were adjusted 
stratiﬁ cation, and baseline diﬀ erences (table 3). NMR 
was reduced by 45% in intervention clusters compared 
with control clusters during the last 2 years (table 3). 
The reduction in NMR was still signiﬁ cant when 
migrated mothers and their babies were excluded from 
the intention-to-treat analyses during the 3 years 
(table 3). k, estimated from retrospective data from 
control clusters, was 0·10 when we took stratiﬁ cation 
into account, and corresponded to an intracluster 
correlation coeﬃ cient of 0·0005.23 In the analysis of 
neonatal mortality data at the cluster level, the risk ratio 
was 0·71 (95% CI 0·57–0·90, p=0·0011) for years 1 to 
3 when adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with 
the Holm procedure and unadjusted for baseline 
diﬀ erences. 















































































































Data are number or number (%). *Standard terms used in Indian demographic surveys. †Home deliveries only (stillbirths 
were not excluded from the count). ‡Stillbirths excluded. §Number of infants alive at 6 weeks were 2202 in intervention 
clusters, and 2046 in control clusters. 


year 3—the NMRs fell below their baseline level in most 
intervention clusters. Between 2005 and 2008, perinatal 
mortality rates in the intervention clusters decreased 
compared with those in the control clusters when 
adjusted for clustering (table 2; table 3). Stillbirth rates 
did not diﬀ er between intervention and control clusters 
(table 2). Maternal mortality ratio was generally lower in 
intervention than in control clusters, but the study was 
not powered to detect signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences (table 3). 
Qualitative evidence from the assessment of the trial’s 
process showed that community mobilisation through 
women’s groups might have contributed to avoidance of 
some maternal deaths (panel 2). 
There was no detectable diﬀ erence in maternal 
depression K10 scores, when measured about 6 weeks 
after delivery, between intervention and control clusters 
in year 2 of the study or overall (table 4). However, in 
year 3, when 55% of all pregnant women in the 
intervention clusters had joined a group, a 57% reduction 
was noted in moderate depression among mothers in 
the intervention clusters compared with control clusters 
(table 4). 





Stillbirth rate per 
1000 births 
Early neonatal mortality 
rate per 1000 livebirths 
(0–6 days) 
Perinatal mortality rate 
per 1000 births 

Inter- 
vention 











Inter- 
vention 








Inter- 
vention 








Inter- 
vention 









Inter- 
vention 





Inter- 
vention 
















































































































































Neonatal mortality rate 
per 1000 livebirths 















Late neonatal mortality 
rate per 1000 livebirths 
(7–28 days) 















Maternal mortality ratio 
per 100 000 livebirths 















Years 1–3 (including 
migrated)* 

Years 1–3 (excluding 
migrated)* 





























Neonatal mortality rate 
per 1000 livebirths‡ 
Late neonatal mortality 
rate (7–28 days) 
Perinatal mortality rate 
per 1000 births 
Data are odds ratio (95% CI). *Adjusted for stratiﬁ cation (by district and pre-existing women’s groups) and clustering only. †Adjusted for stratiﬁ cation, clustering, maternal 
education, assets, and any tribal aﬃ liation. ‡p values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with Holm correction were <0·001. 

Early neonatal mortality 
rate (0–6 days) 








Stillbirth rate per 
1000 births 








Maternal mortality ratio 
per 100 000 livebirths 









Figure 7: Boxplot of cluster-level neonatal mortality rates by allocation and 
study year 
Figure 8: Scatterplot of cluster-speciﬁ c neonatal mortality rates in year 3 
with rates at baseline 
with improved care. The reason for this combined 
reduction of asphyxia, prematurity, and septicaemia 
could also be improved intrapartum care. Potential 
mechanisms for reduction of mortality rate will be 
further assessed in future analyses of verbal autopsies 
and seasonal mortality trends. 
Our ﬁ ndings also show that a low-cost intervention 
involving non-health-care workers might aﬀ ect maternal 

No signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences were noted in health-care- 
seeking behaviour between control and intervention 
clusters (table 5). However, home-care practices showed 
substantial 
intervention clusters, 
birth attendants were more likely to wash their hands, 
use a safe delivery kit and a plastic sheet, and boil the 
thread used to tie the cord than were those in the control 
clusters. The proportion of infants exclusively breastfed 
at 6 weeks was higher in intervention areas in adjusted 
analyses for years 2 and 3. 
Cause-speciﬁ c diﬀ erences in mortality rate as a 
percentage of all causes—septicaemia, birth asphyxia, 
hypothermia, and prematurity—during the 3 years were 
not clearly discernable because there was a reduction in 
all causes (table 6). The incremental cost of the women’s 
group intervention was US$910 per newborn life saved, 
increasing to $1308 (in 2007 prices) when health-service 
strengthening activities were included. The incremental 
cost per life-year saved was $33 for the women’s group 
intervention ($48 inclusive of health-service strength- 
ening activities). The women’s group inter vention in 
this setting was therefore more cost eﬀ ective than that 
reported in Nepal5 as a result of the greater eﬀ ect of 
lower 
women’s groups on NMR combined with 
operating costs in the current context. 
Discussion 
Women’s groups led by peer facilitators reduced NMR 
and moderate maternal depression at low cost in largely 
tribal, rural populations of eastern India. Our data show 
that mortality reduction in underserved rural settings 
increased care-seeking 
was not associated with 
likely 
behaviour or health-service use. The most 
mechanism of mortality reduction was 
through 
improved hygiene and care practices. The availability of 
safe delivery kits increased in both control and 
intervention areas, but women’s groups seemed to 
generate more demand in intervention clusters than in 
control clusters. In places where kits were not provided, 
group members made them and provided information 
about their contents to mothers, then visited pregnant 
women during the eighth month of pregnancy to ensure 
that they had received kits and would use them. Birth 
outcomes might have been aﬀ ected by the fact that 
these community members attended the groups or 
were advised by group members, thus generating 
increased social awareness and support for clean 
delivery practices. 
The most striking reduction in mortality rate was noted 
in early neonatal deaths, which might be explained by the 
strong focus on intrapartum and early neonatal periods 
in several case studies and stories discussed during the 
cycle. Attribution of cause of newborn death on the basis 
of verbal autopsy is an imperfect science, and deaths 
might arise from several and overlapping causes. Early 
septicaemia could have been reduced with clean delivery 
practices, and premature babies might have survived 





2 
Year 


2 
Year 













Control clusters 
Intervention clusters 




Panel 2: Case-study eﬀ ect of women’s groups on 
strategies to avoid maternal deaths 
A woman in the eighth month of her pregnancy, and her 
mother-in-law attended a monthly women’s group 
meeting where they participated in a drill based on what to 
do in the event of post-partum bleeding. After a month, 
when the woman delivered at home and had severe 
bleeding, her mother-in-law remembered what had been 
said in the group, and, without wasting time, asked her 
daughter-in-law to breastfeed the baby while she rushed to 
get money from the group and asked her son to arrange for 
a vehicle. The daughter-in-law was immediately taken to 
the district hospital, where she was given medicines, 
intravenous ﬂ uid, and two pints of blood, and was 
discharged after 15 days. 

mental health. We hypothesise that the large reduction 
in moderate depression seen in the third year could 
have occurred through improvements in social support 
and problem-solving skills of the groups. Adequate 
social support reduces the risk of depression during 
pregnancy and is an important social determinant of 
mental health.25 In meetings, information was shared 

about the diﬃ culties encountered by mothers in the 
community, and practical ways to collectively address 
them were 
also 
strengthened problem-solving skills, a component of 
psychotherapeutic interventions that has been shown to 
aﬀ ect depression in other settings.26 The intervention 
seemed to have no eﬀ ect on severe depression, perhaps 








Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI)* 
Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI)* 



Adjusted odds 
ratio (95% CI)* 




















Data are number (%), unless otherwise indicated. *Results adjusted for clustering, stratiﬁ cation, maternal education, tribe aﬃ liation, and household assets by use of generalised estimated equations with 
semirobust SEs for individual-level data. 

























Intervention 
clusters 

(95% CI) for years 
1–3* 
Odds ratio 
(95% CI) for years 
1–3† 
Odds ratio (95% CI) 
for years 2 and 3† 
































Visited health facility in case of illness during 
pregnancy 















































Data are number (%), unless otherwise indicated. *Adjusted for clustering and stratiﬁ cation only. †Adjusted for clustering, stratiﬁ cation, maternal education, assets, and any 
tribal aﬃ liation. ‡Excludes births to migrated mothers and twins. §Denominators are number of infants with any of three infant illnesses: 1739 for intervention clusters and 
2388 for control clusters. 

















































Any of three infant illnesses (cough, fever, 
diarrhoea) 
























responsible for a population of about 500 and for 
recruiting up to half of newly pregnant women. Costs are 
lower 
for most other primary health-care 
interventions, and these interventions can complement 
existing self-help groups in the community. 

Two other issues arising from our study are cost 
eﬀ ectiveness and the eﬀ ect on maternal mortality ratios. 
The interventions in the Ekjut trial were more cost 
eﬀ ective than those in the Makwanpur study5 because of 
lower operating costs and greater eﬀ ect of 
the 
intervention. In the Nepal trial, eﬀ ect of women’s groups 
on maternal mortality ratios was signiﬁ cant, although 
the number of deaths was small and maternal mortality 
ratio was not a stated primary outcome. In our trial the 
maternal mortality ratio was higher in the intervention 
areas at baseline, and 20% lower after 3 years of 
intervention, but this diﬀ erence was not signiﬁ cant and 
the trial was not powered to measure diﬀ erences in 
maternal mortality. Reduction in maternal mortality will 
depend mainly on improved access to health services 
and to life-saving drugs, but community mobilisation 
could help through improvement in hygiene at delivery 
and early care-seeking behaviour for complications by 
addressing the ﬁ rst-delay component. 


This participatory intervention with women’s groups 
could complement or be a potential alternative to health- 
worker led interventions, two examples of which have 
been discussed here. Our ﬁ ndings raise several important 
issues for policy makers in India. Could federal and state 
governments 
this programme? Should 
government or non-government organisations be 
responsible for its scale-up? Could such a participatory 
intervention support and strengthen the National Rural 
Health Mission’s mandate of communitisation of health 
and the Accredited Social Health Activist programme?32 
Further assessments of this approach will involve a 
scale-up in large populations with little access to health 
services, and diﬀ erent delivery mechanisms of the 
intervention will need to be tested in partnership with 
government and non-government organisations. 
Contributors 
All authors contributed to the design of the study and criticised drafts of 
the report. PT, NN, SB, and AC were responsible for the conception and 
overall supervision of the trial. PT and NN managed the project, data 
because it was more similar to primary prevention 
rather than treatment, or because severe depression is 
less amenable to psychotherapeutic interventions. A 
complete analysis and discussion of these ﬁ ndings will 
be presented in the future. 
Two potential eﬀ ect modiﬁ ers in this trial, on the basis 
of evidence, were diﬀ erences in maternal education, and 
tribal membership and assets between the intervention 
and control populations. These were taken into account 
in adjusted analyses and mainly provided an advantage 
for the control areas. Additionally, the high signiﬁ cance 
of some of our results could be a result of an increase in 
mortality rate in the control areas between 2005–08. The 
control and 
in similar 
intervention clusters were 
geographic areas, so factors that aﬀ ected NMR should 
have aﬀ ected both groups equally, but 
further 
investigation is needed. 
We believe that the study had two main weaknesses. 
First, as in several other community-based randomised 
control trials, the intervention and surveillance teams 
were not unaware of allocation. However, there were no 
incentives or disincentives for over-reporting or under- 
reporting births and deaths, and several process 
mechanisms were in place to detect errors. Second, 
although migration out of districts was common, we 
cannot rule out some intercluster migration when 
women married out of their home cluster. Our intention- 
to-treat analysis might have aﬀ ected the results positively 
or negatively. 
In the Shivgarh study,27 in Uttar Pradesh, India, the eﬀ ect 
of an intensive behaviour-change programme involving 
community meetings and home visits by a new cadre of 
in a 
paid, non-governmental community workers 
population of 104 123 during 15 months resulted in a 54% 
reduction (relative risk 0·46, 95% CI 0·35–0·60) in NMR 
with changes in home-care practices, but no real change in 
care-seeking behaviour. No overall diﬀ erences in NMR 
were noted during 30 months of intervention in the 
Projahnmo trial,28 in Bangladesh, but a 34% reduction 
(0·66, 0·47–0·93) was noted in the home-care group in the 
last 6 months of the programme. The investigators of the 
Projahnmo study28 noted that “Availability of referral 
services and a strong supervisory system were crucial to 
this intervention and would be a necessary feature of 
scaling up the intervention.” 
Interventions with health-worker home visits have 
rarely achieved adequate coverage, quality, or eﬀ ectiveness 
when taken to scale in poor populations.29 Participatory 
groups have the advantage of helping the poorest, being 
scalable at low cost, and producing potentially wide- 
ranging and long-lasting eﬀ ects. By addressing critical 
consciousness,30 groups have the potential to create 
improved capability in communities to deal with the 
health and development diﬃ culties arising from poverty 
and social inequalities.31 The intervention requires a 
training and support structure to manage facilitators in 
charge of 12–14 groups per month, with every group 









































gathering, data entry, and administration with assistance from ShR, SuR, 
RM, RG, and DM. SB and AC were technical advisers for the study. 
JB provided technical assistance with gathering and analysis of cost data. 
AC, PT, and SB helped design the original trial protocol. SB designed the 
methods for data gathering and epidemiological surveillance system. 
VP and RL provided technical advice about the K10 scale and commented 
on drafts of the report. RL trained interviewers to administer the K10 
scale. NN, AP, CP, and SB did the quantitative analysis. AC, AP, PT, NN, 
and SB wrote the ﬁ rst draft of the report, and were responsible for 
subsequent collation of inputs and redrafting. PT and AC are guarantors 
for the report. 
Conﬂ icts of interest 
We declare that we have no conﬂ icts of interest. 
Acknowledgments 
The study was funded primarily by the Health Foundation. Funds from 
the UK Department for International Development contributed to ﬁ eld 
expenses during the trial, and funds from the Wellcome Trust supported 
the local team during the data analysis period in 2009. VP is supported 
by a Wellcome Trust Senior Clinical Research Fellowship. We thank the 
members of the partnering communities, women’s group members, and 
all mothers and relatives who gave their time to be interviewed and 
without whom none of this study would have been possible; all the study 
staﬀ Prasant Behera, Birender Mahto, Gunjan Kumari, 
Chaturbhuj Mahanta, Nibha Kumari Das, Lakhindar Sardar, 
Sumitra Gagrai, Rajesh Singhdao, Uttam Mallick, and Lipton Sahoo, and 
the interviewers, facilitators, and key informants; Asit Mishra, 
Parameswar Pradhan, and A K Debdas for their assistance in assigning 
cause of death from the verbal autopsies; H P S Sachdev, 
Suranjeen Pallipamula, Ramesh Sharan, Haldhar Mahto, Almas Ali, 
Alison Dembo Rath, and Ashish Das for reviewing the data; David Osrin 
for his support throughout the study, and for contributions to the data 
monitoring process; Ruth Duebbert (Women and Children First) for 
commenting on the report; Sambit Beura (Addsoft) and Aman Sen 
(Mother and Infant Research Activities, Nepal) for their assistance with 
the database; Sarah Ball for her continuous administrative support; 
Sudharak Olwe for his photographs of Ekjut activities; Professional 
Assistance for Development Action (PRADAN) for providing access to 
the women’s groups set up by them; the Health Foundation, UK 
Department for International Development, and the Big Lottery Fund for 
their ﬁ nancial support of the project; and the anonymous reviewers for 
suggestions that greatly improved this report. 
References 
1 WHO. Neonatal and perinatal mortality: country, regional and 
global estimates. 2006. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/ 
publications/2006/9241563206_eng.pdf (accessed Feb 26, 2010). 
Lawn J, Cousens S, Zupan J, et al. 4 million neonatal deaths: when, 
where? why? Lancet 2005; 365: 891–900. 


and child survival. The 2008 report. New York: UNICEF, 2008. 
4 UNICEF. The state of Asia-Paciﬁ c’s children. New York: UNICEF, 

5 Manandhar DS, Osrin D, Shrestha BP, et al. Eﬀ ect of a participatory 
intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes in Nepal: 
cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 364: 970–79. 
6 Morrison, J, Tamang S, Mesko N, et al. Women’s health groups to 
improve perinatal care in rural Nepal. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 
2005; 5: 6. 
Engle PL. Maternal mental health: program and policy implications. 
Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 89: 963S–66S. 
Patel V, Kirkwood B. Perinatal depression treated by community 
health workers. Lancet 2008; 372: 868–69. 



http://planningcommission.nic.in/news/prmar07.pdf (accessed 
Jan 25, 2010). 

development. 2007. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/ 
EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/0,,contentMDK:21370 
355~pagePK:146736~piPK:146830~theSitePK:223547,00.html 
(accessed Feb 12, 2010). 



(2001–2003). New Delhi: Registrar General of India, 2006: 1–21. 
http://censusindia.gov.in/Vital_Statistics/SRS_Bulletins/MMR- 
Bulletin-April-2009.pdf (accessed Aug 24, 2009). 

tribe population census 2001. http://delhiplanning.nic.in/Economic 
%20Survey/ES2007-08/T18.pdf (accessed Jan 22, 2009). 


15 Census of India: Census data 2001. Oﬃ ce of the Registrar General 
and Census Commissioner, India. http://www.censusindia.gov.in/ 
(accessed Jan 26, 2010). 
16 Barnett S, Nair N, Tripathy PK, Borghi J, Rath S, Costello A. 
A prospective key informant surveillance system to measure 
maternal mortality–ﬁ ndings from indigenous populations in 
Jharkhand and Orissa, India. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2008; 
8: 6. 



http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/wmh/ (accessed Jan 25, 2010). 
19 Kessler RC, Andrews G, Colpe LJ, et al. Short screening scales to 
monitor population prevalences and trends in non-speciﬁ c 
psychological distress. Psychol Med 2002; 32: 956–76. 

disorders in primary care in India: a comparison of ﬁ ve screening 
questionnaires. Psychol Med 2008; 38: 221–28. 

Jharkhand, November 25th-6th December 2008. http://www. 
mohfw.nic.in/NRHM/CRM/Jharkhand_2nd_CRM_Report.pdf 
(accessed Aug 18, 2009). 





women’s group intervention to improve birth outcomes in rural 
Nepal. Lancet 2005; 366: 1882–84. 
25 Milgrom J, Gemmill AW, Bilztza JL, et al. Antenatal risk factors for 
postnatal depression: A large prospective study. J Aﬀ ect Disord 2008; 
108: 147–57. 



behaviour change management on neonatal mortality in Shivgarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, India: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2008; 372: 1151–62. 
28 Baqui AH, El-Arifeen S, Darmstadt GL, et al. Eﬀ ect of 
community-based newborn-care intervention package 
implemented through two service-delivery strategies in Sylhet 
district, Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2008; 371: 1936–44. 
29 Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, et al. Achieving child survival 
goals: potential contribution of community health workers. 
Lancet 2007; 369: 2121–31. 
30 Freire, P. Education for critical consciousness. New York: 
Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005. 
31 Sen A. Development as freedom. New York: Knopf, 1999. 
32 National Rural Health Mission. Accredited Social Health Activists. 
http://www.mohfw.nic.in/NRHM/asha.htm (accessed Feb 2, 2010). 


