JOURNAL OF PALLIATIVE MEDICINE
Volume 9, Number 1, 2006
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Outcome Evaluation of a Randomized Trial of the
PhoenixCare Intervention: Program of Case Management
and Coordinated Care for the Seriously Chronically Ill
LEONA S. AIKEN, Ph.D.,1 JONATHAN BUTNER, Ph.D.,2 CAROL A. LOCKHART, Ph.D.,3
BARBARA E. VOLK-CRAFT, Ph.D.,4 GILLIAN HAMILTON, M.D., Ph.D.,4
and FRANK G. WILLIAMS, Ph.D.5
ABSTRACT
Objective: To document outcomes of a randomized trial of the PhoenixCare demonstration
program of palliative care and coordinated care/case management for seriously chronically ill
individuals who simultaneously received active treatment from managed care organizations
(MCOs).
Design: Patients, continuously enrolled between July 1999, and March 2001, were randomly
assigned to the PhoenixCare program or a control group receiving usual MCO care.
Setting: Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona.
Participants: Participants were 192 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) or chronic heart failure (CHF), who had an estimated 2-year life expectancy.
Intervention: Intensive home-based case management provided by registered nurse case-
managers, in coordination with patients’ existing source of medical care, comprised the in-
tervention. Program foci included disease and symptom management, patient self-manage-
ment of illness and knowledge of illness-related resources, preparation for end-of life,
physical and mental functioning, and utilization of medical services.
Outcome measures: Outcomes, assessed every 3 months by telephone interview, included
measures related to all program foci; the SF-36™was used to evaluate physical and mental
functioning; emergency department visits exemplified medical service utilization.
Results: Compared to controls, PhoenixCare patients exhibited significantly better outcomes
on self-management of illness, awareness of illness-related resources, and legal preparation
for end of life. They reported lower symptom distress, greater vitality, better physical func-
tioning and higher self-rated health than randomized controls. Emergency department uti-
lization was equivalent across groups. Patients with COPD showed stronger responsiveness
to the intervention.
Conclusion: A novel model of patient care that combined greatly enhanced palliative care-
focused case management with ongoing MCO-based treatment was associated with improved
functioning of chronically severely ill patients in the last years of life.
111
1Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.
2Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
3Lockhart Associates, Tempe, Arizona.
4Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona.
5Professor Emeritus, Department of Health Administration and Policy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona.

INTRODUCTION
B
OTH THE QUALITY and cost of health care at
end-of-life are matters of great concern to the
health care delivery system.1–3 Patients with se-
rious advanced illness experience undertreat-
ment of symptoms while they receive aggressive
life-prolonging treatments that are both physi-
cally burdensome and costly.4 By design of
Medicare funding for the hospice benefit, these
patients gain access to palliative care focused 
on alleviation of symptoms, support for care-
givers/families, and preparation for end of life
only after they have relinquished disease-modi-
fying or curative treatment. Palliative care fund-
ing through Medicare is available only for the 
final 6 months of life. Yet many patients and fam-
ilies may face unmet clinical needs for a longer
period of time than the hospice benefit allows.4
To address these issues of quality and cost of
care The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
funded 22 demonstration projects in 1999
through a national initiative, Promoting Excel-
lence at End-of-Life Care. The initiative sought to
support novel care delivery models that “ex-
tend(ed) palliative care upstream in the course of
illness, concurrent with ongoing life-extending
care”2 (p. 311) with the aim of identifying suc-
cessful models and approaches. Among the 22
projects was the PhoenixCare program, a demon-
stration program of palliative care and coordi-
nated care/case management services designed
specifically for seriously chronically ill individu-
als who were simultaneously receiving active dis-
ease treatment through managed care plans. The
demonstration project was funded to Hospice of
the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona, one of the largest
community-based hospice providers in the coun-
try.
This paper provides the outcome evaluation of
a randomized trial to assess the impact of the
PhoenixCare program. From the perspective of
outcome evaluation, randomized trials to evalu-
ate community models of enhanced case man-
agement and palliative care for individuals are
rare. Programs have been documented with case
studies,5,6 demonstration projects showing effects
in treated groups in the absence of untreated
comparison groups7 or in nonequivalent control
group designs.8–10 Meier et al.,11 describe the im-
plementation of a randomized trial of an inter-
vention to integrate formal palliative care with
case management.
OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE OF 
THE PHOENIXCARE PROGRAM
Overview
PhoenixCare was a freestanding program of
home-based palliative care case management de-
veloped specifically for The Robert Wood John-
son initiative.12 Distinct from the hospice model,
it was designed to reach patients receiving treat-
ment from one of multiple managed care organi-
zations (MCOs). Participants were home-resid-
ing, were diagnosed with congestive heart failure
(CHF) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), and had a life expectancy of up to 2 years
from time of enrollment (rather than the 6-month
window of Medicare hospice). The goal of the
PhoenixCare program was to expand the scope
of patient care and to improve patient quality of
life relative to a comparable group of managed
care patients not receiving the additional
PhoenixCare intervention services. PhoenixCare
delivered home-based services focused on dis-
ease and symptom management, patient and
caregiver education on disease management, and
social and psychological support.12 Registered
nurse case managers delivered the primary
PhoenixCare services and assumed a leadership
role in coordinating PhoenixCare services with
the patient’s primary care physician, with any
case managers provided by the patient’s MCO,
and with community agencies. Patients’ health
care was funded by Arizona’s alternative to Med-
icaid, by Medicare  Choice (Medicare Risk con-
tracts), or by commercial health insurance plans.
Rationale
The rationale for the PhoenixCare approach to
integration of palliative care with treatment de-
livery through MCOs was fivefold in nature.
First, at the time of study design, Arizona had the
greatest proportion of its health care delivered 
by MCOs.12 Second, in 1998, the year before the
grant initiative, the federal government initiated
the managed care Medicare model (Medicare 
Choice) as an alternative to fee-for-service; the
model rapidly proliferated. A substantial portion
of chronically ill patients whom PhoenixCare
aimed to reach were Medicare or Medicaid eligi-
ble. Third, most individuals with life-limiting ill-
nesses reside at home rather than in care facili-
ties.11 Home-based palliative care for individuals
AIKEN ET AL.
112

who were seriously ill but neither institutional-
ized nor imminently dying would reach the
largest population needing palliation. Fourth, the
ability to link a single effective program of pal-
liative care to a multiplicity of MCOs was ex-
pected to yield efficiency in providing palliative
care services while treatment continued. Fifth, it
appeared that the MCOs would provide a natural
referral stream of clients to the study. In sum-
mary, partnering with MCOs was expected to cre-
ate the combination of treatment and palliation
that might best serve a large population of pa-
tients with life-limiting illnesses who were still
actively living. It was theorized that the Phoenix-
Care intervention would lead to better physical
and mental functioning, at less or no more cost
to the health care system. Lockhart et al.12 pro-
vide an in-depth description of the PhoenixCare
program content, its delivery, patient recruit-
ment, provider and patient reaction, and the gen-
eralizability of the PhoenixCare model to broad
medical contexts.
FOUR PROGRAM FOCI 
AND HYPOTHESES
The PhoenixCare intervention was organized
around four foci.
Focus 1. Self-management of illness and
knowledge of resources
First, the PhoenixCare program aimed to in-
crease patient self-management of illness and
knowledge of health-related resources by pro-
viding information and education to patients and
caregivers.
Focus 2. Preparation for end of life
Second, the PhoenixCare program aimed to im-
prove patients’ preparedness for end of life by
promoting the acquisition of appropriate legal
documents and discussion of legal documents
with significant others.
Focus 3. Physical and mental functioning
Third, the PhoenixCare program aimed to en-
hance the physical and mental functioning of
clients through intensive case management by
PhoenixCare staff, as well as patient education for
self-management of illness.
Focus 4. Utilization of medical services
Fourth, the PhoenixCare program aimed to
shift from utilization of high cost emergency
medical services and inpatient acute hospitaliza-
tion to proactive management of disease in out-
patient settings, through intensive management
and patient education on self-management of dis-
ease.
It was hypothesized that the PhoenixCare par-
ticipants, compared to controls, would achieve
better self-management, preparation for end of
life, and physical and mental functioning (Foci 1
through 3), with lower utilization of costly emer-
gency and inpatient services, specifically fewer
emergency department visits and reduced length
of stay (LOS) in hospitals (Focus 4).
METHOD
Participants
By design, all participants were residing at
home and were members of one of seven MCOs
in the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area that
agreed to partner with the PhoenixCare demon-
stration project. Enrollment occurred during the
period July 1, 1999 through March 31, 2001. Pa-
tients could be referred by community agencies,
hospitals, the MCOs, physicians, family/friends,
or by self-referral. Over the course of the enroll-
ment period, 965 individuals were referred for
evaluation of eligibility for participation, 365 met
eligibility criteria, and 240 agreed to participate.
Of the 240 individuals, 192 were diagnosed
with either COPD (n  62) or CHF (n  130) and
served as participants in the outcome evaluation.
The remaining 48 patients had metastatic cancer;
they were originally included but were elimi-
nated because of structural changes in the insti-
tution housing the project. All participants met
specific criteria designed to enroll patients who
might live for up to 2 years beyond enrollment,
based on expert judgment that drew on available
prognostic data.13–18
All participants were required to be 18 years of
age or older. Patients with CHF were required to
be diagnosed with either class IIIB heart failure
(i.e., symptoms with any activity) or class IV heart
failure (i.e., symptoms at rest). Patients with
COPD were required to have oxygen saturations
of less than 88% on room air, or baseline pO2 less
than 55 on room air, and to be on continuous oxy-
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
113

gen. Across the two diseases, all patients were re-
quired to exhibit marked limitation of physical
functioning, in that any activity resulted in fa-
tigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or angina. All pa-
tients were required to have exhibited recent ex-
acerbation of their conditions as evidenced by
treatment in an emergency department, urgent
care facility, or hospital within the 3 months prior
to enrollment. For purposes of data collection by
telephone interview, patients were required to
have a telephone in the home, and to either speak
English or have a translator present in the home.
Participation in PhoenixCare was completely vol-
untary. Patients were not paid; nor did they or
their MCO pay for any services provided by the
program. Patients did not relinquish any health
care services for which they were otherwise eli-
gible.
Procedures
Eligibility evaluation, randomization to condition,
and initial data collection. Randomization was car-
ried out within diagnosis, in blocks of 30 patients
(15 PhoenixCare, 15 control) by a member of the
project administration staff. Sealed envelopes,
color-coded by diagnosis and containing the as-
signment to condition, were shuffled and as-
signed to participants in order of shuffling.
A PhoenixCare staff Enroller completed an ini-
tial eligibility evaluation interview and intake
session. In this initial session, eligible patients
were informed (1) that there were two interven-
tion conditions, PhoenixCare and control, (2) that
assignment to condition was random, and (3) that
all study participants in both conditions would
receive telephone interviews every three months.
Patients who agreed to participate gave written
informed consent and completed the initial in-
terview that constituted the baseline (time 0) data
point. Finally, the Enroller, blinded to condition,
opened the sealed envelope that identified the pa-
tient’s study condition. All study procedures
were approved by the Institutional Review Board
of Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center, a
collaborating organization.
Measurement points. Every 3 months all partic-
ipants received a 30- to 45-minute telephone in-
terview administered by a professional inter-
viewing firm; interviewers were blind to
condition and diagnosis. Up to 5 callbacks were
attempted. Patients not interviewed were re-
tained for future interviews. During the inter-
view, proxy respondents could read or translate
for patients. Proxy responses were not accepted,
because they do not represent patients’ self-per-
ceived health well.19,20
Tracing procedures. PhoenixCare staff contacted
control participants monthly to verify managed
care enrollment, required for eligibility, docu-
ment changes in address and in living situation,
and to verify continued participation. Registered
nurse case managers updated this information on
an ongoing basis for PhoenixCare intervention
participants.
PhoenixCare intervention. PhoenixCare pallia-
tive intervention services were added to treat-
ment services provided by the MCOs to consti-
tute the PhoenixCare intervention. The complete
PhoenixCare intervention is described in Lock-
hart et al.12 Registered nurse case managers, each
with a caseload of 30–35 patients, provided ser-
vice. A medical director, social worker, and pas-
toral counselor provided support to case man-
agers, who coordinated “care planning with
PhoenixCare team members, primary care physi-
cian, health plan case manager (if there were one),
patient/family, and community agencies.”12 (pp.
1003–1004). Three distinct care protocols ad-
dressed phases of service delivery: (1) admission
and initial case management of medically unsta-
ble patients, (2) management of stable patients
following stabilization, and (3) support of unsta-
ble patients experiencing an exacerbation epi-
sode. All three protocols provided disease and
symptom management, educational services, and
support services. At admission, the disease and
symptom protocol included assessing current
health status, identifying immediate symptom
management needs, establishing communication
with the MCO contact and attending physician,
developing an emergency response plan and co-
ordinating this plan with attending physician.
Educational services included development of
advance care plans, providing education to pa-
tient and family about the disease, about patient
self-monitoring and self-management of disease.
Support services included assessing psychologi-
cal and spiritual needs, assisting with access to
community resources that might provide custo-
dial care, transportation, and help with finances.
During periods of patient stability, the three
classes of services continued as needed, with
AIKEN ET AL.
114

evaluation of compliance with medication
regimes, assessment of new symptoms, rein-
forcement of educational activities including ad-
vance care planning, and ongoing monitoring of
need for support services. During illness exacer-
bation episodes, the registered nurse case man-
agers took an active role in assessing medical 
status and implementing a symptom control in-
tervention, and in communicating with the at-
tending physician and MCO contact concerning
the exacerbation episode. They also provided ed-
ucation concerning new symptoms or conditions
and use of new medications, developed new pa-
tient goals, supported patient decision making,
assessed psychological, spiritual, and emotional
needs of the patient and family, and made coun-
seling referrals when required.
Control condition. Usual care provided by the
MCOs, including medication and technical treat-
ment, constituted the control condition. The fo-
cus of MCO case management was medical and
disease oriented, including medication and lab
monitoring, weight/blood pressure and blood
glucose monitoring, and implementation of prior
authorization mechanisms. Services were deliv-
ered via telephone by all seven MCOs and, in ad-
dition, through occasional home visits in five
MCOs. Other support services included disease
and symptom education, nutrition and psycho-
logical counseling, transportation and coordina-
tion of medical service. Each MCO provided its
own individual case management to some por-
tion of their clients.
Measures
Four broad classes of measures, summarized
in detail in Table 1, informed the four foci of the
intervention.
Intake interview and every-three–month follow-up
interview (Focus 1–3). Questions addressing the
first three program foci were integrated into a sin-
gle l12-item questionnaire, of which 56 items,
summarized in Table 1, formed the basis of the
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
115
TABLE 1.
OUTCOME MEASURES BY FOCUS OF INTERVENTION (k  NUMBER OF ITEMS)
Focus 1: Patient self-management of illness and knowledge of resources
(every 3-month interview)
1. Resources: resources to help with illness, including community resources, family and friends, individuals to
help with medical problems (k  3 items)
2. Illness self-management: information to manage illness at home, in emergency (k  2 items)
3. Patient experienced an event in 4 weeks immediately preceding the interview for which he/she felt
unprepared (k  1 item)
Focus 2: Preparation for end of life (every 3-month interview)
1. Possession of appropriate legal documents, living will or advance directives, medical power of attorney 
(k  2)
2. Discussion of legal documents with physician, with family and friends (k  2)
Focus 3: Physical and mental functioning (every 3-month interview)
1. Patient able to initiate or resume an enjoyable activity in the 4 weeks immediately preceding the interview 
(k  1)
2. Symptom control, taken from Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale21 as integrated into the Surrogate
Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22 Patient identifies most troublesome symptom within the four
weeks just prior to the interview and then rates the frequency, severity, and distress associated with the
symptom. Up to three symptoms are considered with separate rating of frequency, severity, distress for each
symptom (k  9 items)
3. Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36™, Ware et al.23) which assesses “health-related
quality-of-life outcomes, namely, those known to be most directly affected by disease and treatment” (op.cit,
p.2:3). Eight subscales include Physical Functioning, General Health, Vitality, Social Functioning, Role-
Physical, Bodily Pain, Role-Emotional, Mental Health. Scale scores are derived as weighted sums of items
following Ware et al.19 and then are converted to 100 point scales (k  8 scale scores).
Focus 4: Medical system utilization (medical utilization data furnished by MCOs)
1. Number of emergency department visits in six months prior to study enrollment
2. Number of stand alone emergency department visits (not followed immediately by hospitalization) during
study
3. Hospitalizations, length of stay
Additional measures of study participation
1. Number of months in program
2. Reasons for withdrawal from study

present evaluation. Two existing scales were in-
tegrated into the questionnaire. First, we incor-
porated the symptom control items from the
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale,21 which
previously had been integrated into the Surrogate
Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22
Second, we assessed functional status and well-
being with the SF-36™ Health Survey23 that char-
acterizes “health-related quality of life outcomes,
namely, those known to be most directly affected
by disease and treatment”23 (p. 2:3). The SF-36™
is sensitive to chronic conditions that Phoenix-
Care targeted. A population of patients enrolled
in Medicare  Choice exhibited declining scores
on the SF-36™ in response to chronic condi-
tions.24 The remaining items of the questionnaire
were developed specifically for this evaluation.
Utilization of medical services: Claims information
records (Focus 4). MCOs furnished utilization data
on each participating patient for the duration of
his/her enrollment in the study, as well as for the
6 months prior to enrollment (or all the time that
the patient had been enrolled in the MCO up to
6 months prior to enrollment in the study).a
We considered emergency department visits as
stand-alone events and LOS in the hospital. For
our enumeration of emergency department vis-
its, we considered only those emergency depart-
ment visits that did not result in an immediate
hospitalization. Emergency department visits re-
sulting in hospitalizations were not counted. In
determining which emergency department visits
to count, we established that if a patient’s condi-
tion was so severe and medically compromised
that a hospitalization was required subsequent to
an emergency department treatment, then that
patient could not have managed his/her own
symptoms adequately with the PhoenixCare in-
dividualized treatment plan at home. We derived
two emergency department counts: (1) number of
emergency department visits in the 6 months
prior to entry into PhoenixCare, to characterize
normative emergency department use pattern by
the patient, and (2) total number of emergency
department visits during PhoenixCare enroll-
ment. Multiple medical claims were possible for
a single emergency department visit; we thus
counted only one emergency department visit per
24-hour period. We had originally intended to
characterize hospitalizations as discrete events, to
compute the LOS for each hospitalization, and
then to compute the cumulative LOS across hos-
pitalizations over the same time period as for
emergency department visits. Inadequately re-
ported hospital claims data did not permit calcu-
lation of length of stay. In a notable number of
instances, admission date/discharge date pairs
could not be unambiguously established from
streams of MCO claims data; such pairs are re-
quired for each hospitalization episode for com-
putation of the LOS of that hospitalization.b Be-
yond this, an extensive line-by-line review of
medical claims data by the PhoenixCare Medical
Director and Project Director revealed that hos-
pitalizations could not be sorted into those di-
rectly related to the PhoenixCare target diagnoses
(CHF, COPD) versus those related to other ancil-
lary conditions, because all hospitalizations were
identified by the primary diagnosis regardless of
the treatment provided.
Statistical analysis
We refer to the intake interview as time 0, the
first 3-month follow-up interview as time 3, the
next, as time 6, etc. All analyses of intervention
outcomes examined effects as a function of ex-
perimental condition (PhoenixCare, control), di-
agnosis (CHF, COPD), and their interaction. In
these analyses, we controlled for any pretest dif-
ferences by including the corresponding time 0
score as a covariate. We report both the overall
effect of the intervention and any differential pat-
tern of intervention effects within diagnoses. The
number of patients available for analysis dropped
from 192 at intake (time 0) to 112 at time 3, 92 at
time 6. Our analytic strategies included as many
cases as possible for the analysis of each aspect
of the intervention. We examined outcomes at
AIKEN ET AL.
116
aA fifth class of measures assessed program imple-
mentation, characterizing the extent, timing, and type of
service provided to patients throughout the intervention.
This last stream of data supported the evaluation of pro-
gram implementation, reported in Lockhart et al.12
bWe devoted extensive effort to rendering the streams
of claims data from the MCOs amenable to computation
of LOS. There was no consistent method for reporting of
claims data across MCOs. In our attempt to capture ad-
mission/discharge pairs, we found some measurements
so anomalous from the perspective of medical utilization
that we ultimately judged that the claims data could not
be used to compute LOS (e.g., pairs of admissions and
discharges that were separated by a year and would have
led to computation of 365-day hospitalizations.)

time 3 for all cases with time 3 data and outcomes
at time 6 for all participants with time 6 measures.
We used analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for
analysis of continuous variables; logistic regres-
sion, for binary variables; and Poisson regres-
sion,25 for counts of number of emergency de-
partment visits.
Growth curve modeling of functional status over
time. We expected that changes in functional sta-
tus, as measured on the SF-36™, might accrue
gradually over time, even beyond the first 6
months of the intervention. We thus applied
growth curve modeling in the multilevel frame-
work26 to each of the eight scales of the SF-36™
to test hypotheses concerning the impact of the
PhoenixCare intervention and to characterize
whether groups improved, remained level, or de-
clined over time. For each SF-36™ scale, we fit a
linear trajectory to all available data from each in-
dividual. Each individual’s trajectory was char-
acterized by its intercept and slope. Intercepts
and slopes then became dependent variables for
analysis as a function of condition, diagnosis, and
the condition by diagnosis interaction. The aver-
age intercept of the individuals in a particular
group (e.g., patients with COPD in the Phoenix-
Care group) measures the overall level of func-
tioning of the group at one point in time. Differ-
ences in intercepts across groups represent
differences in level of functioning. By moving the
intercept across the time scale in a series of analy-
ses,27 we could detect the point in time, if any, at
which differences in levels of functioning be-
tween groups emerged. The average slope in a
group characterizes the overall trend (decline,
stability, improvement) for physical and mental
health over time. Differences in slopes across
groups indicate that groups are changing differ-
entially over time. Each trajectory began at the
time 3 data point; trajectories continued through
the full complement of data for each case. The Ini-
tial Interview point (time 0) was used as a co-
variate to control for any differences between
groups in their intercepts at the outset of the in-
tervention.
Treatment effect size estimates. We report a stan-
dardized effect size estimate for each observed dif-
ference between the PhoenixCare and control con-
ditions (i.e., the number of standard deviations of
difference between the groups). We use Hedges’
g  [(PhoenixCare mean-Control mean)/pooled
standard deviation] for continuous outcomes and
Hedges’ h  [(PhoenixCare estimated propor-
tion—Control estimated proportion)/pooled stan-
dard deviation] for binary outcomes.28 We chose
standardized effect size estimates for two reasons.
First, with the exception of SF-36™, there are no
norms on which to compare differences on our
scales. Second, these effect size estimates are used
in meta-analyses of treatment outcome research.29
Effect sizes of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 are considered small,
moderate, and large, respectively30; these effect
sizes have been supported in analyses of treatment
outcomes.29
Pretest equivalence. To evaluate the success of
randomization, we compared PhoenixCare and
control at time 0 on all outcome measures. We
used one-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA)
for continuous outcome measures and 2 tests of
independence for binary outcome measures.
Attrition analysis. We used the Jurs and Glass31
procedure to examine attrition. For each depen-
dent variable listed in Table 1, initial data (time
0) were examined in a two-factor analysis of con-
dition (PhoenixCare versus control) by retention
(retained, attrited). A main effect of retention re-
flects difference between participants who re-
mained in versus left the study. An interaction
between condition and retention signals differ-
ential attrition across conditions. Our statistical
power to detect a small interaction accounting for
4% of variance at   0.05 ranged between 0.79
and 0.84 depending on variance accounted for by
main effects.30
RESULTS
Participant characteristics and outcome 
of randomization
Participant characteristics. Of the 192 patients
enrolled, 101 (or 53%) were randomized to the
PhoenixCare intervention; the remaining 91
(47%) served as controls. Immediately after intake
and before the outset of treatment, 1 intervention
and 1 control case dissenrolled. Analyses of out-
comes are based on these 190 cases. There were
67 CHF and 33 COPD PhoenixCare participants,
and 62 CHF and 28 COPD controls. Participants
were on average 68.5 years of age; 64% were fe-
male; 82% were Caucasian; 42% had greater than
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
117

a high school degree; 44% were married; 87% re-
ported having someone to help them with their
illness. Table 2 summarizes demographic charac-
teristics by experimental condition (PhoenixCare,
control).
Pretest equivalence. PhoenixCare and control
participants did not differ significantly (at p 
0.10) on any outcome measures related to Focus
1, Focus 2, or Focus 4 (i.e., emergency department
visits in the 6 months prior to enrollment.) With
regard to Focus 3, PhoenixCare participants
tended to have higher scores on the SF-36™ So-
cial Functioning Scale, F(1,189)  3.45, p  0.07,
g  0.27, and on the SF-36™ Mental Health Scale,
F(1,190)  3.35, p  0.07, g  0.26.
Delivery of the PhoenixCare intervention and
control case management services
PhoenixCare intervention. The PhoenixCare in-
tervention remained constant in design over the
course of the study. Delivery of service by regis-
tered nurse case managers combined home visits
and telephone calls. Patients averaged 44 contacts
over the course of the intervention. Average
monthly frequency of these services per patient
(visits plus calls) were 6.3, 4.9, 3.9, 3.9, 3.4, 3.3, in
the first 6 months of participation, of which 3.9,
2.2, 1.8, 1.5, 1.4, and 1.4 contacts were home vis-
its. These services were stable beyond the first 6
months. Visits included seeing patients at home
and accompanying patients to the physician’s of-
fice to discuss patient progress and treatment op-
tions. The number of registered nurse contacts
per month did not differ by diagnosis or by
whether the participant lived alone or with some-
one else. The PhoenixCare social worker con-
tacted 45% of patients; this subset of patients re-
ceived an average of 6 contacts from the social
worker.
Control case management services. PhoenixCare
staff monitored the provision of MCO case man-
agement services through quarterly interviews
with MCO directors of case management. In all,
MCOs assigned their own case managers to 62%
of all control participants and to 51% of Phoenix-
Care patients, 2(1)  2.36, p  0.12. Over the
course of the study, the MCOs greatly narrowed
criteria for enrollment into case management and
diminished the services provided, in response to
financial pressures. Home visits and other sup-
port services were terminated by all MCOs;
phone monitoring was maintained by only two
MCOs throughout the study. Only medical and
disease management was maintained throughout
the study by all MCOs, albeit to an increasingly
narrow range of patients. Three MCOs began to
reinstate some services in the last quarter of the
study, when actual enrollment into the Phoenix-
Care study was sparse.
Retention, and reasons for attrition, and 
attrition effects by condition
Retention. Potential length of stay in the pro-
gram depended on enrollment date; participants
enrolled from July 1, 1999 through March 31,
2001, but all data collection terminated on Sep-
tember 30, 2001. Of the 101 PhoenixCare partici-
pants, 62%, 55%, and 43% provided time 3, time
6, and time 9 interviews, respectively. Of the 91
control participants, corresponding percentages
were 54%, 38%, and 33% at time 3, 6, and 9, re-
spectively.
Reasons for attrition. At the end of data collec-
tion 44% of the PhoenixCare participants and 25%
of control patients were still participating. Before
time 3, 6% of all PhoenixCare and 8% of all con-
trol participants had died; 8% versus 9%, respec-
tively, had entered hospice; and 1% versus 1%
had entered skilled nursing facilities (SNFs). Cor-
responding percentages across the whole study
for PhoenixCare versus controls, respectively,
were 16% versus 13%, death; 12% versus 13%,
hospice; 1% versus 3%, SNF. In all 6% of Phoenix-
AIKEN ET AL.
118
TABLE 2.
DEMOGRAPHICS CHARACTERISTICS
OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS
Intervention
Control
n  100
n  90
Age in years
Mean
68 years
70 years
SD
14
13
Percent female
58%
70%
Percent Caucasian
80%
84%
Percent married
40%
48%
Education
Percent  HS degree
44%
41%
Percent HS degree
42%
35%
Percent  HS degree
14%
24%
Percent having someone
87%
88%
to help with illness
SD, standard deviation of age, in years.

Care and 11% of controls declined to continue
participation; another 10% and 14%, respectively,
disqualified by leaving their MCO. In sum,
PhoenixCare and control participants appeared
to have left the study at equal rates for medical
causes (death, hospice, SNF), but controls left
more often for other reasons.
Attrition effects. Participants who were retained
had better physical and mental functioning (Fo-
cus 3) than those who left, because attrition in-
cluded transfer to a skilled nursing facility, to a
hospice, or death. Specifically, those retained at
time 3 reported better General Health on the 
SF-36™ during the 3-month preenrollment pe-
riod, F(1,188)  12.26, p  0.001, g  0.51; the
same result held for those retained versus lost at
time 6, F(1,188)  12.03, p  0.001, g  0.50.
Those retained at time 6 reported significantly
lower 
bodily 
pain 
during 
preenrollment,
F(1,187)  7.93, p  0.01, g  0.41, and also were
more likely to have resumed a pleasant activity
during preenrollment, 2(1)  13.09, p  0.001,
OR  3.25, [CI: 1.72, 6.16], with 48% and 23%
among retained and attrited participants, respec-
tively, h  0.57. With regard to end-of-life prepa-
ration (Focus 2) those retained were less likely to
have discussed illness and death related legal
documents with a physician during preenroll-
ment, 2(1)  4.95, p  0.05, OR  0.51, [CI: 0.28,
0.92] , with 37% and 54% among retained and at-
trited participants, respectively, h  0.34.
Only one condition by retention interaction
was detected that signaled differential attrition,
that for having been given sufficient information
and education to manage illness at home,
F(1,183)  3.93, p  0.05. Among those retained,
PhoenixCare patients had received less informa-
tion than had controls during pre-enrollment,
F(1,87)  3.225, p  0.08; g  0.39. The reverse
was true for those who attrited, F(1,96)  1.071,
p  0.20; g  0.21.
Focus 1: Outcomes for self-management of illness
and knowledge of resources
Table 3 summarizes the means on the five in-
dividual items measuring management of illness
and awareness of resources at time 0 and at times
3 and 6, adjusted for time 0. In all 10 comparisons
of PhoenixCare versus control outcomes (5 items
at time 3 and at time 6), the PhoenixCare mean
exceeded the control mean. As shown in AN-
COVA, at time 3, PhoenixCare patients reported
having received more education concerning com-
munity resources than controls, F(1,107)  5.80,
p  0.05, g  0.45. At 6 months PhoenixCare pa-
tients also exceeded controls in reporting that
they had information about whom to speak con-
cerning medical problems, F(1,78)  5.12, p 
0.05, g  0.50, and had sufficient information to
handle illness emergencies, F(1,86)  8.19, p 
0.05, g  0.59.
After 3 months in the program, PhoenixCare
participants were less likely than controls to have
had an experience for which they were unpre-
pared (see Table 3). In logistic regression of time
3 outcomes, the Condition by Diagnosis interac-
tion, p  0.05, OR  6.07, [CI: 1.01, 36.53] re-
flected that COPD PhoenixCare patients were
much less likely to have had such an experience
than were COPD controls, p  0.05, OR  0.23,
[CI: 0.05, 0.97], 32% and 58% in PhoenixCare and
control respectively, h  0.73. At time 6, a condi-
tion main effect, p  0.05, OR  3.22, [CI: 1.10,
9.44] reflected less preparedness overall of pa-
tients in the PhoenixCare condition, 42% and 21%
in PhoenixCare and control respectively, h 
0.45.
In summary, the PhoenixCare participants re-
ported a sense of having greater information for
self-management of illness, a greater appreciation
of resources available to help with their illness.
In the early months of intervention only, they re-
ported better preparedness for daily experiences,
an effect that reversed at time 6.
Focus 2: preparation for end of life
The percentages of affirmative responses to the
four binary indicators (yes/no) reflecting prepa-
ration for end of life are given in Table 4 (Focus
2) as a function of condition and time. In logistic
regression of time 3 outcomes, PhoenixCare par-
ticipants showed a higher rate of having a living
will or advance directive than did controls, p 
0.05, OR  4.47, [CI: 1.10, 18.18], with 71% com-
pliance in PhoenixCare, 65% in control, h  0.67.
This represented a substantial gain for Phoenix-
Care patients (from 52% to 71%; see Table 4). No
further effects of condition emerged.
Focus 3: physical and mental functioning
Participation in enjoyable activities. By the time 3
measurement point, patients in PhoenixCare re-
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
119

ported having been able to initiate or resume an
activity they enjoyed (see Table 4, Focus 3). As
shown in logistic regression of time 3 outcomes,
the condition by diagnosis interaction reached
significance, 2(1)  6.84, p  0.01, OR  8.5, [CI:
1.69, 39.28]. In COPD, fully 63% of PhoenixCare
patients responded “yes” as opposed to only 16%
of controls, z  3.38, p  0.01, h  1.00. This dif-
ference was not retained at time 6 for patients
with COPD. There was no effect at either time
point for patients with CHF.
Symptom control. At each interview participants
identified, in open-ended fashion, up to three
troublesome symptoms; symptoms identified
could vary across time points. In all, 78%, 90%,
and 92% of patients reported at least one symp-
tom at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively.c At time 0,
the symptom mentioned as most troubling with
the greatest frequency was difficulty breathing
(by 64% of all participants); pain and fatigue were
also frequently mentioned. Mean ratings of the
frequency, severity, and distress associated with
the most troublesome symptom are given in
Table 5. In a series of ANOVAs of time 0 symp-
AIKEN ET AL.
120
TABLE 3.
OUTCOMES FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT OF ILLNESS, KNOWLEDGE OF RESOURCES FOR MANAGEMENT, AND
PREPAREDNESS (FOCUS 1) AT INITIAL INTERVIEW, TIME 3 (THREE MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY) AND AT TIME 6
(SIX MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY)
Means adjusted for initial statusa
Time 3b
Time 6c
Item
PhoenixCare
Control
PhoenixCare
Control
PhoenixCare
Control
Focus 1: Self-management of illness
and knowledge of resources
Focus 1: Self-management of illness
Participant has received sufficient
3.29
3.32
3.73
3.55
3.75
3.70
information to manage illness
at home
Participant has received sufficient
3.51
3.52
3.72
3.52
3.90d
3.51d
information to handle illness
emergency
Focus 1: Resources
Participant has received education
1.80
1.76
2.57d
2.02d
2.14
1.74
about community resources
Participant has received information
1.29
1.42
2.24
1.98
1.97
1.94
about how family and friends
can assist
Participant has received information
1.57
1.76
2.72
2.45
2.63d
2.19d
about who to talk to about a
medical problem
Focus 1: Preparedness (percent
affirmative response)
Participant had an experience which
47%
47%
32%e
40%e
42%f
21%f
they were unprepared for in the
last 4 weeks
Note: All items are on 4-point scales, where 1  mostly false and 4  mostly true.
aMeans reported are adjusted means from an analysis of covariance with response to the item at the initial time 0
interview as the covariate.
bThree-month data include all cases with data at time 3.
cSix-month data include all cases with data at time 6.
dCorresponding adjusted means for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p  0.05).
eProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p  0.05).
fProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p  0.05).
Initial interview
(unadjusted means)
cThe non-reporting of symptoms at time 0 by 22% of
patients was attributable to difficulties in initial intake in-
terview administration by one case manager. Whether or
not she had administered any particular interview that
contained this difficulty in administration was unrelated
to diagnosis (CHF, COPD) or to condition (PhoenixCare,
control). Therefore, the lack of response weakened statis-
tical power but did not affect conclusions about differ-
ences between conditions, the focus of the analyses.

tom frequency, severity, and distress ratings as a
function of condition and diagnosis, conditions
were equivalent at outset. In a parallel series of
ANOVAs of Time 3 data,d only symptom distress
showed an effect, specifically in the form of an
interaction between condition and diagnosis,
F(1,99)  4.89, p  0.05. PhoenixCare patients
with COPD reported lower symptom distress
than did COPD controls (p  0.05), g  0.81. The
interaction effect held at time 6, F(1,82)  6.19,
p  0.05, and reflected that PhoenixCare patients
with COPD again tended to have lower (but not
significant) distress ratings than did COPD con-
trols, F(1,22)  1.97, p  0.07, g  0.58. However,
for clients with CHF, the reverse was true, with
PhoenixCare participants reporting higher dis-
tress, F(1,60)  5.26, p  0.05, g  0.60.
Trajectories of physical and mental functioning on
the SF-36™. The eight subscales of the SF-36™
provided the main characterization of function-
ing over time. Table 6 gives the mean transformed
scores on a 100-point scale at initial measurement
(time 0) for all participants in the PhoenixCare
study; high scores reflect better functioning.
These mean scores are far below those of com-
parably aged participants in the Medical Out-
comes Study (MOS), who were diagnosed with
CHF and COPD.23 The average score across the
eight 100-point scales for PhoenixCare partici-
pants was 29. This reflects exceptionally low func-
tioning compared to average scores of 55 and 56,
respectively, for CHF and COPD patients in the
MOS.
Table 6 summarizes the growth analyses. The
slope of each of the four groups (condition  di-
agnosis) is reported. For the intercept, the mea-
surement point (month), if any, at which differ-
ences among groups emerged is reported, along
with a brief description of the difference.
Condition effects. As shown in Table 6, effects of
the PhoenixCare intervention emerged on three
scales: (1) Physical Functioning, a measure of ac-
tivities of daily living, (2) General Health, a self-
assessment of current health and expectation of
future health, and (3) Vitality, a measure of level
of energy. On Physical Functioning, PhoenixCare
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
121
TABLE 4.
OUTCOMES FOR PREPARATION FOR END OF LIFE (FOCUS 2) AND RESUMPTION OF ACTIVITIES (FOCUS 3)
Percent affirmative response
Time 3a
Time 6b
PhoenixCare
Control
PhoenixCare
Control
PhoenixCare
Control
Focus 2: Preparation for end of life
Participant has living will or advance
52%
61%
71%c
65%c
70%
73%
directive for medical treatment desired
Participant has documents such as 
56%
63%
66%
69%
68%
76%
medical power of attorney
Participant has discussed legal documents
40%
48%
48%
59%
34%
62%
with physician responsible for care
Participant has discussed legal documents
62%
71%
78%
90%
82%
94%
with family and friends
Focus 3: Physical and mental functioning
Participant has been able to begin or
34%
36%
49%d
37%d
45%
42%
resume an enjoyable activity in the 
last 4 weeks
Note: All items have a binary (yes, no) response. Number responding: Initial interview, n  189; 3-month inter-
view, n  111; 6-month interview, n  90.
aPatients who remained in the program for 3 months.
bPatients who remained in the program for 6 months.
cAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p  0.05).
dAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p  0.05).
Initial interview
dFor the ANOVAs of symptom frequency, severity, and
distress at time 3 and time 6, we did not covary out time
0 scores, since patients often reported different symptoms
at time 0, time 3 and time 6. However, there were no dif-
ferences in these ratings as a function of Condition and
Diagnosis at time 0 that would have led to bias in out-
comes, if ignored, at time 3 and 6.

patients in both diagnoses remained the same
over time (CHF) or improved (COPD) over time
(as reflected in their slopes), while control pa-
tients declined over time, z  2.50, p  0.05 for
the difference in average slope as a function of
Condition. At the 9-month point, the Phoenix-
Care patients’ physical functioning exceeded that
of controls, as shown by the intercept difference,
z  2.16, p  0.05, g  0.41. Similarly, on the Gen-
eral Health Scale, the average slope for Phoenix-
Care was higher than for controls, z  2.16, p 
0.05, and the PhoenixCare intercept exceeded that
of controls at 9 months, z  2.51, p  0.05, g 
0.47. On the Vitality scale at the 3-month time
point the interaction between condition and di-
agnosis was significant, z  2.52, p  0.05. Specif-
ically, there was an intercept difference for
COPD, with PhoenixCare having higher Vitality
scores than controls, z  2.36, p  0.05, g  0.76;
no difference between conditions was observed
for CHF.
In summary, the PhoenixCare intervention was
associated with maintained or improved Physi-
cal Functioning and General Health, such that
PhoenixCare patients exceeded controls by 9
months. PhoenixCare patients with COPD exhib-
ited enhanced Vitality relative to controls.
Focus 4: medical utilization
In the 6 months prior to the outset of the
PhoenixCare intervention, PhoenixCare partici-
pants averaged 0.12 emergency department vis-
its per month (SD  0.18). Control participants
averaged 0.11 emergency department visits per
month (SD  0.20). This level of utilization re-
mained essentially unchanged during the inter-
vention, with averages of 0.11 (SD  0.34) and
0.10 (SD  0.31) visits per month for PhoenixCare
and control participants, respectively.
In 
an 
overdispersed 
Poisson 
regression
model25 we predicted number of emergency de-
partment visits during enrollment from condi-
tion, diagnosis, and their interaction, controlling
for total number of days in the program and num-
ber of preenrollment emergency department vis-
its; there were no significant effects of condition.
Neither were there any effects of condition on
emergency department utilization for a subgroup
of participants we identified as being at high risk
for emergency department utilization.
Final statistical adjustment
Among all tests of pretest equivalence,
PhoenixCare participants tended to exceed con-
trols (p  0.10) on two SF-36™ scales, Social Func-
tioning and Mental Health. We repeated all
analyses, statistically controlling these differ-
ences. All effects we have reported were main-
tained.
DISCUSSION
Summary of results
Evaluation outcomes supported an association
between participation in PhoenixCare and posi-
AIKEN ET AL.
122
TABLE 5.
MEAN FREQUENCY, SEVERITY, AND DISTRESS
RATINGS OF THE MOST TROUBLESOME SYMPTOM (FOCUS 3)
Mean frequency at each point in timea
Time 0
Time 3
Time 6
CHF
PhoenixCare
2.83
2.90
2.87
Control
2.90
2.68
3.00
COPD
PhoenixCare
3.08
3.35
3.08
Control
3.23
3.35
2.90
Mean severity at each point in timeb
Time 0
Time 3
Time 6
CHF
PhoenixCare
2.35
2.18
2.20
Control
2.24
2.18
2.13
COPD
PhoenixCare
2.54
2.35
2.08
Control
2.50
2.29
2.20
Mean distress at each point in timec
Time 0
Time 3
Time 6
CHF
PhoenixCare
4.19
3.72
4.03d
Control
3.81
3.32
3.30d
COPD
PhoenixCare
4.38
3.41d
2.85e
Control
4.35
4.29d
3.80e
Note: Number of respondents is n  146 for time 0, 
n  101 for time 3, and n  85 for time 6.
aFrequency measured on a 4-point scale: 1  occasion-
ally; 2  some of the time; 3  most of the time; 4  all
of the time.
bSeverity measured on a 3-point scale: 1  not at all 
severe; 2  moderately severe; 3  extremely severe.
cDistress measured on a 5-point scale: 1  not at all; 
2  a little bit; 3  somewhat; 4  quite a bit; 5  very
much.
dp  0.05 for difference between means.
ep  0.07 for difference between means.

tive outcomes. In support of Focus 1, Self-Man-
agement of Illness, PhoenixCare patients re-
ported having received more information about
both management of illness and about resources
than did controls. In addition, after the first three
months (time 3) PhoenixCare patients reported
being less likely to have experienced health re-
lated events for which they were unprepared
(though this effect reversed at time 6). In support
of Focus 2, Legal Preparation for End-of-Life,
PhoenixCare patients were more likely to have a
living will or advance directive by time 3. With
regard to Focus 3, Physical and Mental function-
ing, more PhoenixCare COPD patients than con-
trols had returned to an enjoyable activity by time
3. PhoenixCare COPD patients also reported
lower symptom distress time 3 (although the op-
posite was observed for PhoenixCare patients
with CHF at time 6). On the SF-36™ scales,
PhoenixCare patients with COPD reported
greater vitality (level of energy versus fatigue)
than COPD controls by time 3. Control patients
declined in both Physical Functioning and Gen-
eral Health while PhoenixCare patients did not.
At 9 months after treatment onset superior Phys-
ical Functioning and General Health emerged
among PhoenixCare above control participants.
Across program foci there were more positive ef-
fects associated with PhoenixCare for patients
with COPD. Successful management of the symp-
toms of COPD has long been associated with
adaptive psychological functioning and emo-
tional stability of the patient.32,33 All the effect
sizes associated with the PhoenixCare interven-
tion are moderate to large.
For Focus 4, Utilization of Emergency Medical
Services, there was no reduction in standalone
emergency department visits associated with
PhoenixCare. Study participants apparently ex-
perienced extreme exacerbations of their condi-
tions that could not be handled at home. The 
illness level of participants cannot be overesti-
mated. On the SF-36™ Physica1 Functioning
scale, which measures activities of daily living,
the mean scale score was 13 for PhoenixCare par-
ticipants, a remarkably low level of functioning,
as compared to mean scale scores of 48 and 57 for
patients with CHF and patients with COPD, re-
spectively, in the MOS.19
Limitations of PhoenixCare design and evaluation
We experienced difficulties with recruitment of
eligible participants, yielding fewer cases than
planned.12 The prognostication criteria we em-
ployed to predict life expectancy, while based on
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
123
TABLE 6.
GROWTH MODELING ANALYSIS OF SF-36™ TRAJECTORIES OF
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FUNCTIONING OVER TIME (FOCUS 3)
Slopesa
Time 0
SF-36™ Scale
Scale mean
CHF
COPD
CHF
COPD Monthc
Description of finding
Physical
13.0
0.18
1.00
1.39
0.95
9
PhxCare Clients  Control (COPD & CHF)
functioningd
General healthe
17.4
0.16
0.54
0.17
1.67
9
PhxCare Clients  Control (COPD & CHF)
Vitality
18.8
0.02
0.09
0.91
0.61
3
PhxCare Clients  Control (COPD only)
Social functioning
33.9
0.80
1.09
2.15
3.72
3
CHF  COPD
Role-physical
12.7
0.51
0.57
1.60
0.14
—
Bodily painf
48.5
0.57
2.98
0.09
0.45
—
Role emotional
31.3
0.00
1.77
0.24
3.08
—
Mental health
53.6
0.69
0.37
1.77
0.10
—
Note: All scores on the SF-36™ are transformed scores according to Ware et al.19, (p. 6.17) that range from 0 to 100,
as calculated by the formula: Transformed score  {[actual raw score-lowest possible score]/highest possible raw
score}  100.
aSlopes of average linear trajectory within a group, averaged across slopes of individual linear trajectories of 
individual within the group.
bIntercept difference reflects difference in overall elevation of trajectories across groups at a particular time (month).
cMonth is month since enrollment in program; 3 months is at Time 3, and 9 months is at Time 9.
dOverall control slope is declining while overall PhoenixCare slope is rising (p  0.05)
eControl slope is declining while PhoenixCare functioning remains stable (p  0.05)
fHigh scores on the bodily pain scale represent freedom from pain, (i.e., lower experience of pain).
CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
PhxCare
Control
Intercept differencesb

the best available data, were limited. We sought
participants expected to live for 2 years. One third
of all participants died or transferred to hospice
in the first 3 months, resulting in diminished sta-
tistical power to detect effects associated with the
PhoenixCare intervention. Statistical power to de-
tect moderate effect size differences between
PhoenixCare and control participants fell from
0.93 to 0.74 to 0.64 at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively.
We may have failed to detect small, yet mean-
ingful, outcomes.
The quality of medical claims data put severe
limitations on our ability to explore shifts in uti-
lization. Hospitalization claims could not be
meaningfully explored, as previously explained.
Moreover, we were unable to characterize po-
tential shifts to less costly aspects of care (e.g., of-
fice visits) because these services were not docu-
mented by all plans.
We experienced from 0% to 2% missing data
on individual items, evenly distributed across
conditions. If this minimal nonresponse to indi-
vidual items reflected greater patient illness, then
our data would be very slightly biased toward
healthier overall responding.
We carried out multiple statistical tests, in-
creasing the probability of collective type I error.
Yet, the pattern of results is favorable to Phoenix-
Care. Of 14 effects reported, 12 favored Phoenix-
Care. If there were no difference between condi-
tions in the population, the probability of
observing this pattern of results by chance alone
would be less than or equal to 0.004.
With regard to generality of findings, our re-
sults in general apply to those participants whom
we retained for at least three months. Results for
physical functioning pertain to those retained for
nine months. Retained individuals had better
health than those lost to the study. Our analysis
of differential attrition across the PhoenixCare
and control conditions suggests that the outcomes
associated with PhoenixCare are not caused by
differential health status across conditions.
Case management in treatment versus palliation
As characterized by Meier et al.11 case man-
agement programs delivered by MCOs for those
with life-threatening illnesses “typically focus
primarily on service coordination, to a lesser ex-
tent on medical evaluation and decision making,
and only rarely incorporate standard palliative
care assessment and interventions. . . . “ (p. 120).
In contrast, palliative care services include estab-
lishing treatment goals in concert with patient
and caregivers; pain and symptom relief; psy-
chological support, and coordination of care.4 The
PhoenixCare staff, particularly the registered
nurse case managers, engaged in all these pallia-
tive care activities. These registered nurse case
managers also advocated for care to be delivered
by the MCOs, and assumed a leadership role in
coordination of care with MCO case managers
(where they existed), physicians, family, and
community organizations. Because PhoenixCare
participants were approaching death but at the
same time were actively living and pursuing
treatment, PhoenixCare registered nurse case
managers had both their own role in palliation
and an administrative role in bringing together
palliation and treatment services.
Mechanism of action of PhoenixCare
The potential mechanisms by which the
PhoenixCare intervention was associated with
beneficial outcomes bear exploration.e One pos-
sibility is that the PhoenixCare intervention pro-
vided an excess of usual care. PhoenixCare staff,
particularly the registered nurse case managers,
delivered specific palliative services focused on
education and patient empowerment, services
designed to complement, not duplicate, MCO-
based treatment. A second possibility is that the
PhoenixCare staff were exceptionally skilled at
service delivery. PhoenixCare staff were selected
to have experience in both chronic disease man-
agement and end-of-life care. They received spe-
cialized training in how to deliver the intensive
PhoenixCare palliative care protocol. We at-
tribute any positive impacts associated with
PhoenixCare to delivery of the PhoenixCare pal-
liation protocol, including advocacy for treat-
ment, by experienced registered nurse case man-
agers. We believe that the staff training and the
PhoenixCare program can be exported to other
settings.
Alternative models of home-based palliative care
The PhoenixCare program delivered home-
based palliative care to individuals expected to
AIKEN ET AL.
124
eWe thank an anonymous reviewer for suggestions as
to potential mechanisms that stimulate this discussion, as
well as the discussion of limitations of the study.

live for 2 years who were still actively pursuing
treatment through one of seven different MCOs.
PhoenixCare provided palliative care as an add-
on to the treatment services, including treatment-
oriented case management, provided by the
MCOs. In contrast, Meier et al.11 furnished home-
based palliative care by training case manage-
ment nurses to add palliative case management
to treatment oriented case management they usu-
ally provided; an outcome evaluation of this pro-
gram is forthcoming. Alternative models of pal-
liation funded through The Robert Wood Johnson
initiative3 included integrating hospice into a
hospital setting and adding palliative care ser-
vices in outpatient treatment settings. We de-
signed our PhoenixCare model specifically to test
whether a stand-alone organization especially de-
voted to delivery of high-quality home-based pal-
liative care could partner with a variety of health
care plans. We chose individualized case man-
agement in order to reach an essentially home-
bound population of seriously ill individuals.
CONCLUSION
Patients with severe illnesses who were still ac-
tively pursuing treatment appeared to benefit
from the palliative services provided by the
PhoenixCare intervention. Our findings lend sup-
port to the concept of palliation as integral to
treatment for severe life limiting disease.4
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is a project of The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation: Promoting Excellence in End-of-Life
Care Program, which provided funding. It was
also supported in part by the Flinn Foundation,
Phoenix, Arizona, and St. Luke’s Health Initia-
tives, Phoenix, Arizona, which provided funding
for both clinical and research project staff.
PhoenixCare was housed at Hospice of the Val-
ley, Phoenix, Arizona; the support of Executive
Director Susan Goldwater-Levine is gratefully ac-
knowledged.
REFERENCES
1. Byock IR, Twohig JS: Expanding the realm of the pos-
sible. J Palliat Med 2003;6:311–313.
2. Byock IR: End-of-life care: A public health crisis and
an opportunity for managed care. Am J Manag Care
2001;7:1123–1132.
3. Beresford, L, Byock, I., Twohig, JS: Financial implica-
tions of promoting excellence in end-of-life care.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2002.
4. Morrison RS, Meier DE: Palliative care. N Engl J Med
2004;350:2582–2590.
5. Armes PJ, Addington-Hall JM: Perspectives on symp-
tom control in patients receiving community pallia-
tive care. Palliat Med 2003;17:608–615.
6. Bixby MB, Knoick-McMahon J, McKenna CG: Ap-
plying the transitional care model to elderly patients
with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2000;14:53–63.
7. Rosenfeld K, Rasmussen J: Palliative care manage-
ment: A Veterans Administration demonstration proj-
ect. J Palliat Med 2003;6:831–839.
8. Bakitas M, Stevens M, Ahles T, Kirn M, Skalla K, Kane
N, Greenberg R: Project ENABLE: A palliative care
demonstration project for advanced cancer patients in
three settings. J Palliat Med 2004;7:363–372.
9. Brumley RD, Enguidanos S, Cherin DA: Effectiveness
of a home-based palliative care program for end-of-
life. J Palliat Med 2003;6:715–724.
10. Stuart B, D’Onofrio CN, Boatman S, Feigelman G:
CHOICES: promoting early access to end-of-life care
through home-based transition management. J Palliat
Med 2003;6:671–683.
11. Meier DE, Thar W, Jordan A, Goldhirsch SL, Siu A,
Morrison RS: Integrating case management and pal-
liative care. J Palliat Med 2004;7:119–134.
12. Lockhart CA, Volk-Craft BE, Hamilton G, Aiken LS,
Williams FG: The PhoenixCare Program: Teaching the
seriously chronically ill skills for living and dying. J
Palliat Med 2003;6:1001–1012.
13. Christakis NAL: Predicting patient survival before
and after hospice enrollment. Hosp J 1998;13:71–87.
14. Connor SR: New initiatives transforming hospice
care. Hosp J 1999;14:3–4, 193–203.
15. Finne-Soveri UH, Tilvis RS: How accurate is the ter-
minal prognosis in the minimum data set? J Am Geri-
atr Soc 1998;46:8,1023–1024.
16. Fox E, Landrum-McNiff K, Zhong Z, Dawson NV, Wu
AW, Lynn J: Evaluation of prognostic criteria for de-
termining hospice eligibility in patients with advanced
lung, heart, or liver disease. SUPPORT Investigators.
Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for
Outcomes and Risks of Treatments. JAMA 1999;282:
17,1638–1645.
17. Luchins DJ, Hanrahan P, Murphy K: Criteria for en-
rolling dementia patients in hospice. J Am Geriatr Soc
1997;45:9,1054–1059.
18. Stuart B: The NHO Medical Guidelines for Non-Can-
cer Disease and local medical review policy: Hospice
access for patients with diseases other than cancer.
Hosp J 1999;14:3–4, 139–154.
19. Shields M: Proxy reporting in the national population
health survey. Health Rep 2000;12:21–39.
20. Yip JY, Wilber KH, Myrtle RC, Grazman DN: Com-
parison of older adult subject and proxy responses on
PHOENIXCARE INTERVENTION OUTCOME EVALUATION
125

the SF-36 health-related quality of life instrument. Ag-
ing Ment Health 2001;5:136–142.
21. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, Lepore JM,
Friedlander-Klar H, Kiyasu E, Sobel K, Coyle N, Ke-
meny N, Norton L, Scher H: The memorial symptom
assessment scale: An instrument for the evaluation 
of symptom prevalence, characteristics, and distress.
Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1326–1336.
22. Teno J: Surrogate Integrated Care System Afterdeath
Interview. In: Toolkit of Instruments to Measure End of
Life. Washington, DC: Center to Improve Care of the
Dying. George Washington University, 1997. (http://
www.gwu.edu/cicd/toolkit/toolkit.htm) Last ac-
cessed 12/06/05.
23. Ware JE Jr, Snow KK, Kosinski M, Gandek B: SF-36
Health Survey: Manual and Interpretation Guide. Boston
MA: The Health Institute, New England Medical Cen-
ter, 1993.
24. Ellis BH, Shannon ED, Cox JK, Aiken LS, Fowler BM:
Chronic conditions: Results of the Medicare Health
Outcomes Survey. Health Care Financing Rev
2004;25:75–91.
25. McCullagh P, Nelder JA: Generalized Linear Models,
2nd ed. London: Chapman & Hall, 1989.
26. Singer JD, Willett JB: Applied Longitudinal Data Anal-
ysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
27. Mehta PD, West SG: Putting the individual back into
individual growth curves. Psychol Methods 2000;
5:23–43.
28. Hedges LV, Olkin I: Statistical Methods for Meta-Anal-
ysis. New York: Academic Press, 1985.
29. Lipsey MW, Wilson DW: The efficacy of psychologi-
cal, educational, and behavioral treatment. Am Psy-
chol 1993;48:1181–1209.
30. Cohen J: Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral
Sciences, 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
1988.
31. Jurs SG, Glass GV: The effect of experimental mor-
tality on the internal and external validity of the ran-
domized comparative experiment. J Exper Educ
1971;40:62–66.
32. Dowson CA, Town GI, Frampton C, Mulder RT: Psy-
chopathology and illness beliefs influence COPD self-
management. J Psychosom Res 2004;56:333–340.
33. McCathie HC, Spence, Tate RL: Adjustment to chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: The importance of
psychological factors. Eur Respir J 2002;19:47–53.
Address reprint requests to:
Leona S. Aiken, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
Arizona State University
Box 871104
Tempe, AZ 85287-1104
E-mail: Leona.Aiken@asu.edu
AIKEN ET AL.
126

