JAMA Intern Med. 2020 Feb; 180(2): 233–242.
Published online 2019 Nov 11. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.5349:
10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.5349
PMCID: PMC6865772
PMID: 31710345
Lieve Van den Block, PhD,
 Elisabeth Honinx, MSc,
 Lara Pivodic, PhD,
 Rose Miranda, MSc,
Bregje D. Onwuteaka-Philipsen, PhD,  Hein van Hout, PhD,  H. Roeline W. Pasman, PhD,  Mariska Oosterveld-Vlug, PhD,
Maud Ten Koppel, MSc,  Ruth Piers, PhD,
 Nele Van Den Noortgate, PhD,
 Yvonne Engels, PhD,  Myrra Vernooij-Dassen, PhD,
Jo Hockley, PhD,  Katherine Froggatt, PhD,  Sheila Payne, PhD,  Katarzyna Szczerbińska, PhD,
 Marika Kylänen, MSc,
Giovanni Gambassi, MD,
 Sophie Pautex, PhD,
 Catherine Bassal, PhD,
 Stefanie De Buysser, PhD,
 Luc Deliens, PhD,
and Tinne Smets, PhD
, for the PACE trial group
VUB-UGhent End-of-Life Care Research Group, Ghent University and Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussel, Belgium
Department of Clinical Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussel, Belgium
Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussel, Belgium
Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Expertise Center for Palliative Care, Department of Public and Occupational
Health, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Department of General Practice and Elderly Care Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Department of Geriatric Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
Department of Anesthesiology, Pain and Palliative Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
IQ Healthcare, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
International Observatory on End-of-Life Care, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
Unit for Research on Aging Society, Department of Sociology of Medicine, Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine Chair, Faculty
of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Center for the Interdisciplinary Study of Gerontology and Vulnerability (CIGEV), University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Biostatistics Unit, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Ghent University, Belgium
Corresponding author.
Article Information
Group Information: The PACE trial group members appear at the end of the article.
Corresponding Author: Lieve Van den Block, PhD, VUB-UGent End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium (lvdblock@vub.be).
Accepted for Publication: September 17, 2019.
Published Online: November 11, 2019. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.5349
Author Contributions: Drs Van den Block and Smets had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Joint last authorship: Drs Deliens and Smets.
Study concept and design: Van den Block, Onwuteaka-Philipsen, van Hout, Oosterveld-Vlug, Piers, Van Den Noortgate, Engels,
Vernooij-Dassen, Hockley, Froggatt, Payne, Szczerbińska, Kylänen, Gambassi, Deliens, Smets.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Van den Block, Honinx, Pivodic, Miranda, Onwuteaka-Philipsen, van Hout, Pasman,
Oosterveld-Vlug, ten Koppel, Piers, Engels, Vernooij-Dassen, Froggatt, Szczerbińska, Kylänen, Gambassi, Pautex, Bassal, De
Buysser, Deliens, Smets.
Drafting of the manuscript: Van den Block, Honinx, Miranda, Engels, Froggatt, Szczerbińska, Kylänen, Smets.
1,2,3
1,3
1,3
1,3
4
5
4
4
4
1,6
1,6
7
8
9
9
9
10
11
12,13
14
15
16
1,3,17
1,3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
JAMA Internal Medicine

Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Van den Block, Honinx, De Buysser.
Obtained funding: Van den Block, Engels, Froggatt, Szczerbińska, Pautex, Deliens.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Pivodic, Miranda, van Hout, ten Koppel, Hockley, Gambassi, Deliens.
Study supervision: Van den Block, Pivodic, Onwuteaka-Philipsen, van Hout, Piers, Van Den Noortgate, Vernooij-Dassen, Payne,
Gambassi, Bassal, Deliens, Smets.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Pivodic is a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Research Foundation-Flanders. Drs Pivodic and
Smets are recipients of an AXA Research Fund Postdoctoral Grant. No other conflicts are reported.
Funding/Support: This work was supported by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/ 2007e2013) under
grant agreement 603111 (PACE project Palliative Care for Older People). It has been cofunded by Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education in the years 2014 to 2019 based on the decision no 3202/7PR/2014/2 (November 25, 2014) and by the Swiss
Academy of Medical Sciences in the years 2015 to 2017.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The Seventh Framework Program, the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education, and the
Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for
publication.
The PACE Trial Group: Eddy Adang, PhD, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Paula Andreasen,
MSc, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Ilona Barańska, MPH, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Krakow, Poland; Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Teija Hammar, PhD,
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Rauha Heikkilä, MSc, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland; Danni Collingridge Moore, MSc (Hons), University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK; Violetta Kijowska, MPH,
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland; Suvi Leppäaho, MSc, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland; Federica Mammarella, MD, PhD, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy; Martina Mercuri, MSc, Università
Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy; Outi Kuitunen-Kaija, MSc, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland;
Agnieszka Pac, PhD, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland; Emilie Morgan de Paula, MA, Haute-Ecole Arc,
Neuchâtel, Switzerland; Paola Rossi, MSc, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy; Ivan Segat, MSC, Università Cattolica
del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy; Jenny T. van der Steen, PhD, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands; Agata
Stodolska, MPH, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland; Marc Tanghe, MSc, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium;
Anne B. Wichmann, MSc, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Additional Contributions: We thank the Biostatistic Unit of Ghent University (R Colman, MSc) for advising the statistical
analyses and the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics of the UMC Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit (Dr MA Jonker, Phd) for
performing the randomization. We thank all participating nursing homes and participants, all country trainers, and all PACE
collaborators who are not in the author list. We thank Jane Ruthven, MA, for language editing.
Data Sharing Statement: Available in Supplement 3.
Received 2019 Jul 19; Accepted 2019 Sep 17.
Copyright 2019 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved.

 
 
   




   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   







