JAMA Intern Med. 2019 Dec; 179(12): 1658–1667.
Published online 2019 Sep 30. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.4101:
10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.4101
PMCID: PMC6777227
PMID: 31566651
Katherine L. Possin, PhD,
 Jennifer J. Merrilees, RN, PhD,  Sarah Dulaney, RN, MS, CNS,  Stephen J. Bonasera, MD,
Winston Chiong, MD, PhD,  Kirby Lee, PharmD,  Sarah M. Hooper, JD,  Isabel Elaine Allen, PhD,  Tamara Braley, MSN, APRN,
Alissa Bernstein, PhD, MPH,
 Talita D. Rosa, MS, MD,
 Krista Harrison, PhD,
 Hailey Begert-Hellings, BA,  John Kornak, PhD,
James G. Kahn, MD, PhD,  Georges Naasan, MD,  Serggio Lanata, MD, MS,  Amy M. Clark, PhD, MSW,
 Anna Chodos, MD,
Rosalie Gearhart, RN, MS, CNS,  Christine Ritchie, MD, MSPH,
 and Bruce L. Miller, MD
Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of California, San
Francisco
Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco
Home Instead Center for Successful Aging, Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco
UCSF/UC Consortium on Law, Science & Health Policy, UC Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco
Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, University of California, San Francisco
Division of Geriatrics, University of California, San Francisco
Department of Social Work, Nebraska Wesleyan University, Lincoln
Center for Research on Aging, San Francisco Campus for Jewish Living, San Francisco, California
Corresponding author.
Article Information
Accepted for Publication: July 28, 2019.
Corresponding Author: Katherine L. Possin, PhD, Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, UCSF Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Ln, Ste 190, San Francisco, CA 94158
(katherine.possin@ucsf.edu).
Published Online: September 30, 2019. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.4101
Author Contributions: Drs Possin and Allen had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Possin, Merrilees, Dulaney, Bonasera, Chiong, Lee, Braley, Bernstein, Begert-Hellings, Kahn, Clark,
Gearhart, Ritchie, Miller.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Possin, Bonasera, Chiong, Lee, Hooper, Allen, Bernstein, Rosa, Harrison, Begert-
Hellings, Kornak, Naasan, Lanata, Chodos, Ritchie.
Drafting of the manuscript: Possin, Allen, Braley, Begert-Hellings, Clark, Gearhart, Ritchie.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Possin, Merrilees, Dulaney, Bonasera, Chiong, Lee, Hooper,
Allen, Bernstein, Rosa, Harrison, Kornak, Kahn, Naasan, Lanata, Chodos, Ritchie, Miller.
Statistical analysis: Possin, Allen, Begert-Hellings, Kornak.
Obtained funding: Possin, Bonasera, Miller.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Possin, Merrilees, Dulaney, Bonasera, Chiong, Lee, Hooper, Bernstein, Rosa,
Harrison, Begert-Hellings, Kahn, Clark, Chodos, Gearhart.
1,2
1
1
3
1
4
5
6
3
2,7
1,2
2,7,8
1
6
7
1
1
3,9
8
1
8,10
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
JAMA Internal Medicine

Supervision: Possin, Bonasera, Miller.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Possin reported receiving grants from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS), National Institute on Aging (NIA), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Global Brain Health Institute,
and UCSF (Quest Diagnostics Dementia Pathway Collaboration Research Grant) during the conduct of the study and personal
fees from ClearView Healthcare Partners outside the submitted work. Dr Merrilees reported receiving a grant from the University
of California, San Francisco (UCSF) during the conduct of the study. Dr Dulaney reported receiving grants from the CMS and NIA
during the conduct of the study. Dr Bonasera reported receiving a grant from the CMS during the conduct of the study. Dr
Chiong reported receiving grants from the CMS and NIA during the conduct of the study. Dr Rosa reported receiving grants from
Global Brain Health Institute, Department of Health and Human Services, CMS, NIA, and National Institute on Neurological
Disorders and Stroke during the conduct of the study. Dr Harrison reported receiving an Atlantic Fellowship from Global Brain
Health Institute, a pilot grant from UCSF Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Center, a career development grant
from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grants from the UCSF
Hellman Fellows Program, and a junior faculty development award from National Palliative Care Research Center during the
conduct of the study. Drs Kornak, Gearheart, and Ritchie reported receiving grants from CMS during the conduct of the study. In
addition, Dr Ritchie reported receiving grants from the NIH, the John A. Hartford Foundation, the West Foundation, the Patient
Centered Outcomes Research Institute, and the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine outside the submitted
work. Dr Miller reported receiving grants from the NIA and UCSF (Quest Diagnostics Dementia Pathway Collaboration Research
Grant) and a subcontract from Cornell University during the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This project was funded by the Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (1C1CMS331346), Global Brain Health Institute, National Institute on Aging (5R01AG056715), and National Institute on
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (UG3 NS105557).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding agencies had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, and approval of the manuscript; and decision to
submit the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
official views of the Department of Health and Human Services or any of its agencies.
Data Sharing Statement: See Supplement 3.
Additional Contributions: The authors thank the study participants, who gave generously of their time. Kristen Cook, PharmD,
Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, College of Pharmacy, University of Nebraska Medical Center; Julie Feuer, LCSW,
Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital and Clinics, UCSF Medical Center; Shalini Lynch, PharmD, Department of Clinical Pharmacy,
University of California, San Francisco, and the care team navigators provided clinical services to participants in the Care
Ecosystem group. Andrew Bindman, MD, Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, University of California, San Francisco;
Celia Kaplan, DrPh, and Anna Napoles, PhD, MPH, Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco; Maya Katz, MD, Department of Neurology, Movement Disorders and Neuromodulation Center,
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco; Sutep Laohavanich, MS, Program Officer, Patient Care, Gordon
and Betty Moore Foundation, Palo Alto, California; Caroline Prioleau, BA, and Michael Schaffer, BSE, Memory and Aging Center,
Department of Neurology, UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences University of California, San Francisco; Katrin Schenk, PhD,
Department of Physics, Randolph College, Lynchburg, Virginia; Leslie Wilson, PhD, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University
of California, San Francisco, and the research coordinators made important contributions to the research. These additional
contributors, as well as all authors, received salary support for their work. Geoffrey Kerchner, MD, PhD, Department of Neurology
& Neurological Sciences, Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California, and Laurel Beckett, PhD,
Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Science, University of California, Davis, volunteered their services as data
safety monitors.
Received 2019 Jun 18; Accepted 2019 Jul 28.
Copyright 2019 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved.

   
   
   
   
   
   
   



   
   
   
   
   

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   





