JAMA. 2019 Feb 26; 321(8): 753–761.
Published online 2019 Feb 26. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.0710: 10.1001/jama.2019.0710
PMCID: PMC6439867
PMID: 30806695
Harriette G. C. Van Spall, MD, MPH,
 Shun Fu Lee, PhD,  Feng Xie, PhD,
 Urun Erbas Oz, PhD,  Richard Perez, MSc,
Peter R. Mitoff, MD,
 Manish Maingi, MD,  Michael C. Tjandrawidjaja, MD,  Michael Heffernan, MD, PhD,
 Mohammad I. Zia,
MD,
 Liane Porepa, MD,
 Mohamed Panju, MSc, MD,  Lehana Thabane, PhD,  Ian D. Graham, MA, PhD,
 R. Brian Haynes, MD,
MSc, PhD,  Dilys Haughton, BScN, MHSc,
 Kim D. Simek, BSc,  Dennis T. Ko, MD, MSc,
 and Stuart J. Connolly, MSc, MD
Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Centre for Health Economics and Policy Analysis, Program for Health Economics and Outcome Measures, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada
Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, St Joseph’s Health Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Cardiac Health Program, Trillium Health Partners, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, William Osler Health System, Brampton, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, Halton Health Care Services, Oakville, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, Michael Garron Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Medicine, Southlake Regional Health Centre, Newmarket, Ontario, Canada
School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Hamilton Niagara Haldimand Brant Community Care Access Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Corresponding author.
Article Information
Corresponding Author: Harriette G. C. Van Spall, MD, MPH, Population Health Research Institute, 20 Copeland Ave, David
Braley Research Institute Bldg, Ste C3-117, Hamilton, ON L8L 0A3, Canada (harriette.vanspall@phri.ca).
Accepted for Publication: January 23, 2019.
Author Contributions: Dr Erbas Oz and Mr Perez had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Van Spall, Lee, Xie, Haughton, Connolly.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Van Spall, Lee, Xie, Erbas Oz, Perez, Mitoff, Maingi, Tjandrawidjaja, Heffernan, Zia,
Porepa, Panju, Thabane, Haynes, Simek, Ko, Connolly.
Drafting of the manuscript: Van Spall, Lee.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Van Spall, Lee, Xie, Mitoff, Maingi, Heffernan, Zia, Porepa,
Panju, Thabane, Graham, Haynes, Simek, Ko.
Statistical analysis: Van Spall, Lee, Xie, Erbas Oz, Perez, Thabane, Connolly.
Obtained funding: Van Spall, Graham, Haynes, Connolly.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Van Spall, Perez, Mitoff, Maingi, Tjandrawidjaja, Heffernan, Zia, Porepa, Simek, Ko.
Supervision: Van Spall, Haughton, Connolly.
1,2,3
3
2,4
5
5
6,7
8
9
10
6,11
12
1
2
13
2
14
3
5,6
1,3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
JAMA

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Van Spall reports speaker fees from Roche Diagnostics and is supported by MOHLTC and
the Hamilton Health Sciences Early Career Award. Dr Ko reports support from an Ontario Mid-Career Scientist Award from the
Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada, Ontario’s office. Dr Connolly reports receiving grants and personal fees from Bayer,
Bristol Myers-Squibb Pfizer, Portola, Bristol Myers-Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, and Medtronic. No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This study was funded by peer-reviewed grants held by Dr Van Spall from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (135917) and Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care (MOHLTC) Health System Research Fund (6686), as well
as in-kind support from the participating hospitals and Community Care Access Centers and from Roche Diagnostics.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding organizations had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication or veto the publication.
Disclaimer: The study was coordinated by PHRI of Hamilton Health Sciences Corporation and McMaster University. Statistical
analysis was conducted at ICES, which is funded by an annual grant from the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.
Parts of this material are based on data and information compiled and provided by the Canadian Institute for Health Information
(CIHI). The opinions, results, and conclusions reported in this article, and selection of journal for submission, are those of the
authors and are independent from the funding sources. The analyses, results, conclusions, opinions, and statements expressed
in this article are those of the authors, and are independent from the funding sources, ICES, or CIHI. No endorsement by funding
sources, ICES, CIHI, or the Ontario MOHLTC is intended or should be inferred.
Data Sharing Statement: See Supplement 4.
Additional Contributions: We are indebted to Daniel Ball, MA (Halton Healthcare), Elizabeth Banting, RN (Southlake Regional
Health Centre), Maria De Leon, RN (Mississauga Halton CCAC), Nancy Elford, MN (Michael Garron Hospital), Jeanine Harrison, MN
(Southlake Regional Health Centre), Elena Holt, MHSc (St Joseph’s Health Centre), Quazi Ibrahim, MSc (Population Health
Research Institute [PHRI]), Gail Johnson, MSc (Guelph General Hospital), Colleen Lackey, RN (Ontario Telemedicine Network), Bill
Liu, MSc (PHRI), Roberta Napoleoni, DipBA (PHRI), Tracy Renton, BNc (Trillium Health Partners), Donna Richardson, BScN
(Trillium Health Partners), Teresa Smith, MBA (Hamilton Health Sciences), Nazneen Solkar, BPhm, (PHRI) Anne Stephens, MEd
(Toronto Central LHIN), and Shannon Tyrrell, MHM (Trillium Health Partners) for their roles in the trial. PHRI employees received
salary support for their roles through the study’s grant funds. The roles of employees from other institutions were funded by in-
kind institutional support. This work is dedicated to the memory of Aubrey Ignatius Van Spall.
Received 2018 Jul 31; Accepted 2019 Jan 23.
Copyright 2019 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved.

   
   
   
   
   
   
   


   
   

   
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   




   


