1234
JOURNAL OF PALLIATIVE MEDICINE
Volume 11, Number 9, 2008
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/jpm.2008.0078
Do Preparation and Life Completion Discussions Improve
Functioning and Quality of Life in Seriously Ill Patients? 
Pilot Randomized Control Trial
Karen E. Steinhauser, Ph.D.,1–4 Stewart C. Alexander, Ph.D.,1–3 Ira R. Byock, M.D.,7
Linda K. George, Ph.D.,4,6 Maren K. Olsen, Ph.D.,1,3,8 and James A. Tulsky, M.D.1–5
Abstract
Background: Significant palliative care intervention has focused on physical pain and symptom control; yet less
empirical evidence supports efforts to address the psychosocial and spiritual dimensions of experience.
Objective: To evaluate the impact of an intervention (Outlook) that promotes discussions of end-of-life prepa-
ration and completion on health outcomes in dying persons, including pain and symptoms, physical function,
emotional function (anxiety and depression), spiritual well-being, and quality of life at the end of life.
Design: A three-arm pilot randomized control trial. Subjects were recruited from inpatient and outpatient hos-
pital, palliative care, and hospice settings. Intervention subjects met with a facilitator three times and discussed
issues related to life review, forgiveness, and heritage and legacy. Attention control subjects met with a facili-
tator three times and listened to a nonguided relaxation CD. True control subjects received no intervention.
Measurements: Preoutcomes and postoutcomes included the Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale, QUAL-E,
Rosow-Breslau ADL Scale, Profile of Mood States anxiety sub-scale, the CESD short version, and the Daily Spir-
itual Experience Scale.
Results: Eighty-two hospice eligible patients enrolled in the study; 38 were women, 35 were African American.
Participants’ primary diagnoses included cancer (48), heart disease (5) lung disease (10), and other (19) Ages
ranged from 28–96. Participants in the active discussion intervention showed improvements in functional sta-
tus, anxiety, depression, and preparation for end of life.
Conclusions: The Outlook intervention was acceptable to patients from a variety of educational and ethnic back-
grounds and offers a brief, manualized, intervention for emotional and spiritual concerns.
Introduction
P
ALLIATIVE CARE SEEKS to reduce suffering and enhance
quality of life for seriously ill patients.1,2 Increasing re-
search has focused on physical pain and symptom control,
yet less empirical evidence supports efforts to address the
psychosocial and spiritual dimensions of experience. In fact,
recommendations from the 2005 National Institutes of
Health State of the Science in End of Life Care Conference
called for increased efforts to understand the existential
needs of patients and conduct and evaluate interventions to
address these concerns.3
In our previous research on what constitutes quality at the
end of life,4,5 we learned that patient emotional and spiritual
well-being were identified as part of two larger domains: end-
of-life preparation and completion. Together, these domains in-
corporate both the need for looking back to assess the life lived
as well as looking forward to prepare themselves and their fam-
ily for the remaining weeks or months of life.4 For some pa-
tients, that assessment occurs within a traditional religious con-
text, for others it is part of a larger process of meaning-making
facilitated by locating their illness experience in the context of
the values and preferences of a whole life. Completion and
preparation included issues of reviewing life, resolving con-
flicts, achieving forgiveness, spending time with family and
friends, contributing to others and saying good-bye.4,6
Therefore, we developed a new intervention to foster ex-
pression of end-of-life preparation and completion and con-
1Center for Health Services Research in Primary Care, 2Center for Palliative Care, Durham VA Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina.
3Department of Medicine, 4Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development, 5Institute on Care at the End of Life, 6Department
of Sociology, 8Department of Biostatisitcs and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
7Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire.

PREPARATION AND LIFE COMPLETION DISCUSSIONS
1235
ducted a pilot randomized control trial to evaluate the im-
pact of this intervention on physical functioning, emotional
function (anxiety and depression) and quality of life at the
end of life. In this paper, we present the results of the pilot
trial. The intervention (called Outlook) content and structure
is based on robust evidence from the social gerontology life
review and the health psychology self-disclosure literatures.
Life review: Making sense of a life lived
For social gerontologists, late adulthood includes the de-
velopmental task of life review, which contains components
of reminiscence, reconciliation, forgiveness, and resolution
of past conflicts.7 It offers a chance to “edit” one’s life story,
perhaps in the telling or review, “making it right” by inte-
grating events in the broader arc of a full life-course.8–10
In recent years, several studies have evaluated the effects
of life review interventions on psychosocial outcomes.
Haight’s trial of life review among homebound elderly
showed improved psychological well-being and life satis-
faction up to 8 weeks after the intervention.11 Bohlheijmer et
al.12 and Erlin et al.13 each found improved levels of de-
pression, and Erlin et al, using life review among persons
with AIDS also demonstrated improved purpose, self-es-
teem, and quality of life. Finally Bohlmiejer et al.’s meta-
analyses of 20 studies in depressed older adults showed im-
provements in depressive symptomatology. The effect sizes
of 0.84 (95% confidence interval [CI]  0.31–1.37) were sta-
tistically and clinically comparable to pharmacotherapy and
psychological treatments. The majority of life review inter-
ventions have been conducted among persons with chronic
mental or physical health conditions, with fewer conducted
in patients facing the end of life.
Self-disclosure facilitates healing
An entire literature demonstrates a variety of positive out-
comes associated with expressing personally stressful or
emotionally laden experiences.14–20
Conceptually, self-disclosure of stressful experiences is as-
sociated with the opportunity to develop a coherent personal
narrative that allows a person to describe an event and ex-
plore its meaning and significance in their life’s context. By
putting stress into words,21 individuals are able to identify,
acknowledge, classify, and assimilate these emotional expe-
riences into a larger spiritual and psychosocial framework.22
A meta-analysis of 146 randomized control trials of dis-
closure that suggested this technique is effective with an av-
erage effect size of 0.075.23 Studies with higher doses of dis-
closure (at least 3 sessions), increased session spacing
(weekly), greater length (longer than 15 minutes), and with
follow-up in less than 1 month, conducted among popula-
tions with current physical or psychological problems, and
oral and in-person versus written have demonstrated larger
effects sizes.
Conceptual model
Based on the literature outlined above, we developed the
following conceptual model as the foundation for our inter-
vention, which we call Outlook. Patients living with ad-
vanced serious illness face challenges associated with phys-
ical, psychosocial, spiritual, and emotional concerns.
Attention to each is required to reduce suffering and increase
quality of life.24 Specific developmental tasks include: sense
of completion in relationships, exploring issues of regret and
forgiveness, sense of gratitude and appreciation, life review
and transmission of knowledge and wisdom. These tasks
have been identified as components of domains of end-of-
life preparation and completion. Attention to these tasks is
proposed to influence health outcomes including quality of
life, depressive symptoms, and anxiety (Fig. 1).
Methods
Design
We developed a manualized treatment intervention con-
sisting of three intervention session protocols, as well as a
Biomedical
Conditions
Developmental
Tasks
Advanced Illness:
Stage IV Cancer,
CHF, COPD
• Sense of completion in
relationships with family
and friends
• Expressions of regret
and forgiveness
• Acceptance of gratitude
and appreciation.
• Sense of meaning of one’s life
- Life review
- Telling one’s stories
- Transmission of knowledge
and wisdom
Intervention
Content
• Life review
• Forgiveness
• Heritage & legacy
Quality of Life
(preparation and
completion)
Depression
Outcomes
Anxiety
Functional Status
Pain & Symptoms
FIG. 1.
Conceptual model.

STEINHAUSER ET AL.
1236
nonguided relaxation CD, to use as an attention control. We
then tested these in a three-armed trial of the intervention,
attention control and true control on health outcomes. The
pilot study goals were to assess feasibility and initial effi-
cacy.
Subjects
Patients were recruited from: two local hospices, a pallia-
tive care service, home based care program, and the Ex-
tended Care and Rehabilitation Center at the Durham VA
Medical Center and inpatient units at Duke University Med-
ical Center. Patients were eligible if their physicians esti-
mated them to have a prognosis of less than 6 months to live.
To reduce selection bias, referral conversations focused on
clinical criteria, versus physician judgment of willingness to
participate. Patients unable to speak or severely cognitively
impaired were excluded from the study. All other clinically
eligible patients were approached for participation. In addi-
tion, because sessions occurred in patients’ homes, we lim-
ited inclusion to subjects living within a 35-mile radius of
Durham, North Carolina.
Procedure
After obtaining informed consent, participants completed a
baseline survey, and then were randomly assigned to one of
three groups. Subjects assigned to the first group (“treatment”)
were interviewed three times, spaced a week apart, for a pe-
riod of 45 minutes to 1 hour each and asked to discuss issues
related to life completion and preparation. Session 1, focused
on life review, accomplishments, proudest moments, and
cherished times. One week later, Session 2 focused on issues
of forgiveness, things they would have done differently,
things left unsaid or undone. In the final week, Session 3 fo-
cused on lessons learned, heritage, and legacy. To ensure
replicability, the interventionist followed the questions out-
lined in the training manual. Probes were limited to asking if
participants had more to add to each specific topic (Table 1).
Subjects in the second group (“relaxation meditation”)
also met with a facilitator, on three occasions, spaced a week
apart, for a period of 45 minutes each and listened to a
nonguided relaxation tape. The second group, led by a fa-
cilitator and with session time equivalence, was essential to
demonstrating that the effects of “treatment” were not 
simply a result of greater attention but, in fact, due to the in-
tervention content of end-of-life preparation and life 
completion tasks. The third group of participants (“no in-
tervention”—true control) was not contacted between pre-
assessment and postassessment. One week and 2 weeks af-
ter the three sessions (or their timing equivalent, for
controls), participants in all groups completed posttest mea-
sures. One research assistant conducted the intervention and
relaxation meditation sessions. The other research assistant
conducted preassessments and postassessments and was
blinded to subjects’ intervention group assignment (Fig. 2).
Measures
Baseline measures assessed pain and symptoms (Memor-
ial Symptom Assessment Scale),25 functional status (Rosow-
Breslau ADL scale),26 anxiety (Profile of Mood States sub-
scale),27 depression (Center for Epidemiologic Study of
Depression CESD),28 quality of life at the end of life (in-
cluding preparation and completion domains) (the QUAL-
E),6 and daily spiritual experience (The Daily Spiritual Ex-
perience Scale).29 We also administered a brief measure of
family social support.30 To reduce burden, postmeasures did
not include daily spiritual experience or family social sup-
port measures. All other measures were repeated after sub-
jects completed the intervention period. Quantitative analy-
ses were conducted using SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Results
Over an 18-month period we contacted 209 eligible pa-
tients. One hundred twenty-seven refused to participate
(74%–58%, general refusal; 19%–15%, caregiver declined;
15%–12%, too much time; 19%–15%, too sick). Eighty-two
patients enrolled in the study and 42 completed all data
points. Of the 82 enrolled patients, 38 were women, 35 were
African American. Forty-eight patients entered the study
with a primary diagnosis of cancer, 5 with heart disease, 10
with lung disease, and 19 with other illnesses such as end-
stage renal disease or neurodegenerative disease. Forty-eight
were from Duke Hospital, 18 from local hospices, and 15
from the VA. In addition, 40% of the sample was married,
30% divorced, 12% widowed, and 13% never married. There
was a breadth of educational background where 15% had
less than a high school education, 47% graduated high
school; 17% had some college, 9% were college graduates,
and 11% had a graduate or professional degree. Ages ranged
TABLE 1.
INTERVENTION QUESTIONS
Session 1–Life story
Session 2–Forgiveness
Session 3–Heritage and legacy
Tell me about your life
If you were to do things
What are your most
What are cherished times?
again, what might you do
valuable lessons learned?
Of what are you most
differently?
What would you like to
proud?
Are there things or times
share with future
If someone were to make a
you regret?
generations?
movie of your life, what
Is there anyone to whom
If you could choose one
would be important to
you would like to offer
thing to pass on as your
include?
forgiveness?
legacy what would that be?
Is there anyone from
What things would you like
whom you would like to
to accomplish?
ask forgiveness?
Are you at peace?

PREPARATION AND LIFE COMPLETION DISCUSSIONS
1237
from 28–96. Patients from varying backgrounds completed
the intervention with similar facility and responded with
ease to the semistructured formatted that set general pa-
rameters but self-guidance within. (Detailed qualitative re-
sults are reported elsewhere.)
At baseline, each arm contained 26 participants (Table 2),
and, with attrition, the life completion intervention arm in-
cluded 9 participants, relaxation meditation 11 participants,
and control 16 participants. Because all participants were at
the very end of life, attrition was due to severe functional
decline (e.g. losing consciousness), or death. Differences in
attrition by group were not thought to be associated with the
intervention content or participation.
Intervention participants showed improvements in func-
tional status, anxiety, depression, and preparation for end of
life (a QUAL-E domain). For those in the intervention arm,
functional status improved from a total score of 26.1 to 22.7,
compared to attention control (26.3 to 24.8) and true control
(28.4 to 28.3). Anxiety decreased among intervention patients
from 6.4 to 3.7 as compared with anxiety increases in those
in attention control (4.4 to 5.0) and true control (4.4 to 5.6).
Similarly, intervention participants’ depression scores de-
creased (11.8 to 9.1) whereas attention control subjects’ de-
pressive symptoms were the same (10.1 to 10.0) and true con-
trol participant scores worsened (10.7 to 11.9). We did not
see differences in completion scores, among the three arms.
End-of-life preparation improved among intervention sub-
jects from 3.4 to 3.7 and decreased for attention control (4.0
to 3.8) and true control (4.2 to 3.4).
To better understand the treatment effects in the pilot
study, we examined predictors of attrition. Several patient-
level characteristics were associated with differential rates of
dropout. Patients who were widowed, older age, had lower
daily spiritual experience scores, had lung disease, and were
referred from hospice or home health care all were more
likely to not complete the study (either due to illness or
death). Including these predictors of dropout in the estima-
tion of the main study outcomes relaxes the missing data as-
sumption to missing at random (MAR). In MAR, missing
data can depend on any observed data (i.e., other variables
or the outcomes at earlier time points), but not the actual
missing value. We, therefore, constructed a multivariate nor-
Seriously Ill
Patients
Enroll and
pre-test
Post-test
2 weeks
later
Post-test
1 week
later
Preparation and
Completion
Intervention
Control:
No Intervention 
Non-Guided
Relaxation
Meditation
Randomize
TABLE 2.
OBSERVED OUTCOMES BY STUDY ARM, OVER TIME (MEAN AND SD)
Preparation
Functional
for the
Status
Anxiety
Depression
end of life
Arm by time
n
ADLs
POMS
CESD
QUAL-Ep
Intervention
Pretest
26
26.1 (5.3)
6.4 (4.7)
11.8 (4.6)
3.4 (.7)
Posttest 1
12
25.1 (6.4)
4.1 (3.5)
8.3 (3.3)
3.8 (.5)
Posttest 2
9
22.7 (4.0)
3.7 (2.4)
9.1 (2.7)
3.7 (.4)
Relaxation
Pretest
26
26.3 (6.3)
4.4 (4.3)
10.1 (4.8)
4.0 (.9)
Posttest 1
10
26.2 (6.2)
3.9 (4.2)
11.7 (5.5)
3.6 (.8)
Posttest 2
11
24.8 (5.8)
5.0 (5.4)
10.0 (4.0)
3.8 (1.0)
Control
Pretest
26
28.4 (7.3)
4.4 (4.3)
10.7 (5.1)
4.2 (.7)
Posttest 1
18
28.6 (7.3)
5.8 (5.3)
12.3 (6.0)
3.9 (.9)
Posttest 2
16
28.3 (8.8)
5.6 (4.8)
11.9 (6.1)
3.4 (1.0)
ADLs, Rosow-Breslau Activities of Daily Living; POMS, Profile of Mood States, anxiety subscale; CESD, Centers for Epidemiological Study
of Depression scale; QUAL-Ep, preparation for the end of life subscale.
SD, standard deviation.
FIG. 2.
Pilot study design.

STEINHAUSER ET AL.
1238
mal model, which included all of the predictors of dropout
and calculated maximum likelihood estimates of the main
study outcomes, stratified by treatment arm. The expecta-
tion-maximization algorithm (EM) in PROCM MI (SAS, v9)
was used for estimation (Table 3).
Results suggest very little improvement in any outcomes
is seen in the “relaxation” and “true control” arms of the
study. The intervention arm, however, shows improvement
in all of the study outcomes. In other words, these analyses
suggested several measurable factors were driving differen-
tial attrition. When we account for those factors that predict
dropout, the intervention arm’s positive trends remain.
Discussion
The Outlook intervention is brief, fully manualized, ex-
portable, and acceptable to patients with a range of illnesses.
Furthermore, patients participated with similar facility re-
gardless of broad variation in social background and so-
cioeconomic status. The intervention was conducted suc-
cessfully by a nonphysician clinician demonstrating the
usefulness of multi-disciplinary team. The results of this pa-
per suggest discussions of preparation and life completion
influence patient symptoms and quality of life among per-
sons with advanced life-limiting illness.
Sample size was not large enough to demonstrate statisti-
cal significance; however, participants in the active discus-
sion intervention showed improvements in functional sta-
tus, anxiety, depression, and preparation for end of life (a
QUAL-E domain). The life review literature cites improve-
ments in depressive symptomatology as a consistent out-
come.12,13 Similar trends from this study extend that work
to the arena of end-of-life. In contrast, anxiety is not fre-
quently assessed in life review randomized control trials.
However, because many patients with advanced serious ill-
ness struggle with anxiety, finding interventions, like Out-
look, that may improve that symptom will add to palliative
clinicians’ armamentarium. We also saw positive trends in
functional status. For patients approaching the end of life,
maintaining or improving independence and one’s ability to
care for oneself is highly valued by patients and families4
and palliative care clinicians and researchers emphasize
maximizing functional status as a key outcome for seriously
ill and dying patients. Similarly, patients and families, iden-
tify preparation as a central domain of quality at end of life.4,5
The preparation subscale, which measures issues of regret,
burden, and things done differently, showed positive move-
ment in the intervention group.
We did not see changes in the QUAL-E subscale measuring
relationships with health care provider or in the completion
subscale. The completion subscale includes items measuring
both internal completion (e.g., coming to peace) and external
completion (e.g., saying important things to family). The sta-
bility in this measure may be due to the individual items which
assessed sense of having a chance to say good-bye, feeling at
peace, having someone with whom they could share their
deepest thoughts and feeling that they were able to share im-
portant things with others. These items encompassed external
expressions of completion and may not have tapped strongly
the internal sense. The small sample size may have affected
our ability to see differences. In a fuller test of the intervention,
we will include an assessment of internally gauged faith and
purpose. It may be that the post-tests did not have enough time
from intervention to test change. Furthermore, it is possible
that expectations changed due to the intervention resulting in
response shifts that confounded the ability of the subscale to
detect real change.
Previous tests of life review demonstrate improvements
in anxiety, depression and quality of life. Our newly de-
signed intervention included similar content, but also ex-
tended the literature in at least two important ways. Similar
to the structure of other life review interventions, the first
session focused on the past with discussion of biographical
context, accomplishments, and cherished times. In the sec-
ond session, we extended the life review content to probe in
depth about issues of regret and forgiveness. Recent litera-
ture has begun to explore the centrality of this topic to over-
all quality of life.
Several studies have looked at the direct link between for-
giveness and physical health.31,32–35 Although little is known
TABLE 3.
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES OF MEAN OUTCOMES BY STUDY ARM, OVER TIME
Preparation
Functional
for the
status
Anxiety
Depression
end of life
Arm by time
n
ADLs
POMS
CESD
QUAL-Ep
Intervention
Pretest
26
25.9
6.5
11.8
3.4
Posttest 1
26
24.2
2.4
7.0
4.3
Posttest 2
26
21.8
4.2
8.7
4.0
Relaxation
Pretest
26
26.3
4.4
10.4
4.0
Posttest 1
26
25.8
3.3
10.1
3.8
Posttest 2
26
25.5
5.3
10.1
3.9
Control
Pretest
26
28.3
4.6
10.7
4.2
Posttest 1
26
28.5
5.5
11.8
3.9
Posttest 2
26
28.3
4.9
10.5
3.6
ADLs, Rosow-Breslau Activities of Daily Living; POMS, Profile of Mood States, anxiety subscale; CESD, Centers for Epidemiological Study
of Depression scale; QUAL-Ep, preparation for the end of life subscale.

empirically about the relationship between forgiveness and
health, theorists suggest that forgiveness reduces hostility,
and therefore should be related to: (1) a decrease in chronic
blaming, anger, and hostility; (2) self-efficacy to take health-
related actions; (3) social support; and (4) transcendent con-
sciousness.36,37 Although in its infancy, this literature has
demonstrated forgiveness to be negatively correlated with
poor health habits. Most importantly and relevant to the
findings presented here, increases in forgiveness have been
correlated with less negative affect, such as anxiety and de-
pression.32–34 The preparation subscale, which measures re-
gret, did show improvements for those in the intervention
arm.
In a second departure from many life review interven-
tions, the intervention session provided participants with an
opportunity to discuss their heritage and legacy and there-
fore ending with a future orientation. Involvement in dis-
cussions of lessons learned and wisdom to be shared with
the next generation (Table 1) coincides with findings from
previous studies documenting the importance of contribut-
ing to others as a central feature of quality at the end of life.
Providing an opportunity to look forward and set goals for
the future supports the human development model and as-
sumes that personal growth may occur through out all stages
of life. Indeed, participants in this study were within weeks
and sometimes days of death.
In recent years, Chochinov et al.38 have developed and
tested a meaning-making intervention “dignity therapy” for
those with terminal illness (particularly patients with ad-
vanced cancer). Participants complete eight sessions and pro-
duce a “generativity document” that is transcribed and made
into hard copy. In their qualitative work to develop the in-
tervention, the authors identify core components of dignity
preserving perspectives and dignity preserving practices.
The former includes: continuity of self, role preservation,
generativity/legacy, maintenance of pride, hopefulness, au-
tonomy/control, acceptance, and resistance. Related prac-
tices attend to living in the moment, maintaining normalcy,
and seeking spiritual support. These topics are addressed ex-
plicitly in six clinician-guided sessions.
Interestingly, in the process of exploring life review, for-
giveness and heritage and legacy, participants in our study
came to address similar topics but through a briefer, more
self-guided approach. This lends credence to viewing life re-
view as a necessary developmental task that emerges at end
of life, or may be forced to emerge with the challenges of
life-limiting illness. Our intervention differs by being briefer
and not producing a document. Findings suggest that the
power of bearing witness, may prove equally powerful. In
the handouts, participants were encouraged to develop
legacy items, be they photo albums, letters, or other mean-
ingful and tangible forms of legacy.
There were several limitations associated with the study.
As noted, approximately 50% of participants were not able
to complete the study due to functional decline or death.
Dropout was particularly notable among hospice referrals,
where the local lengths of stay mirror the short national me-
dian lengths of stay at approximately 15 days.50 High attri-
tion also is likely related to clinician prognostication, which
when identifying patients with less the 6 months to live, of-
ten yields samples of patients with weeks to live.51 Future
intervention may extend the inclusion criteria to patients
with advanced life limiting illness, as indicated by clinical
criteria.
National consensus panels and a variety of clinicians and
researchers have called for interventions to help seriously
ill patients address issues of spirituality, meaning, and life
review. The data from this pilot study suggest that Out-
look is a brief, transportable, manualized intervention ac-
ceptable to patients from a variety of socioeconomic back-
grounds and may be a useful means of addressing
emotional and existential issues for patients at the end 
of life.
Acknowledgment
We wish to thank Belleruth Naparstek and Bruce Gigax
for their work in developing the relaxation meditation lan-
guage and music.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
This material is the result of work supported with resources
and the use of facilities of the Durham VA Medical Center. The
views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the Department
of Veterans Affairs or the United States government.
References
1. Wanzer S, Federman D, Adelstein S, Cassel C, Cassel CK,
Cassem EH, Cranford RE, Hook EW, Lo B, Moertel CG, Sa-
far P, et al: The physician’s responsibility toward hopelessly
ill patients: A second look. N Engl J Med 1989;320:844–849.
2. Garvin J, Chapman C: Clinical management of dying pa-
tients. West J Med. 1995;163:268–277.
3. National Institutes of Health: End-of-life care. National In-
stitutes of Health statement on the state of the science.
AWHONN Lifelines 2005;9:15–22.
4. Steinhauser KE, Christakis NA, Clipp EC, McNeilly M,
McIntyre L, Tulsky JA: Factors considered important at the
end of life by patients, family, physicians, and other care
providers. JAMA 2000;284:2476–2482.
5. Steinhauser KE, Clipp EC, McNeilly M, Christakis NA,
McIntyre LM, Tulsky JA: In search of a good death: Obser-
vations of patients, families, and providers. Ann Intern Med
2000;132:825–832.
6. Steinhauser KE, Clipp EC, Bosworth HB, McNeilly M, Chris-
takis NA, Voils CI, Tulsky JA: Measuring quality of life at
the end of life: validating the QUAL-E. Palliat Support Care
2004;2:3–14.
7. Erikson E: The Life Cycle Completed: A Review. New York:
Norton, 1982.
8. Butler RN: The life review: An interpretation of reminiscence
in the aged. Psychiatry 1963;26:65–76.
9. Butler RN: Succesful aging and the role of the life review. J
Am Geriatr Soc 1974;22:529–535.
10. Butler RN: The life review: An unrecognized bonanza. Int J
Aging Hum Dev 1980;12:35–38.
11. Haight BK, Michel Y, Hendrix S: Life review: Preventing de-
spair in newly relocated nursing home residents short- and
long-term effects. Int J Aging Hum Dev 1998;47:119–142.
12. Bohlmeijer E, Smit F, Cuijpers P: Effects of reminiscence and
lifer review on late life depression: A meta-analysis. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 2003;18:1088–1094.
PREPARATION AND LIFE COMPLETION DISCUSSIONS
1239

13. Erlin J, Mellors M, Sereika S, Cook C: The use of life review
to enhance quality of life of people living with AIDS: A fea-
sibility study. Qual Life Res 2001;10:453–464.
14. Niederhoffer KG, Pennebaker JW: Sharing one’s story: On
the benefits of writing or talking about emotional experi-
ence. In: Snyder CR, Lopez SJ (eds): Handbook of Positive Psy-
chology. New York: Oxford University, 2002, pp. 573–583.
15. Pennebaker JW, O’Heeron RC: Confiding in others and ill-
ness rate among spouses of suicide and accidental-death vic-
tims. J Abnorm Psychol 1984;93:473–476.
16. Pennebaker JW, Barger SD, Tiebout J: Disclosure of traumas
and health among Holocaust survivors. Psychosomat Med
1989;51:577–589.
17. Cameron LD, Nicholls G: Expression of stressful experiences
through writing: Effects of a self-regulation manipulation for
pessimists and optimists. Health Psychol 1998;17:84–92.
18. Petrie KJ, Booth RJ, Pennebaker JW, Davison KP, Thomas
MG: Disclosure of trauma and immune response to a he-
patitis B vaccination program. J Consult Clin Psychol
1995;63:787–792.
19. Greenberg MA, Wortman CB, Stone AA: Emotional expres-
sion and physical heath: Revising traumatic memories or
fostering self-regulation? J Pers Soc Psychol 1996;71:588–602.
20. Rime B: Mental rumination, social sharing, and the recov-
ery from emotional exposure. In: Pennebaker JW (ed): Emo-
tion, Disclosure, and Health. Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association, 1995, pp. 271–292.
21. Pennebaker JW, Seagal JD: Forming a story: The health ben-
efits of narrative. J Clin Psychol 1999;55:1243–1254.
22. Graybeal A, Sexton JD, Pennebaker JW: The role of story-
making in disclosure writing: The psychometrics of narra-
tive. Psychol Health 2002;17:571–581.
23. Fratorolli J: Experimental disclosure and its moderators: A
meta-analysis. Pyschol Bull 2006;132:823–865.
24. Byock I: The nature of suffering and the nature of opportu-
nity at the end of life. Clinics Geriatr Med 1996;12:237–252.
25. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, Lepore JM, Fried-
lander-Klar H, Kiyasu E, Sobel K, Coyle N, Kemeny N, Nor-
ton L, et al: The Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale: an
instrument for the evaluation of symptom prevalence, char-
acteristics and distress. Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A:1326–1336.
26. Rosow I, Breslau N: A Guttman health scale for the aged. J
Gerontol 1966;21:556–559.
27. Cella DF, Jacobsen PB, Orav EJ, Holland JC, Silberfarb PM,
Rafla S: A brief POMS measure of distress for cancer pa-
tients. J Chronic Dis 1987;40:939–942.
28. Radloff L: The CES-D Scale: a self-report depressional scale
for research in the general population. Appl Psych Meas
1977;1:385–401.
29. Underwood LG, Teresi JA: The Daily Spiritual Experience
Scale: Development, theoretical description, reliability, ex-
ploratory factor analysis, and preliminary construct validity
using health-related data. Ann Behav Med 2002;24:22–33.
30. Schag C, Ganz P, Heinrich R: Cancer Rehabilitation Evalu-
ation System–Short Form (CARES-SF): A cancer specific re-
habilitation and quality of life instrument. Cancer 1991;65:
1406–1413.
31. Scherer M, Cooke K, Worthington E: Forgiveness Bibliogra-
phy. Richmond: Virginia Commonwealth University, 2004.
32. Hebl J, Enright R: Forgiveness as a psychotherapuetic goal
with elderly females. Psychotherapy 1993;30:67.
33. Freedman F, Enright R: Forgiveness as an intervention goal
with incest survivors. J Consult Clin Psychol 1996;64:983–
992.
34. Coyle C, Enright R: Forgiveness intervention with post-abor-
tion men. J Consult Clin Psychol 1997;65:1042–1046.
35. Lawler K, Younger J, Piferi R, Jobe R, Edmonson K, Jones
W: The unique effects of forgiveness on health: An explo-
ration of pathways. J Behav Med 2005;28:157–167.
36. Thoresen C, Harris A, Luskin F: Forgiveness and health: an
unanswered question. In: Mccullough M, Pargament K,
Thoresen C (eds): Forgiveness: Theory, Research, Practice. New
York: Guilford Press, 2000, pp. 254–280.
37. Seibold M: When the wounding runds deep: Encouragement
for those on the road to forgiveness. In: McMint M, Phillips
T (eds): Care for the Soul: Exploring the Intersection of Psychol-
ogy and Theology. Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press;
2001, pp. 294–308.
38. Chochinov HM, Hack T, Hassard T, Kristjanson LJ, Mc-
Clement S, Harlos M: Dignity therapy: A novel psychother-
apeutic intervention for patients near the end of life. J Clin
Oncol 2005;23:5520–5525.
Address reprint requests to:
Karen E. Steinhauser, Ph.D.
VA and Duke Medical Centers
Center for Palliative CareHock Plaza
2424 Erwin Road
Suite 1105, Box 2720
Durham, NC 27705
E-mail: Karen.steinhauser@duke.edu
STEINHAUSER ET AL.
1240

