


Cost-effectiveness analysis of three methods of surgical-site infection 
surveillance: Less is more 
Ghada Ahmed Abu-Sheasha PhD a,*, Ramez Naguib Bedwani PhD a, Medhat Mohamed Anwar MD b, 
Omaima Gaber Yassine PhD a 
a Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Statistics, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt 
b Department of Experimental and Clinical Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt 
Key Words: 
Economic evaluation 
Inpatient surveillance 
Outpatient-clinic surveillance 
Phone surveillance 
Decision- support 
Background: A considerable proportion of surgical site infections (SSI) could be prevented by surveillance. 
The study aimed to compare the cost-effectiveness of 3 methods of SSI surveillance: Inpatient, phone, and 
out-patient clinic (OPC); to ensure that the risk of SSI is independent from loss-to-follow-up in phone and 
OPC surveillances, and to determine the reliability of phone surveillance. 
Methods: A cohort of 351 surgical patients were followed by 3 different surveillance methods: inpatient, 
follow-up in OPC and over the phone. Costs of nurse time and phone calls were expressed in 2019 USD. 
Effectiveness of surveillance was assessed using number of detected SSIs. 
Results: Phone surveillance was more cost-effective than OPC surveillance. Compared to inpatient surveillance, 
the OPC method costs USD 15.6 per extra detected SSI, whereas the phone method costs only USD 4.6 
In phone and OPC surveillances, the risk of SSI was independent of loss-to-follow-up. However, the 
higher rate of SSI among OPC attendees raises the suspicion that the incidence of SSI estimated by OPC 
surveillance could be biased upward. Phone surveillance was reliable with high sensitivity and 
speciﬁcity. 
Conclusions: Phone surveillance was a reliable cost-effective method. Inpatient surveillance was less effec- 
tive, but it still can be used to detect severe SSI at low cost. While out-patient-clinic surveillance had the 
highest cost, the incidence estimated by it might be biased upward. 
© 2020 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved. 


Different methods are proposed for surveillance of SSI either inpa- 
tient or postdischarge. CDC recommended 2 methods to identify inpa- 
tients with SSIs; namely direct observation of the surgical sites, and 
indirect detection by infection control personnel. Postdischarge surveil- 
lance included: Examination of patients' wounds during follow-up visits, 
review of medical records, and patient surveys by mail or telephone.3 
Abbreviations: ASA PS Classiﬁcation, ASA Physical Status Classiﬁcation System; 
CDC, Center for Disease Control and Prevention; EGP, Egyptian pound; LTFU, lost-to- 
follow-up or loss to follow-up; MRI, Medical Research Institute; NNIS, National Noso- 
comial Infections Surveillance; OPC, outpatient clinic; SSI, surgical site infection; USD, 
United States Dollar. 
* Address correspondence to Ghada Abu Sheasha, Biomedical Informatics and 
Medical Statistics Department, Medical Research Institute, 165, Horreya Avenue, 
Hadara, Alexandria, Egypt. 
E-mail address: ghada.elsayed@alexu.edu.eg (G.A. Abu-Sheasha). 
Financial support: This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding 


Postdischarge surveillance can detect more SSIs than that detected 
by inpatient surveillance as the majority of SSIs develop after hospital 
discharge.4 However, the effectiveness of different postdischarge 
methods varies as well as their costs. Also, loss to follow-up (LTFU) 
is inevitable; and may lead to biased estimation if LTFU patients 
have different risk of SSI.5 Moreover, reliability of the data collected 
by phone or e-mail is questionable6 as they rely on patients as the 
source of information. 



methods: 
B Inpatient surveillance: Indirect detection of SSI in the inpatients 





https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2019.12.022 
0196-6553/© 2020 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 











Over a period of 26 weeks, we recruited a prospective cohort of 351 
patients who underwent any surgical procedure in the free section of 
the MRI hospital; with exclusion of endoscopic, diagnostic procedures, 
and procedures where primary closure of the incision was not com- 
pleted in the theater. Eight of them had bilateral surgeries. 


(cid:1) Patient complained from at least 2 of pain, heat, redness, or 
swelling, and noticed the edges of any part of the wound gaped 
open. 


(cid:1) Group 1: Patients who were reached by both OPC and phone 
(cid:1) Group 2: Patients who were reached by phone only 
(cid:1) Group 3: Patients who were not reached by either OPC or phone 





(cid:1) Surgical operation category, as proposed by the Public Health Eng- 
land for the surveillance of SSI.7 Procedures not included were 
grouped into 4 categories according to their anatomical site and 
clinical similarity. 
(cid:1) Duration of postoperative hospital stay in days 
(cid:1) Laparoscopic-assisted procedure, (Yes/No) 
(cid:1) Pre-operative physical condition, measured by ASA PS classiﬁca- 



(cid:1) Operative duration (Prolonged/Not prolonged) was considered 
prolonged if it exceeded a T point, where T point is the length of 
time that represent the 75th percentile for the procedures10 con- 
ducted in the MRI for each operative category. Accordingly, 40 
procedures (12.5%) were prolonged. 
(cid:1) NNIS risk index11 is an index used to categorize patients into 4 
main categories; each has similar risk of SSI. A point was added in 
case of: Contaminated or dirty wound, ASA score higher than 2, or 
prolonged operative duration. A point was subtracted whenever 
the procedure was completely laparoscopic. Risk index ranged 
from ‘‘M’’ (indicates minus 1), where no risk factors were present, 
and the procedure was laparoscopic, to 3. 

Inpatient surveillanc. Staff member regularly contacted wards’ staff 
and reviewed medical and nursing records, temperature, and treat- 
ment charts 3 times a week to identify signs and symptoms of SSI. 
This method detected SSIs developed during the postoperative hospi- 
tal stay as well as severe SSI that required readmission. 
OPC surveillance. Staff member attended the OPC for checking wounds 
of attending patients 3 times a week. Diagnosis of SSI was made by the 
attending surgeon according the criteria deﬁned by CDC for surveil- 
lance purposes.12 This method detected SSI developed after patient 
discharge among patients attended the OPC for wound care. Patients 
did not attend were reported as “LTFU from OPC surveillance” 
Phone surveillance. Staff telephoned patients after their 30th postop- 
erative day and asked them questions on the postdischarge question- 
naire proposed by Public Health England for the surveillance of SSI.7 
If the patient did not reply, 2 other trials were made at different occa- 
sions before being reported as “LTFU for phone surveillance”. SSI was 
reported if any of the followings was met: 


To test the reliability of phone surveillance, data collected by 
phone surveillance were tested against that veriﬁed either by OPC 
or inpatient surveillances. Ethical clearance was obtained from the 
Institutional Review Board of Medical Research Institute. 

Costs were estimated in Egyptian pound (EGP). All costs were 
inﬂated to 2019 prices and expressed in USD using an accepted cost 
converter based on purchasing power parities.13 Time of data collec- 
tion was valued at nurse hourly rate of USD 4.1. The cost of phone 
calls was USD 0.09 per minute. 
The effectiveness of SSI surveillance was assessed using: The num- 
ber of successfully followed surgical sites and the number of detected 
SSIs. 
Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio was used to according to the 
recommendations made by the second panel on cost-effectiveness in 
health and medicine.14 ICER shows the additional cost required to 
obtain additional beneﬁt when switching from inpatient surveillance 
to either OPC or phone surveillance. 
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics 21. 
Chi-square test was used to compare categorical variables; either 
Fisher’s exact or Mont Carlo corrections were applied when 
required. Chi-square test with trend was used to compare the NNIS 
risk index. The 95% CI for the incidence rate was calculated accord- 
ing to Wilson procedure with a correction for continuity.15 Tukey’s 
hinges were used to interpolate the exact location of quartiles16 as 
ﬁnding the quartile could be difﬁcult in small samples. Signiﬁcance 
test results were quoted as 2-tailed probabilities and judged at the 
5% level. 


During the postoperative inpatient stay only 1 patient devel- 
oped organ/space SSI. Three patients were readmitted because of 
deep SSIs (Fig 1). The incidence rate of SSI was 1.1%; (95%CI: 0.4%, 
2.8%) (Fig 2). 



Around 72% (n = 254 patients with 260 SS) sought wound care in 
the OPC. Thirty-two patients had SSI; most of them were superﬁcial 
or deep infections (13, 18 patients respectively) whereas only 1 suf- 
fered organ/space SSI (Fig 1). The mean time elapsed before SSI was 
7.8 days (SD = 4.6, Min = 2, Max = 20). Incidence of SSI in the OPC was 
12.3% (95% CI: 8.9%, 16.9%) (Fig 2). 



Fig 1. Flow chart for the loss to follow-up and the estimated incidence of SSI among the surveillance methods following a cohort of 351 surgical patients admitted to the MRI hospi- 
tal over a 6-month period. CI, conﬁdence interval; OPC, outpatient clinic; IRSSI, incidence rate of surgical site infections. 

Around 88% (n = 309 patients with 315 SS) could be reached by 
phone; 34 patients had SSI. Incidence of SSI by phone surveillance 
was 10.8% (95% CI: 7.7%, 14.9%) (Fig 2) Forty-two patients (12%) could 
not be reached by phone because either their phone numbers were 
wrong, or they did not reply. 

Only one patient falsely reported no SSI on phone surveillance. 
The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of phone surveillance were 96.9% 
(95%CI: 83.8% to 99.9%) and 100% (95%CI: 98.4% to 100%), respec- 
tively. Consecutively, if a patient reported SSI on phone, then there is 
a high certainty that he/she actually having SSI (PPV = 100%; 95%CI: 
88.8% to 100%). If a patient does not, the probability of no SSI (NPV) is 
99.6%; [95%CI: 97.6% to 100%]. 

The LTFU from OPC surveillance was higher (28%) than that from 
phone (12%). NNIS risk index distribution was similar in patients suc- 
cessfully followed by phone and OPC (Group 1), by phone alone 
(Group 2), and LTFU patients (Group 3) (Table 1). Thus, there was 
insufﬁcient evidence that LTFU patients had a different risk of SSI 
than that of successfully followed-up. 
Rate of SSI was compared between OPC attendees and nonatten- 
dees (patients LTFU from OPC surveillance). Among OPC attendees 
(n = 254), 32 patients had SSI (12.5%). Among nonattendees (n = 55), 3 
patients (5%) reported SSI, P-value was small ðX2 
¼ 2:3; P ¼ :130Þ, yet 
1 
did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. 

The average weekly time needed for data collection was 30 minutes 
for inpatient surveillance (10 minutes 3 times a week); 4.5 hours for 
OPC surveillance (1.5 hours 3 times a week) and 1 hour for phone sur- 
veillance (20 minutes 3 times a week). A total of 910 minutes of phone 
calls were spent by phone surveillance (Table 2). Total cost was the 
highest for OPC surveillance (USD 479.4) and the least for inpatient 
(USD 53.4). 
The least cost per successfully followed surgical site was USD 0.1 
by inpatient surveillance; and the least cost per detected SSI was USD 
5.5 by phone surveillance. Compared to inpatient surveillance, OPC 
method costs USD 15.6 per extra detected SSI, whereas phone sur- 
veillance costs USD 4.6. 
Table 1 
NNIS risk index of successfully followed and lost to follow-up patients admitted the Medical Research Institute hospital during the study period 





Duration of surgery 
>75th percentile 


ASA 
≥3 

M 
0 
1 
2 



30 
160 
52 
12 



(12) 
(63) 
(20) 
(5) 



10 
34 
10 
1 



(18) 
(62) 
(18) 
(2) 



4 
29 
8 
1 



(10) 
(69) 
(19) 
(2) 
X2 = 1.9 
(.396) 
X2 = 1.1 
(.764) 
X2 = 3.4 
(.179) 

trend = 3.7 
(.712) 
Values shown in the table are numbers and (%) unless otherwise is speciﬁed. 
NNIS, National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance; OPC, outpatient clinic. 
*Group 1: patients who were reached by both OPC and phone. 
yGroup 2: patients who were reached by phone only. 
zGroup 3: patients who were not reached by either OPC or phoneGroup 3 is the lost-to-follow-ups from phone, while Group 2 and 3 patients are the lost-to-follow-ups from OPC. 



Table 2 
Cost-effectiveness of the surveillance methods for detection surgical site infection in 
the Medical Research Institute hospital during the study period 



Nurse (min) 
Phone (min) 
*Cost due to nurse time (USD) 
yCost due to phone (USD) 


Successfully followed SS, n 
Detected SSIs, n 
xExtra cost (USD) 
║Extra detected SSIs, n 
{ICER of extra detected SSI 
(Extra cost/Extra detected SSI) 
Inpatient 
surveillance 
OPC 
surveillance 
Phone 
surveillance 
780 
0 
54.6 
0 
54.6 
359 
4 
− 
− 
− 
7,020 
0 
491.4 
0 
491.4 
260 
32 
436.8 
28 
15.6 
1,560 
910 
109.2 
100.1 
191.1 
315 
34 
136.5 
30 
4.6 
All monetary values are expressed in 2019 USD. 
ICER, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; OPC, out-patient clinic; SS, surgical sites; SSI, 
surgical site infections. 
*The product of multiplying the time spent by the nurse in minutes by the unit cost of 
nurse minute (USD 0.07). 
yThe product of multiplying the number of phone minutes by the unit cost of phone 
minute (USD 0.09). 
zThe sum of cost due to phone minutes and cost due to nurse time. 
xThe difference between the total cost of the surveillance and that of the inpatient 
surveillance. 
║The difference between the number of detected surgical site infection by the surveil- 
lance and that of the inpatient surveillance. 
{The result of dividing the extra cost by the extra detected SSIs. 
Phone surveillance was more cost-effective than OPC in following 
surgical patients after discharge. In comparison to inpatient surveillance, 
both phone and OPC were more effective in detecting SSIs but at a 
higher cost. Meanwhile, phone surveillance was more cost-effective 
than OPC surveillance (Fig 2). 

OPC surveillance was the least cost-effective due to the time 
needed for data collection as SSI data were not routinely reported in 
Fig 3. Cost-effectiveness plane of the surveillance methods following a cohort of 351 
surgical patients admitted to the MRI hospital over a 6-month period. Extra cost (in 
2019 USD) is displayed on the Y axis. Extra effectiveness is displayed on X axis. Inpa- 
tient surveillance is the reference case. Any surveillance method lies lower and to the 
right is more cost-effective. Both OPC and phone surveillances are more costly and 
more effective. 
the OPC due to either time pressure and heavy workload, and lack of 
reporting obligations (Fig 3). 
Phone surveillance was the most cost-effective although the least 
total cost was in inpatient surveillance, because the number of SSIs 
detected in inpatients was much lower than that detected by phone. 
The number of SSIs detected among inpatients depends on the length 
of postoperative hospital stay, which was less than 2 days in the major- 
ity of cases. Earlier discharge found in the current study is consistent 
with what was reported by others,17-19 and might be explained by lim- 
ited number of beds and shortage of staff. 
The percentage of LTFU patients was 12% in phone surveil- 
lance. A similar rate (11%) was mentioned by Australian study in 
2001.20 This rate was considerably lower than that reported by 
earlier studies21 and could be explained by the increase in tele- 
phone ownership over time. 
Fig 2. Error bar compares the incidence rate of SSI estimated by the 3 SSI surveillance methods following a cohort of 351 surgical patients admitted to the MRI hospital over a 6- 
month period 



Phone surveillance showed no sufﬁcient evidence that LTFU had dif- 
ferent risk of SSI from those successfully followed. We believe that LTFU 
in case of phone surveillance are independent of patients’ risk and 
could be attributed to wrongly reported or changed phone number. 
Incidence of SSI among patients attended OPC was considerably 
higher than among nonattendees. Yet, this difference was statistically 
insigniﬁcant owing to the small number of LTFU. As studied patients 
were poor, they might be reluctant to seek treatment outside MRI 
while it is freely provided in the MRI hospital. Given the observed dif- 
ference was considerable and the P-value was relatively small, the 
hypothesis that the incidence of SSI is higher among OPC attendants 
should be further investigated. If this hypothesis is proved to be true, 
then the incidence of SSI estimated by OPC surveillance is biased 
upward. 


Training on undertaking the surveillance is crucial to ensure the 
quality of data. Training required for phone surveillance is less chal- 
lenging than that required for OPC; while, in OPC surveillance, the 
designated staff should be trained on diagnosing SSI according to 
CDC criteria12; he/she needs to be trained on only administering a set 
of clear questions in phone surveillance. 
We believe that incidence rate estimated by phone surveillance is 
very close to the truth as percentage of LTFU was low, LTFUs were not 
signiﬁcantly different from those successfully followed, and the reli- 
ability of data was high. Moreover, not only the cost in terms of time is 
much lower in phone surveillance, but the time and effort needed for 
training and the qualiﬁcations of the staff member designated to the 
surveillance is lower. While the accuracy of data collected by OPC sur- 
veillance is 100% as patients are directly observed, the higher rates of 
LTFU and of SSI among those attending the OPC raised doubts that the 
incidence estimated by OPC could be biased upward. 
According to the results, adopting the phone surveillance is a cost- 
effective alternative to OPC surveillance. However, inpatient surveil- 
lance is still an option. Although it detected only 4 cases, it did detect 
the “important few “which were so severe that they occurred shortly 
postoperative or necessitate readmission. So, in resource shortage, 
allocation of money to the inpatient surveillance may be the only 
possible solution with 70% reduction in the total cost. 
Our study has limitations. Regarding the rate of LTFU, our results 
cannot be generalized. The percentage of the LTFU varies dramati- 
cally in different settings. It is likely to be inﬂuenced by socioeco- 
nomic conditions, levels of education, population density, availability 
of transport, and population mobility.22 
Another limitation is the use of the nurse’s minute cost to value 
time to collect data. Skills needed to conduct the surveillances are not 
similar. In inpatient and phone surveillances, no need for training in 
examining surgical wounds and applying the deﬁnition of SSI; conse- 
quently, conducting inpatient or phone surveillance is not necessarily 
delegated to a well-trained nurse with higher salary. However, this 
limitation would not change our conclusion that phone surveillance is 
the most cost-effective methods. 
Meanwhile, we achieved the goal of the study at the least effort 
and cost. We did not compare any of the surveillances to the “gold 
standard” SSI surveillance—a surveillance that follow all cases and 
detect all SSIs—as establishing such surveillance is improbable due to 
lack of resources. Also, we did not measure all resources needed to 
implement SSI surveillance (time needed for data acquisition in the 
operative department, or data checking), we only measured resour- 
ces differed among the 3 surveillances. 

Our study compared surveillance methods in terms of cost, rate of 
LTFU and proportion of detected SSIs in a developing country. It 
shows that, at every setting, costs and effectiveness of different sur- 
veillances should be examined before adopting any of them. While 
OPC surveillance was presumed accurate (diagnosed by hospital 
staff); systematic analysis revealed that phone surveillance proved to 
be more effective (in terms of percentage of followed and detected 
cases), highly accurate in estimating the incidence, and less costly. 

Our gratitude is to the Medical Research Institute hospital staff mem- 
bers who gave valuable time, effort, and support. We also acknowledge 
the contribution made by many patients and their caregivers. 



2. Umscheid CA, Mitchell MD, Doshi JA, et al. Estimating the proportion of health- 
care-associated infections that are reasonably preventable and the related mortal- 
ity and costs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011;32:101-114. 


4. Wiseman JT, Fernandes-Taylor S, Barnes ML, et al. Predictors of surgical site infec- 
tion after hospital discharge in patients undergoing major vascular surgery. J Vasc 
Surg 2015;62:1023-1031. 




7. Harrington P, Wloch C, Elgohari S, et al. Protocol for the surveillance of surgical 
site infection. Public Health Engl. 2013;6. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/633775/surgical_site_ 
infections_protocol_version_6.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2020. 


9. B’erard F. Postoperative wound infections: the inﬂuence of ultraviolet irradiation 
of the operating room and of various other factors. Ann Surg 1964;160:1-192. 
10. Leong G, Wilson J, Charlett A. Duration of operation as a risk factor for surgical site 
infection: comparison of English and US data. J Hosp Infect 2006;63:255-262. 
11. Culver DH, Horan TC, Gaynes RP, et al. Surgical wound infection rates by wound 
class, operative procedure, and patient risk index. Am J Med 1991;91:S152-S157. 
12. Horan TC, Andrus M, Dudeck MA. CDC/NHSN surveillance deﬁnition of health care- 
associated infection and criteria for speciﬁc types of infections in the acute care 
setting. Am J Infect Control 2008;36:309-332. 
13. Campbell, Group CEM, for Policy the E, Information P, Centre C. CCEMG-EPPI-Cen- 
tre Cost Converter. 2013. Available at: http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/costconversion/default. 
aspx. Accessed January 23, 2020. 
14. Sanders GD, Neumann PJ, Basu A, et al. Recommendations for conduct, methodo- 
logical practices, and reporting of cost-effectiveness analyses: second panel on 
cost-effectiveness in health and medicine. JAMA 2016;316:1093-1103. 








after bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2007;83:100-107. 
Jones E, Wainwright T, Foster J, et al. A systematic review of patient reported out- 
comes and patient experience in enhanced recovery after orthopaedic surgery. 
Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2014;96:89-94. 




22. Kent P, McDonald M, Harris O, et al. Post-discharge surgical wound infection sur- 
veillance in a provincial hospital: follow-up rates, validity of data and review of 
the literature. ANZ J Surg 2001;71:583-589. 
