
Evaluation of surveillance for surgical site infections 
in Thika Hospital, Kenya 
A.M. Aiken a, b, *, A.K. Wanyoro c, d, J. Mwangi c, P. Mulingwa c, J. Wanjohi c, 
J. Njoroge c, F. Juma c, I.K. Mugoya e, J.A.G. Scott b, f, A.J. Hall a 
a London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK 
b Kenya Medical Research Institute e Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kiliﬁ, Kenya 
c Thika Level 5 Hospital, Thika, Kenya 
d Kenyatta University, Nairobi, Kenya 
e Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, Nairobi, Kenya 
f Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University, Oxford, UK 



Article history: 
Received 1 June 2012 
Accepted 8 November 2012 
Available online 18 January 
2013 
Keywords: 
Epidemiology 
Kenya 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Surgical site infection 
Surveillance 
Background: In low-income countries, surgical site infections (SSIs) are a very frequent 
form of hospital-acquired infection. Surveillance is an important method for controlling SSI 
but it is unclear how this can best be performed in low-income settings. 
Aim: To examine the epidemiological characteristics of various components of an SSI 
surveillance programme in a single Kenyan hospital. 
Methods: The study assessed the inter-observer consistency of the surgical wound class 
(SWC) and American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scores using the kappa statistic. 
Post-discharge telephone calls were evaluated against an outpatient clinician review ‘gold 
standard’. The predictive value of components of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention e National Healthcare Safety Network (CDC-NHNS) risk index was examined in 
patients having major obstetric or gynaecological surgery (O&G) between August 2010 and 
February 2011. 
Findings: After appropriate training, surgeons and anaesthetists were found to be 
consistent in their use of the SWC and ASA scores respectively. Telephone calls were found 
to have a sensitivity of 70% [95% conﬁdence interval (CI): 47e87] and a speciﬁcity of 100% 
(95% CI: 95e100) for detection of post-discharge SSI in this setting. In 954 patients 
undergoing major O&G operations, the SWC score was the only parameter in the CDC-NHNS 
risk index model associated with the risk of SSI (odds ratio: 4.00; 95% CI: 1.21e13.2; 
P ¼ 0.02). 
Conclusions: Surveillance for SSI can be conducted in a low-income hospital setting, 
although dedicated staff, intensive training and local modiﬁcations to surveillance 
methods are necessary. Surveillance for post-discharge SSI using telephone calls is 
imperfect but provides a practical alternative to clinic-based diagnosis. The SWC score 
was the only predictor of SSI risk in O&G surgery in this context. 





0195-6701 ª 2012 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2012.11.003 




 



A World Health Organization (WHO) systematic review in 
2011 on hospital-acquired infections (HAIs) highlighted the 
scarcity of studies from low-income countries and from African 
countries in particular.1 From limited information, surgical site 
infections (SSIs) were identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant problem: the 
risk in developing countries was ‘strikingly higher than in 
equivalent surgical procedures in high income countries’. 
Conducting surveillance for SSIs is recognized as making an 
important contribution to reducing the risk of these infections. 
Establishing high-quality surveillance with timely feedback to 
surgeons can lead to reduction in risk of SSI.2 A systematic 
review of interventions for preventing SSI in sub-Saharan Africa 
found no examples of surveillance being conducted with the 
primary purpose of reducing the risk of SSI.3 
The SENIC project (Study on the Efﬁcacy of Nosocomial 
Infection Control) had demonstrated that the critical compo- 
nents of SSI surveillance were: (i) accurate collection and 
reporting of information; (ii) appropriate stratiﬁcation of risk.4 
For the ﬁrst component, methods for accurate collection of 
surveillance have been extensively 
information for SSI 
researched in high-income countries.5,6 However, 
these 
methods are not applicable in hospitals in low-income settings 
where data extraction from inpatient records is challenging 
and electronic linkage to primary healthcare records is 
impossible. In all settings, many SSI cases occur after discharge 
from hospital.6 Incorporating these cases into surveillance 
systems is especially problematic in low-income settings, 
where surgical patients are often dispersed over a wide area. 
For the second component of SSI surveillance, an appro- 
priate system of risk stratiﬁcation is needed to make compar- 
isons of the risk of SSI between centres or over time. The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention e National 
Healthcare Safety Network (CDC-NHSN) risk index provides one 
such system. A score of 0e3 is assigned based on the sum of 
values derived from the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
physical status classiﬁcation (ASA) score, the surgical wound 
class (SWC) and operation duration in relation to a procedure- 
speciﬁc length (time T).7 Although these components of the 
risk index are, in principle, readily transferable to low-income 
settings, an important question is whether accuracy of scoring 
in routine clinical practice in such settings is adequate to 
reliably predict risk of SSI. 
The aim was to evaluate epidemiological characteristics of 
various components of SSI surveillance in a low-income hospital 
setting in sub-Saharan Africa. We evaluated: the inter-observer 
consistency of SWC and ASA scoring; the sensitivity and speci- 
ﬁcity of telephone calls for identifying SSI against a clinician 
review ‘gold standard’; the association of CDC-NHSN risk index 
components with the risk of SSI in this setting. 
major and minor operations take place monthly. Caesarean 
sections are the most commonly performed procedure. Surgical 
instruments are reprocessed in a steam autoclave with moni- 
toring by a change in colour of sealant tape. Prior to February 
2011, antibiotic prophylaxis was normally administered to 
patients postoperatively, as is standard practice in many 
is not 
government hospitals in the region. Thika Hospital 
a university hospital, nor does it have an extensive history of 
research collaborations. It is a typical mid-sized Kenyan 
government hospital. 
As a collaborative project between the Ministry of Medical 
Services, the Kenya Medical Research Institute and Thika 
Hospital, SSI surveillance was conducted at Thika Hospital for 
a continuous period from August 2010 to December 2011. 
All patients gave written consent to participation in 
surveillance, which included contact by phone after discharge 
from hospital. This study was approved by the KEMRI National 
Ethical Review Committee. 
Postoperative patient reviews, data and sample collection, 
phone calls and data entry were performed daily by a team of 
hospital staff members (two clinical ofﬁcers and four support 
staff). All data for CDC-NHNS risk index criteria were recorded 
by hospital surgeons and anaesthetists. We diagnosed SSI in 
accordance with CDC-NHSN deﬁnitions as far as possible given 
the diagnostic facilities available.8 Microbiological criteria 
were not used for SSI diagnosis, although microbiology services 
at Thika Hospital were upgraded as part of the surveillance. All 
diagnoses of SSI were discussed with the relevant surgical team 
and an infectious diseases physician. Feedback of ongoing 
surveillance results was given in writing and discussed in 
a series of multidisciplinary seminars. 
In our surveillance, we included all surgical operations 
where a surgical wound was created during the procedure and 
in hospital. We therefore 
the patient stayed overnight 
excluded patients having day-case surgery (including all ear/ 
nose/throat, ophthalmic and minor gynaecological procedures) 
and debridement of traumatic or infected wounds. During their 
inpatient stay, postoperative patients were reviewed at every 
dressing change, normally starting on the third postoperative 
day and on alternate days thereafter. Patients remained in SSI 
surveillance for 30 days after all eligible surgical operations, 
including both inpatient and outpatient periods. Postoperative 
readmissions to Thika Hospital were actively sought daily. After 
discharge, telephone-based surveillance was conducted as 
described below. Patients were encouraged to contact the 
surveillance team if they received treatment for wound 
complications at another facility. 


recorded in 
a custom-made PHP-MySQL database. Statistical analyses were 
performed using Stata v12 software (Stata Corp., College 
Station, TX, USA). 


Thika Level 5 Hospital is a 300-bed government hospital in 
the town of Thika, about 50 km north east of Nairobi, in Central 
Province of Kenya. At Thika Hospital there are six consultant 
surgeons and a rotating pool of 16e20 medical ofﬁcers (junior 
doctors) and clinical ofﬁcers (vocationally trained clinicians) 
who carry out a range of elective and emergency surgical 
procedures. There are four operating theatres and about 300 

Scoring consistency tests were conducted with the Surgery, 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology (O&G) and Anaesthetics depart- 
ments in Thika Hospital. In each department, a series of 10 case 
histories was developed describing patient scenarios similar to 
those encountered in local practice. After revision of the 
relevant scoring system, all departmental members indepen- 
dently scored the SWC or ASA for these case histories. These 
results were presented to each department and the need to 


ensure inter-observer consistency was explained. Various 
different approaches to improving consistency were employed: 
departmental discussions, educational meetings and written 
guidelines and posters in departments. Among surgeons, 
a second round of this exercise was conducted with actual 
patients; in the O&G and Anaesthetics departments, a second 
round of this exercise used different paper-based case 
histories. 
As the scoring depended on making a clinical judgement, no 
answer was considered ‘correct’: the kappa statistic (k) was 
employed to assess inter-observer consistency. A weighted k 
was used to account for the ordered nature of the scoring 
categories. 
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of telephone-based 
surveillance 
At discharge, patients (or their guardians) were asked to 
give a mobile phone number where they could be contacted 
during the next 30 days. More than 90% of patients provided 
this. Patients were contacted twice by mobile phone on 
approximately the 14th and 28th postoperative days to inquire 
about wound complications since discharge. Surveillance staff 
asked a standard series of questions regarding current condi- 
tion of the wound, and distinguished between presence of 
(normal) postoperative mild pain, itching and serous ooze and 
(abnormal) severe pain, wound breakdown and purulent 
discharge. Patients could also contact the SSI surveillance team 
by phone. Patients reporting current symptoms consistent with 
wound infection were asked to re-attend Thika Hospital for 
free outpatient review. 
Using clinician review in the outpatient clinic as the diag- 
nostic gold standard, paired observations of telephone inter- 
view and direct clinician review were analysed when these 
were performed within 48 h of each other to determine the 
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of telephone calls as a diagnostic 
test. It was assumed that ‘wound infection status’ could not 
change within a 48 h period. 

To analyse the predictive performance of the CDC-NHNS risk 
index, all forms of SSI were re-categorized (including those 
occurring after discharge) into a single outcome variable. 
Exposure variable data were extracted from medical notes at 
the time of the operation. Logistic regression was used to 
analyse risk index components in a group consisting of 
caesarean sections and major gynaecological operations 
Table I 
Results of scoring consistency projects 
conducted between August 2010 and February 2011. Time T 
represented 1 h for all of these procedures. We did not include 
other procedures in this modelling as the risk index is only 
intended to be applied to groups of similar procedures e there 
were insufﬁcient numbers of any other operative group for 
adequate evaluation. 

Following extensive development, training and piloting, SSI 
surveillance was conducted at Thika Hospital for a 16-month 
continuous period from August 2010 to December 2011). All 
consecutive adult and paediatric patients undergoing eligible 
operative procedures were enrolled. 

Consistency studies were conducted for the SWC and ASA 
score as shown in Table I. Junior staff rotated between 
departments every three months, so this exercise could not be 
repeated in the surgical departments at intervals longer than 
this. The second exercise was performed in the Anaesthetics 
department after a 13-month interval. 
Whereas consistency of scoring between clinicians initially 
ranged from fair (within the O&G department) to excellent 
(within the Surgery department), after a period of routine use 
of these scoring systems, the consistency between clinicians 
improved in all departments. The high degree of consistency 
achieved in the Surgery department in a ‘paper-based’ exercise 
(k ¼ 0.81) was replicated when the same approach was applied 
with actual patients (k ¼ 0.83, based on 55 paired observa- 
tions). Subsequently, continuous training of incoming staff was 
used to maintain these high levels of consistency. 

There were a total of 89 pairs of outpatient clinician reviews 
and telephone interviews within 48 h of each other. For 23 
patients diagnosed in outpatients by a clinician as having SSI, 
16 of these had been judged to have SSI in their telephone 
interview. For 66 patients seen in outpatients by a clinician and 
considered not to have SSI, none of these had been considered 
to have SSI in their telephone interview. On the basis of these 
results, the sensitivity of telephone calls was 69.6% [95% 
conﬁdence interval (CI): 47.1e86.8%] and the speciﬁcity was 
100% (95% CI: 95e100%). 


Anaesthetics 
O&G 
Surgery 
ASA 
SWC 
SWC 
No. 
of staff 
5b 
6 
7 

Jun 2010 
Jun 2010 
Jun 2010 
First exercise 
Average weighted k score 
0.68 
0.48 
0.81 


Sep 2011 
Sep 2010 
AugeOct 2010 
Average weighted k score 
0.89 
0.72 
0.83 
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; SWC, surgical wound class. 
There are no P-values associated with k as it does not test a particular hypothesis. 
a All exercises compared paper-based scenarios except the second exercise in surgery which examined actual patients. 
b Only four of the ﬁve participants undertook the second exercise. 


Description of surveillance operations and 
performance of CDC-NHSN risk index 
Between August 2010 and February 2011, a total of 1172 
operations conducted at Thika Hospital were followed up in SSI 
surveillance. The characteristics of these operations are given 
in Table II. As caesarean sections predominated among these 
procedures (75% of operations), surveillance mainly included 
women of child-bearing age. A wide variety of other operations 
were also included in surveillance including laparotomies, 
hysterectomies, hernia repairs, appendicectomies and ampu- 
tations. There was a high risk of SSI 
in orthopaedics and 
neurosurgery (14%), reﬂecting the high incidence of exten- 
sively contaminated road-accident trauma in this hospital. 
Surgery performed by clinical ofﬁcers (vocationally trained 
clinicians) did appear to have elevated risk of SSI (15%) 
although this is based on a very small number of procedures. 
Antibiotic prophylaxis was normally delivered as a post- 
operative regime, as is widely used in hospitals in Kenya. We 
have not calculated an overall risk of SSI in the surveillance 
Table II 
Risk of surgical site infection (SSI) in operations at Thika Hospital, 
Kenya: August 2010eFebruary 2011 



(cid:2)14 
15e39 
40e65 
(cid:3)65 
Patient sex 
Female 
Male 

Caesarean section 
General surgery 
Orthopaedic/neurosurgery 
Gynaecological 
32 
1015 
110 
15 
1060 
112 
882 
144 
36 
110 
Surgeon grade 
Consultant 
Medical ofﬁcer 
Medical ofﬁcer intern 
Registered clinical ofﬁcer 
198 
685 
266 
20 
Preoperative antibiotic prophylaxisb 
18 
1154 
Given 
Not given 
0 (0) 
76 (7.5) 
16 (14.6) 
1 (6.7) 
82 (7.7) 
11 (9.8) 
64 (7.3) 
12 (8.3) 
5 (13.9) 
12 (10.9) 
17 (8.6) 
51 (7.5) 
21 (7.9) 




Given 
Not given 

1169 
3 
1172 



a Includes caesarean section with tubal ligation (N ¼ 36) and with 
hysterectomy (4); general surgery includes laparotomy (61), hernia 
repair 
(10); orthopaedic/neurosurgery 
includes open reduction internal ﬁxations (9), limb amputations (7) 
and plating procedures (5); gynaecological surgery includes hyster- 
ectomy (43), salpingectomy (11), cystectomy (8). 





cohort e this is strongly dependent on the mix of procedures, 
which is outside of institutional control. 
The performance of the CDC-NHSN risk index in predicting 
the outcome of SSI (of any type, including post-discharge 
infections) in caesarean sections and major gynaecological 
operations is given in Table III. For individual components of 
the risk index, only the parameter derived from the SWC (odds 
ratio: 3.93; 95% CI: 1.25e12.4; P ¼ 0.02) was signiﬁcantly 
associated with the risk of SSI e this remained the case in 
a multivariate model. Parameters relating to the ASA score and 
the duration of the operation were not associated with the risk 
of SSI in these operations. 

There are very few previous reports that have studied SSI 
surveillance methods in sub-Saharan Africa, and we are 
unaware of any that have examined either the consistency of 
scoring of risk index components or the characteristics of 
telephone calls as a surveillance method for SSI.9,10 This study 
represents the largest SSI surveillance cohort reported in sub- 
Saharan Africa. 
After appropriate training and with ongoing feedback, 
surgeons and anaesthetists in Thika Hospital were consistent in 
categorization of SWC and ASA scores in paper-based evalua- 
tions. This consistency improved over time and was similar 
when applied to actual patients. On this basis, the scoring of 
these indices by clinicians in this setting can achieve an 
adequate consistency to make them suitable for use as SSI risk 
stratiﬁcation variables. 
The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of telephone calls as a post- 
discharge follow-up tool for SSI surveillance were 70% and 
100% respectively. Although this was based on a relatively small 
number of paired observations, the analysis was restricted to 
those observations within 48 h of each other to maximize 
accuracy. Speciﬁcity was high as there were no false-positive 
telephone-based diagnoses (type 1 errors) among our paired 
observations. The moderate sensitivity obtained means that 
some genuine SSI cases may have been missed (type 2 errors) in 
surveillance. This combination of high speciﬁcity and moderate 
sensitivity are satisfactory characteristics for a ‘stand-alone’ 
test where the outcome is rare. During the pilot phase of 
surveillance, we had found that in Thika Hospital the actual 
attendance at postoperative outpatient appointments was 
extremely poor (<25%). Researchers in Tanzania had also found 
poor attendance (54%) at postoperative follow-up appoint- 
ments.9 Telephone calls have also been used for post-discharge 
SSI detection in a cluster-randomized trial of a surgical hand- 
washing intervention in Kenya, although that study did not 
examine the sensitivity or speciﬁcity of the method.11 Tele- 
phone calls appear to be a reasonable method of detecting 
in this setting, although this should be 
post-discharge SSI 
further evaluated as a diagnostic tool.12 This method may be 
population-speciﬁc as Kenya has very high penetration of 
mobile phone services. 
Surgical wound class was predictive of risk of SSI in the 
univariate and multivariate models in major O&G operations. 
This is consistent with studies from Tanzania and Ethiopia and 
with ﬁndings from elsewhere in the world, where SWC remains 
a cornerstone of SSI risk stratiﬁcation.1,8,10,13 
Few studies in Africa have examined the use of the ASA score 
as a predictor of SSI risk. The ASA score approximates ‘global’ 


Table III 
CDC-NHSN risk index in Thika Hospital, Kenya in major Obstetrics and Gynaecology surgerya (N ¼ 954) 










Clean 
Clean-contaminated 
Contaminated 
Dirty-infected 

Clean or clean-contaminated 
Contaminated or dirty-infected 
ASA score 
ASA 1 
ASA 2 
ASA 3 
ASA 4e5 

ASA 1e2 
ASA 3e5 

<30 
30e60 
60e120 
(cid:3)120 

<60 min 
(cid:3)60 min 
Total operations 
103 
834 
13 
4 
937 
17 
629 
294 
27 
4 
923 
31 
162 
616 
171 
5 
778 
176 
954 
9 
59 
2 
2 
68 
4 
44 
25 
3 
0 
69 
3 
9 
46 
16 
1 
55 
17 
72 
1.0 
3.93 (1.25e12.4) 

e 
4.00 (1.21e13.2) 

1.0 
1.32 (0.39e4.47) 

e 
0.88 (0.24e3.22) 

1.0 
1.41 (0.79e2.49) 

e 
1.25 (0.77e2.04) 

CDC-NHSN, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention e National Healthcare Safety Network; SSI, surgical site infection; OR, odds ratio; CI, 
conﬁdence interval; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists. 

patient health at the time of the operation, and is a reliable 
predictor of the risk of SSI in high-income settings.14 However, 
it provided no useful predictive information in this setting 
when applied to major O&G operations. This may be because 
these procedures were mainly performed on healthy young 
women among whom higher scores were rarely assigned, which 
may limit the utility of the ASA score as a discriminator of risk. 
In other African studies, the ASA score was strongly predictive 
of risk in a mixture of obstetric and general surgical procedures 
in Tanzania but only weakly predictive of risk in a study of 
paediatric surgery in Nigeria.10,15 
The duration of an operation gives an indication of the 
complexity of performing that speciﬁc procedure. When this is 
compared to a standard length, this can predict the risk of 
subsequent complications. Operation duration was predictive 
of SSI risk in several studies in low-income settings, though 
using ‘local’ values for standard operation length was found to 
improve the predictive power.9,10,16,17 The duration of surgery 
in this study was not associated with the risk of SSI in major 
O&G operations. 
There are limitations to our study. Both the evaluation of 
the consistency of SWC and ASA scores and the sensitivity and 
speciﬁcity of telephone calls are based on relatively small 
numbers of observations. However, these are the most detailed 
examinations of these topics in the region to date. The evalu- 
ation of the CDC-NHNS risk index in O&G surgery is the largest 
such group ever reported in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Six full-time staff with salaries equivalent to entry-level 
nurses were required to conduct this surveillance. About 250 
procedures were followed up each month. The high cost of 
supporting these staff meant that surveillance could not be 
sustained beyond the duration of this collaborative project. 
Commercially available software for SSI surveillance might 
have been a cheaper alternative to our bespoke, locally pro- 
grammed database. 
The value of surveillance is providing surgeons with 
comparative data about their speciﬁc performance. Combining 
many different types of procedure with different intrinsic risks 
of infection is therefore of no real value. In the smaller 
throughput types of surgery, it would be necessary to collect 
surveillance data for much longer periods or across many sites 
in order to adequately evaluate the risks of SSI. 
In conclusion, surveillance is an important method of 
measuring and controlling SSIs, which are recognized to 
be a signiﬁcant form of HAI in sub-Saharan Africa. In a low- 
income hospital setting it was found that surgeons and 
anaesthetists can assign consistent scores for the SWC and 
ASA; ongoing training and feedback are required. Telephone 
calls appear to be a reasonable method of detecting post- 
discharge SSI cases, although further evaluation is needed. 
Of the components of the CDC-NHNS risk index, only the 
SWC provided useful predictive information on the risk of SSI 
in our hospital, where caesarean sections represent the bulk 
of operations. 



The authors thank Thika Hospital staff and patients for their 
involvement in surveillance. We thank G. Mimano for his work 
in constructing the SSI surveillance database. 
Conﬂicts of interest 
None declared. 
Funding sources 
Surveillance at Thika Hospital was funded by the Wellcome 
Trust, UK as part of the Training Fellowship for A.A. (grant 
number 085042). 

1. Allegranzi B, Bagheri Nejad S, Combescure C, et al. Burden of 
endemic health-care-associated infection in developing countries: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2011;377:228e241. 
2. Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance 
data to prevent hospital-acquired infections. Emerg Infect Dis 
2001;7:295e298. 
3. Aiken AM, Karuri DM, Wanyoro AK, Macleod J. Interventional studies 
for preventing surgical site infections in sub-Saharan Africa e 
a systematic review. Int J Surg 2012;10:242e249. 
4. Haley RW. The scientiﬁc basis for using surveillance and risk factor 
infection rates. J Hosp Infect 
data to reduce nosocomial 
1995;30(Suppl):3e14. 
5. Rosenthal R, Weber WP, Marti WR, et al. Surveillance of surgical 
site infections by surgeons: biased underreporting or useful 
epidemiological data? J Hosp Infect 2010;75:178e182. 
6. Petherick ES, Dalton JE, Moore PJ, Cullum N. Methods for identi- 
fying surgical wound infection after discharge from hospital: 
a systematic review. BMC Infect Dis 2006;6:170. 
7. Culver DH, Horan TC, Gaynes RP, et al. Surgical wound infection 
rates by wound class, operative procedure, and patient risk index. 
National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Am J Med 
1991;91:152Se157S. 
8. Horan TC, Andrus M, Dudeck MA. CDC/NHSN surveillance deﬁnition 
of health care-associated infection and criteria for speciﬁc types 
of infections in the acute care setting. Am J Infect Control 
2008;36:309e332. 
9. Fehr J, Hatz C, Soka I, et al. Risk factors for surgical site infection 
in a Tanzanian district hospital: a challenge for the traditional 
National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance system index. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2006;27:1401e1404. 
10. Eriksen HM, Chugulu S, Kondo S, Lingaas E. Surgical-site infections 
J Hosp Infect 
at Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Center. 
2003;55:14e20. 
11. Nthumba PM, Stepita-Poenaru E, Poenaru D, et al. Cluster- 
randomized, crossover trial of the efﬁcacy of plain soap and water 
versus alcohol-based rub for surgical hand preparation in a rural 
hospital in Kenya. Br J Surg 2010;97:1621e1628. 
12. Whiting P, Rutjes AW, Reitsma JB, Bossuyt PM, Kleijnen J. The 
development of QUADAS: a tool for the quality assessment of 
studies of diagnostic accuracy included in systematic reviews. 
BMC Med Res Methodol 2003;3:25. 


14. Woodﬁeld JC, Beshay NM, Pettigrew RA, Plank LD, van Rij AM. 
American Society of Anesthesiologists classiﬁcation of physical 
status as a predictor of wound infection. Aust NZ J Surg 
2007;77:738e741. 

Iroha E, Odugbemi TO. Aerobic 
bacterial nosocomial infections in paediatric surgical patients at 
a tertiary health institution in Lagos, Nigeria. Niger Postgrad Med 
J 2004;11:4e9. 
16. Koigi-Kamau R, Kabare LW, Wanyoike-Gichuhi J. Incidence of 
wound infection after caesarean delivery in a district hospital in 
central Kenya. East Afr Med J 2005;82:357e361. 
17. Ameh EA, Mshelbwala PM, Nasir AA, et al. Surgical site infection in 
children: prospective analysis of the burden and risk factors in 
a 
(Larchmt) 
setting. 
sub-Saharan 
2009;10:105e109. 



