traci l. hedrick, m.D.1 • Amy M. Harrigan, B.S., C.C.R.C.1 • Robert G. Sawyer, M.D.1,2 
florence e. turrentine, Ph.D., R.n.1 • George J. Stukenborg, Ph.D., M.A.1,2 
Bindu A. Umapathi, M.D.1 • Charles M. Friel, M.D.1 
1 Department of surgery, university of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
2 Department of health evaluation sciences, university of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
BACKGROUND: surgical site infection is common 
following colorectal surgery, yet the incidence varies 
widely. CDC criteria include “diagnosis by attending 
physician,” which can be subjective. alternatively, the 
asePsis score is an objective scoring system based on the 
presence of clinical findings. 
OBJECTIVE: the aim of this study is to compare the 
interrater reliability of the asePsis score vs CDC 
definitions in identifying surgical site infection. 
DESIGN: this 24-month prospective study used serial 
photography of the wound. three attending surgeons 
independently reviewed blinded photographic/clinical data. 
SETTINGS: this study was conducted at an academic 
institution. 
PATIENTS: Patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery 
were selected. 
INTERVENTIONS: surgeons assigned an asePsis score 
and identified surgical site infection by using CDC 
Funding/Support: this work was funded by the american society of 
Colon and Rectal surgeons (asCRs) Research foundation, Career De- 
velopment award. 

Podium presentation at the meeting of the american society of Colon 
and Rectal Surgeons, Boston MA, May 30 to June 3, 2015. It will be pre- 
sented at the meeting of the european society of Coloproctology, Dub- 
lin, ireland, september 23 to 25, 2015. 
Correspondence: traci hedrick, m.D., assistant Professor of surgery, 
University of Virginia Health System, PO BOX 800709, Charlottesville, 
Va 22908. e-mail: th8q@virginia.edu 
Dis Colon Rectum 2015; 58: 1070–1077 
Doi: 10.1097/DCR.0000000000000466 
© the asCRs 2015 

definitions. the interrater reliability of asePsis and 
the CDC criteria were compared by using the κ statistic. 
these data were also compared with the institutional 
national surgical Quality improvement Program 
database. 
RESULTS: one hundred seventy-one patients were 
included. four surgical site infections (2.4%) were 
identified by the national surgical Quality improvement 
Program. Data from the surgeons demonstrated 
significantly higher yet discrepant rates of infection 
by the CDC criteria, at 6.2%, 7.4%, and 14.1% with 
a κ of 0.55 indicating modest interrater agreement. 
alternatively, the asePsis assessments demonstrated 
excellent interrater agreement between surgeons with 
96% agreement (2.4%, 2.4%, and 3.6%) and a κ of 0.83. 

CONCLUSIONS: this study demonstrates the relatively 
poor reliability of CDC definitions for surgical site 
infections in comparison with an objective scoring 
system. these findings could explain the wide variability 
in the literature and raise concern for the comparison 
of institutional surgical site infection rates as a quality 
indicator. alternatively, an objective scoring system, like 
the asePsis score, may yield more reliable measures for 
comparison. 
KEYWORDS: surgical site infection; asePsis; Quality; 
scoring system. 

tional surgical Quality improvement Program (aCs 
nsQiP), which uses the CDC definitions for the 
diagnosis of surgical site infections (ssis), the national rate 
of ssi following elective colorectal surgery is 9%.1 however, 
the incidence of ssi is almost uniformly greater than 15% 


Defining Surgical Site Infection in Colorectal 
Surgery: An Objective Analysis Using Serial 
Photographic Documentation 



throughout the literature when prospective collection meth- 
ods are used2–4 and varies widely from 5% to 40%.5,6 un- 
derstandably, there will be variability based on case mix and 
patient demographics. however, this discrepancy raises ques- 
tions surrounding the difficulty in accurately defining ssi. 
one of the key criteria in the CDC definition is “diag- 
nosis by attending physician,” leaving the attending surgeon 
as the final arbiter. Previously, we demonstrated poor reli- 
ability between attending surgeons in defining ssi using 
CDC criteria based on blinded chart review of the electron- 
ic medical record (emR).7 however, it was unclear whether 
the discrepancy related to differences in interpretation of 
documentation or true differences in clinical interpretation. 
alternatively, the asePsis score is an objective wound- 
scoring system, previously described in cardiac surgery, 
based on the presence of specific clinical findings.8 the 
asePsis score has the advantage of being objective and is 
designed to relate the wound appearance to clinical conse- 
quences. in addition, it provides a quantitative analysis that 
can be used to grade the severity of the wound disturbance. 
the aim of this prospective study is to evaluate the in- 
terrater reliability of the CDC definitions and the asePsis 
score in identifying ssis. We hypothesize that there will 
be poor interrater reliability between surgeons in defining 
ssi based on CDC definitions and that the asePsis score 
will provide a more reliable and quantifiable mechanism 
for defining ssi in patients undergoing colorectal surgery. 

Study Design 
a 24-month (november 29, 2012 to november 30, 2014) 
prospective observational study was undertaken at the uni- 
versity of Virginia under informed consent with permission 
to obtain and publish deidentified information including 
photographs of the wound (IRB # 16097). Adult patients 
(≥18 years) undergoing elective colorectal procedures by 1 
of 2 colorectal surgeons were consented and prospectively 
followed by a clinical research coordinator. emergent proce- 
dures, patients younger than 18, prisoners, pregnant wom- 
en, and patients unable to provide consent were excluded. 
Patients were identified in the outpatient clinic and 
approached for informed consent after the decision was 
made to proceed with surgery. the clinical research coor- 
dinator followed the patients and maintained a prospec- 
tive database including digital photographic images of 
each patient’s wound. the patient’s wound was photo- 
graphed every other day beginning after postoperative day 
2 during his/her inpatient stay, and at any follow-up visits 
up to 30-days or until wound healing. Clinical data, such 
as whether or not the wound had been opened, the pres- 
ence of drainage, and treatment with antibiotics, were col- 
lected independently from what was documented in the 
emR at each wound assessment. 
three surgeons reviewed the prospectively gathered 
data (complete with photographs) individually and inde- 
pendently. all identifying information was removed so the 
reviewers were completely blinded. Reviewers classified 
each wound with the use of CDC definitions for ssi. Re- 
viewers also assigned an asePsis score to each wound as- 
sessment to generate a cumulative 30-day asePsis score. 
secondary clinical variables were collected including 
patient and procedure demographic variables, length of 
stay, 30-day readmission, and 30-day morbidity/mortality 
from the prospectively collected database and the institu- 
tional aCs nsQiP database. nsQiP data are abstracted on 
all procedures included in the colectomy and proctectomy 
modules in the targeted Procedure Program. 
CDC Definition of SSI 
aCs nsQiP uses the CDC’s national nosocomial infec- 
tions surveillance (nnis) system,9 which classifies ssis 
into incision or organ/space. incisional ssis are further 
divided into those involving only skin and subcutaneous 
tissues (superficial ssi) and deeper softer tissues (deep 
ssi) (table 1). according to the CDC, “nnis definitions 
of ssis have been applied consistently by surveillance and 
surgical personnel in many settings and currently are a de 
facto national standard.” CDC definitions were reviewed 
with the surgeons before the review, and each case file was 
associated with a copy of the CDC definitions to aid dur- 
ing the review process. We did not include organ/space 
ssis given their inherent difference from incisional ssis. 
ASEPSIS Score 
the asePsis score is calculated by assigning a score based 
on the presence of erythema, serous exudate, purulent 
exudate, and deep tissue separation according to the per- 
centage of the wound affected by each process (table 2). 
additional points are awarded for antibiotic treatment, in- 
cision and drainage, isolation of bacteria from the wound, 
and an inpatient stay. the addition of home health for the 
purposes of wound care was added to the score as a modi- 
fication to reflect current practice. a score greater than 20 
defines a ssi. scores are grouped into 4 categories (satis- 
factory (0–10), disturbance of healing (11–20), minor ssi 
(21–30), moderate ssi (31–40), severe ssi (>40)). 
Analysis 
the primary outcome of interest was the interrater reli- 
ability of the CDC definition of a superficial or deep ssi 
between the 3 surgeons and the institutional nsQiP data- 
base. a secondary outcome of the study was the interrater 
reliability of the asePsis score in identifying ssi. Wound 
evaluations were compared between the 3 surgeons and 
nsQiP. Patient, procedure, and wound variables were 
evaluated in cases of disagreement to determine predic- 
tive factors of disagreement. in addition, because the 




tissue of the incision and at least one of the following: 
• Purulent drainage, with or without laboratory confirmation, from the superficial incision. 
• Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture of fluid or tissue from the superficial incision. 
• At least one of the following signs or symptoms of infection: pain or tenderness, localized swelling, redness, or heat AND superficial incision 
is deliberately opened by the surgeon, unless incision is culture negative. 
• Diagnosis of superficial incisional SSI by the surgeon or attending physician. 

• Stitch abscess (minimal inflammation and discharge confined to the points of suture penetration). 
• 
• 
Infected burn wound. 
Incisional SSI that extends into the fascial and muscle layers (see deep incisional SSI). 

fascial and muscle layers) of the incision and at least one of the following: 
• Purulent drainage from the deep incision but not from the organ/space component of the surgical site. 
• A deep incision spontaneously dehisces or is deliberately opened by a surgeon when the patient has at least one of the following signs or 




Note: 
• 
• An organ/space SSI that drains through the incision is reported as a deep incisional SSI. 


number of assessments was not uniform for each patient 
based on differences in the length of stay and frequency of 
follow-up visits, we evaluated this as a potential contribu- 
tor to discordance. the χ2 statistic and student t test were 
used to compare categorical and continuous variables. 
the interrater reliability of the CDC definition of 
ssi was compared between the 3 surgeon reviewers and 
aCs nsQiP by using the weighted generalized κ statis- 
tic.10 the surgeons also calculated a cumulative 30-day 
asePsis score for each patient based on the clinical and 
photographicdata collected at each wound assessment. 
 
the interrater reliability of the asePsis score was also 
compared by using the weighted generalized κ statistic. 
the κ statistic is a commonly used measure of the reli- 
ability of paired measures with nominal or ordinal scales. the 
fleiss generalized weighted κ extends the statistic to multirat- 
er comparisons (3 or more raters) with scores for nominal or 
ordinal categories. Weights are included to adjust for differ- 
ences in the scale of disagreement between ordinal scale val- 
ues. the weighted generalized κ statistic measures how much 

Serous exudate 
Erythema 
Purulent exudate 
Separation of deep tissues 
Additional points for: 
Antibiotics
 
Incisionand drainage 
 
Debridementof the wound 
 
Isolation of bacteria 
Inpatient stay >14 days 
Need for home healtha 
Total points 
0–10
 
11–20
 
21–30
 
31–40
 
>40
 
 
 
 
 
 


2 pts 
2 pts 
4 pts 
4 pts 

3 pts 
3 pts 
6 pts 
6 pts 

4 pts 
4 pts 
8 pts 
8 pts 

5 pts 
5 pts 
10 pts 
10 pts 

1 pts 
1 pts 
2 pts 
2 pts 
10 pts 
5 pts 
10 pts 
10 pts 
5 pts 
5 pts 
Category of infection 
Satisfactory healing 
Disturbance of healing 
Minor wound infection 
Moderate wound infection 
Severe wound infection 
Pts = points; SSI = surgical site infection. 
aThe addition of home health specific for wound care was added to the score as a modification to reflect current standards in practice that are commonly used for patients 
with SSI. 



 
 
 


the level of agreement among raters exceeds the amount of 
agreement expected by chance alone. in general, κ statistic 
values of >0.7 indicate excellent interrater agreement. 
a power analysis with continuity correction was 
performed based on the authors’ previous study, which 
demonstrated an nsQiP institutional ssi rate of 8% and 
an average surgeon ssi rate of 25% among the same 3 
surgeon reviewers. the power analysis indicated that a to- 
tal sample of 170 would be needed to detect a difference 
from 25% to 8% in the incidence of ssi with 80% power 
with α at 0.05. 

one hundred ninety-two patients were consented dur- 
ing the study period. twenty-one patients were excluded 
from analysis, leaving 171 patients in the final analysis: 
1 patient was lost to follow-up, 1 patient died in the imme- 
diate postoperative period, 2 patients withdrew consent be- 
fore surgery, 6 patients were consented but did not undergo 
surgery, and 11 patients were not captured by nsQiP. the 
Age, y 
Sex, % male 
Diagnosis 
Malignancy
 
IBD
 
Diverticulardisease 
 
Other
 
BMI 
Diabetes mellitus 
Steroids 
Smoker 
Chronic renal insufficiency 
Bowel preparation (PEG + oral antibiotics) 
ASA classification 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 

Clean-contaminated
 
Contaminated
 
Dirty
 

Hartmanreversal (44626) 
 
Partialcolectomy (44140) 
 
Lowanterior resection (44145, 44146) 
 
Laparoscopiclow anterior resection 
 
Totalproctocolectomy (44158, 44155) 
 
Laparoscopicpartial colectomy (44204) 
 
Abdominoperinealresection (45110, 45126) 
 
Rectal surgery 
Laparoscopy 
Ostomy 
Operative time 
59.5 ± 6.7 
82 (48.0) 
100 (58.5) 
34 (19.9) 

29.0 ± 7.5 
21 (12.3) 
21 (12.3) 
28 (16.4) 
11 (6.4) 
150 (87.7) 
1 (0.6) 
79 (46.2) 
86 (50.3) 
5 (2.9) 
148 (86.5) 
18 (10.5) 
5 (2.9) 
13 (7.6) 
22 (12.9) 
45 (26.3) 
30 (17.6) 
4 (2.4) 
33(19.4) 
8 (4.7) 
92 (53.8) 
73 (42.7) 
68 (39.8) 
224.0 ± 99.3 
Values shown are n (%), unless otherwise stated. 
CPT = Current Procedural Terminology; PEG = polyethylene glycol. 
complete demographic data for the final study population 
are presented in table 3. 
CDC Definition 
nsQiP identified 3 patients with a superficial ssi (1.8%) 
and 1 patient with a deep ssi (0.6%) in the study group. 
Data from the 3 surgeons demonstrated significantly 
higher (p < 0.001) rates of ssi by CDC criteria in com- 
parison with the institutional nsQiP database. in addi- 
tion, the rates of ssi were significantly different between 
each of the 3 surgeon reviewers at 6.2% (3.7% super- 
ficial, 2.5% deep), 7.4% (7.4% superficial), and 14.1% 
(9.2% superficial, 4.9% deep) (p < 0.001). there was 
91.2% agreement between the 3 surgeon reviewers and 
nsQiP with a κ of 0.55 indicating relatively poor inter- 
rater agreement. 
table 4 represents a detailed outline of cases with an 
ssi identified by at least 1 reviewer. the data presented 
in the table were collected from the prospectively main- 
tained database independent of what was documented 
in the emR. the next to last column in the table de- 
scribes what was actually documented in the emR. all 
3 surgeons agreed there was a ssi in 3 nsQiP-identified 
superficial ssis; however, 2 of these ssis were classified 
as deep by at least 1 of the surgeons. none of the sur- 
geons identified a ssi in the patient identified as having a 
deep ssi by nsQiP (case D). this patient developed dif- 
fuse erythema around each laparoscopic site prompting 
evaluation by the treating surgeon. a Ct scan revealed 
fat stranding in the subcutaneous tissue but no fluid col- 
lection. the surgeon documented the findings were not 
consistent with an ssi. the patient’s primary care physi- 
cian subsequently placed the patient on antibiotics, and a 
deep ssi was identified by nsQiP. the patient’s wounds 
at the time of evaluation are depicted in figure 1. 
six patients not identified by nsQiP as having a ssi 
were identified by all 3 of the surgeons independently as 
having a SSI (Table 4, cases e–J). In each case, the wound 
had been deliberately opened. The wound of patient J is 
seen in figure 2. on postoperative day 9, this patient was 
ordered to receive antibiotics for “cellulitis versus wound 
infection,” which was charted in the emR, and staples were 
removed from the wound. the following day the physician 
note states “no purulent drainage, erythema has improved 
slightly since staples were removed.” the patient remained 
in the hospital for several more days where documentation 
only states “wound open and packed.” the photograph in 
figure 2 was taken the day before discharge. ten additional 
superficial ssis were identified by surgeon 3, but not by 
the other 2 surgeons. each of these patients had either ery- 
thema or was placed on antibiotics by their primary care 
physician. surgeon 3 captured 1 additional deep ssi that 
was not identified by the other 2 surgeons or nsQiP. this 
patient presented with bleeding from the midline wound. 

TABLE 3. Demographic data of patients undergoing elective 
colorectal surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







Purulent 
drainage 



Documentation in 
medical record 
Average 
ASEPSIS 




















































“Port site with erythema 
requiring incision and 
drainage, purulent 
drainage” 
“Small area at midline wound, 
foul smelling drainage, 
opened” 
“Small area opened in 
midline wound” 
“Diffuse erythema around 
all port site wounds, not 
consistent with SSI” 
“Small area opened, foul 
smelling drainage” 
“ Redness and drainage, 
incision opened, purulent 
drainage” 








closed via delayed primary 
closure, subsequently 
“wound opened and 
packed for drainage and 
erythema” (classified as 
organ space SSI in NSQIP) 

















wound, wound infection vs 
dehiscence” 
“Incision opened, hematoma 
evacuated”, culture with 
Enterococcus faecalis 








None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Super 
Super 
Super 
Super 
Super 




None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Super 
Super 
Super 
Super 
Deep 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 

None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
None 
Yes 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
PCP 


None 
None 
None 
None 
Yes 
PCP 
None 
None 
None 
None 
staples removed, no 
purulent drainage, 
erythema improved 
slightly”(Fig. 2) 
“Wound healing well” 
Wound not commented on 
“Wounds healed” 
Erythema 
“PCP placed on antibiotics, 
wound looks fine” 
“Erythema and mild 

“PCP placed on antibiotics” 
“Wound with mild drainage” 
“No issue with wound” 
“Mild redness” 
“Wound opened and a 
hematoma drained” 


K 
L 
M 
N 
O 

Q 
R 
S 
T 
U 










1 
4 
2 
6 
7 

11 
13 
13 
13 
14 

according to the progress notes, the wound was “opened 
at the bedside and hematoma evacuated from the wound.” 
in total, there was only 1 case in which all 3 surgeons and 
nsQiP fully agreed with regard to the CDC definition and 
only 2 additional situations where all 3 surgeons fully agreed 
with 1 another. Documentation was generally thought to ac- 
count for the lower rate of ssi identified in nsQiP. 
table 5 demonstrates comparisons of patient, pro- 
cedure, and wound factors in patients with ssi disagree- 
ment. In addition to the difference in wound factors, BMI 
was the only patient factor associated with disagreement. 
Patients with disagreement have statistically higher BMIs 
than those without disagreement. the number of assess- 
ments did not predict disagreement. 




FIGURE 1. Photograph demonstrating an example of disagreement between NSQIP and the surgeon reviewers in the presence of an 
incisional SSI. None of the surgeons identified an SSI in this patient, who was identified as having a deep SSI by NSQIP. NSQIP = National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program; SSI = surgical site infection. 
ASEPSIS Criteria 
the breakdown of asePsis scores for each reviewer is seen in 
figure 3. there was 95.7% agreement with asePsis between 
the 3 surgeons with a κ of 0.83 indicating excellent interrater 
agreement. four patients had scores greater than 20 (indica- 
tive of a ssi by asePsis criteria) from all 3 surgeons. the aver- 
age asePsis score for these 4 patients was 33.0. each of these 
FIGURE 2. Photograph demonstrating an example of disagreement 
between NSQIP and the surgeon reviewers in the presence of an 
incisional SSI. This patient was identified as having an incisional SSI by 
all 3 of the surgeons independently but not by NSQIP. NSQIP = National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program; SSI = surgical site infection. 
patients was determined to have an ssi by the use of CDC 
criteria by the surgeon reviewers but only one by nsQiP. of 
note, the average asePsis score for the 4 patients identified 
as having an ssi by nsQiP was 15. two additional patients 
received a score greater than 20 by 1 surgeon: 1 patient was 
thought to have an ssi by CDC criteria by 2 surgeons, and the 
other was thought to have an ssi by CDC criteria by 1 surgeon 
alone. the average asePsis score of the 3 surgeons for each 
patient is depicted in the last column of table 4. 

the current study demonstrates relatively poor interra- 
ter reliability among 3 attending surgeons in identifying 
ssi according to CDC criteria, particularly in patients 
with obesity. Compared with our previous study, which 
relied on documentation in the emR, the addition of pho- 
tographic data in the current study indicates that these 
surgeons, despite looking at the same wound, could not 
reliably agree on the presence of an ssi. 
Clinical Implications 
the potential discrepancy in accurately defining ssi has sig- 
nificant implications. these findings could explain the wide 
variability reported in the literature with regard to ssi fol- 
lowing colorectal surgery. however, it also highlights the lim- 
itations inherent to using institutional ssi rates as a reliable 
marker of quality. increasingly, deep and organ space ssis 
to a greater extent than superficial ssis following colorectal 
surgery are tied to quality. Centers for medicare & medicaid 
services requires hospitals to report deep and organ space 
ssis after colon surgery through the national healthcare 
safety network. in addition, the rate of ssi following col- 
ectomy for each institution is now available on the hospital 
Compare Web site. Ju et al6 investigated the discrepancies in 



Table 5. Patient, procedure, and wound variables in patients with 
reviewer disagreement for the presence of an incisional SSI 
Agreement 
(n = 151) 
Disagreement 
(n = 20) 


Sex,male, % 
 
Diagnosis,malignancy, % 
 
BMI
 
Diabetesmellitus, % 
 
Steroids,% 
 
Smoker,% 
 
Race,white, % 
 
47.6 
57.6 
28.15 ± 7.08 
11.9 
11.9 
15.9 
89.4 
50.0 
60.0 
33.99 ± 8.12 
15.0 
15.0 
20.0 
90.0 

Bowelpreparation 
 
Woundclassification, 
 
 clean-contaminated 
Rectalsurgery 
 
Laparoscopy
 
Ostomy
 
Surgeon
 

Serousdrainage 
 
Erythema
 
Purulentdrainage 
 
Separationdeep tissue 
 
Incisionand drainage 
 
 of wound 
Homehealth 
 
88.1 
86.1 
56.3 
41.7 
41.7 
40.4 
13.9 
15.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.7 


85.0 
90.0 
40.0 
50.0 
30.0 
52.0 
30.0 
55.0 
30.0 
30.0 
35.0 

N/S 
N/S 
0.0008 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
N/S 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 

ssi rates between national healthcare safety network and 
aCs nsQiP in 16 participating hospitals and demonstrated 
discordant rates of ssi between the 2 surveillance methodol- 
ogies. improved methods for defining ssi should be sought 
after and implemented if these data are made publicly avail- 
able and tied to performance measures. 
aCs nsQiP is among the most reliable surgical outcomes 
database. shiloach et al11 and Davis et al12 demonstrated great- 
er than 95% and 98% interrater agreement between auditors 
and clinical reviewers who are trained in data collection. how- 
ever, this was based on reviews of what was documented in the 
emR. unlike a urinary tract infection or deep vein thrombo- 
sis, where the definition is based on objective data, ssi is based 
entirely on the physical examination findings documented in 
the emR. therefore, ssi is particularly vulnerable to omis- 
sions in documentation. this was clearly demonstrated in our 
study, because the majority of omissions by nsQiP were due 
to the lack of clear documentation leading to a very low rate of 
ssi in the nsQiP database. as a result, institutions that pro- 
vide detailed documentation of the wounds may actually have 
higher rates of ssi than other centers where the documenta- 
tion is less robust. this type of bias cannot be quantified or 
controlled for between institutions and may, in fact, provide a 
disincentive for accurate documentation. 
alternatively, an objective scoring system, such as the 
asePsis score, which allows for objective stratification of 
the wound may prove more useful in overcoming the sub- 
jective interpretation of the physical examination findings 
inherent in defining ssi. a study undertaken in turkey of 
patients undergoing elective or emergency colorectal sur- 
gery performed surveillance of the surgical wound with 
the asePsis method. the authors found that 47.7% of all 
wounds developed some delay in healing. however, 17.6% 
met criteria for an ssi by using an asePsis score greater 
than 20 points indicative of infection. (abstract presented at 



















FIGURE 3. This figure demonstrates the breakdown of ASEPSIS scores for each surgeon reviewer. Surgeon 1 (90.2% no wound issues, 7.6% minor wound 
issue, 0.6% minor wound infection, 1.8% major wound infection); Surgeon 2 (94.2% no issue, 3.5% minor wound issue, 0.6% minor wound infection, 1.8% 
major wound infection); Surgeon 3 (88.9% no issue, 7.6% minor wound issue, 1.8% minor wound infection, 1.8% major wound infection). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


18th World Congress of the international associated of sur- 
geons and Gastroenterologists, October 2008.) Therefore, it 
is possible that an objective scoring system, much like the 
asePsis score, may improve documentation by providing 
a template that could be incorporated into the emR. 
Strengths and Limitations 
the primary strength of the current study is that, to the au- 
thors’ knowledge, this is the only known prospective blind- 
ed evaluation addressing the identification of ssi using 
photographic data in patients undergoing colorectal sur- 
gery. however, we are limited in that this was a single-in- 
stitution study involving 3 surgeons, and further validation 
is needed. in addition, the asePsis score itself, although 
seemingly less vulnerable to subjective interpretation, is 
not an ideal clinical tool. it includes variables that may be 
superfluous such as the presence of serous exudate and the 
use of antibiotics, which in our study were prescribed lib- 
erally. it only takes into account the percentage of the af- 
fected wound rather than the length of the incision, which 
is important in laparoscopy. a ssi involving a 1-cm port 
site that must be opened incurs much less morbidity than a 
20-cm midline laparotomy wound. 
a further limitation that became apparent during the 
study is that the asePsis score is cumbersome to collect 
and may not be clinically viable unless modified for simplic- 
ity. ultimately, the morbidity incurred by the development 
of an ssi is in the care and the long-term implications of an 
open wound. unfortunately, an unintended consequence 
of the focus on ssi has been that wounds considered “high 
risk” are now deliberately left open by many surgeons to 
“prevent” ssi, leaving the patient with the very outcome 
we are trying to prevent. Based on the authors’ opinion, 
the most clinically applicable data in the asePsis scoring 
system pertains to the objective evaluation of whether the 
wound was opened and the length of the wound affected. 
a modified scoring system based on these 2 key criteria has 
the potential to improve the accuracy of uniformly captur- 
ing ssi and is an avenue for further study. 
finally, it should be noted that the rates of ssi in the 
current study are significantly lower than in our prelimi- 
nary study from which the power calculation was derived. 
a significant quality initiative, based on the implementation 
of a standardized enhanced recovery protocol, was initiated 
during the study period. this was associated with a signifi- 
cant reduction in overall complications including ssi.13 it is 
unlikely that the reduction in the incidence of ssi affected 
the results of the current study, because it should have no 
bearing on the methodology for defining ssi. 

this study highlights the difficulty in accurately capturing 
ssi within a single institution and represents a first step 
toward the development of an objective measure of ssi. 
Given the discrepancy in defining SSI based on subjective 
interpretation of physical examination findings, poor doc- 
umentation in the emR, as well as the unintended conse- 
quence of prophylactically leaving more wounds open, it 
may be more logical to simply measure whether a wound 
is open and, if so, the length of this open wound as a quality 
metric. this could be tracked using photodocumentation of 
the wound in the emR and subject to independent objec- 
tive review. although there is no doubt that transparency in 
quality outcomes is important and can significantly improve 
patient care, it must be founded on sound data, which, as 
this study suggests, is difficult to define in the current system. 

 1. Hedrick Tl, Sawyer RG, Friel CM, Stukenborg GJ. A method for es- 
timating the risk of surgical site infection in patients with abdomi- 
nal colorectal procedures. Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56:627–637. 
 2. Anthony T, Murray BW, Sum-Ping JT, et al. evaluating an evi- 
dence-based bundle for preventing surgical site infection: a ran- 
domized trial. Arch Surg. 2011;146:263–269. 
 3. Krieger BR, Davis DM, Sanchez Je, et al. The use of silver nylon 
in preventing surgical site infections following colon and rectal 
surgery. Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:1014–1019. 
 4. Itani KM, Wilson Se, Awad SS, Jensen eH, Finn TS, Abramson 
ma. ertapenem versus cefotetan prophylaxis in elective colorec- 
tal surgery. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2640–2651. 
 5. Krieger BR, Davis DM, Sanchez Je, et al. The use of silver nylon 
in preventing surgical site infections following colon and rectal 
surgery. Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:1014–1019. 
 6. Ju MH, Ko CY, Hall Bl, Bosk Cl, Bilimoria KY, Wick eC. 
a comparison of 2 surgical site infection monitoring systems. 
JAMA Surg. 2015;150:51–57. 
 7. Hedrick Tl, Sawyer RG, Hennessy SA, Turrentine Fe, Friel CM. 
Can we define surgical site infection accurately in colorectal 
surgery? Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2014;15:372–376. 
 8. Wilson AP, Treasure T, Sturridge MF, Grüneberg Rn. A scoring 
method (asePsis) for postoperative wound infections for use in 
clinical trials of antibiotic prophylaxis. Lancet. 1986;1:311–313. 
 9. Delgado-Rodríguez m, sillero-arenas m, medina-Cuadros 
M, Martínez-Gallego G. nosocomial infections in surgical pa- 
tients: comparison of two measures of intrinsic patient risk. In- 
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 1997;18:19–23. 


11. Shiloach M, Frencher SK Jr, Steeger Je, et al. Toward robust 
information: data quality and inter-rater reliability in the 
american College of surgeons national surgical Quality im- 
provement Program. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210:6–16. 
12. Davis Cl, Pierce JR, Henderson W, et al. Assessment of the reli- 
ability of data collected for the Department of Veterans affairs 
national surgical quality improvement program. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;204:550–560. 
13. thiele Rh, Rea km, turrentine fe, et al. standardization of 
care: impact of an enhanced recovery protocol on length of 
stay, complications, and direct costs after colorectal surgery. 
J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220:430–443. 

 
 
 
 
