
A study of telephone screening and direct 
observation of surgical wound infections 
after discharge from hospital 
J. Reilly, 
A. Noone, 
A. Clift, 
L. Cochrane, 
L. Johnston, 
D. I. Rowley, 
G. Phillips, 
F. Sullivan 
Post-discharge surveillance of surgical site infection is necessary if accurate rates of infection 
following surgery are to be available. We undertook a prospective study of 376 knee and hip 
replacements in 366 patients in order to estimate the rate of orthopaedic surgical site 
infection in the community. The inpatient infection was 3.1% and the post-discharge infection 
rate was 2.1%. We concluded that the use of telephone interviews of patients to identify the 
group at highest risk of having a surgical site infection (those who think they have an 
infection) with rapid follow-up by a professional trained to diagnose infection according to 
agreed criteria is an effective method of identifying infection after discharge from hospital. 
From Health 
Protection Scotland, 
Glasgow, Scotland 
and University of 
Dundee 
(cid:132) 
RGN, Consultant Nurse 
Epidemiologist 
(cid:132) 
Consultant Medical 
Epidemiologist 
Health Protection Scotland, 
Clifton House, Clifton Place, 
Glasgow G3 7BR, UK. 



A. Clift, RGN, Audit Nurse 
L. Cochrane, BSc, PhD, 

(cid:132) 
(cid:132) 
Lecturer 
(cid:132) 
Audit Manager 
(cid:132) 
FRCS, Professor 
University Department of 
Orthopaedic & Trauma 
Surgery 
(cid:132) 
FRCPath, Dip HIC, Consultant 
Medical Microbiology 
Ninewells Hospital & Medical 
School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK. 


(cid:132) 
FRCGP, Professor 
Community Health Sciences, 
Tayside Centre for General 
Practice, Mackenzie Building, 
Kirsty Semple Way, Dundee, 
UK. 
Correspondence should be 
sent to Professor D. I. Rowley; 
e-mail: 
d.i.rowley@dundee.ac.uk 
©2005 British Editorial 
Society of Bone and 
Joint Surgery 
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.87B7. 
16061 $2.00 
J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 
2005;87-B:997-9. 
Received 8 October 2004; 
Accepted after revision 
3 March 2005 

Surgical site infection (SSI) is an important 
indicator of outcome after surgery. The costs 
for the patient, hospital and community care 
1 
 In England, these have been 
team are high. 
estimated to total £61 million per annum, with 
2 
 National 
a cost per infection of some £3200. 
surveillance systems in the United Kingdom 
have been established using the Centre for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) deﬁnition 
3 
 However, only mandatory pre-dis- 
for SSI. 
charge rates of SSI are identiﬁed and these 
underestimate the true rates of SSI. It is esti- 
mated that 70% of post-operative infections 
4 
present after discharge. 
Surveillance after discharge is challenging as 
the patient is no longer under direct medical 
supervision. A Department of Health working 
5 
 recommended that priority should be 
group 
given to procedures involving a short length of 
stay. The authors also suggest that direct obser- 
vation of the surgical site, the most reliable and 
valid way of detecting infection, should be 
included in the normal patient pathway to 
minimise additional cost. 
Direct observation in the course of normal 
clinical care is easily achieved with procedures 
as Caesarean sections, in which patients are 
seen routinely during the period after dis- 
charge. However, when such post-operative 
follow-up 
is not routine, monitoring all 
patients by healthcare workers is costly. 

Orthopaedic implant infection rates are 
reported to be between 1% and 15% depending 
on the methodology and deﬁnitions adopted. 
These patients are not routinely seen in the six 
weeks following surgery and there is no health- 
care worker in the normal patient pathway dur- 
ing this period. Hence, there is a need to 
consider alternative methods of collecting data. 
Methods for SSI surveillance after clean sur- 
gery include telephone enquiry or question- 
 With those 
naire to patient or surgeon. 
methods infection rates range between 1.5% 
and 17%. However, SSI surveillance using 
direct observation of the wound for up to 30 
days by one observer reported infection rates 
 While it is clear that 
between 9% and 16%. 
direct observation is the most sensitive method 
for detecting infection, it is also expensive. 



Several large studies have suggested that 
feedback of the data for SSI to surgeons can 
7,17-19 
 However, the vary- 
reduce infection rates. 
ing deﬁnitions used do not allow the compari- 
son of infection rates. Further, where data were 
collected beyond the inpatient stay, the follow- 
up consisted only of a monthly report, by the 
surgeon to the project nurse, of the number of 
7 
 possibly leading to bias. It may be 
infections, 
that the steadily falling rates of infection 
19 
7 
 and Haley et al 
reported by Cruse and Foord 
are due to a shorter inpatient stay with an in- 
effective post-discharge surveillance programme 
and not, as assumed, the results of feedback of 
the incidence of infection to surgeons. 
Recently, attention has been focused on the 
patient’s ability to detect surgical infection. 
Postal questionnaires returned by the patient 
 but this 
to the hospital have been used, 
approach is limited by the response rate. Some 
studies have explored the use of telephone 
 as a method of detecting SSI 
questionnaires 
but it has not been validated. It has been iden- 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


tiﬁed as a practical method with good response rates. Tele- 
phone surveillance could be used to screen-out patients who 
report that they do not have a SSI, and allow time for direct 
observation of only those who state that they have prob- 
lems. Direct observation of the patient by a trained observer 
has indicated that patients know when they do not have 
infections, 98.2% of the time, but only 66% of patients 
know when they do have an infection. 

 
4 
 have shown that research is needed to formally 
Bruce et al 
assess the reliability of patient self-diagnosis and validate the 
3 
 for 
performance of the deﬁnitions used for SSI in hospital 
use in the community setting. The associated costs of collect- 
ing this information need to be considered to determine the 
most appropriate healthcare worker to be employed. 
The aims of this study were to estimate orthopaedic SSI 
in the community and test the validity of both telephone 
surveillance and SSI case deﬁnitions. 
Patients and Methods 
This was a prospective study of patients who were about to 
undergo elective hip or knee arthroplasty and who lived 
within Tayside. Patients were excluded if they were unable 
to give informed consent, could not communicate directly 
by telephone or were inpatients up to 30 days post-opera- 
tively. 
Consenting participants were given a form to take home 
which they were instructed to give to their general practi- 
tioners or district nurse should they have any problems 
with their wound. All 72 general practice surgeries in Tay- 
side were contacted and provided details of SSI case deﬁni- 
tions. They were instructed to post the form back to the 
hospital once complete. 
All patients were also telephoned by the research nurse 
ten, 20 and 30 days post-operatively in order to ascertain 
the state of the wound using a standard interview schedule. 
At each telephone interview, patients who identiﬁed prob- 
lems with their wound were told to ask their general prac- 
titioner or district nurse to complete the form they had been 
given on discharge and post it back to the hospital. Inde- 
pendently of this, all patients identifying problems with 
their wound, and 10% of those who did not, were visited 
by a trained research nurse following the telephone inter- 
view, in order to observe their wounds. 
The effectiveness of telephone surveil- 
Statistical methods. 
lance was investigated through tests of sensitivity, speciﬁc- 
ity, positive and negative predictive values. 
Results 
During the study period, 422 patients were admitted, all of 
whom were included in the ongoing acute stay surveillance 
programme in order to determine accurate inpatient rates. 
We excluded patients who did not meet the inclusion crite- 
ria. Of the 376 procedures which did satisfy the inclusion 
criteria, there were 175 knee replacements and 201 hip 
replacements, in 201 women and 165 men. The primary 
diagnoses for the procedures are given in Table I. 


Osteoarthritis 
Inﬂammatory joint disease 
Hip fracture 
Other 
Not recorded 
Total 
Hip 
replacements 
Knee 
replacements 

182 
 6 
 6 
 3 
 4 
201 
161 
 8 
 0 
 0 
 6 
175 
343 
 14 
 6 
 3 
 10 
376 
Table II. Telephone surveillance versus research nurse assessment of 
infection 





Research nurse 
No infection 
Infection 

72 
 1 
73 
2 
6 
8 
20 
 4 
24 
 94 
 11 
105 

The majority of cases (350) were unilateral. The mean 
 10.4). The majority of 
age was 67 years (30 to 91; 
patients (78.2%) had a Centre for Disease Control and Pre- 
vention (CDC) National Nosocomial Infections Surveil- 
 of 0 or 1. This index is based on three risk 
lance risk index 
factors (American Society of Anaesthesiologists score, 
wound class and duration of operation) and scored as 0, 1, 
2 or 3. The CDC’s experience is that the infection rate 
increases with an increasing risk score. 

The research nurse, regarded as the gold standard for the 
detection of infection, visited 105 of the 366 patients in 
order to assess their wounds. The inpatient infection rate 
was 3.1% (13 validated SSI of a total of 422 cases), and the 
post-discharge infection rate was 2.1% (eight validated SSI 
of the 376 cases included in the surveillance study). 
The numbers of patients categorised as infected or not 
infected in the telephone surveillance report and by the 
research nurse are shown in Table II. 
The effectiveness of telephone surveillance was calcu- 
lated ﬁrst when responses of ‘not sure’ from patients were 
recorded as ‘no infection’ and then when they were classi- 
ﬁed as infected (Table III). 
Of the 1026 telephone reports of no infection problems, 
90 were checked by the research nurse and one (1.1%) was 
found to have an infection. General practitioners pre- 
scribed antibiotics for 39 (11%) of the patients. Thirty-one 
of 83 community healthcare worker forms received 
recorded the presence of infection, three of which were val- 
idated. While the sensitivity and negative predictive value 
of community reporting of SSI are high (100% in both 
cases), the speciﬁcity and positive predictive value are low 
(7.4% and 19.4%, respectively). 
Discussion 
This is the ﬁrst study, to our knowledge to examine the 
validity of patient diagnosis of SSI post-discharge using the 
3 
CDC deﬁnitions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Table III. Telephone surveillance versus research nurse assessment of 
infection 


Positive predictive value‡ 
Negative predictive value§ 



0.5454 
(0.2801 to 0.7873) 
0.9787 
(0.9257 to 0.9941) 
0.75 
0.9485 
0.9091 
(0.6226 to 0.9838) 
0.7660 
(0.671 to 0.8401) 
0.3125 
0.9863 
* Probability the telephone report was positive given the wound was in- 
fected (true +ve) 
† Probability the telephone report was negative given the wound was not 
infected (true -ve) 
‡ Probability the wound was infected given a positive telephone report 
§ Probability the wound was not infected given a negative telephone 
report 

The Centre for Disease Control deﬁnition of surgical 
site infection; the telephone, nurse, and healthcare 
worker questionnaires, a ﬂowchart of the research method 
used in this study and a further opinion by Professor Sean 
Hughes are available with the electronic version of this arti- 
cle on our website at www.jbjs.org.uk. 
The authors acknowledge Mr Robert Hill, Health Protection Scotland for sup- 
port with the statistics in this paper. This project was supported by a grant from 
Eastern, the Eastern node of the Scottish School of Primary Care (NHS Tayside 
and NHS Fife). 





When responses of ‘not sure’ were classiﬁed as positive 
for infection in our study, the method could detect most 
infections (90.91%). The positive and negative predictive 
values (31.25% and 98.63%, respectively) were compara- 
 (28.7% and 
ble with the ﬁgures reported by Whitby et al 
98.2%). 

The categorisation of ‘not sure’ as negative for infection 
increased the speciﬁcity but decreased the sensitivity of the 
method. In addition, a positive result from this categorisa- 
tion was more likely to indicate the presence of infection 
and a negative result was less likely to do so. 
The number of patients who were unsure they had an 
infection was relatively small and, in the interests of obtain- 
ing an accurate measure of the infection rate, they should 
be included for follow-up. 
This study suggests that patients can reliably self-diag- 
nose SSI and that telephone screening of patients is a valid 
method for detecting infection. The speciﬁcity of the 
method could be maximised if it was used to screen-out 
patients with no SSI, allowing direct observation of those 
who say they have, or are unsure if they have, an infection. 
While community health workers identiﬁed all the infec- 
tions in patients they observed, the speciﬁcity of their 
assessment was poor. Although this study did not ﬁnd the 
use of community staff in this way a reliable and valid 
method for detecting SSI, collaborative work should aim to 
ﬁnd new approaches to enhance communication to 
improve surveillance after discharge. It may be useful to 
screen patients who believe that they have a wound prob- 
lem and those that are not sure, or to provide open access 
wound clinics. 
The infection rate after discharge was higher than the 
inpatient rate. Without post-discharge surveillance, eight 
infections would not have been detected. 
This study was carried out on an orthopaedic patient 
population from a single hospital and therefore the meth- 
odology needs to be repeated in differing settings and sur- 
gical patient populations to assess the applicability of the 
ﬁndings. Another limitation of our study is the small num- 
bers of patients included. 






acquired infection: public health laboratory service. London. 1999. 
3. Horan TC, Gaynes RP, Martone WJ, Jarvis WR, Emori TG. 
 CDC deﬁnitions of 
nosocomial surgical site infection: a modiﬁcation of CDC deﬁnitions of surgical 
wound infections. 







 A UK approach to post-discharge surveil- 
Hospital Infection Society Conference 

lance: exploring the decision making process. 
Book of Abstracts. 
 London. 2002. 
6. Glenister HM, Taylor LJ, Bartlett CLR, et al. 



 An evaluation of surveillance 
 1993;23:229-42. 
 The epidemiology of wound infection: a 10 year prospective 
 1980;60:27-40. 





J Hosp Infect 
9. Zoutman D, Pearce P, McKenzie M, Taylor G. 








J Hosp Infect 
11. Keeling NJ, Morgan MWE. 






12. Bailey IS, Karran SE, Toyn K, et al. 
 1992;304:469-70. 
BMJ 
13. Byrne DJ, Lynch W, Napier A, et al. 

inition and post-discharge surveillance. 
14. Ferraz EM, Ferraz AAB, Coelho HJ, et al. 

 Wound infection rates: the importance of def- 
 1994;26:37-43. 

 PDS for nosocomial wound infection: 
 1995;23:290-4. 


 Surgical site infec- 
tion: rates, etiology and resistance patterns to antimicrobials among strains isolated 
at Rio de Janeiro University. 





J Hosp Infect 
17. Condon RE, Schultz WJ, Malangoni MA, Anderson-Teschenda MJ. 






tive study of 20,193 wounds at the Mineapolis VA Medical Centre. 
199:253-9. 
 Surgical wound infections: a 5 year prospec- 
 1984; 


control programmes in preventing nosocomial infections in US hospitals. 
miol 
 1985;121:182-205. 
 The efﬁcacy of infection surveillance and 
Am J Epide- 
surgery on the same day as their hospital admission. 
1998;19:17-22. 
 Surgical-site infection rates in patients who undergo elective 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
20. Manian FA, Meyer L. 













24. Whitby M, McLaws M-L, Collopy B, et al. 
patients reliably diagnose wound infections? 
 Post-discharge surveillance: can 
 2002;55:155-60. 


 Surgical wound infection rates by wound class, 
operative procedures and patient risk index: national Nosocomial Infections Surveil- 
lance System. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
