

Telephone call contact for post-discharge 
surveillance of surgical site infections. A pilot, 
methodological studyq 
E.W. Taylora,*, K. Duffyb, K. Leec, A. Nooned, A. Leanorde, P.M. Kingf, 
P. O’Dwyerb 
aInverclyde Royal Hospital, Greenock PA16 0XN, UK 
bWestern Inﬁrmary, Glasgow, UK 
cScottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health, Glasgow, UK 
dSCIEH, Glasgow, UK 
eMonklands Hospital, Airdrie, Lanarkshire, UK 
fAberdeen Royal Inﬁrmary, UK 

Summary Accurate determination of superﬁcial surgical-site infection (SSI) requires 
post-discharge surveillance (PDS) for up to 30 days. To be useful for regional or 
national audit the method must be effective, inexpensive, and acceptable to patients. 
We assessed the role of telephone calls to patients in PDS of SSI in 3150 patients in 32 
Scottish hospitals undergoing groin hernia repair during one year. Overall, 104 (3.3%) 
patients opted out of the audit by declining to give a contact telephone number, 96 
(3.0%) could not provide a personal telephone contact number, and 12 could not be 
contacted, a compliance rate of 93.3%. Two thousand, nine hundred and thirty-eight 
patients were contacted at one or all of the call points, i.e. 10, 20, or 30 days 
postoperatively, from a single call centre by medical records clerks, working to a 
piloted protocol. Contact data, including contact at all three time points are available 
on 2665 (84.6%) patients. All patients who believed their wound to be infected were 
seen by a healthcare worker (HCW) to conﬁrm or refute the diagnosis. Of the 2665 
patients in whom complete data are available, 140 (5.3%) patients developed 
conﬁrmed wound infection and a further 57 (2.1%) thought their wound was infected, 
but this was not conﬁrmed by the HCW. Patients appeared to welcome the concept of 
telephone contact. Methods for identifying all patients eligible for surveillance need to 
be improved. However, we believe this method of patient contact could be 
appropriate for PDS in regional or national audit. 
Q 2003 The Hospital Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights 
reserved. 
q This work was undertaken at the Western Inﬁrmary, Glasgow 
and at hospitals throughout Scotland. 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: eric.taylor@irh.scot.nhs.uk 

Infection remains a common complication after 
most forms of surgery. In ‘clean’ operations no 
0195-6701/03/$ - see front matter Q 2003 The Hospital Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 
doi:10.1016/S0195-6701(03)00217-2 
KEYWORDS 
Telephone calls; Post- 
discharge surveillance; 
Postoperative infection; 
Hernia repair 


bacterially colonized tract of the body is opened 
and any postoperative wound infection might be 
seen as a reﬂection of the environmental conditions 
in which the operation was performed, or as an 
indicator of surgical technique and expertise. The 
incidence of postoperative, ‘clean’ wound infection 
could, therefore, be advocated as an indicator of 
hospital performance and a possible form of 
assessment for clinical governance. 
The incidence of surgical-site infection (SSI) 
recorded in the course of audit depends on the 
deﬁnition of SSI adopted, on the intensity of 
surveillance, and on the prevalence of risk factors 
for SSI in the patient group being audited. The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
deﬁnitions of infection1 have been developed and 
validated over the past 20 years and are the 
deﬁnitions most commonly used for diagnosis of 
SSI in audit and research worldwide. In addition 
other work has shown that most postoperative, 
superﬁcial SSIs present within 30 days of oper- 
ation,2 and this has become the accepted period of 
surveillance for SSI after operations that do not 
involve prosthetic implantation. With the increas- 
ing trend towards day-care or short-stay hospital- 
ization for many clean wound operations, 
surveillance of the patient in the community, 
post-discharge surveillance (PDS), is an important 
part of the audit of postoperative complications.3 
To determine the incidence of infection accurately, 
all patients undergoing the procedure must be 
surveyed for the same duration and using the 
same deﬁnition of infection. 
There is no international consensus on the 
optimal method of PDS. Many approaches have 
been reported including patient review by a 
healthcare worker (HCW) at follow-up clinics or by 
questionnaire, contacting patients by questionnaire 
or by telephone. These methods are the subject of a 
systematic critical analysis by Bruce et al.4 who 
report a range in the effectiveness of follow-up 
from 30% to over 90% (Table I). The comparative 
costs of these methods is not reported. 

is also 
problematical. Different deﬁnitions of infection 
have been applied and the validity of the diagnosis 
of wound infection during PDS is not often 
reported.5 In some studies the diagnosis has been 
made by a HCW and in the others the diagnosis has 
been made by the patient. The ability of the patient 
to diagnose infection accurately has been shown, in 
a number of studies, to be poor.6,7 However there is 
some evidence to suggest that the patient is much 
more accurate in determining when their wound is 
not infected.5,6 

after the patient has been discharged from hospital 
would be repeated, frequent review of patients by a 
trained HCW.7,8 This approach is likely to be too 
labour intensive and expensive for a national audit 
after operations where a low incidence of SSI is 
anticipated. 
Currently 93% of households have a land-line 
telephone and 73% of the adult population now own 
a mobile telephone (Annual Market Information 
1996/7 to 2000/1. Dec 2001. www.oftel.gov.uk, 
Chapter 4). We have undertaken a study to assess 
the feasibility and effectiveness of telephone 
interviews to screen patients for the presence of 
SSI after discharge following a ‘clean’ procedure, a 
groin hernia repair. Groin hernias were considered 
suitable for this pilot methodological study as they 
are day-case or short-stay operations, and this work 
would be a follow-on to the Scottish Hernia Audit,9 
in which all complications after groin hernia repair 
had been audited by a group based in the Western 
Inﬁrmary, Glasgow, and which had suggested the 
incidence of infection was 8%. 


Patients undergoing groin hernia repair in mainland 
Scottish hospitals between October 2000 and 
September 2001 were included in the audit. All 
surgeons involved gave permission for data on their 
patients to be utilized in this audit. In view of the 
fact that this was an audit of SSI, and no new form 
of treatment was being investigated, Ethics Com- 
mittee approval was not considered necessary. 
Table I Methods of post-discharge surveillance (adapted 
from Bruce et al.4) 

Range of response rates 
(%) 


by medical, nursing or 
infection control staff 
Postal questionnaire to patients 
HCWs/surgeon 
Diary cards 
Telephone contact with patients, 
30–79 
50–79 
54–65 
38–92 




The audit centre 
A study co-ordinating centre was established at the 
Western Inﬁrmary in Glasgow. Three staff based at 
the centre coordinated the study, being responsible 
for liaison with hospitals, for patient recruitment 
data entry, making telephone calls to patients, 
arranging for HCWs to inspect suspect wounds, 
collecting additional data from case notes, and 
entering all the study data on to the database. In 
addition, the project co-ordinator visited each 
participating hospital to collect data on risk factors 
for infection, duration of operation, etc. 
Recruitment of patients 
On admission to the hospital, local medical records 
staff were asked to give each patient undergoing 
groin hernia repair a written explanation of the 
study, an invitation to take part and a questionnaire 
to complete which would indicate their home, work 
and/or mobile telephone numbers. If a patient 
declined to take part, by not giving contact 
telephone numbers, this was documented. The 
completed questionnaires were transmitted elec- 
tronically to the audit centre established at the 
Western Inﬁrmary, Glasgow, and entered onto the 
study database. 
Telephone calls to patients 
The study database was programmed to alert centre 
staff to contact the patients at 10, 20 and 30 days 
after operation to ascertain whether they thought 
they had a wound infection and to ask about their 
symptoms. The questions asked at each telephone 
contact are given in Table II. The questions asked 
were intended to detect superﬁcial SSIs only, not 
deep or organ/space infections. 
All follow-up telephone calls were made by one 
of three members of staff, who had received 

training in the use of a standardized, piloted 
telephone questionnaire and were made at a time 
that the patient had previously indicated would be 
convenient. The audit centre staff worked ﬂexibly 
to permit a wide range of call times. 
Conﬁrmation of the diagnosis of SSI by a HCW 
Patients who reported a wound problem during a 
telephone interview were referred to a HCW who 
assessed whether the wound was infected and 
instituted treatment if necessary. It was logistically 
difﬁcult to arrange training in SSI diagnosis against 
the deﬁnition for all HCWs in this national study, 
but the deﬁnition was sent to the HCW every time 
an assessment was requested and staff were asked 
to make the assessment against this diagnosis. 
Arrangements were made for the patient to be seen 
as soon as possible, either in primary care or at the 
hospital where the operation was performed. A 
‘Details of Infection’ form was faxed to the HCW 
who was to see the patient for completion. 
Diagnosis of infection was made according to the 
CDC deﬁnition of superﬁcial SSI1 and a copy of this 
deﬁnition was included with the ‘Details of Infec- 
tion’ form for use by the HCW making the diagnosis. 
The HCW was asked to complete the form and to 
take a microbiological wound culture swab if this 
was appropriate. The completed form was trans- 
mitted back to the audit centre for entry onto the 
study database. 
Costing of telephone calls 
The duration of all calls where this was recorded 
was summed and this was costed at British Tele- 
com’s call per minute rate at peak time 
(£0.08/min). Faxes were costed at £0.08 each. 

The audit was conducted from 1 October 2000 to 30 
September 2001. Details of 3150 patients were 
received by the audit centre, of whom 104 (3.3%) 
declined to give contact details. Twenty-ﬁve (24%) 
of these patients were in one hospital. Overall, 
2938 patients were contacted by telephone at one 
or more of the contact time points during the study, 
giving a response rate of 93.3%. Complete follow-up 
data, with contact at 10, 20 and 30 days, as well as 
the data required from the operation notes, were 
available on 2665 patients. The remaining 381 were 
excluded because the patient was not contactable 
by telephone on one or more of the three contact 
dates (N ¼ 116); only the general practitioner’s 
(GP) contact telephone number was given ðN ¼ 96Þ, 

Do you think you have developed a wound infection? 
How many days ago did you ﬁrst notice any signs of infection? 
Is the area around the wound red and inﬂamed? 
Is the wound swollen or painful? 
Do you have any ﬂuid leaking from your wound? 
If YES, is it: (a) clear? (b) pus/cloudy yellow? (c) pink, red or 
blood? 
Is the wound gaping open? 
Do you have a temperature? 
Has anyone seen the wound, e.g. district nurse or GP? If YES, 
who? 
Has a wound swab been taken? 
Are you taking any antibiotics for a wound infection? If YES, 
give name(s) 


the HCW record was missing ðN ¼ 6Þ; and required 
data from operation notes were missing ðN ¼ 163Þ 
(Figure 1). 
Up to four attempts were made to contact each 
patient at each time point. A total of 104 patients 
could not be contacted at one or more of the three 
call points. In addition, 12 patients were not 
contacted at any point. The number of calls made 
was 11 502, with a median of one call to each 
patient at each time point. Three quarters of all 
calls (8787/11502) resulted in successful data 
collection. The duration of the call was recorded 
for 83% of these calls, which averaged about 1 min 
(range 1 – 23 min). Calls were made between 05.58 
and 21.15 h, with the majority (91%) being made 
during ‘peak time’ (08.00 to 18.00). 

Of the 2665 patients for whom complete data are 
available, 197 (7.4%) reported that they thought 
they had a wound infection. SSI was conﬁrmed by 
the HCW in 140 (71%) of these patients; 59 (42%) 
presented between 0 and 10 days, 55 (39%) between 
11 and 20 days, and 26 (19%) between 21 and 30 
days. The overall conﬁrmed incidence of infection 
was 5.3%. Further details of the results from this 
audit and the inﬂuence of the risk factors for 
infection will be published elsewhere. 
The majority (80%) of patients who suspected 
that they had a SSI were seen in general practice by 
a GP or by a nurse, and an infection was conﬁrmed 
in 77% (121/158). Surgical ward staff conﬁrmed the 
presence of a SSI in 47% (14/30) of patients seen by 
them. Other hospital-based HCWs, including acci- 
dent and emergency doctors and nurses, and an 
audit nurse, reviewed the remainder of patients, 
diagnosing infection in 67% (5/9). 



Audit Group (CRAG) of the Scottish Executive. The 
costs additional to routine clinical practice were as 
follows: computer programming and data analysis 
£10 000; telephone calls/faxes £959; project co- 
ordinator and medical records staff salaries 
£62 942; travel expenses £6327; supplies £2960; 
total £83 188. No charge was made for the facilities 
used in which to conduct the audit. 
The cost of a hospital consultant outpatient 
consultation is currently £63, and £19 for a GP 
consultation (NHS Executive ‘The New NHS—Refer- 
ence Costs 2001’. www.doh.gov.uk/nhsexec/ 
refcosts.htm). Thirty patients were seen for review 
in hospital, at a cost of up to £1890, and the other 
167 patients seen in primary care at a cost of up to 
£3173. Therefore the total cost for this audit is 
£88 251, which is £28.97 for each of the 3146 
patients participating. 

In an era of clinical governance, it is increasingly 
important that surgeons and hospital management 
are aware of the incidence of healthcare-associ- 
ated infection and other complications of hospital 
care, and are thus able to take steps to minimize 
these complications. However, with the diminishing 
duration of postoperative inpatient stay and the 
increasing trend towards day-care or short-stay 
surgery, the incidence of infection after operation 
becomes difﬁcult to determine. There is, as yet, no 
agreement on the optimal method of PDS. In an 
article in 1999 entitled ‘Guidelines for the preven- 
tion of surgical site infection’ Mangram et al. state 
‘At this time, no consensus exists on which post- 
discharge surveillance methods are the most 
sensitive, speciﬁc, and practical’.10 Monitoring for 
SSI after the patient has left hospital presents two 
challenges, ﬁrst to follow-up all eligible patients, 
and second to diagnose wound infection accurately 
in these patients. 
In view of the wide availability of telephone 
communications in the UK, we believed this method 
of contacting patients to screen for the presence of 
SSI should be reassessed. The study has demon- 
strated that this method of contact is both feasible 
and effective. Only 3.3% of patients declined to give 
a contact telephone number, and one quarter of 
these were in one hospital, which may reﬂect the 
approach or enthusiasm of the staff member making 
the request at that hospital. Ninety-three percent 
of those who agreed to take part could be 
contacted by telephone. This compares very 
favourably with other methods of PDS (Table I).4 


Most patients were happy to be contacted about the 
state of their wound, and the average duration of a 
successful call was very short at 1 min. The 
increasing prevalence and availability of mobile 
telephones makes contacting patients much easier, 
particularly in those age groups and in those areas 
of the country where there is a high level of 
workforce mobility. If this method were to be used 
in areas of the country where English is not the ﬁrst 
language of a proportion of the population appro- 
priate arrangements would need to be considered. 
Weigelt et al.2 have demonstrated that 96% of all 
superﬁcial wound infections are evident by the 28th 
postoperative day and 30 days has become the 
accepted duration of follow-up for SSIs where there 
is no prosthetic implant. We attempted to contact 
all patients at 10, 20 and 30 days postoperatively, as 
it was not clear when in this period the infection 
usually presents and whether all three contacts are 
necessary. We found that patients presented with 
conﬁrmed infection throughout the 30-day surveil- 
lance period. A single call at 30 days would not be a 
satisfactory method of audit, as diagnosis will 
depend on the patient’s recall of the presence of 
signs and symptoms of infection. Further, if only a 
single call were to be made at 30 days, the presence 
of infection could not always be conﬁrmed by a 
HCW. 
The method we have studied is suitable for the 
diagnosis of superﬁcial wound infection but we 
found that only 140 (71.2%) of the 197 patients 
reporting problems were correctly diagnosed as 
infection by the patient. This ﬁgure is consistent 
with the results of other studies.5,6 Deep SSIs and 
infections associated with implants usually result in 
contact with a HCW and/or readmission to hospital. 
Other methods of ascertainment, for example 
through linkage of inpatient records, may need to 
be used in the surveillance of these more severe 
postoperative infections. 

studies have demonstrated that 
patients accurately diagnose the absence of a 
wound complication,5,6 but are less accurate in 
diagnosing the presence of infection. Screening for 
wound infection through telephone calls to patients 
identiﬁed the small proportion (197 or 7% of 2665) 
who needed to be seen by a HCW to conﬁrm or 
refute the patient’s diagnosis of SSI. The HCW was 
provided with a copy of the CDC deﬁnitions of 
superﬁcial SSI each time a patient was referred for 
examination of a suspect wound and was asked to 
report whether a wound infection was present 
according to that deﬁnition. The majority of 
patients had their wounds assessed in primary 
care. However a large number of different HCWs 
were involved in diagnosis, and there was a marked 
difference in the proportion of infections conﬁrmed 
in hospital and in general practice. It was not 
possible to validate the accuracy of the diagnoses 
that were made by these HCWs. In any future study 
it would be essential to ensure that all HCWs 
undertaking diagnosis of SSI are trained in diagnos- 
ing infection according to the CDC deﬁnition, and 
for quality checks to be undertaken to ensure that 
wound infections are being accurately diagnosed. 
We were unable to ensure that all patients 
undergoing groin hernia repair were invited to 
participate in this study and, from the previous 
Scottish Hernia Audit,9 we are aware that the total 
number of patients undergoing groin hernia repair 
in Scottish hospitals each year is in the region of 
5500. Therefore we estimate that this audit is based 
on 55– 60% of the total eligible population, but have 
no reason to believe that failure to invite patients 
to participate in this prospective audit was other 
than on a random basis. 
It was not possible to establish an efﬁcient or 
consistent method of identiﬁcation of all eligible 
patients and we had to rely on a variety of local 
arrangements. This approach relied on the good will 
of various members of staff and on their availability 
and memory rather than on established procedures. 
If national audit is to be undertaken by this method 
in the future, efﬁcient recruitment of patients can 
only take place if data are available that enable the 
identiﬁcation of the eligible patient group, and 
robust organization ensures recruitment of all 
eligible patients. Obtaining telephone contact 
details needs to be done in accordance with 
guidance on the conﬁdentiality of patient 
information. 
We believe this method of audit of SSI is feasible 
and ﬁnancially viable. This audit has cost less than 
£30 per head, whereas to have patients reviewed in 
primary care or in hospital at the same intervals 
would have been greatly more expensive and, we 
believe, less acceptable to the patient. We have 
used a telephone call centre concept with clerical 
staff contacting the patients, working to a piloted 
protocol and have only reviewed, physically, those 
patients where there appeared to be a wound 
complication. A dedicated call centre has a number 
of beneﬁts, which include standardizing the con- 
tent and tone of the telephone contact. It also 
permits ﬂexible, out-of-hours working, which 
improves the likelihood of successful contact with 
the patient. 
Collection of appropriate data for audit should 
become part of the admission routine of the 
patient. Linkage and integration of operating 
theatre data to hospital admission and discharge 
data, and to laboratory data is essential before 


meaningful audit can be conducted on a national 
basis using standardized data collection sets. 
Previous studies have indicated a wide variation in 
the effectiveness of telephone call contact to 
identify possible postoperative infection. This 
study has demonstrated that using a dedicated 
call centre in an era of wide telephone availability, 
contact can be made with a high proportion of 
patients by this method and is acceptable to the 
majority of patients. It has permitted the identiﬁ- 
cation of the small proportion of patients who need 
to be seen by a HCW to document the presence of 
infection. We would commend this method of 
patient contact for audit as a model for the future, 
indeed the call centre concept could be broadened 
to include audit of other medical and surgical 
outcomes. 

The audit was supported by funding from the 
Clinical Research and Audit Group (CRAG) of the 
Scottish Executive. 


deﬁnitions of nosocomial surgical site infections, 1992: a 
modiﬁcation of CDC deﬁnitions of surgical wound infection. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:606—608. 
2. Weigelt JA, Dryer D, Haley RW. The necessity and efﬁciency 
of wound surveillance after discharge. Arch Surg 1992;127: 
77—82. 
3. Mishriki SF, Law DJ, Jeffery PJ. Factors affecting the 
incidence of postoperative wound infection. J Hosp Infect 
1990;16:223—230. 
4. Bruce J, Russell EM, Mollison J, Krukowski ZH. The 
measurement and monitoring of surgical adverse events. 
Health Technology Assessment, Vol 5.; 2001. Number 22 
p. 29—53. 
5. Barratt E, Fuller A, Hollyoak V. An evaluation of post 
discharge surveillance methods for surgical site infection: 
Phase II. 2000. PHLS CDSC. Northern and Yorkshire. 
6. Whitby M, McLaws M-L, Collopy B, et al. Post-discharge 
surveillance: can patients reliably diagnose surgical wound 
infections? J Hosp Infect 2002;52:155—160. 
7. Reilly JS, Baird D, Hill R. The importance of deﬁnitions and 
methods in surgical wound infection audit. J Hosp Infect 
2001;47:64—66. 
8. Bailey IS, Karran SE, Toyn K, Brough P, Ranaboldo C, Karran 
SJ. Community surveillance of complications after hernia 
surgery. BMJ 1992;304:469—471. 


10. Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, The Hospital Infection 
Control Practices Advisory Committee, et al. Guidelines for 
prevention of surgical site infection. Am J Infect Control 
1999;27:97—132. 
