S74
8th Congress of the EUGMS / European Geriatric Medicine 3S (2012) S33–S143
P137
An unusual cause of acute delirium in a
septogenarian with Alzheimer’s dementia
D. Ní Chróinín a,∗, J. Doyle b, Mitchell b, P. Mallon b, G. Sheehan b,
J. Lambert b
a Department Of Medicine For The Older Person, Mater Misericordiae
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
b Department Of Infectious Diseases, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Introduction.– Case.– A 73 year old man presented acutely with a
two-week history of increased confusion, on a background (proba-
ble) Alzheimer’s dementia. Initial workup was unremarkable bar a
mild leucopenia. This prompted further investigation for the cause
of his delirium, included HIV serology. HIV antibody and antigen
tests were positive. Additional testing indicated early infection
with associated seroconversion. HIV RNA level (viral load) was
extremely high (> 10 million copies/ml), and cerebrospinal ﬂuid
protein was elevated. These parameters improved spontaneously
(prior to initiation of anti-retroviral therapy), as did the patient’s
clinical condition.
Text.– HIV may be associated with acute confusion through a variety
of mechanisms. Both acute encephalopathy and aseptic meningitis
have been described in the context of HIV seroconversion. Addition-
ally, patients with HIV may develop chronic cognitive impairment,
on a spectrum from mild cognitive and motor deﬁcits to HIV-
associated dementia [3]. Such patients are likely to be vulnerable
to delirium, similar to persons with cognitive impairment of other
aetiologies. This is the ﬁrst case report of a patient with pre-existing
degenerative dementia, presenting with a superimposed delirium
secondary to acute HIV infection. An index of suspicion should
be maintained in any patient presenting with delirium. In Ireland,
10.3% of new diagnoses of HIV were in persons aged 50 years old,
and 1.5% in patients aged 65 (2010 data). Underlying cognitive
impairment may make patients vulnerable to risk behaviours for
HIV acquisition, due to poor understanding and impaired judgment.
The management of such patients may be challenging due to issues
regarding adherence and behaviour modiﬁcation.
Disclosure.– No signiﬁcant relationships.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eurger.2012.07.138
P138
A liberal blood transfusion strategy after hip
fracture surgery does not increase the risk of
infection in frail elderly
M. Gregersen a,∗, L.C. Borris b, E.M. Damsgaard a
a Department Of Geriatrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus C,
Denmark
b Department Of Orthopaedics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus C,
Denmark
Introduction.– Postoperative anaemia is common in frail elderly
hip fracture patients. Blood transfusion down regulates immune
responses. Numerous studies suggest that transfusions slightly
increase the risk of infections. Our aim is to assess whether a lib-
eral postoperative blood transfusion strategy increases the risk of
infection.
Text.– Patients and methods.– One hundred and eighty-ﬁve hip frac-
ture patients with postoperative anaemia aged 65 or older admitted
from nursing home or senior housing for surgery were enrolled.
The patients were randomized to two different blood transfusion
strategies, a liberal and a restrictive. In the liberal strategy, transfu-
sions were given when the hemoglobin level was less than 7 mmol/l
(11.3 g/dl). In the restrictive strategy, transfusions were given at
hemoglobin levels below 6 mmol/l (9.7 g/dl). During the ﬁrst 30
postoperative days, C-reactive proteins (CRP), and leucocytes were
determined weekly, and time to ﬁrst treatment-requiring infection
indicated by a positive urine culture or suspected infection.
Results.– The likelihood ratio test (LRT) of the repeated measure-
ments of CRP showed no difference in the logarithm transformed
CRP-values (P = 0.85) in the two groups. LRT of the repeated mea-
surements of leucocytes showed no difference in the logarithm
transformed leucocytes (P = 0.55). In a Cox regression model, time
to ﬁrst infection after surgery was similar in the two groups (Hazard
Ratio 0.81 [95% conﬁdence interval: 0.58; 1.14]).
Conclusion.– A liberal strategy of blood transfusion does not
increase the risk of infection after hip fracture in the frail elderly
compared to a restrictive transfusion strategy.
Disclosure.– No signiﬁcant relationships.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eurger.2012.07.139
P139
Chronic abdominal pain and eosinophilia, an
intriguing diagnosis
J. Meeuwissen
General Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases And Geriatric
Medicine, Ziekenhuis Oost Limburg, Genk, Belgium
Introduction.– Chronic abdominal pain is a difﬁcult clinical prob-
lem we see frequently. Differential diagnosis is often broad and
complex. Parasitic infections are rare.
Text.– A 61-year-old ex-miner was admitted to our hospital because
of worsening right-sided paralysis several months after an ischemic
stroke. Besides, he complained of abdominal pain, diarrhea and
ﬂatulence since many years. This patient has a history of benign
prostatic hypertrophy and arterial hypertension. Laboratory tests
showed remarkable eosinophilia that was already present for
many years. A chest-X-ray was unremarkable. A stool sample was
collected and was positive for Strongyloides stercoralis. We also per-
formed an ileocolonoscopy with biopsies. Microscopic evaluation
showed numerous eosinophils in the lamina propria. Albendazole
400 mg once daily for 7 days was initiated and after this treat-
ment the patient was relieved of abdominal discomfort and other
complaints.
S. stercoralis is a rare parasitic infection. The diagnosis is often
delayed because of non-speciﬁc complaints. Early diagnosis relies
on a high index of suspicion. Important clues are travel/residency
in an endemic region, eosinophilia and immunosuppresive condi-
tions. Initiation of adequate therapy can lead to complete resolution
in uncomplicated cases.
Disclosure.– No signiﬁcant relationships.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eurger.2012.07.140
P140
Fever of unknown origin among elderly
J. Meeuwissen
General Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases And Geriatric
Medicine, Ziekenhuis Oost Limburg, Genk, Belgium
Introduction.– Fever of unknown origin (FUO) is a challenge. A pre-
cise diagnosis can be made in 87 to 95% of cases. The most common
causes of FUO among the elderly are infections. A foreign origin or
travel can widen the differential diagnosis.
Text.– A 76-year-old man of Moroccan origin was admitted to our
hospital. He had a persistent fever greater than 38. 5 ◦C since the
beginning of his stay in Morocco for 3 months. Apart of the fever, he
lost over 15 kg of weight. He complains of interscapular and lumbar
back pain. The clinical investigation conﬁrmed fever of greater than
38.5 ◦C and local tenderness to gentle spinal percussion in the areas
D5-D6 and L2- L3. Laboratory tests show an elevation in the ery-
throcyte sedimentation rate (80 mm/h) and the C-reactive protein
(2.8 mg/dl). We performed a PET-CT and MRI of the spine. This con-
ﬁrmed the diagnosis of spondylodiscitis at the level of D5-D6 and

