JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Original Paper
The Use of a Smartphone App and an Activity Tracker to Promote
Physical Activity in the Management of Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease: Randomized Controlled Feasibility Study
Claire L Bentley1, BSc, MPH; Lauren Powell2, BSc, MSc; Stephen Potter1, BSc, MSc, PhD; Jack Parker3, BSc, PhD;
Gail A Mountain1, DipCOT, MPhil, PhD; Yvonne Kiera Bartlett4, BSc, MSc, PhD; Jochen Farwer5, PhD; Cath
O'Connor6, BSc, MSc; Jennifer Burns1, BSc, PG Dip; Rachel L Cresswell1, BSc, MSc; Heather D Dunn1, BSc, MSc;
Mark S Hawley1, BSc, PhD
1School of Health and Related Research, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom
2School of Education, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom
3School of Human Sciences, The University of Derby, Derby, United Kingdom
4Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
5Library, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
6Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Integrated Community Care Team, Sheffield, United Kingdom
Corresponding Author:
Mark S Hawley, BSc, PhD
School of Health and Related Research
The University of Sheffield
Regent Court
30 Regent Street
Sheffield, S1 4DA
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 114 222 1726
Email: mark.hawley@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is highly prevalent and significantly affects the daily functioning
of patients. Self-management strategies, including increasing physical activity, can help people with COPD have better health
and a better quality of life. Digital mobile health (mHealth) techniques have the potential to aid the delivery of self-management
interventions for COPD. We developed an mHealth intervention (Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and
Telehealth technologies-COPD [SMART-COPD]), delivered via a smartphone app and an activity tracker, to help people with
COPD maintain (or increase) physical activity after undertaking pulmonary rehabilitation (PR).
Objective: This study aimed to determine the feasibility and acceptability of using the SMART-COPD intervention for the
self-management of physical activity and to explore the feasibility of conducting a future randomized controlled trial (RCT) to
investigate its effectiveness.
Methods: We conducted a randomized feasibility study. A total of 30 participants with COPD were randomly allocated to
receive the SMART-COPD intervention (n=19) or control (n=11). Participants used SMART-COPD throughout PR and for 8
weeks afterward (ie, maintenance) to set physical activity goals and monitor their progress. Questionnaire-based and physical
activity–based outcome measures were taken at baseline, the end of PR, and the end of maintenance. Participants, and health care
professionals involved in PR delivery, were interviewed about their experiences with the technology.
Results: Overall, 47% (14/30) of participants withdrew from the study. Difficulty in using the technology was a common reason
for withdrawal. Participants who completed the study had better baseline health and more prior experience with digital technology,
compared with participants who withdrew. Participants who completed the study were generally positive about the technology
and found it easy to use. Some participants felt their health had benefitted from using the technology and that it assisted them in
achieving physical activity goals. Activity tracking and self-reporting were both found to be problematic as outcome measures
of physical activity for this study. There was dissatisfaction among some control group members regarding their allocation.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 1
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Conclusions: mHealth shows promise in helping people with COPD self-manage their physical activity levels. mHealth
interventions for COPD self-management may be more acceptable to people with prior experience of using digital technology
and may be more beneficial if used at an earlier stage of COPD. Simplicity and usability were more important for engagement
with the SMART-COPD intervention than personalization; therefore, the intervention should be simplified for future use. Future
evaluation will require consideration of individual factors and their effect on mHealth efficacy and use; within-subject comparison
of step count values; and an opportunity for control group participants to use the intervention if an RCT were to be carried out.
Sample size calculations for a future evaluation would need to consider the high dropout rates.
(JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(6):e16203) doi: 10.2196/16203
KEYWORDS
mobile health; mHealth; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; feasibility; physical activity; activity tracker; Fitbit;
self-management; health behavior change; pulmonary rehabilitation
of the condition and how to manage them (eg, breathlessness),
Introduction
and strategies for improving daily functioning [4,5,14]. PR has
demonstrated a number of benefits for people with COPD,
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
including improved exercise capacity, alleviation of symptoms,
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the
reduced number and severity of exacerbations, reduced
most prevalent chronic conditions (CCs), and one of the leading
depression, and improved quality of life and sense of control
causes of death and disability, in the United Kingdom [1] and
[15]. In addition, PR has been demonstrated as cost-effective
worldwide [2]. COPD is characterized by progressive and
in the UK context [5]. However, long-term maintenance of
nonreversible narrowing or inflammation of the airways or
increased physical activity and self-management behaviors after
alveoli in the lungs [3,4]. People with COPD experience
PR completion is a significant challenge [16,17].
symptoms such as breathlessness, frequent chest infections,
reduced ability to exercise, and impaired day-to-day functioning Health Behavior Change
[5-7]. COPD and its treatment cost the UK’s National Health It is advantageous to design health behavior change interventions
Service (NHS) approximately 800 million pounds annually that are underpinned by behavior change theories or models,
[3,5]. eg, the Behavior Change Wheel (BCW) [18]. Within the BCW
model, intervention functions and policy categories are arranged
Self-Management
around a central hub that outlines three different sources for
Even with appropriate medical care, people with COPD
health-related behaviors: opportunity, capability, and motivation.
experience symptoms and functional challenges on a daily basis,
By providing education, training, persuasion, and environmental
and therefore, they must engage in long-term self-management
restructuring and enablement, PR can increase the social and
to maintain their physical, social, and psychological health [8,9].
physical opportunity for patients with COPD to engage in
Teaching people with CCs to self-manage their health has
self-management, increase the physical and psychological
become an important strategy for alleviating symptom burden
capability of patients to engage in self-management, and help
and improving quality of life and is advocated within the NHS
patients feel motivated to carry out self-management behaviors.
as a method of empowering people to take control of their health
[10]. Participation in self-management activities requires The potential for digital technology to help people with COPD
changes to personal health behaviors by the individual with to self-manage their condition is increasingly being investigated
COPD. For example, COPD is associated with low physical [19,20] and advocated in the NHS [10,21]. Bartlett et al [22]
activity levels [11]—higher levels of physical activity in the demonstrated that people with COPD find support with a
management of COPD are associated with a lower risk of primary task, and dialog support (eg, through feedback), to be
hospital admission, a lower risk of COPD-related and all-cause persuasive technological strategies to help increase their levels
mortality, and a higher health-related quality of life compared of physical activity. Therefore, a technological intervention for
with those with lower activity levels [12,13]. self-management that incorporates these elements could increase
an individual’s capability, opportunity, and motivation to carry
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
out that behavior (eg, motivation through encouraging feedback).
Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is an intervention that aims to
Mobile Health
foster self-management among people with COPD in the United
Kingdom. It is a group-based program that takes place over a Although the exact definition is disputed, mobile health
minimum of 6 weeks and aims to teach people with COPD (and (mHealth) broadly refers to medical or health care interventions
other lung conditions) to self-manage their condition [5,14]. delivered through mobile technology (eg, smartphones) [23].
UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 2018 Digital technologies such as mHealth offer several advantages
guidelines [14] stipulate that the service should be available over more traditional forms of care, including low up-front cost
nationally for all people with COPD who have recently been [24]; familiarity and convenience for patients [21]; better access
hospitalized with the condition or who are functionally restricted to information [24]; improved communication between patients
by the condition. The program includes physical exercise of the and health care professionals (HCPs) [21,24,25]; provision of
upper and lower extremities, education about different aspects real-time feedback to patients [24]; and allowing patients to
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 2
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
monitor their own data [24,25]—all of which potentially increase activity, the importance of HCP support in the path to
health service efficiency and reduce costs [21,25]. Although self-management was also emphasized. Therefore, the
mHealth tools represent a promising means to encourage greater intervention was incorporated within the PR program, with the
self-management of COPD, findings from a systematic review aim of encouraging individuals to maintain increased levels of
in this field were inconclusive owing to a high risk of bias in physical activity after completing PR. In accordance with the
the included studies, thus indicating the need for more research BCW approach, the app provides motivation to self-manage
[19]. Digital health interventions should be evidence based, physical activity through personalized feedback along with PR
person based, and robustly evaluated, with considerations given and provides the capability and opportunity to continue
to future implementation of the intervention at an early stage self-managing physical activity after PR. The development of
of its development [20]. the mHealth intervention is summarized in a short YouTube
video [28].
Intervention Development
Feasibility and Acceptability
We developed an mHealth-based self-management intervention
for COPD. According to the Technology Acceptance Model, Feasibility studies are carried out before large-scale studies
the perceived usefulness of a technological intervention directly (such as randomized controlled trials, RCTs) with the aim of
affects an individual’s intention to use the technology in question establishing whether an intervention can be used and, if so, how
[26]. Therefore, we carried out a large amount of exploratory it should be used [29]. The feasibility stage includes testing the
work with the intended users and stakeholders of the technology. intervention for its acceptability, estimating likely recruitment
Qualitative semistructured interviews were conducted with rates and retention of participants, and testing out design
people with COPD (n=15), their family members (n=5), and elements of a larger study [30]. A mixture of quantitative and
HCPs who work in PR services (n=7). During the interviews, qualitative methods is likely needed to establish feasibility [30].
we explored participants’ experiences of COPD
An important element of the feasibility of carrying out a larger
self-management, their priorities for self-management, and their
study is the acceptability of the intervention itself. In this study,
views on using digital technology to aid self-management. We
we assessed the acceptability of the intervention using a
also showed participants examples of ways in which digital
combination of both qualitative (eg, interview data) and
technology could enhance capability, opportunity, and
quantitative (eg, usage data collected by the intervention) data.
motivation [18] for self-management of COPD, eg, through
Assessment of acceptability included attitude toward the
goal setting and automatic monitoring of goals, demonstrating
intervention; burden of the technology; perceived effectiveness
different types of devices and their functions, etc. The purpose
of the intervention; how well the intervention fits with the
of these interviews was to explore participants’reactions to the
participants’perceived value system; intervention coherence;
possibility of using digital technology to help with
and self-efficacy in being able to use the intervention [31].
self-management of the condition and to feed into the design
Although objective data, such as dropout rates, provided a
of such an intervention.
quantitative indication for ease of use of the intervention, the
During these exploratory interviews, both people with COPD research team did not set predetermined thresholds for levels
and HCPs identified physical activity as being a high priority that would deem the intervention feasibleor not feasible. The
for COPD self-management. Feedback from the interviews study evaluated the feasibility of delivering a complex
informed the development of a prototype intervention that used intervention in a complex health care setting; therefore,
an activity tracker and a smartphone app to help people with qualitative interview feedback and reasons for withdrawal were
COPD set physical activity goals and monitor their progress. necessary to understand the nuances behind the intervention’s
A total of 5 in-house researchers (unconnected with the project) feasibility.
and 5 participants with COPD from the exploratory interviews
Research Questions
were later shown the prototype intervention and were asked to
carry out think-aloudtasks using the technology, in accordance This paper reports the results of a randomized feasibility study.
with a user-centered design [27]. The 5 participants with COPD The research questions (RQs) were as follows:
involved in this stage of usability testing were selected to include
• RQ1: Is it feasible and acceptable to use the SMART-COPD
a range of ages, gender, and COPD severities. The usability
intervention within PR to encourage people with COPD to
testing helped with assessing the intervention’s relevance and
maintain (or increase) their physical activity levels after
usability, identified problems in its operation, and helped further
PR?
refine the intervention. After this stage, 2 people with COPD
• RQ2: Is it feasible to conduct a future large-scale RCT to
used the intervention over a period of many weeks. They relayed
investigate the effectiveness of the intervention?
their experiences of using the intervention and offered
suggestions for improvement. Specifically, the following questions were addressed:
The results of these interviews, of usability testing, and of a • How do people with COPD and HCPs react to the
scoping literature review of existing best practice guidelines technology? What are their views on the technology, and
informed the development of a Self-Management supported by on whether it is feasible to use the technology for physical
Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies-COPD activity in COPD? (related to RQ1)
(SMART-COPD) app for COPD self-management and informed • Is the technology acceptable to people with COPD and
strategies for its use. In addition to the emphasis on physical HCPs? For example, do they use the technology as
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 3
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
intended? Do they find the technology easy to use? Which
Methods
parts of the technology do they use? Are there any problems
with the technology? (RQ1)
The Self-Management Supported by Assistive,
• What are the recruitment and dropout rates for the study?
Rehabilitative, and Telehealth Technologies-Chronic
What do these patterns tell us about the acceptability of the
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Intervention
technology and the feasibility of conducting a future RCT?
(RQ1 and RQ2) The SMART-COPD intervention is an Android smartphone
• Which outcome measures should be used for a larger-scale mobile app used in conjunction with a Fitbit wearable activity
evaluation of the technology? (RQ2) tracking device. The app encourages physical activity through
• How do people with COPD react to randomized assignment goal setting, self-monitoring, and feedback, based on behavior
and to being in the Controlgroup? (RQ2) change and persuasive technology principles [18,22]. The app
• How should the technology be deployed: both within health includes three elements of physical activity: general cumulative
care services and within an RCT? Are any changes needed activity over each day (ie, step count); a timed daily walk; and
to increase the feasibility of using technology in this way? timed daily exercises based on standard PR exercises (eg, leg
(RQ1 and RQ2) lifts). The integrated content of the app is summarized in Table
1.
The overall aim of the study was to determine the feasibility
and acceptability of both the intervention and the possibility of
carrying out a future RCT.
Table 1. Summary of physical activity components within the SMART-COPD intervention.
Facet Step-count (activity tracker and app)a Daily walk (app only)a Exercises (app only)a
Goal type • Number of steps (measured by • Length of walk in minutes (mea- • Length of time exercising (measured via
activity tracker) sured by phone's accelerometer) manual timer on phone)
Feedback • Daily step-count visible on activi- • App shows flower gaining petals • Videos demonstrating different exercises,
ty tracker, and feedback graphs as they get closer to their goal, timed doing exercises, and feedback graphs
on phone and feedback graphs on phone on phone
• Videos developed in-house with PR phys-
iotherapists and featuring a range of
COPDbseverities
aIndividualized goals set in partnership with PR staff. Participants self-monitor progress via described outlets.
bCOPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Participants decided on a personal starting goal for each of the [32]. The decision to use Fitbit as a step count device was further
three activities based on advice from their PR team and their supported by in-house comparisons of step count accuracy of
own preferences. It was important that participants felt various activity monitoring devices (including Fitbit One and
ownershipof their goals and that both the participant and HCP Charge HR), at different walking speeds, carried out by
felt they were achievable. The intention was that they should researchers and people with COPD.
consistently achieve their activity goals on a daily basis and, if
The Setting
possible, gradually increase each physical activity goal over
time. The app was used initially in conjunction with the PR In total, PR teams at 3 NHS sites in Northern England, United
program, with continued use once the PR program had finished. Kingdom, participated in the feasibility study. Northern England
has one of the highest rates of lung disease in the United
Study participants were provided a Motorola smartphone with
Kingdom, possibly due to greater socioeconomic deprivation
the SMART-COPD app installed and a Fitbit activity tracker
and higher rates of smoking compared with the south of England
for the duration of the study. Each smartphone was fitted with
[3,4,33]. Preliminary work was conducted to map current PR
a SIM card to enable remote data transfer. The app could be
care pathways (eg, workshops with PR staff; observation of PR
used in conjunction with 1 of 3 Fitbit models: Charge HR
sessions, numbers, and demographics of referred patients; etc),
(wrist-worn); Charge 2 (wrist-worn); or One (hip-worn). Fitbit
and we worked together with the PR teams to determine how
activity trackers use low-energy Bluetooth to automatically
the intervention might best be used within the PR program.
transmit (or sync) data periodically whenever the device is in
Each PR service was delivered over a 6- to 7-week timeframe,
the proximity of a smartphone with an appropriately configured
with similar exercises and educational content. Therefore, the
Fitbit app. These data are then transferred to Fitbit’s internet
same study procedure was used across all sites.
servers, where they can be accessed in the SMART-COPD app.
The devices have a rechargeable battery with an approximately Study Design
5-day battery life. Fitbit One had previously demonstrated high The study was a randomized feasibility study [34] using both
accuracy compared with other low-cost activity trackers even quantitative and qualitative methods. The Medical Research
for slower walking speeds (a factor highly relevant for COPD) Council Framework for the evaluation of complex interventions
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 4
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
emphasizes the feasibility stage as a means of testing procedures Procedure
and estimating parameters for a future large-scale evaluation
Details of the study procedure are summarized in Figure 1. PR
[30].
attendees were assessed for PR eligibility before starting the
Participants program. Participants attended PR twice weekly for 6 to 7
weeks. Each week PR physiotherapists informed the researchers
The aim was to recruit 30 individuals who were formally
if there were any new starters with COPD expected at PR
diagnosed with COPD and who were attending PR in 1 of the
sessions in the coming week. In their second PR session (during
3 study sites. This sample size was chosen based on advice from
week 1), participants were asked if they would be happy for a
an in-house statistician and on a study by Julious [35]. Potential
researcher to speak with them about the feasibility study and
participants met the inclusion criteria if they were attending PR.
what it would involve. Potential participants were given a
There were no exclusion criteria based on age, comorbidities,
participant information sheet and asked to contact the research
or having previously attended PR for managing COPD.
team within the next week if they wished to take part.
Participants did not need any previous experience of using
digital technology.
Figure 1. Summary of participants’progress through the study. COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease; ISWT: Incremental Shuttle Walk
Test; PR: pulmonary rehabilitation.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 5
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Data Collection and Randomization perceived benefits and barriers to using the technology,
acceptability of randomization, perceived impact of the
If a participant agreed to take part, then a baseline appointment
technology on physical activity, and tolerability of outcome
was organized with one of the research team members for week
measures (see Multimedia Appendix 1). During the final ISWT,
2 of PR. At the baseline visit, written informed consent was
participants wore a Fitbit Charge 2 (wrist-worn), a Fitbit One
obtained and the participant completed a set of questionnaires
(hip-worn), and Axivity motion sensors on their hip and wrist
(see Quantitative Outcome Measures). The participant was then
to compare step count accuracy across different devices for
randomized to 1 of 2 conditions:
individual participants. The devices were found to be
• Group 1 (intervention) used the app and activity tracker to comparable in accuracy, although detailed results of this
monitor, maintain, and (if possible) increase their physical comparison are not reported here. Finally, the research team
activity during their time in PR (the PR phase) and for a retrieved the technology from the participant.
further 8 weeks afterwards (the maintenance phase).
Clinical support (via the relevant PR team during PR sessions)
• Group 2 (control) wore a blinded activity tracker for the
and technical support (via the research team) was available to
PR phase and maintenance phase. A strong black tape was
all participants throughout their time in the study. The protocol
used to cover the activity tracker’s screen so the participant
and all materials used for the study were reviewed by people
would not be able to see their step count. This group was
with COPD for relevance and comprehensibility.
also provided with a smartphone so that data from the
activity tracker could automatically be sent to, and stored Health Care Professionals
on, the phone.
At the end of the recruitment period, PR team members (eg,
Uneven randomization was used, whereby two-thirds of respiratory physiotherapists) were contacted via email with a
participants were assigned to group 1 and one-third to group 2. participant information sheet attached and were asked to contact
This was due to the need to assess the acceptability and usability the research team if they wished to take part in a qualitative
of the intervention. A blinded researcher used sealed opaque semistructured interview or focus group discussion. The purpose
envelopes to generate randomization. This method of allocation was to explore HCPs’ opinions of using the technology
was chosen because it mimics the more rigorous alongside PR, including perceived benefits and barriers to using
software-generated randomization method used in RCTs, in a the technology, acceptability of the technology, and perceived
manner that was satisfactory for the purposes of the feasibility impact on participants’ physical activity (see Multimedia
study. Appendix 2).
After allocation, the researcher demonstrated the technology to Quantitative Outcome Measures
the participant and set up baseline activity goals within the app.
The feasibility of using a number of quantitative outcome
Participants were provided with an instruction manual and the
measures (for a future RCT) was assessed during the study, eg,
research team’s contact details.
for relevance and ease of completion. The System Usability
Participants then used the app and activity tracker, or wore a Scale (SUS) [36] was also included as an objective measure of
blinded activity tracker, during the PR phase in accordance with ease of use of the intervention. The quantitative outcome
their allocation. An appointment was made for a member of the measures used are summarized in Table 2.
research team to visit the participant at the end of PR and take
Exercise capacity was assessed using the ISWT, a well-validated
follow-up 1 (F1) measurements. At this point, the set of
measure [37] used as part of standard clinical practice by all
questionnaires applied at baseline was repeated.
three PR sites. Patients completed a baseline ISWT at their
Another appointment was made for 8 weeks after finishing PR assessment visit and another ISWT in their final week of PR
(follow-up 2 or F2), ie, the end of maintenance. If possible, (ie, at F1) as part of standard practice. The research team
participants were seen at the PR facility so that a final requested these scores for all participants in the study and added
incremental shuttle walk test (ISWT) could be conducted (see an additional ISWT for participants at the end of the
Quantitative Outcome Measures), a final set of questionnaires maintenance phase (F2). This was conducted at the PR facility
could be completed, and a semistructured qualitative interview by a respiratory physiotherapist. The research team collected
could be conducted about their experiences on the study. The all other outcome measures.
interview explored their experiences of using the technology,
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 6
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Table 2. Summary of measures taken from participants at different time points.
Measures Baseline Follow-up 1 Follow-up 2 Continuous
Demographics
Age, gender, ethnicity, postcode, medical conditions, previous PRa, and previous Xb N/Ac N/A N/A
experience with technology
Medical Research Council Breathlessness Scale
COPD severity: 1 (“not troubled by breathlessness except on strenuous exercise”) X N/A N/A N/A
to 5 (“too breathless to leave the house, or breathless when undressing”) [38]
Physical activity: step count
As measured by an activity tracker N/A N/A N/A X
Physical activity: CHAMPSdquestionnaire
CHAMPS [39] X X X N/A
Exercise capacity: ISWTe
ISWT [37] X X X N/A
Functioning and quality of life: SGRQf
SGRQ [40] X X X N/A
Anxiety and depression: PHQ-9g
PHQ-9 [41] X X X N/A
Exercise self-efficacy: Ex-SRESh
Ex-SRES [42] X X X N/A
Symptoms: CATi
CAT [43] X X X N/A
Cost-effectiveness: EQ-5D-3Lj
EQ-5D-3L [44] for a future cost-effectiveness assessment X X X N/A
Usability: SUSk
SUS [36] to assess the usability of technology N/A X X N/A
aPR: pulmonary rehabilitation.
bX: Measure taken at indicated timepoint.
cN/A: not applicable.
dCHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors.
eISWT: incremental shuttle walk test.
fSGRQ: St George's Respiratory Questionnaire.
gPHQ: Patient Health Questionnaire.
hEx-SRES: Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale.
iCAT: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test.
jEQ-5D-3L: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level
kSUS: System Usability Scale.
Qualitative Analysis
Quantitative Analysis
Qualitative interviews with patients with COPD and HCPs were
Descriptive statistics were calculated for demographic data,
transcribed verbatim, and a thematic analysis [45] was used to
ISWT scores, and questionnaire-based outcome measures in
identify key themes within the data (using NVivo software).
SPSS. Data collected via the SMART-COPD app on amount
The first author explored the transcript data, taking notes on
and types of physical activity were summarized and explored
pre-existing and emerging themes. These notes were used to
in Microsoft Excel to provide insights into how the intervention
build a coding framework, which was used to code the transcript
was used.
data within NVivo. All data within individual themes were then
explored and summarized (including where there were
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 7
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
differences between participants), to produce summaries of each
Results
theme and also to identify relationships between themes.
Ethics Recruitment and Dropout Rates
The study received NHS research ethics approval (15-YH-0458), A total of 30 people with COPD participated in the feasibility
as well as Health Research Authority and research governance study: 19 participants were assigned to the intervention group
approval from each NHS site. The feasibility study was and 11 were assigned to the control. 16 participants completed
registered on a clinical trials database (NCT02691104). all three data collection points and 14 participants withdrew
from the study. The groups were well matched on most
demographics. Participants’demographics are summarized in
Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of participants’baseline demographics and measurements.
Demographics Intervention Control Overall
Age (years)
Median (IQR) 68.0 (63.0-72.0) 66.0 (60.0-70.0) 67.5 (60.0-70.5)
Range 45-75 53-75 45-75
Gender (frequency)
Male 8 5 13
Female 11 6 17
Medical Research Council Breathlessness scorea(frequency)
2 6 3 9
3 3 3 6
4 10 5 15
PRbattendances (frequency)
First time 11 4 15
Been before 8 7 15
Ethnicity (frequency)
White British 19 11 30
“Regularly use computer” (frequency)
Yes 8 6 14
No 11 5 16
“Regularly use mobile phone” (frequency)
Yes 17 10 27
No 2 1 3
“Regularly use tablet” (frequency)
Yes 8 7 15
No 11 4 15
a1=least severe and 5=most severe.
bPR: pulmonary rehabilitation.
withdrew compared with men (9/17, 53% vs 5/13, 38%,
Study Withdrawal
respectively). Withdrawers also had a lower median age
In the intervention group, 47% (9/19) of participants withdrew, compared with completers (median 65.5, IQR 59.8-70.5 years
and in the control group 46% (5/11) of participants withdrew; vs median 68.0, IQR 61.0-71.3 years, respectively). The most
thus, attrition rates were similar for both groups. In total, 12 common (voluntarily given) reasons for withdrawing included
participants withdrew before F1: 3 participants withdrew either ill health (n=5); withdrew from PR (n=4); burden of research,
at baseline or within 2 weeks of baseline; and 9 participants of technology, or of completing daily exercises (n=4); technical
withdrew within 3 to 6 weeks into the study. A further 2 issues or frustrations with the technology (n=4); and
participants withdrew between F1 and F2. More women disappointment at having been assigned to the control group
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 8
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
(n=3). Some withdrawers cited more than one of these reasons. having worse baseline disease severity and health compared
Several withdrawers (n=3) still liked the concept of the app, with those who completed the study. These comparisons are
and 2 participants who had stopped attending PR would have summarized in Table 4.
liked to continue using the app.
Participants who withdrew had worse baseline scores on exercise
Descriptive statistics on baseline outcome measures revealed a capacity, quality of life, and depression compared with those
pattern of differences between participants who completed the who completed. However, sample sizes were small, so this
study and those who withdrew. Withdrawers showed signs of finding should be interpreted with caution.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 9
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Table 4. Comparison of completed vs withdrawn participants on baseline outcome measures.
Baseline measures Completed Withdrawn
Baseline ISWT score (meters)a
Number 16 13
Median (IQR) 255.0 (172.5-332.5) 170.0 (105.0-305.0)
Range 90-550 40-490
Baseline SGRQ scoreb
Number 16 13
Median (IQR) 52.0 (44.2-63.7) 62.4 (52.3-72.3)
Range 32.3-78.1 42.3-79.6
Baseline SGRQ current health question
Number 16 14
Very poor 0 3
Poor 3 7
Fair 10 3
Good 2 1
Very good 1 0
Baseline CHAMPS scorec
Number 16 14
Median (IQR) 2017.3 (1220.5-5237.3) 2468.5 (1193.8-3138.7)
Range 68.0-9683.6 437.7-9644.3
Baseline Ex-SRES score (%)d
Number 16 14
Median (IQR) 54.1 (27.7-72.0) 54.1 (32.4-69.7)
Range 10.6-93.1 13.1-86.3
Baseline PHQ-9 scoree
Number 16 14
Median (IQR) 7.0 (4.3-12.5) 10.0 (5.5-15.0)
Range 2.0-16.0 2.0-21.0
Baseline CAT scoref
Number 16 14
Median (IQR) 23.0 (16.5-25.0) 23.0 (16.8-26.8)
Range 13.0-32.0 12.0-37.0
EQ-5D scoreg
Number 15 14
Median (IQR) 8.0 (7.0-9.0) 8.0 (8.0-10.3)
Range 5.0-11.0 6.0-12.0
EQ-5D scaleh
Number 16 14
Median (IQR) 60.0 (50.0-70.0) 50.0 (40.8-62.5)
Range 28.0-90.0 20.0-90.0
aISWT: incremental shuttle walk test; higher score=greater distance walked.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 10
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
bSGRQ: St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire; lower score=better quality of life.
cCHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors; higher score=more physical activity.
dEx-SRES: Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale; higher score=more exercise-related self-efficacy.
ePHQ-9: Patient Health Questionnaire for Depression; higher score=more depressed.
fCAT: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test; higher score=more COPD symptoms.
gEQ-5D-3L: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level score; higher score=worse health.
hEQ-5D-3L scale: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level scale; scored 0-100, where 100=best health they can imagine.
provided indications of how the app was used and how often.
Use of the Technology
Table 5 summarizes the percentage of days on which each
For intervention participants, physical activity and usage data physical activity component of the app was used by each
collected by the SMART-COPD app were transmitted by email participant.
using the smartphone’s mobile data connection. These data
Table 5. Individual participants’use of different features of the SMART-COPD app.
App use, no. Steps recordeda, no. Exercise recorded, no. Daily walk recorded, no. Total days participant had inter-
Participant days (%) days (%) days (%) days (%) vention, n
1b 12 (32) 15 (41) 6 (16) 9 (24) 37
2b 18 (64) 25 (89) 3 (11) 3 (11) 28
3 108 (90.0) 107 (89.2) 101 (84.2) 14 (11.7) 120
6 53 (51.0) 53 (51.0) 36 (34.6) 19 (18.3) 104
8 85 (98) 86 (99) 64 (74) 65 (75) 87
11b 23 (100) 18 (78) 1 (4) 10 (43) 23
14 85 (94) 83 (92) 57 (63) 79 (88) 90
15 62 (84) 66 (89) 1 (1) 56 (76) 74
19 100 (89.3) 99 (88.4) 41 (36.6) 41 (36.6) 112
21 19 (20) 79 (82) 8 (8) 0 (0) 96
22b 69 (100) 68 (99) 4 (6) 58 (84) 69
23b 6 (100) 6 (100) 3 (50) 5 (83) 6
24 19 (17) 31 (28) 5 (5) 15 (14) 111
27 71 (63) 88 (79) 7 (6) 20 (18) 112
30 94 (96) 13 (13) 5 (5) 83 (85) 98
Mean 55 (71) 56 (72) 23 (29) 32 (41) 78
aSteps were recorded by an activity tracker even if the Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies-Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease app itself was not used.
bParticipants who later withdrew from the study.
A total of 3 intervention participants withdrew immediately or Participants generally maintained consistent (high or low) usage
within 1 to 2 weeks of receiving the technology. No app use levels for daily walks and exercises across the PR and
data were recorded for these participants. One intervention maintenance phases.
participant (17) withdrew 5 weeks into the study but had no app
Outcome Measure: Step Counts
use data recorded. Technical issues were noted for this
participant (eg, the activity tracker not holding its charge); Participants did not show a consistent pattern overall with
however, it is unclear if this was the reason for the lack of data respect to whether their step counts increased, decreased, or
from this participant. stayed the same over time. Most intervention participants who
completed the study had a near-complete dataset for the full
On average, the SMART-COPD app was used on 73% of days
study timeframe. Only 2 control participants had near-complete
on which it was deployed to a participant, although individual
datasets. Some gaps in the data were explained by technical
participants’usage patterns varied widely. The steps component
issues or by participant illness, but many gaps were unexplained.
of the intervention was the most frequently used physical activity
strategy overall. However, use of the steps component decreased
for some participants when they moved into maintenance.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 11
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Outcome Measure: Incremental Shuttle Walk Test activity questionnaire. Participants did not identify with the
Americanized nature of included activities or the wording of
The ISWT was found to be relevant and appropriate as an
some of the questions (eg, shooting pool), which were felt to
outcome measure for exercise capacity, as this was routinely
be less relevant to a British population. Researchers also noted
collected in the three PR sites and participants were used to
problems in participants’ understanding of the timeframe to
completing it. However, the logistics of carrying out a third
which the questions applied and confusion over calculating how
ISWT at F2 (when participants had already been discharged
often, or for how long, each activity was completed.
from the PR service) at times proved challenging owing to the
need to coordinate availability between participants, the research System Usability Scale
team, and the PR team.
Individual participants’SUS scores at F1 and F2 are summarized
Outcome Measure: Questionnaires in Table 6 (for intervention participants who completed the
study). Scores are out of 100, with a higher score indicating
All participants were generally satisfied with the questionnaires
greater usability.
and length of time needed to complete them. Some participants
requested help from the researcher to complete them, eg, asking SUS scores were generally high compared with the industry
the researcher to read questions aloud and complete answers on standard average score of 68 [42], indicating the intervention
their behalf. Some questions felt repetitive to participants if a had a higher than averageusability level across technological
similar question was included on more than one questionnaire. systems from multiple industries. Participants’ SUS scores
However, the only questionnaire that caused significant generally (but not always) increased with time spent using the
problems in completion was the Community Healthy Activities technology.
Model Program for Seniors (CHAMPS) self-reported physical
Table 6. Individual intervention participants’System Usability Scale scores at Follow-up 1 and Follow-up 2.
Participant Follow-up 1 Follow-up 2
3 97.5 90
6 80 92.5
8 85 90
14 90 90
15 75 85
19 77.5 82.5
21 65 5
24 55 55
27 67.5 97.5
30 Missing Missing
what I was doing… even forgetting sometimes I’d got
Qualitative Results
it on.[Patient 28]
People With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Around half of (completed) the participants felt they had
Reactions to the Intervention benefitted (physically or psychologically) through enhanced
confidence, monitoring of physical activity, and incentivization
The interviews captured the views of 16 participants who
to exercise:
completed the study (n=10 intervention group; n=6 control
group). Qualitative data relating to the intervention were If I hadn’t found this technology erm I would probably
categorized into six main themes: technology; technical issues; be just sat at home watching TV… it would never
previous experience (with digital technology); integration with occur to me to do exercise at home and to move.
PR; control group issues; and involvement in the project. [Patient 3]
Technology Many participants found the technology motivational. Feedback
on activity and goal attainment motivated them to do more:
The intervention was generally well liked and well accepted
among participants who completed the study. Most of these You look at it in the day and... see how many steps
participants found the technology easy to use and were able to you’ve done and it encourages you I think. [Patient
incorporate it into their daily routine, eg, putting on the activity 6]
tracker in the morning:
Two participants did not use the intervention in this way—they
Yes, absolutely no problem, once I’d got, had a were already active and used the intervention to monitor activity
shower and you know put it on and just carried on that they were already doing rather than trying to increase it:
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 12
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
It’s just the way I live. I’ve not done anything different Just at odd times I did [check steps on Fitbit app],
to what I normally do… made me realise how much yes, yes just odd times, I didn’t cheat at all.[Patient
I was doing, or how little I was doing but I wouldn’t 28, control]
say it increased what I put into it.[Patient 15] Overall, the activity tracker was the most liked component of
One participant (21) disliked the smartphone and the intervention, and a few participants expressed a preference
SMART-COPD app and found them difficult to use (supported for using the activity tracker alone and leaving out the
by her F2 SUS score), although she was happy to continue SMART-COPD app:
wearing the activity tracker:
With Fitbit bit, chuck phone away and just leave
Rubbish cause I couldn’t do it, couldn’t do it, no way Fitbit. As long as you’ve got the app that you can
could I do it… I’ve never been able to use one of them have on your own phone.[Patient 24]
phones for a start.[Patient 21] Participants who already owned smartphones often expressed
Participants rarely updated goals. Reasons included conforming a preference for having the SMART-COPD app installed on
to what the experts (physiotherapists or researchers) their own phone rather than carrying and charging extra
recommended (and the physiotherapists did not explicitly tell equipment. In total, 3 participants were conscious of not wanting
them to increase these goals) and keeping the goal achievable: to damage or lose the study’s equipment, which would be less
of a worry if they were using their own technology:
I didn’t want to do it too much because I knew I’d be
disappointed if I didn’t reach the goal I’d set.[Patient The only thing that did affect me was the fear of losing
3] it all… it’s using somebody else’s equipment and
Opinions of the daily walk and exercise sections of the app were being responsible for it.[Patient 6]
mixed. Even where the exercise section was used, the videos Most participants did not carry the smartphone with them when
were not well liked—they were viewed as repetitive or they left the house. Participants were also less likely to use the
participants were put off by people in the videos they perceived technology if they were unwell, busy, or on holiday:
as less able than themselves:
I just want to get up and go. If I’m taking my dog out
I haven’t used the exercise bit because I looked at the for a walk I’ve got enough trouble getting leads,
exercise thing and it’s all people sat in chairs and making sure there’s bags on it and harness on dog
looks like they’re all in old people’s homes, I’m a and treats to make sure they come back without
little bit more active than that.[Patient 15] having to take [the phone].[Patient 24]
Reasons for low use of the daily walk section included difficulty
Technical Issues
getting the smartphone to register the walk and not wanting to
The Fitbit device frequently stopped synchronizing with the
walk outside alone:
Fitbit app. This happened for at least six participants. These
I don’t go for daily walks so I thought I’ll give it a occurrences were sometimes due to the device not being charged
try in the house and I had to walk at such a speed [for and, in one case, a participant accidentally deleting the Fitbit
the walk to register via the accelerometers in the app from the smartphone. However, in most cases, these
smartphone] I was frightened of banging into doors communication errors were unexplained:
and all sorts so in the end I decided not to do the daily
They weren’t getting no data through and I said well
walks.[Patient 3]
I don’t know whether Fitbit what’s not charging or
There were misunderstandings around the daily walk section
phone what’s not charging.[Patient 25]
of the app, with a few participants referring to the step count
There were a number of reports of itchiness, rash, or discomfort
and daily walk sections interchangeably. At least two
from wearing the activity tracker, particularly in warm weather:
participants did not understand that the phone needed to register
continuous movement and hence needed to be placed in the I bruise very easily, my skin is wafer thin and it was
hand or the pocket to record the duration of the walk: very uncomfortable and it marked both arms so it had
to go.[Patient 3]
I can have walked for twenty minutes at the rehab
centre on the err treadmill and it doesn’t show it, it A few participants who experienced early problems were offered
never works… I have on the machine you know I stand the hip-worn Fitbit One as an alternative and seemed to get on
it up on the machine.[Patient 6] well with this option. A few other participants expressed a
preference for a hip-worn activity tracker at the interview stage,
Many participants, from both groups, discovered the Fitbit app
eg, for discretion.
on the smartphone, even though it was not intended that either
group should use it directly. Installation of the app was necessary There were at least three cases of the activity tracker catching
for data synchronization but could be discovered by participants on clothes and falling off:
with an experience of, or curiosity about, using smartphones.
I lost it in the churchyard once; luckily it was still
Several used this, rather than the SMART-COPD app, to monitor
there when I went back... it had caught on my sleeve
their step counts. At least two control participants used the Fitbit
and just pulled off.[Patient 15]
app to monitor their steps and increase their activity despite it
being against the planned intervention:
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 13
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
Previous Experience Well, I honestly felt a bit disappointed... because erm
I did want to experience trialling erm the Fitband
Many participants had previous experience with using digital
[sic] as it should be used... but I realise the
technology, such as smartphones and computers, and a few had
importance of that um, you need both aspects of it,
a prior interest in technology:
so, I was still happy to do it.[Patient 07, control]
[Talking about the game Pokémon Go] So I quite
One control group participant who had no prior experience with
enjoy that and I’ve starting using my eggs as distances
digital technology stated he would have withdrawn if he had
on how much I’ve walked.[Patient 24]
been allocated to the intervention group:
However, some participants had little or no previous experience,
I’d have probably put it back in box and have rung
and these participants were more likely to encounter difficulties
em back up and said I don’t want to do it, it’s too
with using the intervention:
much for me this, I’m not into it.[Patient 25]
I don’t know how they work and I’m not interested to
When technical issues occurred, control group participants were
be honest. The learning how to work it, in my opinion
less likely to realize that there was a technical issue compared
I’m at wrong time, wrong side of life now to start
with intervention group participants, as they could not see the
worrying about technology.[Patient 25]
Fitbit display or the Fitbit app (unless they had discoveredit).
No one had previously used a Fitbit. Some participants knew When participants did realize that there was a technical issue,
about Fitbit devices through advertisements or family members, it was usually because they were using the Fitbit app or noticed
but had perceived them as being irrelevant for themselves or as the activity tracker no longer had a flashing light underneath:
being only for athletes:
Well part of it was when it wasn’t working, which I
I wouldn’t have known about that Fitbit cos I weren’t didn’t know, when I was unaware of that.[Patient 28]
interested in things like that… I never took no notice.
One control group participant had been given a Fitbit Charge
I always thought people did it when they went in gym,
2, whose charging cradle differs from the Charge HR. For this
you know like they bought a Fitbit just to cycle and
participant, the black tape covering the screen interfered with
things like that.[Patient 29]
the charging cradle, which caused weeks of problems getting
Some participants felt the intervention was less suited to people data from this participant (until the root cause was discovered).
with COPD who were older, less technologically savvy, with
Involvement in the Project
more severe disease, or living alone, despite the app being
perceived as easy to use: Participants did not generally contact the research team if they
were having problems using the technology or were
I could understand how some people that are a bit
experiencing technical issues. These problems were usually
older than me would struggle with it if they hadn’t
detected when members of the research team called participants
got any support in the house. I mean I’ve got a
to arrange data collection visits. Some participants had lost the
husband and he’s pretty good with technical things
research team’s contact details; others seemed reluctant to bother
but I didn’t have to really ask him, I figured it myself.
researchers with issues they feared were due to their own
[Patient 6]
incompetenceor inexperience with technology:
Integration With Pulmonary Rehabilitation
No I’ve never contacted you. I was thinking about it
There were few reported issues with the intervention being used in the beginning because I wasn’t getting, as I say I
alongside PR, and many participants liked their concurrent use. was a bit flummoxed by it all, but I figured it out so
Most participants did not speak to the PR team about the I didn’t, I’ve not phoned up or anything, I’ve not had
technology. However, where they did speak to physiotherapists, any contact other than the visits.[Patient 6]
they often found the HCP did not know much about the
One participant who was initially resistant to using technology
technology or the study (though they still showed an interest
decided to try it after hearing the researcher’s explanation of
and tried to help with any issues):
the study:
They didn’t know how it worked. They didn’t, you
Well when you when they first asked me, would I, you
know because I did ask at the beginning I was a bit
know at pulmonary rehab, would I take one and I was
flummoxed with it all erm and I did ask the physio
thinking no I can’t be doing with that, you know.
that was there then and she, she had a look but she
Can’t be doing with that… because I didn’t
couldn’t tell me, but I figured it out myself in the end.
understand it… until it was explained and then I
[Patient 6]
thought, yes I’m going to have that, yes.[Patient 14]
Control Group Participants enjoyed taking part in the study and were mostly
Most control group participants would have liked to see and happy with their contact with the research team. Some
use the intervention but were usually happy to take part. A few participants had purchased, or planned to purchase, their own
intervention participants felt they would have been disappointed Fitbit to continue using after the study had finished:
to receive the control condition but stated they would have
It would never have entered my head to go and buy
continued with the study:
something to improve my condition, never, erm but
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 14
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
now I’ve got another Fitbit waiting for me when I go Workload
home.[Patient 03] The study did not have a large impact on workload, as PR
physiotherapists are accustomed to speaking with individual
Health Care Professionals: Reactions to the Technology
patients during PR sessions and checking their progress. One
A total of 5 HCPs took part in either a focus group discussion
difficulty, however, was that the research team was not always
or an interview exploring their experiences of participating in
told in good time when a new starter would be attending a PR
the study. Five themes relevant to HCPs’experiences with the
session, especially when this was decided at short notice or
technology are discussed: technology; recruitment;
when this coincided with staff absence on either side.
communication; workload; and suggested improvements.
Physiotherapists sometimes reported difficulties deciding
Technology appropriate physical activity goals for participants, as they did
not think in terms of the number of daily steps a person with
One physiotherapist (with personal experience of using activity
COPD should aim to achieve. There were also difficulties
trackers) described the SMART-COPD app as clunky and
organizing appointments for conducting F2 ISWT tests (which
visually unattractive. The staff felt some participants were
were not a part of normal service delivery). Overall, it was felt
motivated by the technology to achieve physical activity goals
that the SMART-COPD intervention had become a tool used
between PR sessions, although they also noted that some
alongside PR rather than incorporated within PR, although it
participants are naturally more motivated regardless of whether
was thought in some cases to have enhanced people’s PR
they have technology.
experience and the benefits they gained from it.
Recruitment
Suggested Improvements
The staff reported that some participants got on with the
Suggestions for improving the study included a dedicated central
technology better than others, and that it was usually (but not
email list to improve communication and sharing of
always) younger and more technologically experienced
responsibility for appointments and tasks. One HCP suggested
participants who adapted quickly and gained the most benefit.
asking participants to wear a blindedactivity tracker for a week
However, 2 staff members pointed out that older people are
before starting the study to gain a better baseline physical
becoming more technologically experienced as the years
activity level. This would help with setting appropriate physical
progress, so this may not be an issue for future generations.
activity goals for the individual and would help with working
The study did not have any inclusion criteria around previous out whether the intervention was effective for that individual.
experience with technology. However, there were hints that a
small number of potential participants may not have been put Discussion
forward to the research team if staff members felt they would
not benefit from the intervention, eg, if they had never used Principal Findings
digital technology or did not seem motivated to benefit from
This randomized feasibility study examined the feasibility and
PR. The staff also heard a few control group participants
acceptability of using a wearable activity tracker and the
expressing disappointment with their allocation, eg, wondering
SMART-COPD app both within and following PR to encourage
about the purpose of their involvement.
people with COPD to increase, or at least maintain, their
Communication physical activity levels (RQ1). The study also explored the
feasibility of conducting a future RCT to investigate the
During the feasibility study preparation, the research team
effectiveness of the intervention (RQ2). The intervention shows
conducted workshops with PR staff and involved them in
potential in helping a subset of people with COPD to achieve
planning the logistics of the intervention and the study.
physical activity goals. However, both the intervention and
Unfortunately, it was (understandably) difficult to speak with
methods used would need to be modified if a future RCT were
the entire PR team; therefore, not all staff were briefed in-person
to be conducted.
on the study and technology, and key information did not always
filter through to the entire team. In addition, physiotherapists Acceptability of the Intervention
within PR teams are frequently rotated to different locations.
A total of 30 people with COPD were recruited to the study.
In the time it took to complete development work and get ethical
The 16 participants who completed the study were generally
amendments approved, some PR team members had changed,
positive about the intervention (or liked the concept if they were
and even those who were involved in earlier stages of the study
in the control group). Some believed they had gained tangible
did not always recall how the technology or the study worked.
benefits from using the intervention, both in terms of motivation
This was reflected in the staff interviews, in which to achieve physical activity goals and subsequent benefits to
physiotherapists often reported that they did not know much their physical or psychological health. Most participants who
about the technology or the wider study. Owing to their own completed the study found the technology easy to use and most
experiences with technology, PR team members were more able experienced no problems incorporating it into their daily lives.
to help with generic smartphone issues but were not usually
However, almost half of the participants (n=14) withdrew from
experienced with using activity trackers or the SMART-COPD
the study. Some participants seemed to find the prospect of
app.
using digital technology for physical activity monitoring to be
daunting or overwhelming. This was supported by the reasons
given for withdrawing, and qualitative feedback from both
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 15
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
patients and staff, which indicated that people who were older greater disease severity, lower quality of life, and greater
or less experienced with digital technology or did not have symptoms of depression [53,54]. Even if the intervention were
support at home might be wary of using this type of intervention. deployed within PR in the future, a large number of people with
Overall, people who withdrew from the study had worse baseline COPD would not have the opportunity to use this method of
scores on exercise capacity, quality of life, and depression self-managing their physical activity. Therefore, future research
compared with those who completed the study, which indicates should explore other ways of delivering mHealth interventions
that people with better COPD-related health may gain more to people with COPD who do not access PR.
benefits from mHealth-based interventions. This claim must
Feasibility of the Study Design
however be interpreted with caution due to the small sample
size. Almost half of recruited participants dropped out of the study.
This finding has implications both for the acceptability of the
Although mHealth is a promising intervention for the
intervention and for the sample size of a future RCT, which
self-management of COPD, the evidence base around mHealth
would need to account for high dropout rates. It could be argued
is currently mixed and underdeveloped [46-48]. In this study,
that the inclusion criteria should be modified to target people
there was arguably a dichotomy between people who completed
with COPD who are deemed more likely to engage with this
the study and gained perceived physical and psychological
type of intervention. However, 1 or 2 individuals readily adopted
benefits from the intervention and those who did not easily
the technology against their own or the physiotherapists’
adopt the technology or found it to be a burden. This has been
expectations. HCPs in this study made the point that future
found for related interventions such as telehealth [46,49,50] and
generations coming through PR are likely to have more
supports McCabe et al’s [19] hypothesis that patients with
experience with digital technology and might therefore be more
COPD with greater interest in technology may gain greater
likely to engage with mHealth. These points suggest that the
benefits from mHealth interventions. In addition, a recent
inclusion criteria should not exclude potential participants based
literature review of wearable technologies for physical activity
on age, (actual or perceived) COPD-related health, or (actual
in COPD identified only a small number of RCTs with highly
or perceived) aptitude toward, or previous experience with,
heterogeneous technologies and study designs, meaning no
technology.
conclusions could be drawn about their effectiveness [51]. More
evidence is needed on the use of wearables in COPD, along Most outcome measures tested were found to be suitable for
with an improved ability for accurate step count detection, and use in a future RCT. The ISWT is routinely conducted in PR
more robust guidelines are needed for clinical staff to implement and would be suitable as an outcome measure for exercise
wearable technologies for COPD [51]. capacity in a future trial. However, in this study, we were unable
to identify a suitable outcome measure for physical activity.
The SMART-COPD app itself mostly worked well. However,
Fitbit One and Fitbit Charge were both accurate in counting
one of the most challenging technical issues was the failure of
participants’steps during the F2 ISWT (when compared with
activity data to be transmitted from the activity tracker to its
Axivity sensor readings). However, control participants were
corresponding smartphone app. This was frustrating for all
more likely to have gaps in their step count data, and so these
concerned as it meant some participants’physical activity data
data are unlikely to have constituted an adequate comparison
were not recorded, and indeed technical issues were cited by
if this was an RCT. In addition, although control group
several participants as a reason for withdrawing. The wrist-strap
participants could not see their step count on the Fitbit screen
also caused discomfort and could catch on clothes and fall off.
or on the smartphone’s home screen, some control group
These issues would need to be resolved if the intervention were
participants discovered the Fitbit app on the smartphone (a
to be used on a wider scale.
necessity for recording step count data) and were able to see
Although the intervention seemed acceptable as a tool for use their step counts. This meant that some control group
alongside standard PR, a full integration of the intervention participants were monitoring their step counts despite the
within service delivery was problematic. Communication errors blindedactivity tracker. Thus, it would currently be challenging
occurred between the research team and PR team despite the to use step count as a between-group comparative outcome
best efforts of everyone involved. In addition, the logistical measure in any future study. Participants also experienced
difficulties of briefing entire PR teams, coupled with the difficulties completing the CHAMPS questionnaire for physical
tendency of PR physiotherapists to be moved between teams, activity in older adults, thus ruling out this option as an outcome
resulted in some PR team members feeling uninformed about measure for physical activity. One physiotherapist suggested
the technology and the wider study. However, PR staff were using a blinded activity tracker to take a baseline step count for
still supportive of the intervention, especially when participants participants between their assessment visit and beginning PR,
within their service told them about their positive experiences. which could provide a more reliable indication of physical
activity changes within individual participants rather than
There are potential patient-level advantages to incorporating
between experimental groups in an RCT.
the SMART-COPD intervention within PR, eg, access to clinical
support when first using the app. However, it is worth noting Some (though not all) participants were disappointed to be
that a large proportion of patients with COPD referred to PR assigned to the control group, and in some cases, it was difficult
do not attend or do not complete the course [52,53]. Reasons for participants to appreciate the purpose of the control
for nonattendance and noncompletion include perceived lack condition. For a future study, this may be resolved by giving
of benefit, disruption to usual routine, poor access to transport, all control group participants the opportunity to try using a
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 16
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
wearable activity tracker at some stage in the study, eg, after technology that is widely available and has a commercial team
data collection. developing and maintaining it. However, while the
SMART-COPD app was specifically designed to consider the
Implications for Future Development of the
needs of users with COPD and included simplification of the
Intervention
presentation of step count information collected via the activity
Smartphones and wearables are two technologies predicted to tracker, commercially available apps are not designed for this
transform health care provision in the coming decades [21]. population. Hence, we would need to determine whether patients
Participants who helped codevelop the SMART-COPD with COPD without prior experience with digital technology
intervention stressed the importance of being able to personalize could benefit from this approach (and, indeed, to ensure that
the intervention. This led to the inclusion of three different the motivational aspects of commercial apps are not harmful or
strategies to encourage maintenance of physical activity. counter-productive for this population).
However, when using the intervention in the real world, this
Strengths and Limitations
approach proved too complicated. The daily walk and exercise
components of the app were not widely used, and in some cases One strength of the feasibility study was that the SMART-COPD
proved confusing for participants and PR team members alike. intervention was tested with people with COPD in a real-life
The more complex a technological intervention is, the less setting, with real-life complexities and challenges, and over a
usable it is likely to be [26], and problems with usability may period of several months. The study involved both people with
negatively impact participants’motivation to continue with the COPD and relevant HCPs and tested out design elements of an
intervention or the behavior [18]. Although efforts were made RCT. In addition, to our knowledge, no one has previously used
to design the intervention based on the needs and capabilities a wearable activity tracker to monitor step count for both an
of people with COPD, more could have been done to achieve experimental and a control group.
a truly co-designed intervention [55]. In addition, the
Potential limitations of the study include technical issues
self-selected participants who helped codevelop the
affecting participants’ experiences of using the intervention,
SMART-COPD intervention were mostly experienced with
and the effect of those issues on data completeness. The study
digital technology and may not have been fully representative
also experienced a high dropout rate. While this in itself
of the general COPD population.
provided valuable information on the usability and acceptability
Our results also suggest that people’s engagement with of the intervention, it also affected data completeness. We were
technology might wane over time (as had happened with some unable to formally interview these participants to fully
of our participants), although this study does not provide any understand their experiences with the technology and their
indication as to whether participants began disengaging from reasons for leaving the study.
the technology only or from the entire health behavior. This
The resource-limited nature of the feasibility study meant we
pattern was not present for all participants and the use of
were only able to include three PR sites: these sites may not
different components of the intervention differed between
have been representative of PR services (and COPD populations)
participants, which implies there were individual differences in
across the United Kingdom. To practically conduct the study,
how participants interacted with, and responded to, the
we also had to use more than one researcher for recruitment and
intervention.
data collection. Researchers were trained on the use of the
This study shows that participants also need the capability [18] technology and on how to introduce both the study and the
to learn how to use the technology. People with less experience technology to participants. However, there may still have been
of digital technologies may have had less capability to use the differences in how each researcher introduced and explained
intervention, and thus were more likely to leave the study. the technology and the study, which may have influenced some
Participants appeared to have differing experiences of the participants’interactions with the technology.
SMART-COPD intervention depending on their previous
However, all of the above strengths and limitation issues reflect
experience with digital technology and their baseline health.
the wider complexities of assessing mHealth interventions in
This finding is indicative of the need to consider the
real-world settings.
circumstances, motivations, and capabilities of individual
participants. The SMART-COPD intervention was complex, Conclusions
and the COPD population is complex and has complex needs. Overall, the SMART-COPD intervention was well liked and
One intervention does not fit all, and future investigations of perceived as easy to use and easy to incorporate into
similar mHealth-based interventions need to consider individual participants’ daily lives by those who completed the study.
factors as well as group factors when determining who could However, there was a high dropout rate which implies high
gain the most benefit [19]. rates of people who were eligible for the intervention but who
Our results suggest that a future version of the app would need did not easily adopt the technology, or else disliked the study
to be simplified. One option would be to adopt an existing design (eg, because of allocation). The data suggest that people
commercially available activity tracker (eg, Fitbit) and its with COPD who had worse baseline health were more likely to
associated app to monitor step count and the completion of withdraw from the study, which may indicate that this patient
individually relevant step count goals. This approach has the group is harder to reach with mHealth interventions. The results
benefit of not needing to be updated or maintained directly by suggest the intervention would need to be simplified for future
the (resource-limited) research team, instead relying on a use, eg, by focusing on step count only, with the possible sole
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 17
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
use of a wearable activity tracker and an associated app. This intervention and either the ISWT or a within-subject measure
finding contradicts a key finding from our earlier codevelopment of step count should be considered as a primary outcome
work, which emphasized the importance of having a measure. Any future evaluation of the intervention would need
multi-option personalizable intervention. In a future RCT, the to consider individual factors that affect the usability,
control group would be offered an opportunity to use the acceptability, and efficacy of the intervention.
Acknowledgments
This paper presents the independent research by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership
in Applied Health Research and Care Yorkshire and Humber. The views expressed are those of the authors, and not necessarily
those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of partner organizations and particularly those of the participants from
this study.
Authors' Contributions
MH was the Principal Investigator on the project. MH, CB, YB, GM, and JP were involved in the study design and development
of the protocol. CB and LP were involved in the day to day management of the project. SP and JF were technical researchers on
the project involved in development, maintenance, and delivery of the intervention. YB, GM, and JP were advisors on the project.
LP, CO, JB, RC, HD, and CB were involved in participant recruitment and data collection. CB, SP, JP, and MH were involved
in data analysis and interpretation. CB wrote and finalized the manuscript. LP, SP, JP, GM, YB, and MH all made substantial
contributions to the final manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patient Interview Guide.
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
Healthcare professional interview guide.
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
Multimedia Appendix 3
Screen Flow for SMART COPD App.
[PPTX File , 1652 KB-Multimedia Appendix 3]
Multimedia Appendix 4
CONSORT-eHealth Checklist (V 1.6.1).
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 1564 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4]
References
1. Department of Health. Government of UK. 2012. Long Term Conditions Compendium of Information. Third Edition URL:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/216528/dh_134486.pdf
[accessed 2015-06-02]
2. Quaderi SA, Hurst JR. The unmet global burden of COPD. Glob Health Epidemiol Genom 2018;3:e4 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1017/gheg.2018.1] [Medline: 29868229]
3. British Lung Foundation. Shopify. 2016. The Battle for Breath - The Impact of Lung Disease in the UK URL: https://tinyurl.
com/yalnngfk[accessed 2018-09-05]
4. National Institute for Health Research. 2017. Implantable & Wearable Medical Devices for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease URL: https://tinyurl.com/yc2wdq92[accessed 2018-09-05]
5. National Health Service. UK Government. 2012. COPD Commissioning Toolkit URL: https://tinyurl.com/r9k9u8f[accessed
2018-09-05]
6. Miravitlles M, Ribera A. Understanding the impact of symptoms on the burden of COPD. Respir Res 2017 Apr 21;18(1):67
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0548-3] [Medline: 28431503]
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 18
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
7. Rzadkiewicz M, Bråtas O, Espnes GA. What else should we know about experiencing COPD? A narrative review in search
of patients' psychological burden alleviation. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2016;11:2295-2304 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2147/COPD.S109700] [Medline: 27695316]
8. Halding A, Aarsheim EI, Dolmen NM, Jensen AJ, Stavøstrand S, Grov EK. COPD transitions in health and self-management:
service users' experiences from everyday life. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2018;13:2075-2088 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2147/COPD.S158058] [Medline: 30013335]
9. Zwerink M, Brusse-Keizer M, van der Valk PD, Zielhuis GA, Monninkhof EM, van der Palen J, et al. Self management
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 Mar 19(3):CD002990 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD002990.pub3] [Medline: 24665053]
10. National Health Service. The NHS Long Term Plan. 2019. URL: https://www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/
2019/08/nhs-long-term-plan-version-1.2.pdf[accessed 2019-06-03]
11. Hunt T, Madigan S, Williams MT, Olds TS. Use of time in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease--a systematic
review. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2014;9:1377-1388 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/COPD.S74298] [Medline:
25548519]
12. Garcia-Aymerich J, Lange P, Benet M, Schnohr P, Antó JM. Regular physical activity reduces hospital admission and
mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a population based cohort study. Thorax 2006 Sep;61(9):772-778
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/thx.2006.060145] [Medline: 16738033]
13. Moy ML, Teylan M, Weston NA, Gagnon DR, Garshick E. Daily step count predicts acute exacerbations in a US cohort
with COPD. PLoS One 2013;8(4):e60400 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060400] [Medline: 23593211]
14. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Over 16s: Diagnosis
and Management. England: NICE; 2018.
15. Lacasse Y, Goldstein R, Lasserson TJ, Martin S. Pulmonary rehabilitation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006 Oct 18(4):CD003793. [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003793.pub2] [Medline: 17054186]
16. Dyer CAE, Harris ND, Jenkin E, Langley-Johnson C, Lewis R, Taylor GJ, et al. Activity levels after pulmonary rehabilitation
- what really happens? Physiotherapy 2013 Sep;99(3):228-232. [doi: 10.1016/j.physio.2012.01.004] [Medline: 23219642]
17. Egan C, Deering BM, Blake C, Fullen BM, McCormack NM, Spruit MA, et al. Short term and long term effects of pulmonary
rehabilitation on physical activity in COPD. Respir Med 2012 Dec;106(12):1671-1679 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.rmed.2012.08.016] [Medline: 23063203]
18. Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method for characterising and designing behaviour
change interventions. Implement Sci 2011 Apr 23;6:42 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-6-42] [Medline: 21513547]
19. McCabe C, McCann M, Brady AM. Computer and mobile technology interventions for self-management in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017 May 23;5:CD011425 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD011425.pub2] [Medline: 28535331]
20. Morrison D, Mair FS, Yardley L, Kirby S, Thomas M. Living with asthma and chronic obstructive airways disease: using
technology to support self-management - An overview. Chron Respir Dis 2017 Nov;14(4):407-419 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1177/1479972316660977] [Medline: 27512084]
21. National Health Service. 2019. The Topol Review: Preparing the Healthcare Workforce to Deliver the Digital Future URL:
https://topol.hee.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/HEE-Topol-Review-2019.pdf[accessed 2019-06-03]
22. Bartlett YK, Webb TL, Hawley MS. Using persuasive technology to increase physical activity in people with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease by encouraging regular walking: a mixed-methods study exploring opinions and preferences.
J Med Internet Res 2017 Apr 20;19(4):e124 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.6616] [Medline: 28428155]
23. Park Y. Emerging new era of mobile health technologies. Healthc Inform Res 2016 Oct;22(4):253-254 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.4258/hir.2016.22.4.253] [Medline: 27895955]
24. Wang J, Wang Y, Wei C, Yao NA, Yuan A, Shan Y, et al. Smartphone interventions for long-term health management of
chronic diseases: an integrative review. Telemed J E Health 2014 Jun;20(6):570-583. [doi: 10.1089/tmj.2013.0243] [Medline:
24787747]
25. NHS Digital. 2018. Digital Inclusion Guide for Health and Social Care URL: https://digital.nhs.uk/about-nhs-digital/
our-work/digital-inclusion[accessed 2018-09-05]
26. Venkatesh V, Davis FD. A theoretical extension of the Technology Acceptance Model: four longitudinal field studies.
Manag Sci 2000;46(2):186-204. [doi: 10.1287/mnsc.46.2.186.11926]
27. Coleman R, Clarkson J, Dong H, Cassim J. Design for Inclusivity: A Practical Guide to Accessible, Innovative and
User-Centred Design. London & New York: Routledge; 2016.
28. CATCH. YouTube. 2014 Apr 24. Smart Project - Supporting Self Management for COPD URL: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=iPiRqWdZ2yc[accessed 2019-06-03]
29. Eldridge SM, Lancaster GA, Campbell MJ, Thabane L, Hopewell S, Coleman CL, et al. Defining feasibility and pilot
studies in preparation for randomised controlled trials: development of a conceptual framework. PLoS One
2016;11(3):e0150205 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150205] [Medline: 26978655]
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 19
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
30. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M, Medical Research Council Guidance. Developing and
evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. Br Med J 2008 Sep 29;337:a1655 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.a1655] [Medline: 18824488]
31. Sekhon M, Cartwright M, Francis JJ. Acceptability of healthcare interventions: an overview of reviews and development
of a theoretical framework. BMC Health Serv Res 2017 Jan 26;17(1):88 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2031-8]
[Medline: 28126032]
32. Storm FA, Heller BW, Mazzà C. Step detection and activity recognition accuracy of seven physical activity monitors. PLoS
One 2015;10(3):e0118723 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118723] [Medline: 25789630]
33. Boulieri A, Hansell A, Blangiardo M. Investigating trends in asthma and COPD through multiple data sources: a small area
study. Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol 2016 Nov;19:28-36 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.sste.2016.05.004] [Medline:
27839578]
34. Blatch-Jones AJ, Pek W, Kirkpatrick E, Ashton-Key M. Role of feasibility and pilot studies in randomised controlled trials:
a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2018 Sep 25;8(9):e022233 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022233]
[Medline: 30257847]
35. Julious SA. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pilot study. Pharm Stat 2005;4(4):287-291. [doi: 10.1002/pst.185]
36. Brooke J. SUS: a retrospective. J Usability Stud 2013 Feb;8(2):29-40 [FREE Full text]
37. Parreira VF, Janaudis-Ferreira T, Evans RA, Mathur S, Goldstein RS, Brooks D. Measurement properties of the incremental
shuttle walk test. A systematic review. Chest 2014 Jun;145(6):1357-1369. [doi: 10.1378/chest.13-2071] [Medline: 24384555]
38. Stenton C. The MRC breathlessness scale. Occup Med (Lond) 2008 May;58(3):226-227. [doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqm162]
[Medline: 18441368]
39. Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, Haskell WL, Gillis D, Ritter PL. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire for older
adults: outcomes for interventions. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001 Jul;33(7):1126-1141. [doi:
10.1097/00005768-200107000-00010] [Medline: 11445760]
40. Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM. The St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Respir Med 1991 Sep;85(Suppl B):25-31;
discussion 33. [doi: 10.1016/s0954-6111(06)80166-6] [Medline: 1759018]
41. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 2001
Sep;16(9):606-613 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x] [Medline: 11556941]
42. Davis AHT, Figueredo AJ, Fahy BF, Rawiworrakul T. Reliability and validity of the Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy
Scale for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Heart Lung 2007;36(3):205-216. [doi:
10.1016/j.hrtlng.2006.08.007] [Medline: 17509427]
43. Jones PW, Harding G, Berry P, Wiklund I, Chen W, Leidy NK. Development and first validation of the COPD Assessment
Test. Eur Respir J 2009 Sep;34(3):648-654 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1183/09031936.00102509] [Medline: 19720809]
44. Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy 1996 Jul;37(1):53-72. [doi: 10.1016/0168-8510(96)00822-6]
[Medline: 10158943]
45. Braun A, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006 Jan;3(2):77-101. [doi:
10.1191/1478088706qp063oa]
46. Clifford GD, Clifton D. Wireless technology in disease management and medicine. Annu Rev Med 2012;63:479-492. [doi:
10.1146/annurev-med-051210-114650] [Medline: 22053737]
47. Fiordelli M, Diviani N, Schulz PJ. Mapping mHealth research: a decade of evolution. J Med Internet Res 2013 May
21;15(5):e95 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.2430] [Medline: 23697600]
48. Sobnath DD, Philip N, Kayyali R, Nabhani-Gebara S, Pierscionek B, Vaes AW, et al. Features of a mobile support app for
patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: literature review and current applications. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth
2017 Feb 20;5(2):e17 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.4951] [Medline: 28219878]
49. Cartwright M, Hirani SP, Rixon L, Beynon M, Doll H, Bower P, Whole Systems Demonstrator Evaluation Team. Effect
of telehealth on quality of life and psychological outcomes over 12 months (Whole Systems Demonstrator telehealth
questionnaire study): nested study of patient reported outcomes in a pragmatic, cluster randomised controlled trial. Br Med
J 2013 Feb 26;346:f653 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.f653] [Medline: 23444424]
50. Emme C, Rydahl-Hansen S, Ostergaard B, Schou L, Jakobsen AS, Phanareth K. How virtual admission affects coping -
telemedicine for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Nurs 2014 May;23(9-10):1445-1458. [doi:
10.1111/jocn.12444] [Medline: 24372676]
51. Pericleous P, van Staa TP. The use of wearable technology to monitor physical activity in patients with COPD: a literature
review. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2019;14:1317-1322 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/COPD.S193037] [Medline:
31354259]
52. Harrison SL, Robertson N, Graham CD, Williams J, Steiner MC, Morgan MDL, et al. Can we identify patients with different
illness schema following an acute exacerbation of COPD: a cluster analysis. Respir Med 2014 Feb;108(2):319-328 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.016] [Medline: 24238773]
53. Hayton C, Clark A, Olive S, Browne P, Galey P, Knights E, et al. Barriers to pulmonary rehabilitation: characteristics that
predict patient attendance and adherence. Respir Med 2013 Mar;107(3):401-407 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.rmed.2012.11.016] [Medline: 23261311]
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 20
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JMIR MHEALTH AND UHEALTH Bentley et al
54. Keating A, Lee A, Holland AE. What prevents people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from attending pulmonary
rehabilitation? A systematic review. Chron Respir Dis 2011;8(2):89-99. [doi: 10.1177/1479972310393756] [Medline:
21596892]
55. Sanders EB, Stappers PJ. Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. CoDesign 2008;4(1):5-18. [doi:
10.1080/15710880701875068]
Abbreviations
BCW: Behavior Change Wheel
CC: chronic condition
CHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors
COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
HCP: health care professional
ISWT: Incremental Shuttle Walk Test
mHealth: mobile health
NHS: National Health Service
NIHR: National Institute for Health Research
PR: pulmonary rehabilitation
RCT: randomized controlled trial
SMART: Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies
SUS: System Usability Scale
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 10.09.19; peer-reviewed by H Chih, K Gordon; comments to author 16.10.19; revised version
received 07.01.20; accepted 24.01.20; published 03.06.20
Please cite as:
Bentley CL, Powell L, Potter S, Parker J, Mountain GA, Bartlett YK, Farwer J, O'Connor C, Burns J, Cresswell RL, Dunn HD, Hawley
MS
The Use of a Smartphone App and an Activity Tracker to Promote Physical Activity in the Management of Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease: Randomized Controlled Feasibility Study
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(6):e16203
URL: https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203
doi: 10.2196/16203
PMID: 32490838
©Claire L Bentley, Lauren Powell, Stephen Potter, Jack Parker, Gail A Mountain, Yvonne Kiera Bartlett, Jochen Farwer, Cath
O'Connor, Jennifer Burns, Rachel L Cresswell, Heather D Dunn, Mark S Hawley. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and
uHealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 03.06.2020. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth, is properly cited. The complete
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://mhealth.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license
information must be included.
https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 21
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
