Title: Fetal central nervous system anomalies: When should we offer exome 
sequencing? 
Authors: C. Baptiste, R. Mellis, V. Aggarwal, J Lord, R. Eberhardt, M.D Kilby, E.R 
Maher, R Wapner, J Giordano, L.S Chitty 
Journal: Prenatal Diagnosis  
Funding 
The PAGE study was funded by the Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF) from the 
UK Department of Health and Wellcome Trust (no. HICF-R7-396). For the purpose of 
open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license, to any Author 
Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. The CUIMC study was 
supported by the Columbia Institute for Genomic Medicine and OB/GYN departments. 
External funders of these studies had no role in study design, data collection, data 
analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. RM is wholly and LSC partially 
funded by the NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre. ERM 
acknowledges funding from the NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre. The 
University of Cambridge has received salary support (ERM) from the NHS in the East of 
England through the Clinical Academic Reserve. The views expressed are those of the 
authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR, the NHS or Department of Health. 
Acknowledgements: 
We would like to acknowledge Matthew Hurles for his contribution to this work.  
What’s already known about this topic? 
• 
In fetuses with a structural abnormality and normal karyotype and chromosomal 
microarray, exome sequencing can provide additional diagnostic yield.  
• 
The role of exome sequencing in fetuses with anomalies specific to the central 
nervous system remains unclear.  
What does this study add? 
Accepted Article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through
the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between
this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1002/pd.6145.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
This study supports the importance of including whole exome sequencing in the 
workup of fetuses affected by CNS anomalies, even if the CNS anomaly is found 
in isolation.  
Data Sharing Statement 
• 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request. 
Ethical Approval 
The PAGE study received ethical approval of research at the Research Ethics 
Committees (South Birmingham – REC reference number 14/WM/0150 and Harrow - 
REC reference number 01/0095) in the UK. The CUIMC study received ethical approval 
from the institutional review board of Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY, USA (approved 23 February 2015, protocol #AAAO8009. All 
clinical information for this analysis was accessed in pseudo-anonymised format, with 
participants’ written informed consent.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Objective 
To investigate the detection of pathogenic variants using exome sequencing in an 
international cohort of fetuses with central nervous system (CNS) anomalies. 
Methods 
We reviewed trio exome sequencing (ES) results for two previously reported unselected 
cohorts (Prenatal Assessment of Genomes and Exomes (PAGE) and CUIMC) to 
identify fetuses with CNS anomalies with unremarkable karyotypes and chromosomal 
microarrays. Variants were classified according to ACMG guidelines and association of 
pathogenic variants with specific types of CNS anomalies explored. 
Results 
ES was performed in 268 pregnancies with a CNS anomaly identified using prenatal 
ultrasound . Of those with an isolated, single, CNS anomaly, 7/97 (7.2%) had a likely 
pathogenic/pathogenic (LP/P) variant. This includes 3/23 (13%) fetuses with isolated 
mild ventriculomegaly and 3/10 (30%) fetuses with isolated agenesis of the corpus 
callosum.  
Where there were multiple anomalies within the CNS, 12/63 (19%) had LP/P variants. 
Of the 108 cases with CNS and other organ system anomalies, 18 (16.7%) had LP/P 
findings.  
Conclusion 
ES is an important tool in the prenatal evaluation of fetuses with any CNS anomaly. The 
rate of LP/P variants tends to be highest in fetuses with multiple CNS anomalies and 
multisystem anomalies, however, ES may also be of benefit for isolated CNS 
anomalies.  
 
 
 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
Malformations of the central nervous system (CNS) are commonly diagnosed on 
prenatal ultrasound but, even with additional imaging to define the abnormality, giving 
parents an accurate prognosis can be difficult because of the variable association with 
underlying genetic etiologies and the immaturity of the brain in utero.1 Karyotyping and 
microarray testing can identify pathogenic chromosomal changes in around 20-40% of 
fetuses with sonographic anomalies2,-4 and the advent of next generation sequencing 
has now enabled rapid diagnosis of underlying monogenic conditions.5-9 in 
chromosomally normal fetuses. However, diagnostic rates vary widely across 
phenotypes9-11 and prescreening with genetic review to select cases most likely to have 
a monogenic etiology has been shown to increase diagnostic yield.12 In two large, 
prospective studies of unselected fetuses with any structural abnormality and normal 
chromosomes and microarrays, ES provided a diagnosis in 8 - 10% of cases.10,11 In 
fetuses with anomalies in the CNS, between 5 – 22% were found to have diagnostic 
genetic variants.10,11 However, these studies did not publish the full details on the CNS 
anomalies diagnosed. 
As costs decrease and availability and speed of sequencing increases, an evidence-
based approach would help manage patients with prenatally diagnosed CNS anomalies. 
Here we reviewed the extended datasets from the United Kingdom Prenatal 
Assessment of Genomes and Exomes (PAGE) and U.S. Columbia (CUIMC) exome 
studies to identify all cases presenting with isolated CNS anomalies, complex CNS 
anomalies, and CNS findings in the setting of multiple anomalies, aiming to further 
delineate which fetuses would benefit most from prenatal exome sequencing.  
Methods  
This is an expanded review of two previously published prospectively collected cohort 
studies of fetuses presenting with a CNS anomaly diagnosed on ultrasound and 
recruited to the UK PAGE10 and US CUIMC11 fetal exome sequencing studies. In these 
studies, both cohorts were sequentially recruited based only on the presence of at least 
one structural anomaly of any system. Some, but not all, of these cases have been 
previously reported.10,11 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE Study 
From the PAGE study we reviewed a total of 876 fetuses and 1727 matched parental 
samples (851 fetus-parent trios and 25 fetus-parent duos), of which 610 cases (596 
trios and 14 duos) have previously been reported.10 Study methodology and eligibility 
criteria were as previously published. All cases were referred based on the routine 20-
week ultrasound. These scans are standardized in the UK National health Service. All 
fetuses have head circumference, posterior horn of the lateral cerebral ventricles and 
transverse cerebellar diameter measured. Couples undergoing invasive testing for any 
ultrasound identified fetal abnormality were consented for exome sequencing when fetal 
karyotype and chromosomal microarray (CMA) were normal or non-causative. Exome 
sequencing was performed with analysis targeted to a virtual panel of 1628 genes 
associated with developmental disorders30 for all cases discussed here.  
 
CUIMC Study  
 
CUIMC recruited a total of 494 fetuses with matched parental samples, of which 234 
trios have been previously reported.11 Pregnancies complicated by any fetal abnormality 
were offered participation in the study following invasive testing or collection of a cord 
sample after birth. All fetuses underwent ultrasound by maternal fetal medicine 
physicians with additional training and expertise in fetal imaging. These ultrasounds are 
standardized and include biometry of the fetal head, measurement of the posterior horn 
of the lateral cerebral ventricles, visualization of the cavum septum pellucidum and 
measurement of the transverse cerebellar diameter. Untargeted trio ES was performed 
when karyotype/CMA was non-causative of the anomaly. The bioinformatic analysis is 
described in a previous publication.11 For cases previously published, exome data was 
not reanalysed for this publication. 
 
For both cohorts, LP/P variants considered causative of the phenotype were disclosed 
to the families and providers. Secondary findings were disclosed according to ACMG 
guidelines. 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variant interpretation 
In both studies, a multidisciplinary clinical review panel (MCRP) consisting of relevant 
clinicians and scientists reviewed candidate pathogenic variants. Pathogenic variants or 
likely pathogenic variants that explained the fetal phenotype were classified according 
to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines,7 
orthogonally confirmed using Sanger sequencing, and reported to parents.10,11  
Procedures 
Review of the study databases was undertaken to identify cases presenting with any 
CNS anomaly whether in isolation or in combination with other anomalies. Clinical 
information was manually reviewed, including the phenotypes recorded in the study 
databases and ultrasound scan reports at presentation if available. If an MRI was 
performed and the report was available, this was also reviewed.  
Due to the multifactorial inheritance pattern of non-syndromic neural tube defects, and 
the contribution of environmental factors, cases with isolated open neural tube defects 
were excluded.13 Recognized CNS sequelae of open neural tube defects were not 
counted as separate anomalies. For example, if a fetus had ventriculomegaly, a Chiari 
malformation and a myelomeningocele, this was categorized as an isolated neural tube 
defect and excluded.  
Following manual review of the dataset, each case was categorized into 1) a single, 
isolated CNS anomaly (e.g isolated ventriculomegaly), 2) multiple CNS anomalies (e.g 
ventriculomegaly, an interhemispheric cyst and parenchymal defects) or 3) One or more 
CNS anomalies with extra-CNS findings (e.g. ventriculomegaly and a cardiac defect). 
For extra-CNS anomalies, markers of aneuploidy (dilated bowel, echogenic intracardiac 
foci, etc) were excluded, as were placental anomalies or amniotic fluid volume 
abnormalities such as oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios. Growth restriction was 
considered an anomaly outside of the CNS as was a nuchal translucency of >3.5mm. 
Structural anomalies that resolved during the pregnancy, such as a thickened nuchal 
translucency, were included as anomalies. If there was a discrepancy between the MRI 
and ultrasound, the MRI findings were used for classification. Ventriculomegaly was 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classified based on the lateral ventricular diameter as mild (10–12 mm), moderate (12–
15 mm), or severe (> 15 mm).  
Cases with multiple CNS anomalies were then reviewed by a pediatric neurologist to 
ensure that our categorization was accurate. For example, a case initially categorized 
as multiple CNS anomalies where the fetus had mild ventriculomegaly and agenesis of 
the corpus callosum (ACC) was re-categorized as an isolated, single finding of ACC as 
the ventriculomegaly represents colpocephaly, part of the ACC anomaly. When 
possible, images were reviewed to clarify classification.  
For all cases, further ultrasound reports and clinical information from later in pregnancy 
were reviewed, however the findings of the initial referral were used to categorize 
cases. Pregnancy outcomes, and postnatal clinical information or post-mortem findings 
were ascertained when this information was available. However, the majority of 
pregnancies were ultimately managed by the local, referring providers and thus 
outcome data was not available.  
Outcomes 
All variants were classified according to ACMG guidelines and the rate of pathogenic 
(P) or likely pathogenic (LP) genetic variants in the different categories was assessed. 
We calculated rates of LP/P variants that were considered causative of the phenotype 
for fetuses with, 1) a single, isolated CNS anomaly including isolated ventriculomegaly, 
2) multiple CNS anomalies, 3) a CNS anomaly as well as an anomaly in another organ 
system.  
Results 
In total, 268 fetuses with anomalies of the central nervous system were identified; 97 
were classified as single, isolated findings, while 63 had multiple anomalies within the 
CNS, and 108 also had multiple organ system anomalies. The average gestational age 
at the time of enrollment was 22 weeks. MRI was performed on 56 fetuses, of which 
24/56 (43%) cases had discrepant or additional findings compared to ultrasound.   
Pregnancy outcome data is missing for 62 cases (23.1%). Of the 206 with known 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcomes, 112 pregnancies were terminated, 86 delivered a liveborn baby, and eight 
were stillborn or died in the neonatal period.  
Of the 268 sequenced fetuses, a total of 37 (13.8%), had a pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic genetic variant that was considered causative of the fetal phenotype (Figure 
1, Table 1). One of these variants was diagnosed in a monochorionic, diamniotic twin 
gestation. This was considered as a single case. In addition, there were 10 other LP/P 
variants identified but their contribution to the phenotype was uncertain and thus they 
were not reported.  Of the 268 cases in the cohort, 173 (65%) came from the PAGE 
cases overall, and 95 (35%) came from the Columbia group. The overall diagnostic rate 
for the PAGE group was 10.4% (18/173) and for the Columbia group was 20% (19/95). 
Although the diagnostic rates are different, every gene diagnosed in the Columbia 
cohort was included on the PAGE panel and thus the difference in detection is due to 
the difference in cases themselves rather than the approach to sequencing.  
Fetuses with an isolated, single CNS anomaly  
Ninety-seven fetuses had an isolated, single anomaly in the CNS. The average 
gestational age at the time of referral was 21 weeks (range, 11 – 35 weeks). Causative 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were found in 7 (7.2%) (Figure 2). The most 
common isolated finding was isolated mild ventriculomegaly, seen in 23 fetuses, of 
which three (13.0%) had pathogenic or likely pathogenic findings on ES. The isolated 
finding with the highest likelihood of having a finding on ES was agenesis of the corpus 
callosum where 30% (3/10) had pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants. Table 1 details 
the pathogenic findings found in fetuses with isolated CNS anomalies.  
The three pathogenic variants in cases of isolated mild ventriculomegaly were in the 
CHD7, B3GLCT and ARID1A genes. The CHD7 variant, associated with CHARGE 
syndrome was a de novo variant. In the original PAGE study this was initially reported 
as ‘potentially clinically relevant’ because the contribution to the phenotype which 
commonly includes choanal atresia, malformations of the heart, inner ear and retina,14 
was uncertain based on prenatal imaging.  Follow-up at 7 months of age revealed 
bilateral colobomas and left renal agenesis. A post-natal MRI confirmed bilateral, mild 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ventriculomegaly (11-12mm) and the clinical review panel thus reclassified the variant 
as clinically relevant.  
The B3GLCT gene variants causes Peters plus syndrome which is characterized by eye 
abnormalities, short stature, intellectual disability, ventriculomegaly and distinctive 
facies.15 This case had compound heterozygous, autosomal recessive inheritance and 
the family had terminated a prior pregnancy due to ventriculomegaly.  
The third case of isolated ventriculomegaly which occurred in a MCDA gestation had a 
de novo pathogenic variant in the ARID1A gene, consistent with Coffin -Siris 
syndrome.16 Prenatal ultrasounds demonstrated mild, bilateral ventriculomegaly in both 
twins which remained stable throughout pregnancy.  
Thirty percent of fetuses with isolated agenesis of the corpus callosum had a 
pathogenic variant (L1CAM, SHH, and PTCH1). The L1CAM variant was inherited from 
an unaffected mother who had previous unexplained, pregnancies with CNS anomalies.  
The SHH variant arose de novo and the PTCH1 gene variant was inherited from an 
affected father whose disease status was not known to the clinical or research teams at 
the time. Postnatally, the diagnosis of Gorlin syndrome was confirmed clinically. The 
father had been diagnosed with Gorlin syndrome in childhood but had not disclosed 
this.  
Fetuses with multiple CNS anomalies: 
There were 63 fetuses with multiple CNS anomalies, 12 of whom (19.0%), had 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic findings (Table 1). The average gestational age at the 
time of referral was 23 weeks (range 14 – 34 weeks).  
Fetuses with anomalies in multiple organ systems  
Of the 108 cases with anomalies in multiple organ systems, 18 (16.7%) had causative 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic findings. The average gestational age at referral was 21 
weeks (range 11 – 35 weeks). There were 53 cases where the CNS and one other 
organ system was involved. Fetuses with an anomaly in the CNS and renal or 
genitourinary system were most likely to have pathogenic findings.  

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pathogenic/likely pathogenic genetic variants and their inheritance pattern 
Fifty four percent (20/37) of variants were inherited from one or both parents. Of these, 
17 were autosomal recessive, one was X-linked recessive and one was autosomal 
dominant. Forty six percent (17/37) of variants were de novo, 15 of which were 
autosomal dominant and 2 of which were X-linked dominant.  
Discussion   
Principal findings 
In a prospective cohort of pregnancies with unselected fetal central nervous system 
anomalies, in which karyotype and CMA were normal or non-causative, exome 
sequencing revealed a likely pathogenic / pathogenic variant that was considered 
causative of the fetal phenotype in 13.8% (37 / 268) of cases. A diagnosis was more 
than twice as likely in fetuses with multiple CNS anomalies (ES diagnostic rate of 
19.0%) or additional extra-CNS anomalies (ES diagnostic rate of 16.7%) compared to 
fetuses with a single isolated anomaly in the CNS (ES diagnostic rate 7.2%), which is in 
keeping with other studies showing higher rates of pathogenic variants where there are 
multisystem abnormalities.10,11 Over half (54%) of the genetic variants detected were 
inherited, one of which was autosomal dominant, 17 were recessive and one x-linked. 
De novo P/LP variants accounted for just under half (46%).  
Three cases with isolated, mild ventriculomegaly had pathogenic findings on ES. 
Current professional bodies suggest providing families with reassurance in the setting of 
isolated mild ventriculomegaly if they have had a normal karyotype and microarray.18 
Under the current guidelines, these three families would have likely received somewhat 
inaccurate prenatal counseling. The three pathogenic variants were in the CHD7, 
B3GLCT and ARID1A genes. It is of note that additional, subtle abnormalities not 
particularly amenable to sonographic diagnosis were diagnosed after birth in the case 
with CHARGE syndrome demonstrating the limitations of prenatal phenotyping.19 
Detailed phenotyping of neurological changes is challenging prenatally as CNS 
development continues throughout pregnancy and into the postnatal period. Whilst MRI 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can refine the diagnosis of some anomalies1 even when performed, the natural history 
of many conditions is such that changes may not be detected until late in gestation.  
Clinical implications  
The rate of pathogenic findings on ES in 13.8% of cases with CNS anomalies falls 
within the wide range published in the existing literature from 3-55%.17, 20- 22 
Unsurprisingly, the diagnostic yield of ES in our cohort of unselected fetuses is lower 
than cohort of selected fetuses with severe anomalies or in children with postnatal 
referrals to medical genetics where 24-25% have genetic diagnoses.23,24  
Our findings highlight the importance of considering ES even when a minor CNS 
anomaly, such as mild ventriculomegaly or ACC, is found in isolation. Current guidelines 
from the Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine recommend providing reassurance in the 
setting of isolated ventriculomegaly if genetic testing is unremarkable.18 Our finding that 
13% of fetuses with isolated, mild VM had a finding on ES highlights the importance of 
offering ES in the genetic workup of these fetuses prior to providing reassurance.  
Our finding that 30% of cases with isolated agenesis of the corpus callosum had a 
pathogenic, causative variant on ES is higher than one previous literature report22 , but 
in keeping with the report from Lei and colleagues who reported pathogenic variants in 
29% of cases with isolated ACC.25  In the series looking at 65 fetuses with agenesis of 
the corpus callosum, 15% of fetuses with isolated ACC had pathogenic variants on ES 
compared to 42% of fetuses with non-isolated ACC.22 Of note, in this series, almost 
15% of fetuses that were initially diagnosed with isolated ACC subsequently had 
additional anomalies diagnosed. In our series, 2 out of the 3 cases of isolated ACC 
terminated the pregnancy during the second trimester. It is possible that other 
anomalies may been picked up later in pregnancy or postnatally which could have 
contributed to our higher rate of ES findings. However, ours is a small series and further 
studies are required to confirm the rate of LP/P variants associated with isolated ACC. 
Our data support the use of ES if a fetal CNS anomaly is diagnosed prenatally and 
traditional genetic testing is not informative since identifying a genetic etiology can 
provide families and care givers improved insight into the long- and short-term course of 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the child as well as its risk of recurrence. In 2020, the ACMG stated that one can 
consider ES in a fetus with one or more significant anomaly(ies) when routine prenatal 
methods such as karyotype and chromosomal microarray are negative. In 2021, ACMG 
further recommended that in the pediatric population, exome or genome sequencing be 
considered as a first- or second-tier test for patients with congenital anomalies.26. The 
International Society of Prenatal Diagnosis and the Royal College of Obstetricians in the 
UK suggest that sequencing can be useful in the presence of fetal abnormalities when 
other genetic tests are normal yet The American College of Obstetrician Gynecologists 
and the Society for Maternal Fetal Medicine still do not recommend ES in routine 
prenatal diagnosis. Recently in the UK, prenatal ES was introduced by the NHS into 
clinical practice and is indicated for fetuses with multiple major structural abnormalities 
where a monogenic cause is considered likely. This would include major CNS 
anomalies, but exclude isolated mild ventriculomegaly.27,28 
Regardless of governing body recommendations, in the prenatal period the time and 
cost associated with ES presents challenges in choosing appropriate patients for 
testing. This is further complicated by the incomplete phenotyping available prenatally 
which could exclude appropriate candidates.29  
Research implications  
Further use of ES in both the prenatal and postnatal setting with assimilation of both 
genotypes and phenotypes into large data repositories is required to expand the 
experience of single centers and improve our understanding of phenotype-genotype 
relationships. This also will require following pregnancies with unknown or uncertain 
variants or those with discordant phenotypes from the prenatal period through childhood 
to elucidate the causality of the genetic variants and the full expansion of their 
phenotypes. Further research may also focus on the patient experience of undergoing 
ES during pregnancy, the impact on provider healthcare utilization and patient 
outcomes, and the impact on decision making for future pregnancies and family 
planning. 
Strengths and limitations 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is the largest cohort of fetuses with unselected CNS anomalies that have 
undergone ES in the literature to date. The prospectively collected nature of the study 
allowed the pregnancies to follow their natural histories making this study relevant to 
clinical practice where rapid ES may be considered in an ongoing pregnancy.  
Although the overall cohort is the largest in the literature to date, the sample size of 
each specific anomaly remains small which limits the generalizability of our findings. 
The varied interpretations of whether a constellation of CNS anomalies is actually 
representative of one anomaly or multiple CNS anomalies may also limit comparison of 
our results to other cohorts.  And, as always, working within the confines of the prenatal 
phenotype limits the interpretation of prenatal ES. 
Conclusion 
ES for prenatally detected CNS anomalies yields a genetic diagnosis in almost 14% of 
pregnancies that have had a negative genetic workup through traditional karyotype and 
chromosomal microarray. When a CNS anomaly is found in isolation, exome 
sequencing reveals an overall genetic diagnosis in approximately 7% of fetuses with 
higher rates in some isolated findings such as mild ventriculomegaly or ACC similar to 
rates found by others.22,25 
Securing a genetic diagnosis helps families understand the current pathology and 
prognosis as well as facilitates planning for future pregnancies. Although limitations 
remain, including cumbersome interpretation of results and time and cost restraints, ES 
adds utility to the workup of anomalous pregnancies. With time, these limitations will 
diminish. Given its utility, we envision that ES will become an important part of the 
armamentarium of maternal fetal medicine specialists, reproductive geneticists, and 
genetic counselors in the near future. However, for this to become reality in many health 
services, costs will need to fall further and health professional and patient education will 
be required. Similarly, this will require access to laboratories accredited and prepared to 
deliver prenatal exome sequencing.29   
References   

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Van den Veyver IB. Prenatally diagnosed developmental abnormalities of the 
central nervous system and genetic syndromes: A practical review. Prenat Diagn. 
2019;39:666-678.  
2. van Zalen-Sprock MM, van Vugt JM, Karsdorp VH, et al. Ultrasound diagnosis of 
fetal abnormalities and cytogenetic evaluation. Prenat Diagn. 1991;11:655-60.  
3. Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJ, Gosden CM, et al. Ultrasonographically detectable 
markers of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Lancet. 1992;340(8821):704-7.  
4. Wapner RJ, Martin CL, Levy B, et al. Chromosomal microarray versus 
karyotyping for prenatal diagnosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2175-84.  
5. Best S, Wou K, Vora N, et al. Promises, pitfalls and practicalities of prenatal 
whole exome sequencing. Prenat Diagn. 2018;38:10-19.  
6. Vora NL, Powell B, Brandt A, et al. Prenatal exome sequencing in anomalous 
fetuses: new opportunities and challenges. Genet Med. 2017;19:1207-1216.  
7. Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, et al. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation 
of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular 
Pathology. Genet Med. 2015;17:405-24.  
8. Chandler N, Best S, Hayward J, et al. Rapid prenatal diagnosis using targeted 
exome sequencing: a cohort study to assess feasibility and potential impact on 
prenatal counseling and pregnancy management. Genet Med. 2018;20:1430-
1437.  
9. Yang Y, Muzny DM, Xia F, et al. Molecular findings among patients referred for 
clinical whole-exome sequencing. JAMA. 2014;312:1870-9.  
10. Lord J, McMullan DJ, Eberhardt RY, et al. Prenatal exome sequencing analysis 
in fetal structural anomalies detected by ultrasonography (PAGE): a cohort study. 
Lancet. 2019;393(10173):747–57.  
11. Petrovski S, Aggarwal V, Giordano JL, et al. Whole-exome sequencing in the 
evaluation of fetal structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 
2019;393(10173):758–67.  

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Normand EA, Braxton A, Nassef S, et al. Clinical exome sequencing for fetuses 
with ultrasound abnormalities and a suspected Mendelian disorder. Genome 
Med. 2018;10:74.  
13. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins-Obstetrics. ACOG practice bulletin. 
Neural tube defects. Number 187, December 2017. (Replaces committee opinion 
number 44, July 2003). Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2017 Vol 130, No 6, Dec 2017.  
14. Hsu P, Ma A, Wilson M, et al. CHARGE syndrome: a review. J Paediatr Child 
Health. 2014;50:504-11.  
15. Demir GÜ, Lafcı NG, Doğan ÖA, et al. Peters Plus syndrome: a recognizable 
clinical entity. Turk J Pediatr. 2020;62:136-140.  
16. Schrier Vergano S, Santen G, et al. Coffin-Siris Syndrome. 2013 Apr 4 [updated 
2018 Feb 8]. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, 
Stephens K, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA): 
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993–2020. PMID: 23556151. 
17. Fu F, Li R, Li Y, et al. Whole exome sequencing as a diagnostic adjunct to 
clinical testing in fetuses with structural abnormalities. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 2018;51:493-502.  
18. Fox NS, Monteagudo A, Kuller JA, et al. Mild fetal ventriculomegaly: diagnosis, 
evaluation, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018;219:B2-B9.  
19. Busa T, Legendre M, Bauge M, et al. Prenatal findings in children with early 
postnatal diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome. Prenat Diagn. 2016;36:561-7. 
20. Reches A, Hiersch L, Simchoni S, et al. Whole-exome sequencing in fetuses with 
central nervous system abnormalities. J Perinatol. 2018;38:1301-1308.  
21. Tan H, Xie Y, Chen F, et al. Novel and recurrent variants identified in fetuses with 
central nervous system abnormalities by trios-medical exome sequencing. Clin 
Chim Acta. 2020;510:599-604.  
22. Heide S, Spentchian M, Valence S, et al. Prenatal exome sequencing in 65 
fetuses with abnormality of the corpus callosum: contribution to further diagnostic 
delineation. Genet Med. 2020;22:1887-1891.  

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. Zhu X, Petrovski S, Xie P, et al. Whole-exome sequencing in undiagnosed 
genetic diseases: interpreting 119 trios. Genet Med. 2015;17:774-81.  
24. Kin Chau MH, Choy KW. The role of chromosomal microarray and exome 
sequencing in prenatal diagnosis. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2021;33:148-155. 
25. Lei T-Y, She Q, Fu F et al. Prenatal exome sequencing in fetuses with callosal 
anomalies. Prenat Diagn 2022. 28 January published on-line. 
26. Manickam K, McClain MR, Demmer LA, et al. Exome and genome sequencing 
for pediatric patients with congenital anomalies or intellectual disability: an 
evidence-based clinical guideline of the American College of Medical Genetics 
and Genomics (ACMG). Genet Med. 2021;23:2029-2037.  
27. https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Rare-and-Inherited-
Disease-Eligibility-Criteria-November-2020-21.pdf 
28. NHS England and NHS Improvement. Guidance document: Rapid Exome 
Sequencing Service for fetal anomalies testing [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.labs.gosh.nhs.uk/media/1396328/guidance_document_rapid_exome_
sequencing_service_for_fetal_anomalies_v3.pdf   
29. International Society for Prenatal Diagnosis; Society for Maternal and Fetal 
Medicine; Perinatal Quality Foundation. Joint Position Statement from the 
International Society for Prenatal Diagnosis (ISPD), the Society for Maternal 
Fetal Medicine (SMFM), and the Perinatal Quality Foundation (PQF) on the use 
of genome-wide sequencing for fetal diagnosis. Prenat Diagn. 2018;38:6-9.  
30. Wright CF, Fitzgerald TW, Jones WD, et al. Genetic diagnosis of developmental 
disorders in the DDD study: a scalable analysis of genome-wide research data. 
Lancet 2015; 385: 1305–14.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure and Table Legends 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart of all cases in the cohort and the rates of pathogenic and likely 
pathogenic variants on exome sequencing that were considered causative of the 
phenotype.  
 
Figure 2. Flowchart of isolated CNS anomalies and the rates of pathogenic and likely 
pathogenic variants on exome sequencing that were considered causative of the 
phenotype. 
 
Table 1. Rates of likely pathogenic variants on exome sequenicng (ES) in fetuses with 
central nervous system (CNS) anomalies and the genes involved. 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1.  
 
Rates of likely pathogenic / pathogenic variants on ES in fetuses with CNS anomalies 
n  
LP / P finding on 
ES (%) 
Genes involved 
Isolated, single CNS anomaly  
97 
7 (7.2) 
Mild ventriculomegaly  
23 
3 (13.0) 
CHD7*, B3GLCT*, ARID1A 
Moderate ventriculomegaly 
15 
Severe ventriculomegaly  
18 
1 (5.6) 
KIDINS220 
Unknown severity of 
ventriculomegaly  
8 
Agenesis of the corpus callosum  
10 
3 (30.0) 
L1CAM*, SHH, PTCH1 
Cerebellar hypoplasia  
2 
Dandy walker  
5 
Encephalocele  
3 
Holoprosencephaly  
6 
Parenchymal defect  
1 
Intracranial Hemorrhage  
1 
Other  
5 
Multiple CNS Anomalies  
63 
12 (19.0) 
FLNA*, C5ORF42, CHD7*, 
GPSM2, TUBB3, ARMC9, 
RAC1, OCRL, TUBA1A, 
ASPM, TUBB*, PIK3R2, 
 
 
 
 
Anomalies in multiple organ 
systems including CNS 
108 
18 (16.7) 
TSC2*, TMEM67*, SCN2A*, 
COL4A1*, CE0, CC2D2A, 
FLVCR2*, FGFR2, PORCN, 
CPT2, TCTN2*, TMEM67*, 
PEX1, ISPD, CHD7, 
CDKN1C*, RAB23*, TCTN3 
 
*previously published 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Isolated CNS anomalies 
n = 97 
7 pathogenic variants (7.2%) 
Agenesis of the corpus callosum  
n = 10 
3 pathogenic variants (30%)  
Gene (GA at referral): 
L1CAM (17 6/7) 
SHH (22 3/7) 
PTCH1 (22 3/7) 
Isolated Ventriculomegaly 
n = 64 
4 pathogenic variants (6.3%) 
Isolated mild ventriculomegaly 
(10-12mm) 
n = 23 
3 pathogenic variants (13%) 
Gene (GA at referral): 
CHD7 (20 5/7) 
B3GLCT (16 1/7) 
ARID1A (19 5/7) 
 
Isolated moderate 
ventriculomegaly 
(12 – 15 mm) 
n = 15 
0 pathogenic variants 
Isolated severe ventriculomegaly 
(≥15mm) 
n = 18 
1 pathogenic variant (5.6%) 
Gene (GA at referral): 
KIDINS220 (16 5/7) 
 
Isolated ventriculomegaly (unquantified) 
n = 8 
0 pathogenic variants 
 

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. All CNS Anomalies Flowchart 
 
 
 
 
Note, the CNS anomalies are obtained from an unselected cohort of all anomalies presenting to the fetal centers of the study 
 
 
 
 
 

