The genetic landscape of familial congenital hydrocephalus 
Ranad Shaheen1, Mohammed Adeeb Sebai1, Nisha Patel1, Nour Ewida1, Wesam Kurdi2, Ikhlass 
Altweijri3, Sameera Sogaty4, Elham Almardawi2, Mohammed Zain Seidahmed5, Abdulrahman 
Alnemri6, Sateesh Madirevula1, Niema Ibrahim1, Firdous Abdulwahab1, Mais Hashem1, Tarfa 
Al-Sheddi1, Rana Alomar1, Eman Alobeid1,  Bahauddin Sallout7, Badi AlBaqawi7, Wajeih 
AlAali7,14, Nouf Ajaji7, Harry Lesmana8, Robert J Hopkin8, Lucie Dupuis9, Roberto Mendoza-
Londono9, Hadeel Al Rukban9, Grace Yoon9,10, Eissa Faqeih11, Fowzan S Alkuraya1,12,13 
1Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia 
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
3Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
4Department of Medical Genetics, King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
5Department of Pediatrics, Security Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
6Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
7Maternal Fetal Medicine Department, Women's Specialized Hospital, King Fahad Medical 
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
8Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, USA 
9Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process which may lead to
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as an
‘Accepted Article’, doi: 10.1002/ana.24964
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

10Division of Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
11Department of Pediatric Subspecialties, Children’s Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
12Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia 
13Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia 
14Bnoon Medical Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
Key words: WDR81, EML1, MPDZ, heterotopia, aqueduct stenosis, cerebellar hypoplasia 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

ABSTRACT 
Objective: Congenital hydrocephalus is an important birth defect, the genetics of which remains 
incompletely understood.  To date, only four genes are known to cause Mendelian diseases in 
which congenital hydrocephalus is the main or sole clinical feature, two X-linked (L1CAM and 
AP1S2) and two autosomal recessive (CCDC88C and MPDZ).  In this study, we aimed to 
determine the genetic etiology of familial congenital hydrocephalus with the assumption that 
these cases represent Mendelian forms of the disease.   
Methods: Exome sequencing combined, where applicable, with positional mapping. 
Results: We identified a likely causal mutation in the majority of these families (21/27, 78%), 
spanning 16 genes, none of which is X-linked.  Ciliopathies and dystroglycanopathies were the 
most common etiologies of congenital hydrocephalus in our cohort (19% and 26%, respectively).  
In one family with four affected members, we identified a homozygous truncating variant in 
EML1, which we propose as a novel cause of congenital hydrocephalus in addition to its 
suggested role in cortical malformation.  Similarly, we show that recessive mutations in WDR81, 
previously linked to cerebellar ataxia, mental retardation, and dysequilibrium syndrome 2, cause 
severe congenital hydrocephalus.  Furthermore, we confirm the previously reported candidacy of 
MPDZ by presenting a phenotypic spectrum of congenital hydrocephalus associated with five 
recessive alleles.   
Interpretation: Our study highlights the importance of recessive mutations in familial congenital 
hydrocephalus and expands the locus heterogeneity of this condition. 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

INTRODUCTION 
Hydrocephalus is defined as an active distension of the ventricular system of the brain due to 
inadequate passage of cerebrospinal fluid from its point of production within the cerebral 
ventricles to its point of absorption into the systemic circulation 1.  Hydrocephalus is a highly 
morbid condition if not managed appropriately to relieve the central nervous system from the 
building pressure caused by a distended ventricular system.  Environmental and genetic factors 
are known to play a role in the etiology of hydrocephalus although their relative contribution 
varies with age.  For example, whereas infections are the leading cause of hydrocephalus in 
children, single gene mutations are most commonly associated with congenital (prenatal) 
hydrocephalus 2.   
Congenital hydrocephalus is a severe birth defect affecting 4.65 per 10,000 births and is 
associated with high morbidity and mortality 3, 4.  Although many syndromes can be associated 
with congenital hydrocephalus, there are surprisingly very few genes that are known to cause the 
disease as the sole or primary clinical feature 5.  L1CAM (MIM 308840) is the best known 
disease gene in congenital hydrocephalus with an estimated contribution to as many as 30% of 
suspected X-linked cases 6.  This gene has been linked to a number of neurological phenotypes 
with or without congenital hydrocephalus, in addition to non-syndromic congenital 
hydrocephalus 7.  AP1S2 (MIM 300629) is another X-linked gene that has been found to be 
mutated in patients with congenital hydrocephalus, including those with phenotypes once 
proposed to be allelic to L1CAM-related disorders 8, 9.  Much less is known about the autosomal 
contribution to congenital hydrocephalus.  In 2010, Ekici et al reported a homozygous truncating 
mutation in CCDC88C in a consanguineous multiplex family, a finding that was independently 
confirmed by a subsequent report 10, 11.  In 2013, we reported the identification of a novel locus 
Page 4 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

in two families with autosomal recessive congenital hydrocephalus 12.  A founder homozygous 
truncating variant in MPDZ was identified in both families.  No independent confirmation has 
been published to date to confirm the candidacy of MPDZ.   
Despite the identification of these four genes, the genetic landscape of congenital hydrocephalus 
remains largely unexplored 13.  Previous studies have mostly targeted L1CAM sequencing in 
cohorts of patients with congenital hydrocephalus 6, 14, 15.  Pursuing Mendelian causes of 
congenital hydrocephalus is important because they can expand our knowledge of the molecular 
underpinning of the disease.  It is also a pre-requisite for the proper interpretation of genome 
sequencing in patients with congenital hydrocephalus with the attendant benefit of precise 
recurrence risk estimate.  In this study, we report on the genomic analysis of a relatively large 
cohort of families with recurrence of congenital hydrocephalus.  Our results reveal marked 
genetic heterogeneity, which we further expand by proposing EML1 and WDR81 as bone fide 
disease genes in congenital hydrocephalus. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Human Subjects 
The cohort described in the study comprises families with at least two children who were 
diagnosed with congenital hydrocephalus.  Informed consent was obtained from all study 
participants who were enrolled under an IRB-approved research protocol (KFSHRC RAC# 2080 
006 and 2121 053).  Additionally, we include three previously unpublished patients each with a 
biallelic mutation in MPDZ diagnosed by clinical exome sequencing.  Informed consent was 
Page 5 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

obtained to publish their clinical data by their respective institutions (Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital and The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto). 
Genomic Analysis 
All patients recruited through KFSHRC underwent autozygosity mapping irrespective of the 
given history of consanguinity to investigate potentially unrecognized relatedness given the high 
degree of inbreeding in Saudi Arabia.  DNA samples from the all the affected patients were 
genotyped using Axiom SNP chip array following the manufacturer’s instructions.  This was 
followed by genomewide autozygome analysis using runs of homozygosity >2Mb as surrogates 
of autozygosity, as determined by AutoSNPa16.  In parallel, the previously described 
“Mendeliome assay” was applied to search for likely causal variants in previously reported 
ciliopathy genes 17.  When negative, exome sequencing was pursued as follows.  Exome capture 
was performed using TruSeq Exome Enrichment kit (Illumina) following the manufacturer’s 
protocol.  Samples were prepared as an Illumina sequencing library, and in the second step, the 
sequencing libraries were enriched for the desired target using the Illumina Exome Enrichment 
protocol.  The captured libraries were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 2000 Sequencer.  The 
reads were mapped against UCSC hg19 (http://genome.ucsc.edu/) by BWA (http://bio-
bwa.sourceforge.net/).  The SNPs and Indels were detected by SAMTOOLS 
(http://samtools.sourceforge.net/).  Variants from WES were filtered such that only novel (or 
very low frequency <0.1%), coding/splicing, homozygous variants that are within the 
autozygome of the affected individual and are predicted to be pathogenic were considered as 
likely causal variants 18, 19.  Frequency of variants was determined using publically available 
variant databases (1000 Genomes, Exome Variant Server, ExAC and gnomAD) as well as a 
database of 4,577 in-house ethnically-matched exomes and gene panels.  Pathogenicity was 
Page 6 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

likely if the mutation is loss-of-function (splicing/truncating) or, in the case of missense/in-frame 
indels, replaces a highly conserved amino acid and is predicted to be pathogenic by the three in-
silico prediction modules PolyPhen, SIFT and CADD.  All reported variants in this study have 
been Sanger validated and their segregation with the disease confirmed in the respective families. 
 
RESULTS 
Congenital Hydrocephalus is Genetically Heterogeneous 
A total of 27 families with recurrent congenital hydrocephalus were recruited (see Table S2 for 
clinical details and Figure S1 for pedigrees).  Genomic analysis revealed a likely causal variant 
in the majority (21/27, 78%) of cases (Table S1).  No mutations in L1CAM or AP1S2 were 
identified even though six families only had affected males (see Figure S1, and Figure 2 for all 
family pedigrees).  Dystroglycanopathies was the most common disease category accounting for 
26% of cases (7 families, 7 mutations in 6 genes).  As shown in Table S2, most of these cases 
were suspected clinically by the finding of elevated serum creatinine kinase (CK).  Ciliopathies 
was the second most commonly diagnosed category accounting for 19% of cases (5 families, 5 
mutations in 5 genes).  The ciliopathy cases met the diagnostic criteria of Meckel-Gruber 
syndrome (n=4) or Acrocallosal syndrome (n=1).   
Less known causes of congenital hydrocephalus identified included the recently identified 
KIAA1109-related Alkuraya-Reymond syndrome in families 12 and 19 with congenital 
hydrocephalus and severe arthrogryposis (revision in preparation), and PLAT-related 
hydranencephaly and diaphragmatic hernia18. 
Mutations in EML1 and WDR81 Cause Congenital Hydrocephalus 
Page 7 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

A homozygous truncating variant was identified in EM1L in family 22 IV:7 (Figure 1A).  This is 
a 2yr old girl with congenital hydrocephalus, profound global developmental delay, intractable 
epilepsy, and positive family history (Figure 1 and Table S2).  Brain MRI showed extensive 
polymicrogyria, band heterotopia, agenesis of corpus callosum, dilated lateral ventricles, 
compressed tentorium cerebelli and herniated cerebellar tonsil (Figure 1B-G).  Exome 
sequencing and homozygosity mapping revealed a nonsense mutation in EML1 
(NM_004434.2:c.1567C>T, p. (Arg523*) (Figure 1H). The variant introduces a premature stop 
codon in the two known NCBI Reference Sequence protein-coding transcripts (NM_004434.2 
and NM_001008707.1) and has a CADD score of 37.  It is absent in 4,577 ethnically matched 
exomes and panels and ExAC as well as gnomAD database.  Sanger sequencing confirmed the 
segregation of the variant in all the unaffected siblings in the family.  The variant is located at the 
end of the N-terminal ß-propeller domain of the protein and is predicted to cause loss of the 
largest part of C-terminal ß-propeller (Figure 1 H).  
WDR81 was found to be mutated in two families with severe congenital hydrocephalus (Figure 2 
A).  Family 13 consists of a consanguineous couple who lost two pregnancies with severe 
hydrocephalus and cerebellar hypoplasia (Figure 2 B and C).  A homozygous truncating 
mutation was identified in WDR81 NM_001163809.1: c.3286C>T, p. (Gln1096*) (Figure 2F).  
Family 26 also consists of a consanguineous couple with history of a stillbirth diagnosed 
antenatally with massive hydrocephalus and absent cerebellum.  Similar findings were detected 
on antenatal ultrasound of the subsequent pregnancy that resulted in a male neonate with severe 
hydrocephalus and Dandy-Walker malformation (Figure 2D and E).  A homozygous missense 
variant in WDR81 was identified NM_001163809.1:c.845G>A, p. (Gly282Glu) (Figure 2F) that 
Page 8 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

is completely absent in ExAC, gnomAD and 4,577 Saudis with high pathogenicity scores (SIFT: 
deleterious (0), PolyPhen: probably damaging (1), CADD (26)).  
Confirming MPDZ as a bona fide Congenital Hydrocephalus Disease Gene 
Three families, in our cohort harbored the founder MPDZ truncating variant 
NM_003829.3:c.628C>T, p. (Gln210*) (Table S1).  We estimated the carrier frequency of this 
mutation at 0.00044 (2 among 4,575 screened), which probably explains why this was the single 
most common founder mutation in our cohort.  Representative clinical images of the affected 
members in families 4 and 24 with MPDZ mutation are shown in Figure 3A and 3B.  Given the 
lack of a second mutation in MPDZ in our cohort, we initiated an international collaboration to 
seek additional pathogenic alleles and determine their clinical consequences.  This collaboration 
uncovered three previously unpublished cases that are described below: 
Family 1 (The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto (SICK F1)): The proband is a 2.5 year old 
girl born to a consanguineous Palestinian couple.  Antenatal U/S revealed mild hydrocephalus, 
polyhydramnios, and a two-vessel cord.  Postnatal MRI showed dilatation of the lateral 
ventricles and the third ventricle, and bilateral subependymal grey-matter heterotopia.  There was 
a soft tissue structure obliterating the cerebral aqueduct (Figure 3 C and D).  Past-medical history 
is also notable for a moderate ASD, right sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia and macular 
hypoplasia.  Fine motor skills and language are nearly within the normal range, but she had 
delayed motor development.  Dysmorphic features include frontal bossing, facial asymmetry, a 
bulbous nose, persistent fetal pads and striking creases over her knees.  Clinical exome 
sequencing revealed a novel homozygous one base pair deletion in MPDZ with resulting 
frameshift and premature truncation NM_001330637.1: c.4469delA, p. (Gln1490Argfs*19).  The 
parents were confirmed heterozygous carriers of the mutation. 
Page 9 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Family 2 (The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto (SICK F2))):  An 8 year old male was 
referred to clinical genetics for multiple congenital anomalies (foveal dysplasia, portal vein 
thrombosis, lung hypoplasia, aberrant subclavian artery, malrotation of the gut, and sensorineural 
hearing loss).  Parents are non-consanguineous of Scottish/Irish/Dutch descent with negative 
family history.  CT of chest at age 4m showed absence of the right upper lobe bronchus and 
small unilobar right lung.  Eye evaluation at age 3yrs showed foveal dysplasia, thin inner retina, 
and bilateral lacrimal ducts stenosis.  On examination at age 5.5 years, the following were noted: 
two posterior hair whorls, downslanting palpebral fissures, posteriorly rotated ears, 
microretrognathia, small teeth, joint hypermobility and normal neurological examination.  MRI 
brain showed small olfactory bulbs, minimal dilatation of the lateral brain ventricles which have 
squared frontal horns and dilated occipital horns, multiple bilateral foci of subependymal nodular 
grey matter heterotopia, an enlarged massa intermedia and possibly accessory commissures in 
the third ventricle (Figure 3E and F).  Clinical exome sequencing revealed two novel 
heterozygous variants in MPDZ that confirmed to be inherited in trans: 
(NM_001330637.1:c.2230C>T, p. (Arg744*) and c.3211C>T, p. (Arg1071*). 
Family 3 (Cincinnati Children’s (CIN F1)): a 15 months old male referred from Kuwait for liver 
transplant evaluation.  He was a product of full term pregnancy but was born small for 
gestational age (birth weight 2450 grams).  He had prolonged NICU course due to cholestatic 
jaundice and liver biopsy was consistent with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis.  He 
was also found to have a small left multicystic dysplastic kidney.  His echocardiography was 
normal.  Parents are first cousins and he has a healthy sister.  On initial physical examination (15 
months old) he was noted to have relative macrocephaly and a large full anterior fontanelle.  He 
also had bilateral iris coloboma, prominent optic nerve, hypotonia and reduced reflexes.  Brain 
Page 10 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

MRI revealed enlarged third and lateral ventricles and extra-axial spaces, and increased signal 
intensity within the central tegmental tracts and frontal horns which may represent areas of 
localized hypomyelination or gliosis (Figure 3G and H).  Although NGS panel revealed a likely 
cause of his cholestasis (homozygous TJP2 NM_001170416.1: c.570_574dup, p. 
(Leu192Profs*3)), we hypothesized that he has another distinct neurological disorder and 
proceeded with clinical exome sequencing, which revealed, in addition to the pathogenic variant 
in TJP2, a novel homozygous variant in MPDZ gene (NM_001330637.1: c.5278 G>A, 
p.(Ala1760Thr)).  The variant is absent in ExAC and predicted to be pathogenic (PolyPhen: 
probably damaging (0.948), SIFT: deleterious (0.01) and CADD 34).   
 
DISCUSSION 
Although congenital hydrocephalus is known to be enriched for genetic causes compared to 
other forms of pediatric hydrocephalus, little is known about the magnitude of this genetic 
contribution.  Small family size in the studied populations greatly limits recurrence even in 
Mendelian forms of the disease.  Furthermore, until recently only L1CAM has been known to 
cause non-syndromic congenital hydrocephalus so studies on the genetics of the disease have 
been largely limited to investigating sequence variants in this gene 20.  To our knowledge, our 
study is the first to take a comprehensive genomic approach in the investigation of a cohort of 
congenital hydrocephalus selected only on the basis of recurrence to enrich for Mendelian 
causes. 
Consistent with our prior experience in the study of genetics of recessive diseases 21-26, we found 
a high hit rate of exome sequencing in the study cohort.  Although recurrence in our cohort was 
Page 11 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

not selected on the basis of autosomal recessive inheritance (some families had male-only 
affected members), our analysis did not reveal any X-linked mutations.  This is surprising when 
one considers the reports of up to 74% of congenital hydrocephalus in families with male 
recurrence caused by L1CAM mutations 6.  This may be explained by the significant contribution 
of autosomal recessive mutations to the etiology of recurrent congenital hydrocephalus in our 
cohort.  In addition, we note that the strictly familial nature of our cohort limits the contribution 
of de novo L1CAM mutations, although these account for a very small percentage of previously 
reported mutations 15. 
EML1 encodes a microtubule-binding protein that influences planar polarity.  It has been shown 
to determine the mitotic plate angle of neuroprogenitors in relation to the periventricular 
germinal zone protein, and that its deficiency causes abnormal migration pattern with resulting 
band heterotopia in mouse 27.  In that same study, two missense, likely hypomorphic variants in 
EML1 were identified in two patients with band heterotopia 27.  The family in this study has, in 
addition to band heterotopia, severe congenital hydrocephalus in several affected members.  We 
posit that the severe, potentially null, nature of the mutation resulted in a much more severe 
migration disorder and abnormal posterior fossa configuration with resulting “distal” 
hydrocephalus.  Thus, not only does our study provide the first independent confirmation of 
EML1 involvement in band heterotopia in humans, but it also expands the phenotype to also 
include severe congenital hydrocephalus.   
Similarly, our study expands the phenotypes associated with WDR81 to also include severe 
congenital hydrocephalus with cerebellar hypoplasia.  In 2011, Gulsuner and colleagues reported 
a single consanguineous family with quadrupedal locomotion, mental retardation, and cerebro-
cerebellar hypoplasia (CAMRQ) in which they identified a homozygous missense variant in 
Page 12 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

WDR81 28.  Although this association has not been independently confirmed by follow up reports 
in humans, this finding helped in the mapping of an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mutant 
mouse with Purkinje fiber degeneration to a missense variant in WDR81 29.  Unlike the mutation 
reported in the context of CAMRQ (P856L) and the mouse mutation (L1349P), we report the 
first truncating mutation Gln45*, which may explain the much more severe phenotype we 
observed in this family.  Surprisingly, the same severe phenotype was observed in the other 
family we report with a homozygous missense variant, which suggests that this variant is an 
equally severe loss of function mutation.  The independent identification of likely causal 
mutations in WDR81 in two families with a strikingly similar phenotype comprising a lethal form 
of congenital hydrocephalus with cerebellar hypoplasia strongly support the notion that WDR81 
is a bone fide autosomal recessive disease gene for this phenotype. 
We have originally reported MPDZ in two families (one with long term survival to adulthood) 
with a remarkably consistent phenotype comprising severe congenital hydrocephalus with 
variable penetrance of heterotopia, coloboma and ASD 12.  Lack of subsequent reports and the 
suggestion that MPDZ mutation may result in an eye-limited phenotype cast doubt on the 
original link to congenital hydrocephalus 30.  However, we show in this study that the founder 
mutation in MPDZ is the most commonly encountered mutation in familial congenital 
hydrocephalus, consistent with its relatively high carrier frequency.  More importantly, we report 
three additional patients each with a novel biallelic variant in MPDZ that is likely deleterious and 
they all share the core feature of hydrocephalus, albeit of variable severity.  Patient 1 also 
features coloboma, strabismus and ASD, and Patient 2 features coloboma that we reported at 
variable penetrance in the original families.  In addition, all additional families appear to share 
Page 13 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

some degree of heterotopia, which suggests that this is an important clinical consequence of 
MPDZ mutation in humans.  
Our study is not designed to be generalizable to all forms of congenital hydrocephalus.  
However, it seems reasonable to recommend that a prenatally diagnosed hydrocephalus should 
be aggressively investigated for the possibility of a Mendelian cause.  Exome sequencing of 
these cases is warranted given the broad differential diagnosis and the high yield of this 
diagnostic tool in the setting of Mendelian forms of the disease.  While others have 
recommended L1CAM sequencing in all cases of congenital hydrocephalus, we believe the 
decreasing cost of exome sequencing and the genetic heterogeneity of the condition warrant 
considering exome sequencing as the first-tier test in these patients.  The unsolved cases in our 
series may represent non-Mendelian familial aggregation 31.  Alternatively, they may harbor 
challenging classes of Mendelian mutations that evaded detection using our standard filtering 
strategy and these will be subject to deeper scrutiny in the near future. 
In summary, our results show a remarkably high contribution of recessive mutations to familial 
congenital hydrocephalus that clearly surpass that of L1CAM, at least in our study population.  
We provide independent confirmation of MPDZ as a bona fide congenital hydrocephalus disease 
gene, and expand the phenotype of EML1 and WDR81 to also include congenital hydrocephalus 
in severe cases.  We encourage the use of exome sequencing to investigate an underlying genetic 
cause of congenital hydrocephalus, especially in familial cases. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Page 14 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

We thank the study families for their enthusiastic participation.  We also thank the Sequencing 
and Genotyping Core Facilities at KFSHRC for their technical help.  The participation of 
numerous clinicians in the care of the patients described here is acknowledged.  This work was 
supported in part by King Salman Center for Disability Research grant (FSA), and KACST grant 
13-BIO1113-20 (FSA).  We acknowledge the support of the Saudi Human Genome Program 
(FSA). 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION 
 
RS and FSA Contributed to the conception and design of the study; RS, MAS, NP, NE, WK, IA, 
SS, EA, MZS, AA, SM, NI, FA, MH, TA, RA, EA, BS, BA, WA, NA, HL, RJH, RD, RML, HA, 
GY, EF and FSA contributed to the acquisition and analysis of data; RS, MAS, NE, HL, RJH, 
RD, RML, HA, GY, EF and FSA contributed to drafting the text and preparing the figures.  
 
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
None to declare 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

REFERENCES 
1. 
Rekate HL. The definition and classification of hydrocephalus: a personal recommendation to 
stimulate debate. Cerebrospinal fluid research. 2008;5(1):1. 
2. 
Corns R, Martin A. Hydrocephalus. Surgery (Oxford). 2012;30(3):142-8. 
3. 
Garne E, Loane M, Addor M-C, Boyd PA, Barisic I, Dolk H. Congenital hydrocephalus–prevalence, 
prenatal diagnosis and outcome of pregnancy in four European regions. european journal of paediatric 
neurology. 2010;14(2):150-5. 
4. 
Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbrick DD, Warf BC. Hydrocephalus in children. The Lancet. 
2016;387(10020):788-99. 
5. 
Kousi M, Katsanis N. The Genetic Basis of Hydrocephalus. Annual review of neuroscience. 
2016(0). 
6. 
Finckh U, Schröder J, Ressler B, Veske A, Gal A. Spectrum and detection rate of L1CAM 
mutations in isolated and familial cases with clinically suspected L1-disease. American journal of medical 
genetics. 2000;92(1):40-6. 
7. 
Fransen E, Van Camp G, Vits L, Willems PJ. L1-associated diseases: clinical geneticists divide, 
molecular geneticists unite. Human molecular genetics. 1997;6(10):1625-32. 
8. 
Fried K. X-linked mental retardation and/or hydrocephalus. Clinical genetics. 1972;3(4):258-63. 
9. 
Cacciagli P, Desvignes J-P, Girard N, et al. AP1S2 is mutated in X-linked Dandy–Walker 
malformation with intellectual disability, basal ganglia disease and seizures (Pettigrew syndrome). 
European Journal of Human Genetics. 2014;22(3):363-8. 
10. 
Ekici AB, Hilfinger D, Jatzwauk M, et al. Disturbed Wnt signalling due to a mutation in CCDC88C 
causes an autosomal recessive non-syndromic hydrocephalus with medial diverticulum. Molecular 
syndromology. 2010;1(3):99-112. 
11. 
Drielsma A, Jalas C, Simonis N, et al. Two novel CCDC88C mutations confirm the role of DAPLE in 
autosomal recessive congenital hydrocephalus. Journal of medical genetics. 2012;49(11):708-12. 
12. 
Al-Dosari MS, Al-Owain M, Tulbah M, et al. Mutation in MPDZ causes severe congenital 
hydrocephalus. Journal of medical genetics. 2013;50(1):54-8. 
13. 
Tully HM, Dobyns WB. Infantile hydrocephalus: a review of epidemiology, classification and 
causes. European journal of medical genetics. 2014;57(8):359-68. 
14. 
Weller S, Gärtner J. Genetic and clinical aspects of X-linked hydrocephalus (L1 disease): 
Mutations in the L1CAM gene. Human mutation. 2001;18(1):1-12. 
15. 
Vos YJ, Hofstra RM. An updated and upgraded L1CAM mutation database. Human mutation. 
2010;31(1):E1102-E9. 
16. 
Carr IM, Flintoff KJ, Taylor GR, Markham AF, Bonthron DT. Interactive visual analysis of SNP data 
for rapid autozygosity mapping in consanguineous families. Human mutation. 2006;27(10):1041-6. 
17. 
Group SM. Comprehensive gene panels provide advantages over clinical exome sequencing for 
Mendelian diseases. Genome Biol. 2015 Jun 26;16:134. 
18. 
Alkuraya FS. The application of next-generation sequencing in the autozygosity mapping of 
human recessive diseases. Human genetics. 2013;132(11):1197-211. 
19. 
Alkuraya FS. Discovery of mutations for Mendelian disorders. Human Genetics. 2016:1-9. 
20. 
Adle-Biassette H, Saugier-Veber P, Fallet-Bianco C, et al. Neuropathological review of 138 cases 
genetically tested for X-linked hydrocephalus: evidence for closely related clinical entities of unknown 
molecular bases. Acta neuropathologica. 2013;126(3):427-42. 
21. 
Alazami AM, Patel N, Shamseldin HE, et al. Accelerating novel candidate gene discovery in 
neurogenetic disorders via whole-exome sequencing of prescreened multiplex consanguineous families. 
Cell reports. 2015;10(2):148-61. 
Page 16 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

22. 
Shamseldin HE, Alshammari M, Al-Sheddi T, et al. Genomic analysis of mitochondrial diseases in 
a consanguineous population reveals novel candidate disease genes. Journal of medical genetics. 
2012;49(4):234-41. 
23. 
Abu-Safieh L, Alrashed M, Anazi S, et al. Autozygome-guided exome sequencing in retinal 
dystrophy patients reveals pathogenetic mutations and novel candidate disease genes. Genome 
research. 2013;23(2):236-47. 
24. 
Anazi S, Maddirevula S, Faqeih E, et al. Clinical genomics expands the morbid genome of 
intellectual disability and offers a high diagnostic yield. Molecular Psychiatry. 2016. 
25. 
Shamseldin HE, Maddirevula S, Faqeih E, et al. Increasing the sensitivity of clinical exome 
sequencing through improved filtration strategy. Genetics in Medicine. 2016. 
26. 
Shaheen R, Szymanska K, Basu B, et al. Characterizing the morbid genome of ciliopathies. 
Genome Biology. 2016;17(1):242. 
27. 
Kielar M, Tuy FPD, Bizzotto S, et al. Mutations in Eml1 lead to ectopic progenitors and neuronal 
heterotopia in mouse and human. Nature neuroscience. 2014;17(7):923-33. 
28. 
Gulsuner S, Tekinay AB, Doerschner K, et al. Homozygosity mapping and targeted genomic 
sequencing reveal the gene responsible for cerebellar hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion in a 
consanguineous kindred. Genome research. 2011;21(12):1995-2003. 
29. 
Traka M, Millen KJ, Collins D, et al. WDR81 is necessary for purkinje and photoreceptor cell 
survival. Journal of Neuroscience. 2013;33(16):6834-44. 
30. 
Ali M, Hocking PM, McKibbin M, et al. Mpdz null allele in an avian model of retinal degeneration 
and mutations in human leber congenital amaurosis and retinitis pigmentosa. Investigative 
ophthalmology & visual science. 2011;52(10):7432-40. 
31. 
Munch TN, Rostgaard K, Rasmussen M-LH, Wohlfahrt J, Juhler M, Melbye M. Familial 
aggregation of congenital hydrocephalus in a nationwide cohort. Brain. 2012;135(8):2409-15. 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

FIGURE LEGENDS 
Figure 1: A) Pedigree of family 22 showing the consanguinity between the parents. Red asterisks 
indicate individuals from whom DNA was available for testing mutation segregation. B) Facial 
picture to the index in family 22 with mutation in EML1 showing the macrocephaly, and 
plagiocephaly. C-G ) MRI images of the index in family 22 showing band heterotopia (white 
arrows), polymicrogyria (red arrows) and hydrocephalus (blue arrows). H) Upper panel: 
Diagram of EML1 and sequence chromatogram of the nonsense mutation with the parent tracing 
shown for comparison (sequence differences are indicated by black asterisks, red arrows indicate 
the sites of the mutations). Lower panel: schematic of EML1 protein showing the position of the 
early stop codon (yellow triangle) upstream the large part of the C-terminal ß-propeller domain 
(Protein domains and positions was based on PMID:24706829). 
Figure 2: A) Pedigree of families 13 and 26 showing their consanguineous nature.  Red asterisks 
indicate individuals from whom DNA was available for segregation analysis.  B and C) 
Ultrasound images for the affected member in family13 with the nonsense mutation in WDR81 
showing massive ventriculomegaly (B) and dilated posterior fossa (C). D and E) Ultrasound and 
CT scan images for the affected member in family 26 with missense mutation in WDR81 
showing hydrocephalus (blue arrows), absent cerebellum and abnormal brain tissue. F) Upper 
panel: Diagram of WDR81 and sequence chromatogram of the two mutations in this gene with 
the control tracing for comparison (sequence differences are indicated by black asterisks; red 
arrows indicate the sites of the mutations). Lower panel: schematic of WDR81 protein showing 
the position of the early stop codon (yellow triangle) upstream the seven WRD repeat domains of 
this protein (protein domains and positions were based on the database uniprot.org). 
Page 18 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Figure 3: A-H representative clinical images to the affected members with mutation in MPDZ A) 
T2 Axial MRI image for the affected member in family 4 showing massively enlarged lateral 
ventricles (red arrow) and simplified gyration pattern (white arrow). B) Ultrasound image for the 
affected member in family 24 showing the severe ventriculomegaly (red arrow) and signs of 
holoprosencephaly.  C and D) are Axial FLAIR and sagittal T1 of the brain MRI images for 
patient in SICK F1 showing moderate dilatation of the lateral ventricles with extensive nodular 
gray matter heterotopia (red arrow) along the ependyma of the lateral ventricles bilaterally which 
is most confluent at the trigones and occipital horns. There is no midline shift or Chiari 
malformation.  There is some fusion of the forniceal columns and a prominent massa intermedia 
with some fusion of the thalami also suspected.  E and F) Brain MRI images for patient in SICK 
F2 showing dilatation of the lateral ventricles with extensive nodular gray matter heterotopia (red 
arrow) noted along the ependyma of the lateral ventricles bilaterally which is most confluent at 
the trigones and occipital horns.  A thin linear band in the midline appears to extend from the 
prominent mass intermediate to the proximal aqueduct (blue arrow). G and H) Brain MRI images 
for patient in CIN F1 showing enlarged lateral ventricles.  I): Upper panel: Diagram of MPDZ 
where red arrows indicate the sites of the five with five recessive alleles. Lower panel: schematic 
of MPDZ protein showing the showing the location of the mutations (yellow triangle) (protein 
domains and positions were based on the database uniprot.org). 
 
Table S1: Genomic data for the Saudi families included in this study. 
Table S2: Clinical summaries for the Saudi families included in this study that the likely 
causative mutation has been identified and their diagnosis were established. 
Page 19 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Table S3: Pedigree of the Saudi families included in this study showing the consanguinity of the 
parents. Red asterisks indicate individuals from whom DNA was available for testing mutation 
segregation. 
 
Page 20 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

  
 
 
Figure 1  
 
255x190mm (300 x 300 DPI)  
 
 
Page 21 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

  
 
 
Figure 2  
 
254x190mm (300 x 300 DPI)  
 
 
Page 22 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

  
 
 
Figure 3  
 
252x187mm (300 x 300 DPI)  
 
 
Page 23 of 32
John Wiley & Sons
Annals of Neurology
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

