Calcium plus Vitamin D Supplementation 
and the Risk of Fractures 
Rebecca D. Jackson, M.D., Andrea Z. LaCroix, Ph.D., Margery Gass, M.D., Robert B. Wallace, M.D., 
John Robbins, M.D., Cora E. Lewis, M.D., Tamsen Bassford, M.D., Shirley A.A. Beresford, Ph.D., Henry R. Black, M.D., 
Patricia Blanchette, M.D., Denise E. Bonds, M.D., Robert L. Brunner, Ph.D., Robert G. Brzyski, M.D., 
Bette Caan, Dr.P.H., Jane A. Cauley, Dr.P.H., Rowan T. Chlebowski, M.D., Steven R. Cummings, M.D., 
Iris Granek, M.D., Jennifer Hays, Ph.D., Gerardo Heiss, M.D., Susan L. Hendrix, D.O., Barbara V. Howard, Ph.D., 
Judith Hsia, M.D., F. Allan Hubbell, M.D., Karen C. Johnson, M.D., Howard Judd, M.D., Jane Morley Kotchen, M.D., 
Lewis H. Kuller, M.D., Robert D. Langer, M.D., Norman L. Lasser, M.D., Marian C. Limacher, M.D., Shari Ludlam, M.P.H., 
JoAnn E. Manson, M.D., Karen L. Margolis, M.D., Joan McGowan, Ph.D., Judith K. Ockene, Ph.D., 
Mary Jo O’Sullivan, M.D., Lawrence Phillips, M.D., Ross L. Prentice, Ph.D., Gloria E. Sarto, M.D., 
Marcia L. Stefanick, Ph.D., Linda Van Horn, Ph.D., Jean Wactawski-Wende, Ph.D., Evelyn Whitlock, M.D., 
Garnet L. Anderson, Ph.D., Annlouise R. Assaf, Ph.D., and David Barad, M.D., 
for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators* 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Jackson 
at the Division of Endocrinology, Ohio 
State University, 485 McCampbell, 1581 
Dodd Dr., Columbus, OH 43210, or at 
jackson.20@osu.edu. 
*The Women’s Health Initiative investiga- 
tors are listed in Appendix 1. The authors’ 
affiliations are listed in Appendix 2. 
N Engl J Med 2006;354:669-83. 
Copyright © 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society. 


The efficacy of calcium with vitamin D supplementation for preventing hip and other 
fractures in healthy postmenopausal women remains equivocal. 

We recruited 36,282 postmenopausal women, 50 to 79 years of age, who were already 
enrolled in a Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) clinical trial. We randomly assigned 
participants to receive 1000 mg of elemental calcium as calcium carbonate with 
400 IU of vitamin D3 daily or placebo. Fractures were ascertained for an average 
follow-up period of 7.0 years. Bone density was measured at three WHI centers. 

Hip bone density was 1.06 percent higher in the calcium plus vitamin D group than 
in the placebo group (P<0.01). Intention-to-treat analysis indicated that participants 
receiving calcium plus vitamin D supplementation had a hazard ratio of 0.88 for hip 
fracture (95 percent confidence interval, 0.72 to 1.08), 0.90 for clinical spine fracture 
(0.74 to 1.10), and 0.96 for total fractures (0.91 to 1.02). The risk of renal calculi 
increased with calcium plus vitamin D (hazard ratio, 1.17; 95 percent confidence 
interval, 1.02 to 1.34). Censoring data from women when they ceased to adhere to 
the study medication reduced the hazard ratio for hip fracture to 0.71 (95 percent 
confidence interval, 0.52 to 0.97). Effects did not vary significantly according to 
prerandomization serum vitamin D levels. 

Among healthy postmenopausal women, calcium with vitamin D supplementation 
resulted in a small but significant improvement in hip bone density, did not signifi- 
cantly reduce hip fracture, and increased the risk of kidney stones. (ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT00000611.) 





The new england 
journal of medicine 





jury, loss of independence, and death,1,2 
contributes to more than 300,000 hip 
fractures in the United States annually.3 Observa- 
tional evidence4 and data from randomized clin- 
ical trials5,6 suggest that calcium or vitamin D 
supplements or both may slow bone loss5,6 and 
reduce the risk of falls7,8 in postmenopausal and 
elderly women. However, evidence from trials,5,9-19 
observational studies,20,21 and meta-analyses6,22,23 
of calcium and vitamin D supplementation with 
respect to hip and other fractures is limited. In 
two recent randomized trials, calcium plus vita- 
min D supplements (1000 mg of calcium and 800 
IU of vitamin D3) did not reduce the risk of non- 
vertebral fractures among older women.18,19 When 
the calcium plus vitamin D trial of the Women’s 
Health Initiative (WHI) was designed, in the ear- 
ly 1990s, guidelines recommended daily intakes 
of 800 to 1200 mg of calcium with 400 IU of vi- 
tamin D for the prevention of osteoporosis. Many 
American women consumed less. 
In this context, the WHI calcium with vita- 
min D trial was designed to test the primary hy- 
pothesis that postmenopausal women randomly 
assigned to calcium plus vitamin D supplementa- 
tion would have a lower risk of hip fracture and, 
secondarily, of all fractures than women assigned 
to placebo.24 Another secondary hypothesis was 
that women receiving calcium with vitamin D 
supplementation would have a lower rate of colorec- 
tal cancer than those receiving placebo; the re- 
sults of that investigation are reported elsewhere 
in this issue of the Journal.25 


Participants enrolled in the WHI Dietary Modifi- 
cation trial, WHI Hormone Therapy trials, or both 
were invited to join the calcium with vitamin D 
trial at their first or second annual follow-up visit. 
Detailed descriptions of the eligibility criteria and 
recruitment methods have been published previ- 
ously.24 
Eligible women were 50 to 79 years of age at 
the initial screening and had no evidence of a 
medical condition associated with a predicted 
survival of less than three years and no safety, 
adherence, or retention risks. Exclusion criteria 
included hypercalcemia, renal calculi, corticoste- 
roid use, and calcitriol use. Personal supplemen- 
tal calcium (up to 1000 mg per day) and vita- 
min D (up to 600 IU per day) were allowed. In 
1999, after the publication of reports from the 
Institute of Medicine,26,27 the upper limit of per- 
sonal vitamin D intake was raised to 1000 IU. 
The calcium with vitamin D trial permitted the 
use of bisphosphonates and calcitonin. Use of 
estrogen (with or without a progestin) was ac- 
cording to randomization among women in the 
Hormone Therapy trials. Independent use of hor- 
mone therapy or selective estrogen-receptor mod- 
ulators was permitted for women in the Dietary 
Modification trial. 
Eligible women were randomly assigned in a 
double-blind fashion to receive supplements or 
placebo (provided by GlaxoSmithKline) in equal 
proportions with use of a permuted-block algo- 
rithm stratified according to clinical center and 
age. Active tablets, chewable or swallowable (after 
July 1997), contained 500 mg of elemental cal- 
cium (as calcium carbonate) and 200 IU of vita- 
min D3. Participants were instructed to take two 
tablets per day in divided doses and with meals 
to maximize absorption. Cross-sectional com- 
parison of 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels from 227 
women taking active supplements and 221 wom- 
en taking placebo two years after randomization 
revealed that the 25-hydroxyvitamin D level was 
28 percent higher among the women assigned to 
active calcium plus vitamin D than among those 
assigned to placebo. 
The protocol was approved by the institutional 
review board at each participating institution. 
Written informed consent was obtained from 
each woman at the calcium with vitamin D ran- 
domization visit. The WHI Investigators and Na- 
tional Institutes of Health sponsors all contrib- 
uted to the design and execution of the study. All 
the authors contributed to drafts or revisions of 
the manuscript. Statistical analyses and data man- 
agement were conducted at the WHI Clinical 
Coordinating Center, and the investigators and 
statistical team vouch for the completeness and 
veracity of the data and statistical analyses. 

The presence and severity of symptoms, safety 
concerns, and outcomes were ascertained at an- 
nual clinic visits and telephone or clinic visits at 
intervening six-month intervals.24 Adherence to 
the study medication was established by weigh- 
ing returned pill bottles during clinic visits. Par- 






ticipants were followed for major outcomes, regard- 
less of their adherence to the study medication, 
until death, loss to follow-up, or study close-out. 
Risk factors for fracture were assessed by ques- 
tionnaire, interview, and clinical examination. 
The total daily calcium intake before randomiza- 
tion was defined as the sum of the following: the 
dietary calcium intake (assessed with the use of 
a modification of the Block food-frequency ques- 
tionnaire28), the intake of calcium from supple- 
ments in the previous two weeks, and the intake 
of calcium from prescription medications (assessed 
through an interviewer-administered medication 
survey). Total vitamin D intake was similarly de- 
termined on the basis of diet and supplement use. 

During the trial, intolerable gastrointestinal symp- 
toms were managed without unblinding by re- 
ducing the number of times per day or days per 
week that the study medication was taken. If re- 
nal calculi or hypercalcemia developed or renal 
dialysis was required, calcium with vitamin D 
study medication was permanently discontinued, 
according to the protocol. 

Total fractures were defined as all reported clini- 
cal fractures other than those of the ribs, ster- 
num, skull or face, fingers, toes, and cervical ver- 
tebrae. All included fractures were verified by 
review of radiologic, magnetic resonance imaging, 
or operative reports by centrally trained and blind- 
ed physician adjudicators at each clinical cen- 
ter.24 Final adjudication of hip fractures was per- 
formed centrally by blinded adjudicators; agreement 
between central and local adjudication was 94 
percent. 
A subgroup of 2431 women (1230 in the cal- 
cium with vitamin D group and 1201 in the pla- 
cebo group) at 3 of the 40 clinical centers (Pitts- 
burgh; Birmingham, Ala.; and Tucson, Ariz.) 
underwent dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry of 
the lumbar spine (L2, L3, and L4), total hip, and 
total body (QDR 2000, QDR 2000+, or QDR 
4500W; Hologic). Bone mineral density was mea- 
sured at the calcium with vitamin D randomiza- 
tion visit and at annual visits 3, 6, and 9 according 
to standard protocols.24 Three Hologic phantoms 
(spine, hip, and linearity) were exchanged among 
these three centers and measured in array mode 
five times, once each day for five consecutive days, 
to assess cross-calibration. Spine, hip, and linear- 
ity phantoms were in close agreement (interscan- 
ner variability, <1.5 percent for the spine, 4.8 per- 
cent for the hip, and 1.7 percent for linearity). 

Blood specimens, which were obtained after an 
overnight fast, were collected at the randomiza- 
tion visit. To determine whether the effect of cal- 
cium plus vitamin D on the risk of fracture varied 
according to prerandomization 25-hydroxyvita- 
min D levels, a nested case–control study was per- 
formed with all adjudicated cases of hip, spine, 
and lower arm or wrist fracture used as cases 
(357 case–control pairs for hip fracture and 1491 
pairs for total fracture). Controls were free of frac- 
ture for the duration of the study and were individu- 
ally matched to case participants according to 
age, latitude of the clinical center, race or ethnic 
group, and date of venipuncture. Levels of 25- 
hydroxyvitamin D were measured with the use of 
the DiaSorin Liaison chemiluminescent immu- 
noassay system at DiaSorin headquarters (Still- 
water, Minn.) in one continuous batch with blind- 
ed control runs at periodic intervals (coefficient of 
variation, 11.8 percent). 

All primary outcomes were analyzed on a time- 
to-event basis according to the intention-to-treat 
principle. We present both the total number of 
events and the annualized percentage for these 
fracture rates for each group. Comparisons are 
represented with hazard ratios and nominal 95 
percent confidence intervals from Cox propor- 
tional-hazards models, stratified according to 
age group, prior fracture, and randomization sta- 
tus (randomly assigned to active hormone therapy 
or placebo, dietary intervention vs. dietary control, 
or both) in the Hormone Therapy and Dietary 
Modification trials. 
To assess whether the effect of calcium with 
vitamin D on the risk of fracture varied according 
to baseline levels of risk factors, the same Cox 
proportional-hazards models were extended. In 
formal tests for interaction, continuous variables 
were used whenever possible. Fifteen participant 
characteristics were examined for each of four 
fracture outcomes. Up to three statistically sig- 
nificant interaction tests (P<0.05) would be ex- 
pected on the basis of chance alone. 














Calcium + Vitamin D 
(N = 18,176) 
Placebo 
(N = 18,106) 






















































Table 1. Characteristics of the Participants in the Calcium with Vitamin D Trial at the Time of the WHI Screening, 
According to Randomly Assigned Group.* 





























































 




















Calcium + Vitamin D 
(N = 18,176) 
Placebo 
(N = 18,106) 




































† Race or ethnic group was self-reported. 
‡ The Langley is a unit of solar radiance and relates to the amount that reaches a given area of the earth’s surface. The 
information is from national weather data on total solar irradiance in the United States and is adapted from Garland 
and Garland.30 
§ Values reflect hormone-therapy use during year 1 of the clinical trial, including exposure in the Hormone Therapy trials. 
¶ The data are from the subgroup of women in whom bone mineral density was measured. The T score represents the 
bone mineral density of an individual subject as compared with the mean (±SD) score in a young, healthy population. 






















































tive supplements or placebo), sensitivity analyses 
were conducted in which participants were allowed 
to contribute follow-up time until six months af- 
ter the first visit at which nonadherence, defined 
as use of less than 80 percent of the study medi- 
cation, was detected. Full-adherence hazard ratios 
were also estimated with inverse probability of 
censoring weighted estimators with adjustment for 
10 covariates associated with adherence.29 
Changes in bone mineral density during fol- 
low-up were calculated as mean percent differ- 
ences (and standard errors) from bone mineral 
density at the time of enrollment in the calcium 
plus vitamin D trial. Linear regression was used 
to compare rates of change in bone mineral den- 
sity between the groups, after adjustment for 
clinical center and race or ethnic group. 

to have 85 percent power to detect an interven- 
tion effect of 18 percent for hip fracture, assuming 
a sample size of 35,000 women and an annual 
hip-fracture rate in the placebo group of 33.6 per 
10,000 persons per year. The power to detect an 
intervention effect of similar magnitude for total 
fracture was greater than 99 percent. 


Between 1995 and 2000, 36,282 women were ran- 
domly assigned in the calcium with vitamin D 
trial: 18,176 were assigned to active supplemen- 
tation, and 18,106 to placebo. Demographic char- 
acteristics, health behavior, and medical history 
were well balanced between the groups at base- 
line (Table 1). The women had a mean age of 62 
years and a mean body-mass index (the weight in 
kilograms divided by the square of the height in 
meters) of 29. Sixteen percent were not white. 
The average calcium intake was approximately 
1150 mg per day. More than half the women (52 
percent) were taking hormone therapy (10,725 
reported personal use of hormones, and 8117 had 
been randomly assigned to receive active-hormone 
study medication). The rate of use of other osteo- 
porosis medications was 1 percent (1 used a se- 
lective estrogen-receptor modulator, 366 bisphos- 
phonate, and 33 calcitonin). 

At the termination of the trial, on March 31, 2005, 
1551 participants (4.3 percent) had died and 2.7 
percent had withdrawn or had been lost to fol- 
low-up (Fig. 1). The rate of adherence (defined as 
use of 80 percent or more of the assigned study 
medication) ranged from 60 to 63 percent during 
the first three years of follow-up, with an addi- 
tional 13 to 21 percent of the participants taking 
at least half of their study pills. At the end of the 
trial, 76 percent were still taking the study medi- 
cation, and 59 percent were taking 80 percent or 
more of it. 

Women receiving calcium with vitamin D supple- 
ments had greater preservation of total-hip bone 
mineral density at annual visits 3, 6, and 9 than 
women assigned to placebo (Fig. 2). The mean 
differences between the treatment groups, all in 
favor of calcium with vitamin D, were 0.59 per- 



16,815 Alive and outcomes data 
submitted in last 18 mo 
332 Withdrew 
152 Lost to follow-up 
807 Died 

33,070 in year 1 
3,212 in year 2 

27,347 in the HT trial 
48,835 in the DM trial 

13,481 Were not interested in CaD 
12,765 Refused consent 
3,230 Were not eligible 
2,226 Eligibility criteria unknown 

18,176 Women in CaD group 
1,230 Women in BMD subgroup 

16,936 Alive and outcomes data 
submitted in last 18 mo 
352 Withdrew 
144 Lost to follow-up 
744 Died 
18,106 Women in placebo group 
1,201 Women in BMD subgroup 
Figure 1. Profile of the Calcium with Vitamin D Trial of the Women’s Health 
Initiative (WHI). 
HT denotes hormone therapy, DM dietary modification, CaD calcium with 
vitamin D, and BMD bone mineral density. 




cent at annual visit 3, 0.86 percent at annual visit 
6, and 1.06 percent at annual visit 9. Nonsignifi- 
cant differences favoring the calcium with vita- 
min D group were observed in spine and whole- 
body bone mineral density. 

During a mean of 7.0 years of follow-up, there 
were 2102 fractures (including 175 hip fractures) 
among women assigned to calcium with vitamin 
D and 2158 fractures (including 199 hip frac- 
tures) among women assigned to placebo (Table 2). 
Annualized fracture rates per 10,000 person-years 
in the calcium with vitamin D and placebo groups, 
respectively, were as follows: hip fracture, 14 and 
16; fracture of the lower arm or wrist, 44 and 44; 
clinical vertebral fracture, 14 and 15; and total 
fractures, 164 and 170. 

Calcium + 
Vitamin D 

Hazard Ratio 
(95% CI)† 


* Plus–minus values are means ±SD. CI denotes confidence interval. 
† The hazard ratios are for the group assigned to calcium with vitamin D as 
compared with the placebo group. Hazard ratios, 95 percent confidence inter- 
vals, and P values were calculated in Cox proportional-hazards analyses strati- 
fied according to age; randomization assignment in the Hormone Therapy 
and Dietary Modification trials; and presence or absence of prior fracture. 














































Minimum No. 
CaD 
Placebo 
1181 
1162 
1067 
1079 
949 
933 
406 
415 









Figure 2. Hip, Spine, and Total-Body Bone Mineral 
Density (BMD). 
P values for the comparison between the group 
assigned to calcium with vitamin D supplementation 
and the placebo group were <0.001, <0.001, and 0.01 
at years 3, 6, and 9, respectively, for total-hip values 
and 0.02 at year 3 for whole-body values, according to 
linear models adjusted for clinical center and race or 
ethnic group. The numbers of participants shown 
below the graphs are the minimum sample sizes for 
comparison between the visit year and year 1. 
Table 2. Effect of Calcium with Vitamin D Supplementation on Clinical 
Outcomes, According to Randomly Assigned Group.* 

Rate of fracture — no. of cases 
(annualized %) 




























Analysis excluding follow-up 
time for participants 
6 mo after nonadherence 
detected 
Rate of fracture — no. of cases 
(annualized %) 































P Value for 
Interaction‡ 






































Women assigned to calcium with vitamin D 
supplements had a nonsignificant, 12 percent 
lower risk of hip fracture than women assigned 
to placebo (hazard ratio, 0.88; 95 percent confi- 
dence interval, 0.72 to 1.08). There were no sig- 
nificant reductions in clinical vertebral fracture, 
fracture of the lower arm or wrist, or total frac- 
tures (Table 2). 

Among women who were adherent (i.e., those who 
took at least 80 percent of their study medication), 
calcium with vitamin D supplementation result- 
ed in a 29 percent reduction in hip fracture (haz- 
ard ratio, 0.71; 95 percent confidence interval, 
0.52 to 0.97); there were 167 cases of hip fracture 
among these women (Table 2). The hazard ratio 



































































 
 





P Value for 
Interaction‡ 

* Plus–minus values are means ±SD. CI denotes confidence interval, and MET metabolic equivalent. 
† The hazard ratios are for the group assigned to calcium with vitamin D as compared with placebo. Hazard ratios, 95 
percent confidence intervals, and P values were calculated in Cox proportional-hazards analyses stratified according to 
age; randomization assignment in the Hormone Therapy and Dietary Modification trials; and presence or absence of 
prior fracture. 
‡ P values were obtained from an interaction term between treatment assignment and potential risk factor of interest in a 
Cox proportional-hazards analysis stratified according to age; status of enrollment in the Hormone Therapy and Dietary 
Modification trials, and prior fracture. 
§ Race or ethnic group was self-reported. 
¶ The Langley is a unit of solar radiance and relates to the amount that reaches a given area of the earth’s surface. The 
information is from national weather data on total solar irradiance in the United States and is adapted from Garland 
and Garland.30 Values reflect hormone-therapy use during year 1 of the clinical trial, including exposure in the 
Hormone Therapy trial. 
based on the inverse-probability weighting method 
was nearly identical. For all other fracture out- 
comes, the hazard ratios were similar to those ob- 
tained in the intention-to-treat analyses. 
The hazard ratio for hip fracture among women 
60 years of age or older was 0.79 (95 percent con- 
fidence interval, 0.64 to 0.98), with an indication 
of increased risk among women 50 to 59 years of 
age (P for interaction = 0.05) (Table 3). There was 
a lower hazard ratio among women with no falls 
than among women with at least one fall (P for 
interaction = 0.05). No other significant interac- 
tions were observed for any fracture outcome. 
























































Total calcium intake: supplements, 
diet, and medications 
































levels of total calcium or total vitamin D intake 
modified the association between calcium with 
vitamin D supplementation and fracture (Table 3). 
Dietary calcium intake remained stable during 
follow-up, whereas the intake of calcium from 
supplements increased by approximately 100 mg 
daily in both treatment groups. In both treatment 
groups, participants with initially low levels of 
total calcium intake (<400 mg daily) had larger 
increases (200 mg daily) in supplemental calcium 
intake than did other participants. The effects of 
calcium with vitamin D intervention on the risk 
of hip fracture tended to be greater among par- 
ticipants not using personal calcium supplements 
during follow-up: the hazard ratio was 0.70 (95 
percent confidence interval, 0.51 to 0.98) among 
nonusers, 0.87 (95 percent confidence interval, 
0.61 to 1.24) among those taking less than 500 mg 
per day, and 1.22 (95 percent confidence inter- 
val, 0.83 to 1.79) among those taking 500 mg or 
more per day (P for interaction = 0.11). 
Use of osteoporosis medications increased dur- 
ing follow-up, with 3890 of the women (10.7 
percent) taking alendronate, 654 (1.8 percent) tak- 
ing risedronate, 1094 (3.0 percent) taking ral- 
oxifene, and 451 (1.2 percent) taking calcitonin. 
Censoring data from these participants after their 
first recorded use of these medications yielded 
hazard ratios of 0.87 (95 percent confidence in- 
terval, 0.69 to 1.09) for hip fracture and 0.93 (95 
percent confidence interval, 0.74 to 1.18) for clini- 
cal vertebral fracture. 
ture with calcium with vitamin D supplementa- 
tion were 0.58 (95 percent confidence interval, 
0.37 to 0.93) among women assigned to active 
hormone therapy and 1.15 (95 percent confidence 
interval, 0.81 to 1.63) among those assigned to 
placebo (P for interaction = 0.07). When the anal- 
yses included both exposure in the randomized 
Hormone Therapy trial and personal use, the trend 
toward an interaction between calcium with vita- 
min D supplementation and hormone therapy with 
respect to hip fracture was no longer present. 

As of March 31, 2005, there were 744 deaths in 
the calcium with vitamin D group and 807 deaths 
in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.91; 95 per- 
cent confidence interval, 0.83 to 1.01). No statis- 
tically significant risks or benefits were seen 
with regard to any major disease outcomes, in- 
cluding cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Kid- 
ney stones were reported by 449 women in the 
calcium with vitamin D group, as compared with 
381 women in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 
1.17; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.02 to 1.34), 
and appeared to be unrelated to high baseline 
calcium intake. There were no significant differ- 
ences in gastrointestinal symptoms: 8.9 percent 
of the participants in the placebo group and 10.3 
percent of those in the calcium with vitamin D 
group reported moderate-to-severe constipation, 
and 19.5 percent and 20.4 percent, respectively, 
reported bloating or gas. 

In the nested case–control assessment of 25- 
hydroxyvitamin D, the mean (±SD) baseline 25- 
hydroxyvitamin D level was 46.0±22.6 nmol per 
liter among the participants who had hip frac- 
ture and 48.4±23.5 nmol per liter among their 
controls (P = 0.17). No statistically significant in- 
teractions were found between calcium with vita- 
min D supplementation and baseline 25-hydroxyvi- 
tamin D level with respect to either hip or total 
fractures (Table 4). 
Interaction between calcium with vitamin D 
and Hormone Therapy 
Of the women in the WHI calcium with vitamin 
D trial, 16,089 were concomitantly enrolled in the 
WHI Hormone Therapy trial, in which estrogen 
was found to have strong effects on hip and oth- 
er fractures.31,32 The hazard ratios for hip frac- 

The WHI calcium with vitamin D study was a 
large-scale, randomized, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial designed to test whether calcium 
and vitamin D supplementation reduced the risk 
of hip fracture in a large population of healthy 
postmenopausal women. The trial demonstrated 
that calcium with vitamin D supplementation di- 
minishes bone loss at the hip, but the observed 
12 percent reduction in the incidence of hip frac- 
ture (the primary outcome) was not statistically 
significant. There were no significant reductions 
in the incidence of clinical vertebral fractures, 
fractures of the lower arm or wrist, or total frac- 
tures. The main adverse effect noted was a small 
but significant increase in the proportion of 
women with renal calculi. 







Fracture Category and 
25-Hydroxyvitamin D 
Level† 
Main-Effect Odds Ratio 
(95% CI)‡ 
Calcium + 
Vitamin D 

Intervention 
Odds Ratio 
(95% CI)§ 
P Value for 
Interaction¶ 
no. of case participants/ 
no. of controls 






















* CI denotes confidence interval. 
† 25-Hydroxyvitamin D levels were measured by Bruce Hollis, Ph.D., with use of the DiaSorin Liaison chemiluminescent 
immunoassay system at DiaSorin headquarters (Stillwater, Minn.) in one continuous batch with blinded control runs at 
periodic intervals (coefficient of variation, 11.8 percent). To convert the values for 25-hydroxyvitamin D from nano- 
moles per liter to nanograms per milliliter, multiply by 0.401. 
‡ The odds ratios were obtained from a logistic-regression model, conditioned on case–control pairs, and estimated the 
main effect of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D on the risk of fracture. P = 0.51 for trend with regard to hip fracture. P = 0.23 
for trend with regard to total fractures. 




nations for the results seen in the intention-to- 
treat analyses. It is conceivable that calcium with 
vitamin D, at the doses studied in the WHI, has 
no significant effect on fracture reduction. The 
observed lack of efficacy in reducing clinical ver- 
tebral fractures is discordant with the results of 
meta-analyses of clinical trials that suggest a 
trend toward a small reduction in vertebral frac- 
tures with calcium alone6 and a significant, 37 
percent reduction in vertebral fractures with vi- 
tamin D supplementation.22 The lack of a reduc- 
tion in the risk of hip or total fractures would be 
consistent with the findings of recent studies that 
showed no evidence of reduction in nonvertebral 
fractures in healthy, older women living in the 
community.15,18,19 
The effect of calcium with vitamin D supple- 
mentation on fracture reduction might require 
higher doses of vitamin D than were used in the 
WHI. This dose–response concept33 is supported 
by studies indicating that supplementation with 
400 IU of vitamin D has a small effect or no effect 
on the risk of fracture,16,17 whereas the majority 
of studies supporting a benefit from calcium with 
vitamin D supplements evaluated vitamin D at 
doses that were the equivalent of 600 IU or 
higher.8,10,13,14,33 
It is also plausible that there was a benefit 
only among the women who adhered to the study 
treatment. Although 76 percent of the women in 
this trial were still taking study pills at the end 
of the trial, only 59 percent were taking the in- 
tended dose. In sensitivity analyses, there was a 
decrease in the risk of hip fracture among ad- 
herent participants, yielding an absolute benefit 
of four fewer hip fractures per 10,000 women, or 
a significant, 29 percent relative decrease — a 
finding consistent with the results of other trials 
that showed that efficacy in fracture reduction is 
enhanced among women adherent to calcium with 
vitamin D supplementation11 or is present only 
in this group. 
This trial cannot separate the independent ef- 
fects of calcium and vitamin D. The study popu- 


Table 4. Odds Ratios for Hip Fracture and Total Fractures According to Quartiles of Serum 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Level 
and Study Group, as Determined in a Nested Case–Control Study.* 


























lation was not selected to be deficient in calcium 
and vitamin D, since the participants were allowed 
to take multivitamins as well as calcium and vita- 
min D up to specified levels during the trial. The 
average daily total calcium intake at randomiza- 
tion was estimated to be 1100 to 1200 mg; only 
7.2 percent of the participants had an intake of 
less than 400 mg. 
The effect of calcium with vitamin D supple- 
ments may also differ according to baseline vita- 
min D levels. Chapuy et al. reported that calcium 
with vitamin D (1000 mg of calcium and 800 IU 
of vitamin D per day) significantly reduced the 
risk of hip and nonvertebral fractures among el- 
derly women who were believed to be vitamin D– 
deficient (on the basis of low vitamin D levels in 
a subgroup analysis at baseline).10 Studies involv- 
ing persons who were potentially less deficient 
in vitamin D have failed to confirm this bene- 
fit.18 We found no significant interactions between 
baseline serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and 
a calcium with vitamin D treatment effect. 
Finally, it is also plausible that calcium with 
vitamin D supplementation has a real but small 
effect in reducing the risk of hip fracture among 
postmenopausal women, but the WHI calcium 
with vitamin D trial was not sufficiently powered 
to detect such a small effect, even with 36,282 
women enrolled. The trial design assumed an 18 
percent reduction in the risk of hip fracture and 
projected a hip-fracture rate (approximately 34 per 
10,000 persons per year) that was more than 
twice that observed (16 per 10,000). The lower- 
than-projected hip-fracture rate reduced the pow- 
er of the study to approximately 48 percent. This 
may be attributable to the higher-than-antici- 
pated body-mass index, the recruitment of fewer 
women over the age of 70 years than was projected, 
or a fracture rate already suppressed by high per- 
sonal calcium intake or hormone-therapy use. 
Some support is provided by subgroup analyses 
suggesting that among women over the age of 
60 years who had a higher absolute risk of hip 
fracture, calcium with vitamin D supplementation 
significantly reduced the risk of hip fractures. 
The trend toward a reduction in the incidence 
of hip fracture, with no benefit at other skeletal 
sites, could be consistent with the pathophysiol- 
ogy of hip fracture relative to other osteoporotic 
fractures. Up to 60 percent of patients with hip 
fractures have one or more biomarkers consistent 
with a negative calcium balance, such as second- 
ary hyperparathyroidism, low 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D levels, or low urine calcium excretion.34 These 
perturbations in calcium metabolism associated 
with hip fracture might be amenable to treatments 
that would improve the calcium balance. 
The trial yielded conflicting data regarding hip 
fracture and the interaction between hormone use 
and calcium with vitamin D supplementation. 
Though not statistically significant, the observed 
interaction between active calcium with vitamin 
D and hormone therapy may reflect a synergistic 
role of enhanced calcium balance with hormone 
therapy. This possibility is consistent with the 
previously reported additive effects of calcium 
with vitamin D and hormone therapy on bone 
mineral density.35,36 However, when hormone- 
therapy use outside the trial was included, there 
was no interaction, and a 17 percent reduction in 
the incidence of hip fracture with calcium with 
vitamin D was observed among participants who 
had never used hormone therapy (hazard ratio, 
0.83; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.61 to 1.14). 
Participants in the WHI trial were healthy, 
postmenopausal women living in the community 
who were generally free of disability. The average 
calcium intake at baseline exceeded 1000 mg per 
day, close to the current national recommenda- 
tions.37 Nevertheless, we found significantly higher 
hip bone density but a nonsignificant reduction 
(12 percent) in the rate of hip fracture among 
those assigned to calcium with vitamin D. In sec- 
ondary analyses, the intervention effect appeared 
greater among women who adhered to the regi- 
men, women over 60 years of age, and women not 
taking personal calcium supplements. Using the 
intention-to-treat results from this study, we esti- 
mate that for healthy postmenopausal women 
over the age of 50 years, the number needed to 
treat to prevent one hip fracture per year is 5045. 
This number would be reduced to 1914 among 
women over the age of 60 years, who are at higher 
absolute risk for hip fracture. Although the sta- 
tistically null primary effect argues against rec- 
ommending universal calcium with vitamin D 
supplementation for already calcium-replete wom- 
en, the findings provide evidence of a positive 
effect of calcium with vitamin D on bone health 
in older postmenopausal women. 






Supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
and the General Clinical Research Center program of the Na- 
tional Center for Research Resources, Department of Health 
and Human Services. The active study drug and placebo were 
supplied by Glaxo SmithKline Consumer Healthcare (Pittsburgh). 
Dr. Jackson reports having received consulting fees from 
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals and lecture fees from the 
Alliance for Better Bone Health; she also reports that she cur- 
rently receives grant support from Novartis. Dr. LaCroix reports 
having received consulting fees from Pfizer, Procter & Gamble, 
and the Alliance for Better Bone Health and having received a 
lecture fee from Schering-Plough. Dr. Robbins reports that he 
has worked on grants with industry support but that he has re- 
ceived no salary support. Dr. Lewis reports that she currently 
has grant support from Pfizer and Novartis. Dr. Brunner reports 
that he is principal investigator for a study funded by the Na- 
tional Cancer Institute of Canada and Pfizer through March 31, 
2007. Dr. Cauley reports having received consulting fees from 
Novartis for serving on the HORIZON Study steering committee 
and grant support from Lilly, Pfizer, and Novartis. Dr. Hays re- 
ports having received lecture fees for conferences sponsored by 
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Howard reports having 
received lecture fees from Schering-Plough and having served as 
a consultant for Merck, the Egg Nutrition Council, and General 
Mills. Dr O’Sullivan reports that she currently receives grant 
support from Pfizer. Dr. Assaf reports having been an employee 
of Pfizer since December 2002 and owning Pfizer stock and 
stock options. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported. 
We are indebted to the investigators and staff at the WHI Clin- 
ical Centers, the WHI Clinical Coordinating Center, and the Na- 
tional Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute program office for their 
dedicated efforts; to Joseph Larson for his invaluable expertise in 
completing the statistical analysis reported in this article; and 
most important, to the WHI participants for their extraordinary 
commitment to the WHI calcium with vitamin D study. 

The WHI investigators are as follows: Program Office (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Md.): B. Alving, J. Rossouw, 
L. Pottern, S. Ludlam, J. McGowan, N. Geller, and L. Ford. Clinical Coordinating Centers: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle 
— R. Prentice, G. Anderson, A. LaCroix, R. Patterson, A. McTiernan, B. Cochrane, J. Hunt, L. Tinker, C. Kooperberg, M. McIntosh, 
C.Y. Wang, C. Chen, D. Bowen, A. Kristal, J. Stanford, N. Urban, N. Weiss, and E. White; Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, N.C. — S. Shumaker, R. Prineas, and M. Naughton; Medical Research Laboratories, Highland Heights, Ky. — E. Stein, 
P. Laskarzewski; San Francisco Coordinating Center, San Francisco — S.R. Cummings, M. Nevitt, and L. Palermo; University of Min- 
nesota, Minneapolis — L. Harnack; Fisher BioServices, Rockville, Md. — F. Cammarata and S. Lindenfelser; University of Washington, 
Seattle — B. Psaty and S. Heckbert. Clinical Centers: Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, N.Y. — S. Wassertheil-Smoller, W. Frish- 
man, J. Wylie-Rosett, D. Barad, and R. Freeman; Baylor College of Medicine, Houston — J. Hays, R. Young, J. Anderson, S. Lithgow, 
and P. Bray; Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston — J.E. Manson, J.M. Gaziano, C. Chae, K. Rexrode, and 
C. Solomon; Brown University, Providence, R.I. — A.R. Assaf, C. Wheeler, C. Eaton, and M. Cyr; Emory University, Atlanta — L. Phil- 
lips, M. Pedersen, O. Strickland, M. Huber, and V. Porter; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle — S.A.A. Beresford, V.M. 
Taylor, N.F. Woods, M. Henderson, and R. Andersen; George Washington University, Washington, D.C. — J. Hsia, N. Gaba, and J. 
Ascensao; Harbor–UCLA Research and Education Institute, Torrance, Calif. — R. Chlebowski, R. Detrano, A. Nelson, and M. Geller; 
Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, Oreg. — E. Whitlock, P. Elmer, V. Stevens, and N. Karanja; Kaiser Permanente 
Division of Research, Oakland, Calif. — B. Caan, S. Sidney, G. Bailey, and J. Hirata; Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee — J.M. 
Kotchen, V. Barnabei, T.A. Kotchen, M.C. Gilligan, and J. Neuner; MedStar Research Institute and Howard University, Washington, 
D.C. — B.V. Howard, L. Adams-Campbell, L. Lessin, M. Rainford, and G. Uwaifo; Northwestern University, Chicago and Evanston, Ill. 
— L. Van Horn, P. Greenland, J. Khandekar, K. Liu, and C. Rosenberg; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago — H. Black, L. Pow- 
ell, E. Mason, and M. Gulati; Stanford Prevention Research Center, Stanford, Calif. — M.L. Stefanick, M.A. Hlatky, B. Chen, R.S. Staf- 
ford, and S. Mackey; State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook — D. Lane, I. Granek, W. Lawson, G. San Roman, and 
C. Messina; Ohio State University, Columbus — R. Jackson, R. Harris, E. Paskett, W.J. Mysiw, and M. Blumenfeld; University of Ala- 
bama at Birmingham, Birmingham — C.E. Lewis, A. Oberman, J.M. Shikany, M. Safford, and M. Fouad; University of Arizona, Tucson 
and Phoenix — T. Bassford, C. Thomson, M. Ko, A.M. Lopez, and C. Ritenbaugh; University at Buffalo, Buffalo, N.Y. — J. Wactawski- 
Wende, M. Trevisan, E. Smit, S. Graham, and J. Chang; University of California at Davis, Sacramento — J. Robbins and S. Yasmeen; 
University of California at Irvine, Irvine — F.A. Hubbell, G. Frank, N. Wong, N. Greep, and B. Monk; University of California at Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles — H. Judd, D. Heber, and R. Elashoff; University of California at San Diego, La Jolla and Chula Vista — R.D. 
Langer, M.H. Criqui, G.T. Talavera, C.F. Garland, and M.A. Allison; University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati — M. Gass and S. Wernke; 
University of Florida, Gainesville and Jacksonville — M. Limacher, M. Perri, A. Kaunitz, R.S. Williams, and Y. Brinson; University of 
Hawaii, Honolulu — J.D. Curb, H. Petrovitch, B. Rodriguez, K. Masaki, and S. Sharma; University of Iowa, Iowa City and Davenport 
— R. Wallace, J. Torner, S. Johnson, L. Snetselaar, and J. Robinson; University of Massachusetts, Fallon Clinic, Worcester — J. Ockene, 
M. Rosal, I. Ockene, R. Yood, and P. Aronson; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark — N. Lasser, B. Singh, V. 
Lasser, J. Kostis, and P. McGovern; University of Miami, Miami — M.J. O’Sullivan, L. Parker, T. DeSantis, D. Fernandez, and P. Caralis; 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis — K.L. Margolis, R.H. Grimm, M.F. Perron, C. Bjerk, and S. Kempainen; University of Nevada, 
Reno — R. Brunner, W. Graettinger, V. Oujevolk, and M. Bloch; University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — G. Heiss, P. Haines, D. 
Ontjes, C. Sueta, and E. Wells; University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh — L. Kuller, J. Cauley, and N.C. Milas; University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis — K.C. Johnson, S. Satterfield, R.W. Ke, S. Connelly, and F. Tylavsky; University of Texas Health Sci- 
ence Center, San Antonio — R. Brzyski, R. Schenken, J. Trabal, M. Rodriguez-Sifuentes, and C. Mouton; University of Wisconsin, 
Madison — G.E. Sarto, D. Laube, P. McBride, J. Mares-Perlman, and B. Loevinger; Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston- 
Salem, N.C. — D. Bonds, G. Burke, R. Crouse, M. Vitolins, and S. Washburn; Wayne State University School of Medicine and Hutzel 
Hospital, Detroit — S. Hendrix, M. Simon, and G. McNeeley. Former Principal Investigators and Project Officers: Baylor College of Medicine 
— J. Foreyt; Emory University — D. Hall, S. McNagny, and N. Watts; George Washington University — Valery Miller; Kaiser, Oakland 
— R. Hiatt; Kaiser, Portland — B. Valanis; National Cancer Institute — C. Clifford (deceased); University of Arizona — T. Moon; Uni- 
versity of California, Irvine — F. Meyskens, Jr.; University of Cincinnati — J. Liu; University of Miami — Marianna Baum; University of 
Nevada — S. Daugherty (deceased); University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — D. Sheps, B. Hulka; University of Tennessee, Memphis 
— W. Applegate; University of Wisconsin — C. Allen (deceased). Data and Safety Monitoring Board: J. Wittes (chair), E. Braunwald, M. 
Chesney, H. Cohen, E. Barrett-Connor, D. DeMets, L. Dunn, J. Dwyer, R.P. Heaney, D. Marson, V. Vogel, L. Walters, K. Yaffe, and S. 
Yusuf. 







From the Ohio State University, Columbus (R.D.J.); the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle (A.Z.L., R.L.P., G.L.A.); the 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati (M.G.); the University of Iowa, Iowa City and Davenport (R.B.W.); the University of California at 
Davis, Sacramento (J.R.); the University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (C.E.L.); the University of Arizona, Tucson and Phoe- 
nix (T.B.); the University of Washington, Seattle (S.A.A.B.); Rush Medical Center, Chicago (H.R.B.); the University of Hawaii, Hono- 
lulu (P.B.); Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, N.C. (D.E.B.); the University of Nevada, Reno (R.L.B.); the 
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio (R.G.B.); Kaiser Permanente Division of Research, Oakland, Calif. (B.C.); the 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh (J.A.C., L.H.K.); the Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor–UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, Calif. (R.T.C.); San Francisco Coordinating Center, San Francisco (S.R.C.); State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony 
Brook (I.G.); Baylor College of Medicine, Houston (J.H.); the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (G.H.); Wayne State University 
School of Medicine and Hutzel Hospital, Detroit (S.L.H.); MedStar Research Institute and Howard University, Washington, D.C. 
(B.V.H.); George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, D.C. (J.H.); the University of California at Irvine, Irvine (F.A.H.); 
the University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis (K.C.J.); the University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles (H.J.); 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee (J.M.K.); the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla and Chula Vista (R.D.L.); the 
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark (N.L.L.); the University of Florida, Gainesville and Jacksonville (M.C.L.); 
the National Lung, Heart, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Md. (S.L.); Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston (J.E.M.); the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis (K.L.M.); the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases, Bethesda, Md. (J.M.); the University of Massachusetts, Fallon Clinic, Worcester (J.K.O.); the University of Miami, Miami 
(M.J.O.); Emory University, Atlanta (L.P.); the University of Wisconsin, Madison (G.E.S.); Stanford Prevention Research Center, Stan- 
ford, Calif. (M.L.S.); Northwestern University, Chicago and Evanston, Ill. (L.V.H.); the University of Buffalo, Buffalo, N.Y. (J.W.-W.); 
Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, Oreg. (E.W.); Brown University, Providence, R.I. (A.R.A.); and the Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, N.Y. (D.B.). 

Looker AC, Orwoll ES, Johnston CC Jr, 
1. 
et al. Prevalence of low femoral bone den- 
sity in older U.S. adults from NHANES III. 
J Bone Miner Res 1997;12:1761-8. 
Melton LJ III. How many women have 
2. 
osteoporosis now? J Bone Miner Res 1995; 
10:175-7. 
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Proj- 
3. 
ect. HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample 
(NIS), 2003. (Accessed January 26, 2006, at 
http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/nisoverview. 
jsp.) 
Chevalley T, Rizzoli R, Nydegger V, et 
4. 
al. Effects of calcium supplements on 
femoral bone mineral density and verte- 
bral fracture rate in vitamin-D-replete el- 
derly patients. Osteoporos Int 1994;4:245- 
52. 
Cumming RG. Calcium intake and 
5. 
bone mass: a quantitative review of the evi- 
dence. Calcif Tissue Int 1990;47:194-201. 
Shea B, Wells G, Cranney A, et al. 
6. 
Meta-analyses of therapies for postmeno- 
pausal osteoporosis. VII. Meta-analysis of 
calcium supplementation for the preven- 
tion of postmenopausal osteoporosis. En- 
docr Rev 2002;23:552-9. 
Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes 
7. 
B, Willett WC, et al. Effect of vitamin D 
on falls: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2004;291: 
1999-2006. 
Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Willett WC, Wong 
8. 
JB, Giovannucci E, Dietrich T, Dawson- 
Hughes B. Fracture prevention with vita- 
min D supplementation: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2005; 
293:2257-64. 
Dawson-Hughes B, Harris SS, Krall 
9. 
EA, Dallal GE. Effect of calcium and vita- 
min D supplementation on bone density 
in men and women 65 years of age or 
older. N Engl J Med 1997;337:670-6. 
10. 

Meunier PJ. Vitamin D3 and calcium to 
prevent hip fractures in elderly women. 
N Engl J Med 1992;327:1637-42. 
Chapuy MC, Arlot ME, Delmas PD, 
11. 
Meunier PJ. Effect of calcium and chole- 
calciferol treatment for three years on hip 
fractures in elderly women. BMJ 1994; 
308:1081-2. 
Recker RR, Hinders S, Davies KM, et 
12. 
al. Correcting calcium nutritional defi- 
ciency prevents spine fractures in elderly 
women. J Bone Miner Res 1996;11:1961- 
6. 
Trivedi DP, Doll R, Khaw KT. Effect of 
13. 
four monthly oral vitamin D3 (cholecalcif- 
erol) supplementation on fractures and 
mortality in men and women living in the 
community: randomised double blind con- 
trolled trial. BMJ 2003;326:469-72. 
Chapuy MC, Pamphile P, Paris E, et al. 
14. 
Combined calcium and vitamin D3 supple- 
mentation in elderly women: confirmation 
of reversal of secondary hyperparathyroid- 
ism and hip fracture risk: the Decalyos II 
study. Osteoporos Int 2002;13:257-64. 
Larsen ER, Mosekilde L, Foldspang A. 
15. 
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation 
prevents osteoporotic fractures in elderly 
community dwelling residents: a pragmat- 
ic population-based 3-year intervention 
study. J Bone Miner Res 2004;19:370-8. 
Meyer HE, Smedshaug GB, Kvaavik E, 
16. 
Falch JA, Tverdal A, Pedersen JI. Can vita- 
min D supplementation reduce the risk of 
fracture in the elderly? A randomized con- 
trolled trial. J Bone Miner Res 2002;17:709- 
15. 
Lips P, Graafmans WC, Ooms ME, Be- 
17. 
zemer PD, Bouter LM. Vitamin D supple- 
mentation and fracture incidence in elderly 
persons: a randomized, placebo-controlled 
clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1996;124: 
400-6. 
Grant AM, Avenell A, Campbell MK, 
18. 
et al. Oral vitamin D3 and calcium for sec- 
ondary prevention of low-trauma fractures 
in elderly people (Randomised Evaluation 
of Calcium Or vitamin D, RECORD): a ran- 
domised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 
2005;365:1621-8. 
Porthouse J, Cockayne S, King C, et al. 
19. 
Randomised controlled trial of calcium 
and supplementation with cholecalciferol 
(vitamin D3) for prevention of fractures in 
primary care. BMJ 2005;330:1003. 
Cumming RG, Nevitt MC. Calcium for 
20. 
the prevention of osteoporotic fractures 
in postmenopausal women. J Bone Miner 
Res 1997;12:1321-9. 
Kanis JA. The use of calcium in the 
21. 
management of osteoporosis. Bone 1999; 
24:279-90. 
Papadimitropoulos E, Wells G, Shea B, 
22. 
et al. Meta-analyses of therapies for post- 
menopausal osteoporosis. VIII. Meta-anal- 
yses of the efficacy of vitamin D treatment 
in preventing osteoporosis in postmeno- 
pausal women. Endocr Rev 2002;23:560- 
9. 
Gillespie WJ, Avenell A, Henry DA, 
23. 
O’Connell DL, Robertson J. Vitamin D and 
vitamin D analogues for preventing frac- 
tures associated with involutional and 
post-menopausal osteoporosis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2001;1:CD000227. 
Jackson RD, LaCroix AZ, Cauley JA, 
24. 
McGowan J. The Women’s Health Initia- 
tive calcium-vitamin D trial: overview and 
baseline characteristics of participants. 
Ann Epidemiol 2003;13:Suppl:S98-S106. 
Wactawski-Wende J, Kotchen JM, An- 
25. 
derson GL, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D 
supplementation and the risk of colorec- 
tal cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;354:684- 
96. 
26. 







Medicine. Dietary reference intakes: for 
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, vita- 
min D, and fluoride. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press, 1997:38-144. 
Yates AA, Schlicker SA, Suitor CW. 
27. 
Dietary Reference Intakes: the new basis 
for recommendations for calcium and re- 
lated nutrients, B vitamins, and choline. 
J Am Diet Assoc 1998;98:699-706. 
Patterson RE, Kristal AR, Tinker LF, 
28. 
Carter RA, Bolton MP, Agurs-Collins T. 
Measurement characteristics of the Wom- 
en’s Health Initiative food frequency ques- 
tionnaire. Ann Epidemiol 1999;9:178-87. 
Robins JM, Finkelstein DM. Correct- 
29. 
ing for noncompliance and dependent 
censoring in an AIDS clinical trial with 
inverse probability of censoring weighted 
(IPCW) log-rank tests. Biometrics 2000; 
56:779-81. 
Garland CF, Garland FC. Do sunlight 
30. 
and vitamin D reduce the likelihood of 
colon cancer? Int J Epidemiol 1980;9:227- 
31. 
Cauley JA, Robbins J, Chen Z, et al. 
31. 
Effects of estrogen plus progestin on the 
risk of fracture and bone mineral density: 
the Women’s Health Initiative random- 
ized trial. JAMA 2003;290:1729-38. 
Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR, 
32. 
et al. Effects of conjugated equine estro- 
gen in postmenopausal women with hys- 
terectomy: the Women’s Health Initiative 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004; 
291:1701-12. 
Vieth R. Why the optimal requirement 
33. 
for vitamin D3 is probably higher than 
what is officially recommended for adults. 
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2004;89:575-9. 
LeBoff MS, Kohlmeier L, Hurwitz S, 
34. 
Franklin J, Wright J, Glowacki J. Occult 
vitamin D deficiency in postmenopausal 
US women with acute hip fracture. JAMA 
1999;281:1505-11. 
Ettinger B, Genant HK, Cann CE. 
35. 
Postmenopausal bone loss is prevented by 
treatment with low-dosage estrogen with 
calcium. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:40-5. 
Sirola J, Kroger H, Sandini L, et al. 
36. 
Interaction of nutritional calcium and HRT 
in prevention of postmenopausal bone 
loss: a prospective study. Calcif Tissue Int 
2003;72:659-65. 
Department of Health and Human 
37. 
Services. Bone health and osteoporosis: a 
report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, 
Md.: Office of the Surgeon General, 2004. 
Copyright © 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society. 



At the Journal’s site on the World Wide Web (www.nejm.org), 
you can search an index of all articles published since January 1975 
(abstracts 1975–1992, full text 1993–present). You can search by author, 
key word, title, type of article, and date. The results will include the citations 
for the articles plus links to the full text of articles published since 1993. 
For nonsubscribers, time-limited access to single articles and 24-hour site 
access can also be ordered for a fee through the Internet (www.nejm.org). 



