
Randomised controlled trial of calcium and supplementation with 
cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) for prevention of fractures in primary 
care 
Jill Porthouse, Sarah Cockayne, Christine King, Lucy Saxon, Elizabeth Steele, Terry Aspray, Mike Baverstock, 
Yvonne Birks, Jo Dumville, Roger M Francis, Cynthia Iglesias, Suezann Puffer, Anne Sutcliffe, Ian Watt, 
David J Torgerson 

Objective To assess whether supplementation with calcium and 
cholecaliferol (vitamin D3) reduces the risk of fracture in women 
with one or more risk factors for fracture of the hip. 
Design Pragmatic open randomised controlled trial. 
Setting Practice nurse led clinics in primary care. 
Participants 3314 women aged 70 and over with one or more 
risk factors for hip fracture: any previous fracture, low body 
weight ( < 58 kg), smoker, family history of hip fracture, or fair 
or poor self reported health. 
Intervention Daily oral supplementation using 1000 mg 
calcium with 800 IU cholecaliferol and information leaflet on 
dietary calcium intake and prevention of falls, or leaflet only 
(control group). 
Main outcome measures Primary outcome measure was all 
clinical fractures and secondary outcome measures were 
adherence to treatment, falls, and quality of life (measured with 
the SF-12). 
Results 69% of the women who completed the follow-up 
questionnaire at 24 months were still taking supplements (55% 
with inclusion of randomised participants known to be alive). 
After a median follow-up of 25 months (range 18 to 42 
months), clinical fracture rates were lower than expected in 
both groups but did not significantly differ for all clinical 
fractures (odds ratio for fracture in supplemented group 1.01, 
95% confidence interval 0.71 to 1.43). The odds ratio for hip 
fracture was 0.75 (0.31 to 1.78). The odds of a woman having a 
fall at six and 12 months was 0.99 and 0.98, respectively. Quality 
of life did not significantly differ between the groups. 
Conclusion We found no evidence that calcium and vitamin D 
supplementation reduces the risk of clinical fractures in women 
with one or more risk factors for hip fracture. 
Registration ISRCTN26118436, controlled trials registry. 

Low trauma fractures represent a major burden of illness and 
cost to society.1–3 This burden is likely to increase with ageing 
populations and because the age specific incidence of hip 
fracture seems to be increasing.4 Effective strategies are needed 
in a community setting to prevent the continuing rise in hip and 
other fractures and to reduce the associated excess morbidity 
and cost. 
One relatively inexpensive method of reducing fracture rates 
might be supplementation with calcium and vitamin D. A 
randomised trial among female residents of French nursing 
homes showed significant reductions in both hip and non-hip 
fractures among those assigned supplementation with calcium 
and cholecaliferol (vitamin D3),5 and a study among community 
dwelling American men and women also noted a reduction in 
non-vertebral fractures in women receiving supplementation.6 
More recently another study among women in French nursing 
homes noted a large but statistically non-significant reduction in 
hip, but not non-hip, fractures among those assigned calcium 
and vitamin D supplementation.7 The only trial that had fracture 
as the main end point was the original French nursing home 
study. It remains unknown whether these results can be general- 
ised to populations outside of institutional care settings in 
France. Supplementation with calcium and vitamin D might be 
expected to prevent fractures not only through reductions in 
bone loss but by reducing falls. A recent systematic review found 
that vitamin D supplementation can reduce falls and falling by 
22%.8 
We assessed whether giving calcium and vitamin D 
supplements to community dwelling older women at increased 
risk of hip fracture would reduce their risk of any fracture. 

We identified women aged 70 and over who had at least one self 
reported risk factor for hip fracture: low bodyweight ( < 58 kg), 
any previous fracture, maternal history of hip fracture, smoker, 
and poor or fair health. These risk factors were taken from a 
large population study in the United States9: we subsequently 
confirmed in a British cohort study that, apart from smoking, 
these risk factors predict the risk of hip and non-hip fractures.10 
We assessed self reported calcium consumption through a brief 
10 item questionnaire that was sent to the women along with 
questions on risk factors for fracture. 
Women were excluded from the study if they could not give 
written consent or were receiving any calcium supplementation 
of more than 500 mg a day. We also excluded women with a his- 
tory of kidney or bladder stones, renal failure, or hypercalcaemia. 




Recruitment and randomisation 
After a pilot study in the York area in September 1999, we began 
recruitment for the main trial in September 2001. We asked gen- 
eral practices across England to post information about the 
study, a consent form, and a questionnaire on risk factors for 
fracture to all women aged 70 and over. Women with cognitive 
impairment or a life expectancy of less than six months were to 
be excluded. Eligible women were asked to return the completed 
coordinating centres 
questionnaire to the relevant 
(Hertfordshire, Newcastle, or York). 

Eligible women were randomised (stratified by practice) by 
computer at the York Trials Unit by an independent person with 
no knowledge of the participants’ characteristics. We initially 
randomised in favour of the control group in a 2:1 ratio as this 
was hypothesised to be the most efficient allocation ratio given 
the study resources.11 We included research related costs (for 
example, extra staff), not the costs of the supplements, in the esti- 
mation only. Although a 2:1 ratio in favour of one arm may be 
considered extreme, the effect is minimal in terms of statistical 
power—for example, for a fixed sample size the power would be 
reduced from 80% to 75%. We increased our sample size to com- 
pensate for this reduction. A reanalysis of the trial’s cost profile 
the optimum 
once recruitment had started showed that 
allocation ratio was 3:2. Towards the end of the study we 
therefore changed the allocation to 1:1. 
Intervention and control groups 
started we sought written 
Before supplementation was 
confirmation from the doctors that the participants had no 
known contraindications. Participants were also invited to see a 
nurse at their practice, who discussed the study and also checked 
for contraindications. Women who after randomisation were 
identified as having contraindications to calcium and vitamin D 
supplements were excluded from supplementation but were 
retained for follow-up and analysis on an intention to treat basis. 
The nurses gave participants general lifestyle advice on how to 
reduce their risk of fracture and six months supply of 1000 mg of 
calcium (calcium carbonate) and 800 IU of cholecalciferol (vita- 
min D3) as two tablets daily (Calcichew D3 Forte; Shire, 
Hampshire). Participants were recalled to see the practice nurse 
after six months and given a further supply of supplements if 
they wanted to continue with the study. 
The control group were sent a leaflet with general advice on 
prevention of falls and on how to consume adequate calcium 
and vitamin D from dietary sources. The intervention group also 
received this leaflet. 
Outcomes 
The main outcome was fracture, excluding those of the digits, rib, 
face, and skull. Secondary outcomes included hip fracture; qual- 
ity of life—as measured by the 12 item short form health survey 
questionnaire (SF-12)12 and the European quality of 
life 
instrument (EuroQol); death; visits to the doctor and hospital 
admissions; falls and fear of falling. Falls were self reported over 
the previous six months, and fear of falling was measured on a 
simple six point Likert scale. 
Outcome data were mainly collected from questionnaires 
posted to participants every six months. Doctors were asked to 
confirm fractures in those women who reported a fracture in the 
previous six months. Information on fractures was also collected 
from the doctors of non-responders to the final questionnaire. 
For the principal analysis we included only confirmed fractures. 
Adherence was measured through self report every six months. 
We chose to report quality of life data at six and 12 months 
Flow of participants through trial. Adherence was estimated by 
Fig 1 
subtracting those known to have died. Those who failed to return questionnaires 
were assumed not to be taking treatment 
because of the reduction in follow-up rates with time for the 
quality of life questionnaires. 
Sample size and statistical analysis 
From previous work, and given a median follow-up period of 24 
months, we presumed an all 
fracture rate of 10% among 
untreated participants.13 When two studies on calcium and 
vitamin D were combined in a random effects meta-analysis, the 
pooled reduction of fracture was 34%.5 6 We determined that to 
observe such a reduction in our population with 80% power 
(P = 0.05; two tailed) we would require 2855 participants to be 
allocated in a 2:1 ratio, allowing for a 20% dropout rate. 
All participants were included in the analysis on an intention 
to treat basis. For our main analysis we used survival analysis to 
compare time to first fracture between the groups. We also 
undertook a logistic regression analysis adjusting for practice. 
We undertook subgroup analyses to compare rates for hip and 
wrist fracture between the two groups and secondary analyses 
with all reported fractures whether or not these had been 
confirmed. If a woman had more than one fracture we included 
only the first fracture in the analysis. We adjusted for practice 
because we changed the allocation ratio during the trial. In our 
unadjusted analysis we present the incidence of fracture by 
equally or unequally allocated groups as in any meta-analysis 
these need to be entered as two separate studies. 
Pilot study 
Between December 2000 and August 2001 we undertook a pilot 
trial at the York Centre to estimate recruitment rates. The 117 


General practices (n=107) 
Women invited (n=48 987) 
Women responding (n=11 022) 



Women excluded: 
 Not meeting inclusion criteria (n=3078) 
 Refused to participate (n=4490) 
No seen and given supplements 
(n=1211) 
Adherence at six months 
(735/1199; 61.3%) 
Supplement use at six months 
(107/1982; 5.4%) 
Adherence at 12 months 
(745/1185; 62.9%) 
Supplement use at 12 months 
(129/1975; 6.5%) 
Adherence at 18 months 
(514/877; 58.6%) 
Supplement use at 18 months 
(111/1961; 5.7%) 
Excluded (n=140): 
 Four practices withdrawn before treatment (n=128) 
 One participant randomised twice 
 Protocol violation (participant aged<70) (n=3) 
 Died between randomisation and trial inclusion (n=8) 
≥1 fractures (n=58) 
No fractures (n=1211) 
Died (n=57) 
Missing (n=48) 
Withdrawn (n=4) 
≥1 fractures (n=91) 
No fractures (n=1839) 
Died (n=68) 
Missing (n=53) 
Withdrawn (n=10) 

originally invited). Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics of 
the participants. The intervention and contol groups were well 
balanced across all important predictors of fracture. 
Over a median follow-up of 25 months, 149 confirmed frac- 
tures were reported, lower than anticipated. Time to fracture did 
not differ between the groups (fig 2) and we found no evidence 
of a benefit of supplementation in the prevention of fractures 
(table 2). When we took into account all reported fractures 
(including those not confirmed by a doctor) the results were not 
changed (adjusted odds ratio 1.60, 95% confidence interval 0.75 
to 3.40). 
We also examined the risk of falls, falling, and quality of life. 
We found no evidence of an effect on falls. After adjusting for 
practice, the odds ratio of a woman having a fall at six months 
was 0.99 (0.81 to 1.20). At 12 months we found no evidence that 
supplementation reduced falling (0.98, 0.79 to 1.20). We also 
found no differences in quality of life (table 3). 
Adherence 
Rates for adherence at 12 months were about 63% when we 
included all women randomised but excluded those who had 
died. We compared women taking supplements with those in the 
control group to determine whether women who adhered to 
treatment might have had a reduced fracture rate. We found no 
evidence of any benefit (1.03, 0.68 to 1.56). 

We found no evidence that supplementation with calcium and 
cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) affects fracture rates over two years in 










Fig 2 
supplementation or only advice on diet and prevention of falls 
participants recruited in this pilot are included in the main trial 
report. 

Between September 2001 and November 2002 we recruited 
3197 women in addition to the 117 participants recruited during 
the pilot trial (3314 in total). The recruitment rate of 7% instead 
of the presumed 5% allowed us to exceed our planned sample 
size by 16%. 
Overall, 48 987 women registered with 107 general practices 
were invited to take part in our trial (fig 1). Of the 11 022 women 
who returned the questionnaire, 3078 were ineligible and 4490 
did not want to take part, leaving 3454 women (7.0% of those 
Table 1 Baseline characteristics of women receiving calcium and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) supplementation (intervention group) or only advice on diet or 
prevention of falls to prevent fractures. Values are percentages (numbers) unless stated otherwise 















*High scores denote good mental and physical health. 
†Self reported. 




























Table 2 Odds of fracture in women receiving calcium and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) supplementation (intervention group) and those receiving only advice 
on diet and prevention of falls. Values are percentages (numbers) unless stated otherwise 
































*Adjusted for practice. 
†Two women randomised to control group for every one allocated to treatment group. 


Control 
Intervention 

women aged 70 or over with one or more risk factors for fracture 
of the hip. 
Combined calcium and cholecaliferol 
Five trials have been published on combined calcium and 
vitamin D (see bmj.com). Two were in French nursing homes.5 7 
recruited from the community. A 
Our population was 
community study in Denmark showed a modest 
(16%), 
statistically significant, reduction in fractures.14 This study was a 
2×2 factorial trial, however, which did not take clustering into 
account 
in the analysis despite the participants being 
randomised by cluster. With only one cluster in each cell, this 
resulted in two clusters receiving calcium and vitamin D and 
cluster replication may have been insufficient to control for con- 
founding at the level of the cluster.15 Another community based 
trial in the United States studied bone density and although it 
showed a significant benefit on fractures, this study was relatively 
small.6 The latest calcium and vitamin D study to be published is 
the Medical Research Council RECORD trial,16 which is a 
secondary prevention study in hospital based fracture clinics in 
the United Kingdom. This study essentially showed the same 
findings as our trial, that there was no evidence of a benefit from 
calcium or vitamin D supplementation either alone or in combi- 
nation in preventing fractures. 
Our study differs from the two French studies,5 7 which 
showed a large benefit from supplementation on hip fractures, in 
that our population was generally more healthy and living inde- 
pendently in the community. People living in sheltered 
accommodation or nursing homes may be at more risk of a low 
calcium and vitamin D intake and at higher risk of fracture. Also 
because our study was undertaken among women living 
independently in the community who could give consent, our 
results do not apply to men, those in residential care, or those 
with dementia. Patients in residential care or with dementia are 
of particular interest clinically because they have a higher risk of 
fracture. 
Vitamin D alone 
Four large randomised studies looked at vitamin D supplemen- 
tation (see bmj.com). Lips et al observed a non-significant 
increase in the hazard of hip fractures in 2578 older Dutch men 
and women in primary care receiving a daily dose of 400 IU vita- 
min D.17 A more recent primary care trial of an annual injection 
of 300 000 IU of vitamin D among 9440 men and women from 
southern England reported a small non-significant increase in 
all 
fractures with a large, borderline statistically significant 
increase in hip fractures.18 In contrast, a trial of high dose oral 
vitamin D (100 000 units) every four months among 2686 
mainly retired male doctors showed a borderline statistically sig- 
nificant 22% reduction in all osteoporotic fractures.19 The 
RECORD trial also studied vitamin D alone and found no 
evidence of benefit in preventing fractures (see bmj.com). Our 
study differed from these four in that we included only women 
and selected them on the basis of risk factors for fracture, 
whereas these studies included men and may have sampled a 
population at lower risk. Nevertheless, putting our study into the 
context of these four large trials, with only one showing a signifi- 
cant benefit, suggests that overall vitamin D supplementation 
among a general primary care population may not be an effec- 
tive intervention for reducing fractures. A recent Norwegian 
study, using a quasirandom method of allocation (alternation) of 
vitamin D supplements in cod liver oil among 1144 nursing 
home residents, found a slight, non-significant increase in hip 
fractures and a slight, non-significant decrease in all fractures 
(relative risk 1.09, 95% confidence interval 0.73 to 1.63 and 0.92, 
0.66 to 1.27, respectively).20 
Falls 
We found no evidence that vitamin D supplementation reduced 
the incidence of falls, as previously hypothesised.8 
Strengths and weaknesses of the study 
Our study was large and targeted women at high risk of fracture. 
We chose to use a pragmatic design, which allows our results to 
be generalised to a usual care setting. We did not, however, use a 
placebo preparation in the control group and this could have 
biased the results in several ways. Firstly, dilution effects could 
have occurred if significant numbers of control participants had 
started calcium and vitamin D. This was not a problem, however, 
as by 18 months this applied to fewer than 6% of 
the 
participants, with about 3% being prescribed supplementation 
fracture 
by their doctor. Secondly, differential reporting of 
Table 3 Secondary outcomes in women receiving calcium and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) supplementation (intervention group) and those receiving only 
advice on diet and prevention of falls. Values are percentages (numbers) unless stated otherwise 




Adjusted mean difference* 
(95% CI) 






Equally allocated group 
≥1 visits to doctor in first 12 














































*Adjusted for practice and age. 
†Two women randomised to control group for every one allocated to treatment group. 


outcomes could have occurred. We therefore confirmed all frac- 
tures with the participants’ doctors and we ascertained fracture 
status from the doctors of non-responders to the questionnaires. 
Self reports of fracture have been shown to be reliable.21 There- 
fore, lack of a placebo control was not, in our view, a problem. 
Fewer fractures occurred than we anticipated in our popula- 
tion, thus reducing the power of our study to observe modest dif- 
ferences between groups. This was, however, offset to some 
degree by us exceeding our planned sample size. Furthermore, a 
trial published subsequent to the start of our study noted little 
effect of supplementation on all fractures7 (our main end point). 
Including this result in a meta-analysis would have reduced the 
difference in fracture rates we might have expected to find. 
Therefore, our study was underpowered so that we could not 
reliably exclude a reduction in all fractures of less than 30%. Fur- 
thermore, adherence rates were only a little more than 60% at 12 
months. This may have attenuated any effect of treatment. As this 
was a pragmatic trial this will be the level of adherence seen rou- 
tinely in general practice. 
Although we found no evidence of a benefit on fractures in 
older community dwelling women given calcium and vitamin D 
supplementation, we cannot exclude a clinically significant ben- 
efit of supplementation owing to the relatively wide confidence 
intervals around our estimate of effect. 
We thank Nicky Cullum, Bill Gillespie, and Jill Mollison for acting as the 
independent trial steering group and data monitoring committee; Sue New 
for scoring the calcium questionnaire; and Corrina Petre for helping with 
randomisation. 
Contributors: YB was the original trial coordinator for the pilot study and 
helped write guidance for the practice nurses. SC was a trial coordinator 
and was responsible for data entry and cleaning, combining the datasets, 
and undertaking part of the analysis. JD assisted with data management and 
analysis and undertook the quality of life data analysis. CI undertook the 
randomisation and advised on collection of economic data. SP was assistant 
trial coordinator and helped enter and clean data. JP took over as trial coor- 
dinator and was responsible for recruitment to the main trial at the York 
centre and liaising with collaborating centres, she also undertook and 
supervised data entry and data management and helped draft practice 
nurse guidance. DJT, principal 
investigator, drafted the trial protocol, 
helped obtain funding for the main study, undertook some of the analysis, 
and wrote the first draft of the report. He is guarantor for the paper. IW 
helped draft the trial protocol, advised on primary care and clinical issues, 
and contributed to successive drafts of the main manuscript. TA helped 
draft the protocol and advised on clinical issues. RMF helped draft the pro- 
tocol and advised on clinical issues. CK recruited, and managed data from, 
the doctors and participants for the main trial. AS helped draft the protocol 
and write practice nurse guidance. ES recruited doctors and participants for 
the main trial, managed data from participants, and helped write practice 
nurse guidance. MB helped recruit doctors, supervised the Hertfordshire 
centre, and provided primary care expertise. LS recruited doctors and par- 
ticipants and managed the resulting data. YB, SC, CI, SP, TA, RMF, AS, and 
MB commented on drafts of the paper. 

Funding: Grants from Northern and Yorkshire NHS research and develop- 
ment, healthy ageing programme (TA, RMF, AS, IW, DJT), Shire, and 
Nycomed. Shire supplied the calcium and vitamin D supplements. None of 
the funders were involved in the design, analysis, or writing up of the study. 
Competing interests: RMF has served as an adviser to, and spoken at meet- 
ings organised by, Shire and Nycomed. JP and SP have been sponsored by 
Shire to attend conferences. AS has spoken at meetings organised by Shire 
and served as nurse adviser. DJT has received funding from Shire and other 
pharmaceutical companies for research and sponsorship to attend confer- 
ences and meetings. 
Ethical approval: Northern and Yorkshire multicentre research ethics com- 
mittee 1/3/12 and relevant local research ethics committees. 
1 Schurch MA, Rizzoli R, Mermillod B, Vasey H, Michel JP, Bonjour JP. A prospective 
study on the socio-economic aspects of fracture of the proximal femur. J Bone Miner Res 
1996:11:1935-42. 




4 Grimley-Evans J, Seagroatt V, Goldacre MJ. Secular trends in proximal femoral 
fracture: Oxford record linkage study area and England 1968-86. J Epidemiol 
Community Health 1997;51:424-9. 
5 Chapuy MC, Arlot ME, Duboeuf F, Brun J, Crouzet B, Arnaud S, et al. Vitamin D3 and 
calcium to prevent hip fractures in elderly women. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1637-42. 
6 Dawson-Hughes B, Harris SS, Krall EA, Dallal GE. Effect of calcium and vitamin D 
supplementation on bone density in men and women 65 years of age and older. N Engl 
J Med 1997;337:670-6. 
7 Chapuy MC, Pamphile R, Paris E, Kempf C, Schlichting M, Arnaud S, et al. Combined 
calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation in elderly women: confirmation of reversal of 
secondary hyperparathyroidism and hip fracture risk: the Decalyos II study. Osteoporos 
Int 2002;13:257-64. 
8 Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes B, Willett WC, Staehelin HB, Bazemore MG, Zee 
RY, et al. Effect of vitamin D on falls: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2004;291:1999-2006. 
9 Eddy DM, Johnston CC, Cummings SR, Dawson-Hughes B, Lindsay R, Melton LJ, et al. 
Osteoporosis: cost-effectiveness analysis and review of the evidence for prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment. Osteoporos Int 1998(suppl 4). 






13 Birks YF, Porthouse J, Addie C, Loughney K, Saxon L, Baverstock M, et al. Randomised 
controlled trial of hip protectors among women living in the community. Osteoporos Int 
2004;15:701-6. 
14 Larsen ER, Mosekilde L, Foldsprang A. Vitamin D and calcium supplementation pre- 
vents osteoporotic fractures in elderly community dwelling residents: a pragmatic 
population-based 3-year intervention study. J Bone Miner Res 2004;19:370-8. 


16 MRC RECORD Trial Group. Randomised placebo-controlled trial of daily oral vitamin 
D and/or calcium for the secondary prevention of low-trauma fractures in the elderly. 
Lancet 2005 (in press). 
17 Lips P, Graafmans WC, Ooms ME, Bezemer PD, Bouter LM. Vitamin D supplementa- 
tion and fracture incidence in elderly persons. A randomised, placebo-controlled 
clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:400-6. 
18 Smith H, Anderson F, Raphael H, Crozier S, Cooper C. Effect of annual intramuscular 
randomised, 
vitamin D supplementation on fracture risk: population-based, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Osteoporos Int 2004;15(suppl 1):S8. 
19 Trivedi DP, Doll R, Khaw KT. Effect of four monthly oral vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) 
supplementation on fractures and mortality in men and women living in the commu- 
nity: randomised double blind controlled trial. BMJ 2003;326:469-72. 
20 Meyer HE, Smedshaug GB, Kvaavik E, Falch JA, Tverdal A, Pedersen JI. Can vitamin D 
supplementation reduce the risk of fracture in the elderly? A randomized controlled 
trial. J Bone Miner Res 2002;17:709-15. 
21 Bergmann M, Byers T, Freedman DS, Mokdad A. Validity of self-reported diagnoses 
leading to hospitalization: a comparison of self-reports with hospital records in a pro- 
spective study of American adults. Am J epidemiol 1998;147:969-77. 


York Trials Unit, Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York 
YO10 5DD 
Yvonne Birks research fellow 
Sarah Cockayne research fellow 
Jo Dumville research fellow 
Cynthia Iglesias research fellow 
Jill Porthouse research fellow 
Suezann Puffer research assistant 
David J Torgerson director 
Ian Watt professor of primary care 
Bone Clinic, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne 
Terry Aspray consultant geriatrician 
Roger Francis consultant physician 
Christine King personal assistant 


Calcium and vitamin D supplements have been shown to 
reduce hip fractures among older women living in French 
nursing homes 
No randomised trials have been carried out of supplements 
among high risk women living in the community in the 
United Kingdom 
No evidence was found that calcium and vitamin D 
supplementation reduces the risk of fractures among 
community dwelling older women 



Elizabeth Steele registered general nurse 
Anne Sutcliffe osteoporosis specialist nurse 
Mike Baverstock general practitioner 
Lucy Saxon research coordinator 




