JOURNAL OF BONE AND MINERAL RESEARCH 
Volume 11, Number 12, 1996 
Blackwell Science, Inc. 
© 1996 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 
Correcting Calcium Nutritional Deficiency Prevents Spine 
Fractures in Elderly Women* 
ROBERT R. RECKER, SHARILYN HINDERS, K. MICHAEL DAVIES, ROBERT P. HEANEY, 
MARY RUTH STEGMAN, JOAN M. LAPPE, and DONALD B. KIMMEL 

We tested the spine antifracture and bone sparing efficacy of 1.2 Wdayof oral calcium as carbonate in two groups 
of elderly women, one with prevalent fractures (PF, n =94) on entry and the other without (NPF, n =100). It was 
a prospective randomized, double-blind, placebo-controUed trial in mostly rural communities in women over age 
60 who were living independently and were consuming <1 Wday of calcium. We obtained annual lateral spine 
radiographs and semiannual forearm bone density over 4.3 ± 1.1 years and determined vertebral fractures by 
radiographic morphometry augmented by physician assessment. In the PF group, 15 of 53 subjects on calcium had 
incident fractures, compared with 21 of 41 on placebo (p =0.023, K). Calcium did not reduce the rate of incident 
fractures in the NPF group. Those with a prevalent fracture on entry and not treated with calcium were 2.8 times 
more likely to experience an incident fracture than all others. Change in the forearm bone mass on placebo in the 
PF group was -1.24 ± 2.41%/year compared with +0.31 ± 1.8O%/year on calcium (p < 0.001). In the NPF group, 
the difference was less: -0.39 ± 2.08%/year versus 0.00 ± 1.64%/year (p = 0.2). We conclude that in elderly 
postmenopausal women with spine fractures and selfselected calcium intakes of <1 g/day, a calcium supplement 
of 1.2 Wday reduces the incidence of spine fractures and halts measurable bone loss. (J Bone Miner Res 1996; 
11:1961-1966) 

ing spine fractures, who had low self-chosen calcium intakes 
and were fully ambulatory and living independently. 

health. (1-8) All postmenopausal calcium intervention 
studies reported since 1988 in which the investigator con 
trolled the calcium intake of a test group and excluded 
women within 5 years of menopause have demonstrated a 
bone sparing effect by serial measurement of bone mass.v? 
Nevertheless, self-chosen calcium intakes remain generally 
below recommended levels'?' for women of all ages, and 
physicians seem to regard increasing calcium intake as a 
minor modality in the management of the bone health of 
elderly women. 
We report here the spine antifracture and bone-sparing 
efficacy results of a calcium intervention trial between two 
groups of elderly women, those with and without pre-exist- 



The subjects were healthy white women volunteers of 
European ancestry, aged 73.5 ± 7.1 years, who were ambu 
latory and livingindependently. The study was approved by 
the Creighton University Institutional Review Board. All 
subjects gave informed consent. Recruitment began in No 
vember 1987, and ended in January 1990. Fifty-five study 
sites, most of which were government-sponsored meal sites 
established for the elderly, were used. About 75% of the 
subjects lived in rural communities, and 25% lived in 
Omaha. Enrollment was limited to healthy postmenopausal 
women over age 60 whose usual calcium intakes were esti 
mated to be <1 g/day. There was no upper age limit. 




We designed the study to evaluate spine fracture inci 
dence and forearm bone mass changes in two groups; those 
with prevalent spine fractures (PF) and those without prev 
alent fractures (NPF) on entry. Subjects with other diag 
noses or with treatments known to affect the skeleton were 
excluded. However, there was a wide variety of mild chronic 
illness in members of the study population, precisely the 
universe of people affected most by osteoporosis. Of 750 
candidates screened for entry, 251 were entered. About half 
of the 499 who were screened but not enrolled were re 
jected because calcium intake levels were above 1 g/day (see 
below). The other half chose not to enroll when the details 
of the protocol were explained. No baseline bone density or 
spine fracture data were obtained from the 499 who were 
not enrolled. Of the 251 subjects who were entered, 54 were 
excluded from analysis because they underwent less than 1 
year of observation. Forty-seven withdrew after screening 
before any serial data were obtained, and seven remained 
on the study for less than a year. They yielded few serial 
bone density data and no fracture data. Because of the 
term of 
small amount of treatment data and the short 
treatment, all 54 were simply considered to be in the same 
category as those who declined to participate after screen 
ing. Of the 197 who were entered into the analysis, there 
were 12 deaths after 1-3.5 years of observation and 6 who 
moved out of the area after 1-4.5 years of observation. 

This was a prospective, randomized, double-blind, place 
bo-controlled trial. As predicted from previous data, (L.J. 
Melton, personal communicationj-'?' 
the PF and NPF 
groups were of nearly equal size, at n = 94 and 103, 
respectively. For logistical reasons, 
it was not practical to 
randomize treatment according to prevalent fracture status. 
The subjects were thus randomized without regard to prev 
alent fracture status to receive either calcium carbonate 
tablets (Caltrate, Lederle Laboratories, Wayne NJ, U.S.A.) 
or identical appearing placebo, twice daily with each of two 
meals. The calcium tablets each contained 600 mg of cal 
cium. The treatment code was not broken until all the 
experimental data were obtained. 
Each study site was visited at intervals of 6 months. Visits 
were made with a customized van equipped with an X-ray 
unit, film processor, and a single photon absorptiometer 
(SPA) (Model 2780, Norland Corporation, Fort Atkinson, 
WI, U.S.A.). At each visit, interim history was obtained, 
pills were dispensed, and bone density was measured. Lat 
eral spine radiographs were obtained at intervals of 1 year. 
Compliance was expressed as the percentage of pills pre 
scribed that were not returned on a subsequent visit. Lat 
eral 
thoracic and lumbar spine films were taken in the 
upright position inside the mobile unit under standardized 
conditions with a tube-to-film distance of 40 in. 

Quantitative classification, prevalent fractures: Vertebral 
morphometry was performed on each film according to 
methods previously described in our laboratory.(1l·12) Ver- 
tebral deformity or fracture was defined morphometrically 
as vertebral heights >2.5 and >4 standard deviations (SD) 
below the reference population mean, for wedge and com 
pression deformities, respectively. A vertebra was called 
deformed if either or both of these criteria were met. 
These values are the empirically determined thresholds 
of detection of vertebral deformity by an experienced 
clinician. (11-13) 
Qualitative classification, prevalent fractures: After com 
pletion of the morphometric measurements, the films of 
each individual were reviewed as a group by a clinician 
(RR.R.), and all vertebrae were scrutinized. Positive and 
negative calls of prevalent fracture by the algorithm were 
judged against the clinician's assessment, which was taken 
as the standard. 
Quantitative classification, incident fractures: Incident de 
formities of vertebrae were defined morphometrically as 
>20% reduction in anterior or posterior height relative to 
earlier measured values.(14,15) 
Qualitative classification, 

fractures: During the 
review of the entire set of films of each subject, after 
completion of the morphometric measurements, the clini 
cian (RR.R) also scrutinized all vertebrae for incident 
fractures. Positive and negative calls of incident fractures by 
the clinician's assess 
the algorithm were judged against 
ment, which was again taken as the standard. 
All the morphometric and clinician evaluations were per 
formed before the blind was broken. The final decision on 
all prevalent and incident fractures was made by the clini 
cian during visualization of the films, with the morphomet 
ric results available at the time of the evaluation. Since the 
quantitative algorithms seemed to overdiagnose both prev 
alent and incident vertebral deformity, the more conserva 
tive results obtained by the clinician's reading of the films 
were used in the analysis. This approach, combining mor 
phometry with confirmation by a trained expert, has been 
recommended by an expert panel(l4,15) as an acceptable 
method of eliminating false positives and false negatives 
produced by radiographic morphometry. 

Bone mass was measured by 125I_based SPA, expressing 
bone mineral content (BMC, g) measured at a site on the 
radius one-third the distance from the styloid to the olec 
ranon. Precision was 2.0%. Since we were interested in 
within-person changes and had no need to minimize inter 
individual variation, and since BMC is a more precise mea 
sure than BMC/BW with this instrument, we report here 
only BMC 
A value for the annual rate of bone loss for each subject 
was derived from densitometry measurements as follows. 
The complete set of values from each subject was averaged, 
and each individual measurement was expressed as a frac 
tion of the subject's mean, A slope was calculated for each 
subject with the resulting normalized BMC as the depen 
dent variable and the time of observation as the indepen 
dent variable, Change was then expressed as a rate. 





Calcium 
(n = 51) 
Placebo 
(n = 41) 
Calcium 
(n = 40) 
Placebo 
(n = 59) 








75.4 
0.706 
7.3 
0.118 
74.2 
0.694 
6.9 
0.126 
72.8 
0.724 
6.1 
0.151 
72.1 
0.783 
7.5 
0.150 








Age 
BMC (g)* 
Calcium intake 
(mg/day) 



An estimate of calcium intake from food, medication, 
and supplements was made for each person prior to entry 
by an abbreviated questionnaire-'? administered by the re 
search nurse in charge of the project (S.H.). Candidates 
were invited to volunteer for the study only if calcium intake 
was estimated to be <1 g/day. Whenever there was uncer 
tainty about the validity of a given response, volunteers 
were instructed to keep a diary of all food and liquid intake 
over a 7-day period. The completed diaries and question 
naires were analyzed by a dietitian using Nutripractor soft 
ware (Practorcare, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.). 

Blood specimens were obtained from a randomly chosen 
subset of 38 members of the cohort at 
the beginning of 
observation, at the end of 2 years, and again at the end of 
the study. The serum 25 hydroxyvitamin D (250HD) con 
centration was measured by a competitive binding assay kit 
(Nichols Institute Diagnostics, San Juan Capistrano, CA, 
U.S.A.). The sensitivity of this assay is 2.2 ng/mI. 

The study was designed in advance to permit indepen 
dent analysis of the PF and NPF groups. We analyzed 
incident fracture and bone density changes in the PF and 
NPF groups by "intention-to-treat." The difference in the 
numbers of subjects with incident vertebral deformities be 
tween treated and untreated subjects in the PF and NPF 
groups was tested by the Chi square with Yates' correction. 
Then, to examine the relative contributions of the vari 
ables (prevalent deformity, initial bone mass, and treat 
ment) to vertebral fracture incidence, we used the Cox 
proportional hazards regression model for both univariate 
and multivariate survival analysis in the entire cohort. 
Model determination was made according to the methods 
described by Kleinbaum, Kupper, and Morgenstern.P'" The 
assumptions for the use of this survival analysis were met, as 
determined by the Kaplan-Meier method of comparison of 
survival curves. Each vertebral fracture was estimated to 
have occurred half way between the date of the visit at 
which the incident fracture was visualized and the previous 
visit. Hazard ratios were calculated from the beta coeffi 
cients derived from the Cox proportional hazards regres 
sion model and were calculated for each standard deviation 
decrement of the variable.v"? These analyses were com 
puted using the Statistical Analysis System (SAS, Cary, NC, 
U.S.A.) procedures LIFETEST and PHREG.(18) Differ 
ences in the rates of change in bone mass between treated 
and untreated subjects in the PF and NPF groups were 
compared by t-tests of means. 



Table 1 presents a summary of several pertinent variables 
at entry into the study. The four subgroups, (1) prevalent 
fracture-calcium (PF-calcium), 
fracture 
placebo (PF-placebo), (3) nonprevalent fracture-calcium 
(NPF-ca1cium), and (4) nonprevalent fracture-placebo 
(NPF-placebo), were similar in age and customary calcium 
intake. Of the 94 PF subjects, 53 had one prevalent fracture, 
26 had two, 11 had three, and 4 had more than three. As 
expected.i'?' the baseline BMC was significantly greater in 
the NPF group than in the PF group (0.760 ± 0.152, n = 99, 
vs. 0.701 ± 0.120, n = 92; P < 0.(02). Serum 250HD, 
measured on a subset of 38 individuals, was 62.5 ± 15 and 
65.0 ± 22.5 nmol/ml, respectively, in the calcium and pla 
cebo-treated subjects (NS). 

During the 4.3 ± 1.1 years of observation, 36 persons in 
the PF group (n = 94) had 86 incident vertebral deformi 
ties. Sixty-two involved previously normal vertebrae, and 24 
involved 18 previously deformed vertebrae. In the NPF 
group (n = 103), 25 persons had 59 incident vertebral 
deformities. Fifty-two involved previously normal verte 
brae, and seven involved six previously deformed vertebrae. 
The number of persons with and without incident fractures 
in each of the four subgroups is shown in Table 2. In the PF 
group, calcium supplementation significantly reduced the 
rate of incident fractures (p = 0.023). In the NPF group, 
calcium supplementation did not affect the rate of incident 



Prevalent Fracture Group 
(P = O.023)t 
Nonprevalent Fracture Group 
(P = 0.435) 







Incident fractures 
No incident fractures 
Totals 
15 
38 
53 
21 
20 
41 
36 
58 
94 
12 
30 
42 
13 
48 
61 
25 
78 
103 
* The number in each cell represents the number of subjects. 
t Prevalent calcium vs. prevalent placebo (~). 
*p = 0.002 (~), prevalent fracture-placebo vs. nonprevalent fracture-placebo. 








..>--. 

-CD 
Cl 
c 
eel 
s: 




FIG. 1. 
Treatment effects on rates of change (mean :!:: 
SEM, %/year) in forearm bone mass. The treatment effect 
was significant 
in the PF group (0.31 :!:: 0.25 vs. -1.24 :!:: 
0.38,P < 0.001) but not in the NPF group (0.00 :!:: 0.26 vs. 
-0.39 ::':: 0.27, P < 0.2). Among placebo-treated subjects, 
the rate of bone loss was greater in the PF group than in the 
NPF group (-1.24 :!:: 0.38 vs. -0.39 :!:: 0.27,p = 0.03). The 
rate of bone loss in the PF-placebo group was different 
from zero (p < 0.01), while that in the NPF-placebo group 
was marginally significant (p < 0.1). 
minor amount of the risk of incident fracture, reducing the 
hazard ratio from 2.8 to 2.45. 

Figure 1 presents the data for change in forearm bone 
mass. Two subjects in the PF group and four subjects in the 
NPF group did not have initial BMC measurements be 
cause of technical problems and are not 
included either 
here or in Tables 1 and 3. The PF-placebo group was losing 
bone at a substantially greater rate than the NPF-placebo 
group (-1.24 :!:: 0.38 vs. -0.39 :!:: 0.27; P = 0.03). In both 
groups, calcium supplementation completely abolished 
loss. The difference was highly significant for 
the PF 
group (p < 0.001), and not significant for the NPF group 
(p < 0.2), 
likely because the untreated loss rate was 
much less and the treatment-induced difference corre 
spondingly smaller. 
TABLE 3. ESTIMATED HAzARD RATIOS OF INCIDENT 
VERTEBRAL FRACTURES 


Prevalent fracture 
Initial BMC' 
Treatment effect 
Multivariate analysis t 
Nontreatment X prevalent 
fracture (unadjusted) 
Nontreatment X prevalent 
fracture (adjusted for 
initial BMC) 
Hazard 
ratio 
95% 
confidence 
intervals 
1.9 
1.43 
1.23 


1.14-3.18 
1.10-1.87 
0.74-2.04 


* Hazard ratio for each standard deviation decrement of BMC. 
t First-order interaction model included the variables: nontreat 

fractures (p = 0.435). Incident fracture was greater in the 
PF-placebo group than in the NPF-placebo group (51% in 
PF vs. 21% in NPF; P = 0.002, ,1). 
Contribution of prevalent fracture status, initial BMC, 
and calcium supplementation to incident fracture 
(Cox proportional hazards model) 
Table 3 shows the univariate and multivariate Cox pro 
portional hazards regression analyses. Three components to 
the risk of incident vertebral fracture were tested: prevalent 
fracture, initial BMC, and treatment effect. Subjects with 
prevalent fracture were 1.9 times more likely to experience 
incident fracture than those without prevalent fracture 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 1.14-3.18). For each stan 
dard deviation decrement of initial BMC, the risk of inci 
dent fracture was increased by 1.43 (95% CI, 1.10-1.87). 
Though treatment itself was not associated with incident 
vertebral fracture, the first-order interaction model showed 
a strong interaction of treatment and prevalent fracture. 
Subjects in the PF-placebo group were 2.8 times more likely 
to experience incident fracture than all others (95% CI, 
1.64-4.76). Adjustment for initial BMC accounted for a 



Median compliance was 64%, but the distribution was 
bimodal, with 5% of each group refusing to accept pills after 
they had agreed to the study and been entered into the 
randomization. For 
they 
were retained in their respective groups. 

Side effects were minor, although eight subjects com 
plained of constipation, seven in the treatment group and 
one in the placebo group. In none of the subjects did the 
constipation result in dropping out of the study, and in all 
cases the constipation was managed by diet or stool soften 
ers. No instances of urolithiasis occurred. 

Our study showed that supplemental calcium in a group 
of elderly women with low self-selected calcium intakes 
reduces the risk of incident spine fractures in those who 
already have them and halts measurable bone loss for at 
least 4 years. This effect was evident despite a median 
compliance rate of only 64%. 
The majority of U.S. women of all ages have calcium 
intakes that are below the 1989 RDA(20) and far below the 
recent recommendations of the Optimal Calcium Intake 
Consensus Conference.(21) We enrolled only women whose 
self-selected calcium intakes were <1 g/day; mean intakes 
at baseline for all four of our subgroups were <500 mg/day. 
This selection criterion was intended to enrich all four 
subgroups with persons having nutritional calcium defi 
ciency, thus offering a better chance to demonstrate a cal 
cium effect. The data of this study thus add to the body of 
evidence demonstrating that suboptimal calcium nutrition 
contributes to the increasing vertebral fracture burden of 
aging women. (8,22,23) 
We observed antifracture efficacy of calcium only in the 
PF group. The likely reason is that 
the PF group itself 
concentrated individuals with nutritional calcium defi 
ciency. This is suggested by the greater rate of loss of 
forearm BMC and the greater effect of calcium supplemen 
tation on BMC loss in this group. Also, initial bone mass in 
the PF group was less than that 
in the NPF group. The 
positive response to calcium supplementation observed in 
this study, as in most studies of calcium supplementation, 
will tend to be dominated by those members of a treatment 
group who have nutritional calcium deficiency. There is no 
test for such deficiency beyond a response to calcium. Con 
centration of such individuals in the PF group is therefore 
not surprising. Our subjects were already at the age when 
fractures typically occur. Those with two risk factors (age 
related loss and calcium deficiency) would be expected to 
exhibit more fractures than those who have only one. 
While we used calcium carbonate, we believe that 
the 
results of this study can be generalized to nearly any form of 
calcium, including food calcium, since nearly all are equally 
bioavailable'P" if taken with meals.(25,26) Also, because low 
calcium intake is a marker for several dietary deficien 
cies,(27) and because calcium supplements may aggravate 
certain of them,(28) food sources of calcium are preferable 
to supplements to the extent that it is possible or practical 
to achieve recommended intakes of 1500 mg/day. 
These data provide the clinician with evidence that the 
presence of pre-existing spine fractures is a marker that 
identifies older patients who will benefit most by increased 
calcium intake. In such patients, calcium supplementation 
produces both a decline in incidence of vertebral deformity 
and a slower rate of bone loss. Elderly women without 
vertebral deformity also benefit by experiencing a mild 
slowing in the rate of bone loss. Thus, one should not wait 
until fracture occurs in an elderly woman to begin calcium 
prophylaxis, because an increase in calcium intake to a level 
at or above the NIH recommendations benefits all. 
The failure to observe antifracture efficacy of calcium in 
the NPF group was probably related both to their lower rate 
of incident fractures, significantly less than in the PF group 
(p = 0.023), and to the concentration of the calcium 
dependent subjects in the PF group (see above). Given the 
number of subjects in the NPF group, 
in order to have 
observed a significant calcium effect on fracture incidence, 
a 77% reduction in the number of individuals with incident 
fractures would have been required. No existing treatment 
for osteoporosis produces such a marked antifracture ef 
fect. Thus, 
in 
planning antifracture efficacy studies. They demonstrate in 
a real world setting the impact on the statistical power to 
detect treatment effects in NPF individuals compared with 
PF individuals because of their lower incidence of fractures. 
Since about two-thirds of elderly women are represented by 
the NPF group,(IO) we suggest that a properly powered 
study of the effect of calcium supplementation on incident 
vertebral deformity in elderly women without prevalent 
fractures is needed. 

At entry, vertebral fractures were already present in 48% 
of our subjects. This value is only slightly higher than the 
smoothed prevalence value (38%) among Olmstead County 
women over age 60.(10) Our population was older than the 
Olmstead County group, 68% being over age 70. The prev 
alence of vertebral fracture in women over age 70 in Olm 
stead County was 42%. Furthermore, unlike the Olmstead 
County study, our subjects were chosen for low calcium 
intake, something that is potentially associated with higher 
prevalent vertebral fracture. Thus, making allowance for 
somewhat different age distributions and our restrictive 
calcium intake selection criteria, our fracture prevalence 
value was compatible with existing data from Olmstead 
county.(10) 
The presence of vertebral fractures is a powerful marker 
for increased risk of incident vertebral fracture. (29) Our 
data show that prevalent fracture is such a powerful marker 
predisposing to incident fracture (Cox Hazard ratio 1.9) 
that its presence might overwhelm a treatment effect. We 
suggest that osteoporosis treatment trials involving elderly 
women take into account their prevalent fracture status at 
study onset. 
The bone sparing and antifracture efficacy of supplemen 
tal calcium demonstrated here may rival that demonstrated 
for some of the currently approved prescription-only agents 
that are used in the treatment of established osteoporo 
SiS.(30,31) Thus, in osteoporosis treatment trials that com- 


pare "agent" to "control" when the control group has re 
ceived calcium supplementation, the failure to demonstrate 
a difference is not necessarily to be taken as "no effect" of 
the treatment agent. 
In summary, our study showed that calcium supplemen 
tation of a group of elderly women with low selfselected 
calcium intake not only reduces the risk of incident spine 
fractures in those who already have them, but also halts 
measurable bone loss. 

This work was supported by grants from the National 
Dairy Promotion and Research Board, and the National 
Institutes of Health, AR-40832. The calcium supplement 
was supplied by Lederle Laboratories. 

Group on Vertebral Fractures 1995 Assessing vertebral frac 
tures. J Bone Miner Res 10:518-523. 
15. Chun YW, Jiao L, Jergas M, Genant HK 1995 Diagnosing 
incident vertebral fractures: A comparison between quantita 
tive morphometry and a standardized visual (semiquantitative) 
approach. In: Genant HK, Jergas M, van Kuijk C, eds. Verte 
bral Fracture in Osteoporosis. Radiological Research & Edu 
cation Foundation, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A., pp. 281-291. 
16. Kleinbaum DG, Kupper LL, Morgenstern H 1982 Epidemio 
logic Research. Lifetime Learning Publications, Belmont, CA, 
U.S.A. 




19. Riggs BL, Wahner HW, Seeman E, et al1982 Changes in bone 
density of the proximal femur and spine with aging: Differ 
ences between the postmenopausal and senile osteoporosis 
syndromes. J Clin Invest 70:716-723. 
20. Anonymous 1989 Recommended dietary allowance. National 
Research Council. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 
U.S.A., pp. 174-183. 




2. Nordin BEC, Heaney RP 1990 Calcium supplementation of the 
diet: Justified by present evidence. Br Med J 300:1056-1060. 
3. Barrett-Connor E 1989 The RDA for calcium in the elderly: 





6. Chevalley T, Rizzoli R, Nydegger V, et al 1995 Effects of 
calcium supplements on femoral bone mineral density and 
vertebral fracture rate in vitamin D-replete elderly patients. 
Osteoporosis Int 4:245-252. 
7. Reid IR, Ames RW, Evans MC, Gamble GD, Sharpe SJ 1995 
Long-term effects of calcium supplementation on bone loss 
and fractures in postmenopausal women: a randomized con 
trolled trial. Am J Med 98:331-335. 
8. Chapuy MC, Arlot ME, Duboeuf F, et al1993 Vitamin D3 and 
calcium to prevent hip fractures in elderly women. New Engl 
J Med 327:1637-1642. 
9. Musgrave KO, Gimbalvo L, Leclerc HL, Cook RA, Rosen CJ 
1989 Validation of a quantitative food frequency questionnaire 
for rapid assessment of dietary calcium intake. J Am Diet 
Assoc 89:1484-1488. 
10. Melton U, Lane AW, Cooper C, Eastell R, O'Fallon WM, 
Riggs BL 1993 Prevalence and incidence of vertebral deformi 
ties. Osteoporosis Int 3:113-119. 
11. Davies KM, Recker RR, Heaney RP 1989 Normal vertebral 
dimensions and normal variation in serial measurements of 
vertebrae. J Bone Miner Res 4:341-349. 


13. Davies KM, Recker RR, Heaney RP 1995 An expert-systems 
approach to the detection of vertebral deformity. In: Genant 
HK, Jergas M, van Kuijk C (eds.) Vertebral Fractures in 
Osteoporosis. Radiological Research & Education Founda 
tion, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A., pp. 261-270. 

22. Chevalley T, Rizzoli R, Nydegger V, et al. 1994 Effects of 
calcium supplements on femoral bone mineral density and 
vertebral fracture rate in vitamin-D-replete elderly patients. 
Osteoporosis Int 4:245-252. 
23. Matkovic V, Kostial K, Simonovic I, Buzina R, Brodarec A, 
Nordin BEC 1979 Bone status and fracture rates in two regions 
of Yugoslavia. Am J Clin Nutr 32:540-549. 
24. Heaney RP, Recker RR, Weaver CM 1990 Absorbability of 
calcium sources: The limited role of solubility. Calcif Tissue Int 
46:300-304. 


26. Heaney RP, Smith KT, Recker RR, Hinders SM 1989 Meal 
effects on calcium absorption. Am J Clin Nutr 49:372-376. 
27. Barger-Lux MJ, Heaney RP, Packard PT, Lappe JM, Recker 
RR 1992 Nutritional correlates of low calcium intake. Clin 
Appl Nutr 2:39-44. 
28. Hallberg L, Brune M, Erlandsson MS, Rossander-Hulten L 
1991 Calcium: Effect of different amounts on nonherne- and 
heme-iron absorption in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 53:112-119. 
29. Ross PD, Davis JW, Epstein RS, Wasnich RD 1991 Pre 
existing fractures and bone mass predict vertebral fracture 
incidence in women. Ann Int Med 114:919-923. 
30. Burckhardt P, Burnand B 1993 The effect of treatment with 
calcitonin on vertebral fracture rate in osteoporosis. Osteopo 
rosis Int 3:24-30. 
31. Villareal DT, Rupich RC, Pacifici R, et al 1992 Effect of 
estrogen and calcitonin on vertebral bone density and vertebral 
height in osteoporotic women. Osteoporosis Int 2:70-73. 
Address reprint requests to: 
Robert R. Recker, M.D. 
601 North 30th Street 
Omaha, NE 68131, U.SA. 
Received in original form May 8, 1996; in revised form July 26, 
1996; accepted August 5, 1996. 
