_Lancet 2004; 364: 970–79_

See Comment page 914

Mother and Infant Research
Activities (MIRA), PO Box 921,
Kathmandu, Nepal
(Prof D S Manandhar FRCP,
B P Shrestha MSc,
K M Tumbahangphe MSc,
S Tamang BSc, S Thapa MSc,
D Shrestha BSc, B Thapa BSc,
J R Shrestha MPH); International
Perinatal Care Unit
(D Osrin MRCP, N Mesko MSc,
J Morrison MSc, J Borghi MSc,
Prof A M de L Costello FRCP) and
Centre for Paediatric
Epidemiology and Biostatistics
(A Wade PhD), Institute of Child
Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street
London WC1N 1EH, UK;
Institute of Development
Studies, Falmer, Brighton BN1
9RE, UK (H Standing PhD); and
Nepal Administrative Staff
College, Kathmandu, Nepal
(M Manandhar PhD)

Correspondence to:
Prof Anthony Costello
ipu@ich.ucl.ac.uk


# Effect of a participatory intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes in Nepal: cluster-randomised controlled trial

_Dharma S Manandhar, David Osrin, Bhim Prasad Shrestha, Natasha Mesko, Joanna Morrison, Kirti Man Tumbahangphe, Suresh Tamang,_
_Sushma Thapa, Dej Shrestha, Bidur Thapa, Jyoti Raj Shrestha, Angie Wade, Josephine Borghi, Hilary Standing, Madan Manandhar,_
_Anthony M de L Costello, and members of the MIRA Makwanpur trial team_

### Summary
Background Neonatal deaths in developing countries make the largest contribution to global mortality in children
**younger than 5 years. 90% of deliveries in the poorest quintile of households happen at home. We postulated that a**
**community-based participatory intervention could significantly reduce neonatal mortality rates.**

Methods We pair-matched 42 geopolitical clusters in Makwanpur district, Nepal, selected 12 pairs randomly, and
**randomly assigned one of each pair to intervention or control. In each intervention cluster (average population**
**7000), a female facilitator convened nine women’s group meetings every month. The facilitator supported groups**
**through an action-learning cycle in which they identified local perinatal problems and formulated strategies to**
**address them. We monitored birth outcomes in a cohort of 28 931 women, of whom 8% joined the groups. The**
**primary outcome was neonatal mortality rate. Other outcomes included stillbirths and maternal deaths, uptake of**
**antenatal and delivery services, home care practices, infant morbidity, and health-care seeking. Analysis was by**
**intention to treat. The study is registered as an International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number**
**ISRCTN31137309.**

Findings **From 2001 to 2003, the neonatal mortality rate was 26·2 per 1000 (76 deaths per 2899 livebirths) in**
**intervention clusters compared with 36·9 per 1000 (119 deaths per 3226 livebirths) in controls (adjusted odds ratio**
**0·70 [95% CI 0·53–0·94]). Stillbirth rates were similar in both groups. The maternal mortality ratio was 69 per**
**100 000 (two deaths per 2899 livebirths) in intervention clusters compared with 341 per 100 000 (11 deaths per**
**3226 livebirths) in control clusters (0·22 [0·05–0·90]). Women in intervention clusters were more likely to have**
**antenatal care, institutional delivery, trained birth attendance, and hygienic care than were controls.**

Interpretation Birth outcomes in a poor rural population improved greatly through a low cost, potentially sustainable
**and scalable, participatory intervention with women’s groups.**


### Introduction
Of the world’s 4 million annual neonatal deaths, 98%
occur in developing countries.[1] Infant and child
mortality rates have declined, notably through better
control of diarrhoea, pneumonia, and vaccinepreventable disease, and the importance of the newborn
period has increased. In India, neonatal mortality now
accounts for up to 70% of infant mortality.[2] Most
perinatal and neonatal deaths happen at home, and
many could be avoided with changes in antenatal,
delivery, and newborn care practices.[3] However, primary
and secondary health-care systems have difficulties in
reaching poor rural residents, and a potentially effective
perinatal health strategy must recognise this reality. In
Makwanpur district, Nepal, for example, 90% of women
give birth at home, and trained attendance at delivery is
uncommon.[4]

We are unaware of any randomised controlled trial of
community-based strategies to reduce neonatal mortality,
a shortfall that indicates the absence of information on
demand-side interventions.[5] Two studies have made
important contributions in this area Bolivia’s Warmi


project—an uncontrolled before-and-after study—was
implemented in a poor rural population of 15000 people
with little health-system infrastructure. The project
worked with women’s groups to encourage participatory
planning for mother and infant care,[6–8] and showed a fall
in perinatal mortality rate from 117 to 44 per 1000 births
over 3 years. In India, the SEARCH group reported a nonrandomised controlled study from a rural population of
80000 in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra.[9] The intervention
entailed training of traditional birth attendants, health
education, and a new cadre of supervised village health
workers who visited newborn infants at home, identified
warning signs, and managed sepsis with antibiotics. After
3 years the neonatal mortality rate had fallen by 62%.
Replication and scaling up of this exciting communitybased model presents policy makers with some
challenges, particularly because of the need for a new
cadre of community health worker to deliver injectable
antibiotics at home.
Community participation has long been advocated to
build links between primary services and their users,[10–12]

and to improve service quality [13–15] However the evidence


-----

base for the effectiveness of participatory models is
scarce.[5,16] Previously, we showed no effect of direct
education by health workers on infant care practices and
care-seeking behaviour after delivery.[17] In view of the
Bolivian model, we thought that a participatory approach
might have more effect on perinatal care practices and
might increase consultation for difficulties in pregnancy
and the newborn period. Although external facilitators of
user groups have proven valuable in agriculture and
forestry,[18,19] to our knowledge no study has rigorously
assessed such a potentially scalable approach to
improving reproductive health outcomes.
We postulated that a community-based participatory
intervention could reduce the neonatal mortality rate
from 60 to 40 per 1000 livebirths. The MIRA
Makwanpur trial was a cluster-randomised controlled
trial of such an intervention in a rural mountainous area
of Nepal. The trial tested a large-scale intervention, using
facilitators to work with women’s groups in a population
of 170000 covering 1600 km[2]. A cluster design was
chosen because the intervention was structured around
communities rather than individuals.

### Methods
#### Study location and population
With a population of more than 23 million and a gross
national income of US$240 per person,[20] Nepal is a poor
country whose development challenges are exacerbated
by its geography and unstable political situation. Life
expectancy is 61 years. The total fertility rate is
4·4 children per woman in rural areas,[21] and the
estimated maternal mortality ratio is 539 per
100000 livebirths.[22] 57% of women cannot read.[23] The
estimated infant mortality rate is 64 per 1000 livebirths,
the neonatal mortality rate 39 per 1000 livebirths, and
the perinatal mortality rate 47 per 1000 births.[21] In rural
areas, 94% of babies are born at home,[22] and only 13% of
births are attended by trained health workers.[21]

Makwanpur district lies in Nepal’s central region
where the middle hills join the plains. The population of
about 400000 subsists mainly on agriculture and the
largest ethnic groups are Tamang and Brahmin-Chhetri.
The district hospital in the municipality of Hetauda has
facilities for antenatal care and delivery, although
operative delivery was not available during the study
period. There are 7852 people per hospital bed.[24] The
district health system makes perinatal care available
through a network of primary health centres, health
posts, subhealth posts, and outreach clinics. Traditional
birth attendants are available throughout the district, but
their attendance at births is less common than in some
other parts of south Asia.[4]

Nepal is administratively divided—in descending order
of size—into development regions, zones, districts,
village development committees, and wards. We chose
the village development committee as the cluster unit of
randomisation for the following reasons: it is a standard


geopolitical unit, committee representatives were key
points of liaison, and discussions with local people
suggested that randomisation of smaller units would
increase the risk of contamination. All 43 village
development committees in Makwanpur district were
eligible for randomisation, of which one was excluded at
baseline for security reasons.
We enrolled a closed cohort of married women of
reproductive age. Inclusion criteria were: consent given
for involvement; age 15–49 years inclusive on
June 15, 2000; married; and potential to become
pregnant. Exclusion criteria included long-term
separation from spouse and widowhood. Women who
chose to participate in the study gave verbal consent and
were free to decline to be interviewed at any time.

#### Procedures
We matched 42 village development committees into
21 pairs. Because we did not have disaggregated neonatal
mortality figures, pairing was based on a process
of topographic stratification, grouping of village
development committees with similar ethnic group
distributions, and matching of pairs with similar
population densities. We used a list of random numbers
to select 12 pairs. These 24 village development committees formed the study clusters. We randomly allocated
one cluster in each pair to either intervention or control
on the basis of a coin toss (figure 1) Because of the


-----

_Figure 2: Typical women’s group meeting_
Picture courtesy of Thomas Kelly and Save the Children, USA.

nature of the intervention the trial allocation was not
masked, but analysis of primary and secondary outcomes
was not done until just before the data monitoring
committee meeting at 30 months. We generated the
cluster allocation sequence in Kathmandu before
enrolment of participants.
Enrolment activities were done from September, 1999,
to November, 2000. A team of local enumerators mapped
the 24 village development committees on foot, identified
and allocated a unique identification number to every
household (defined as a group of individuals sharing one
kitchen), did a baseline census of demographic and
socioeconomic indicators, and generated a list of female
household members according to predefined written
protocols. This document was scrutinised by a data
auditor, a surveillance manager, and a group of local
supervisors and converted into a list of women meeting
the inclusion criteria for the cohort. From March, 2001,
to July, 2001, a team of 44 field interviewers visited every
potential member of the cohort, reassessed her for
inclusion, explained the study, asked for her consent,
allocated her a unique identification number, and
completed an individual questionnaire, which included
questions on demography, education, maternity history,
details of any preceding pregnancy, home-care practices,
and use of health services for perinatal illness.[4]

Surveillance began in February, 2001, and involved
28931 participants in 28376 households. The strategy we
used was adapted from one used by the Nepal Nutrition
Intervention Project, Sarlahi,[25] and has been described in
detail elsewhere.[26] It entailed 255 ward enumerators,
25 field interviewers, and nine field coordinators. The
local female enumerator visited all cohort members in
the ward she was responsible for every month over the
study period to record menstrual status. She recorded
data on individualised printed forms The nine ward


enumerators of every cluster met with a cluster
interviewer once a week. In the absence of other
explanatory circumstances, pregnancy was registered
when a cohort member ceased menstruation for
3 months. The cluster interviewer did two interviews for
every pregnancy: the first at 7 months of gestation, as
near as possible to the transition between our definitions
of miscarriage and stillbirth; and the second at 1 month
postpartum, as near as possible to the transition between
neonatal and infancy periods. In the event of an
unfortunate outcome (miscarriage, maternal death,
stillbirth, or neonatal death), the interview was done by a
senior field coordinator. The interview was developed in
Nepali and piloted and repiloted by the local team. It was
modular to deal with different outcomes, covering
antenatal, delivery and postpartum care, home care
practices, maternal morbidity, neonatal morbidity, health
service usage, and cause of death in the event
of mortality.
In the event of neonatal death, we used an approach
refined and locally adapted from existing questionnaires
to establish cause of death. An open question about the
cause of death was followed by a modular series of
closed questions. The answers to these questions were
designed to produce a classification of 14 causes of
neonatal death based on those used by SEARCH in
India,[9] and were classified by a paediatrician (DO) on


Phase Meeting Aim

Introduction

1 To introduce the study to the group
2 To discuss why mothers and newborn infants die and
how the intervention will work in the community
Problem
identification

3 To ascertain how women understand maternal and
neonatal problems
4 To find out about maternal and neonatal problems in
the community
5 To understand the frequency of maternal and
neonatal problems and to identify strategies to obtain
information in the community
Problem
prioritisation

6 To share information from other women in the
community and to prioritise three important maternal
and neonatal health problems
Planning
together

7 To discuss possible strategies for addressing the
priority problems
8 To discuss involvement of other community members
in developing strategies
9 To discuss preparation for a meeting of community
members
10 To hold a meeting involving other community
members to discuss the activities of the
women’s groups, the priority problems identified
by the groups, and possible strategies, and reach
consensus

_Table 1: First ten women’s group meetings_


-----

the basis of open text responses, modular closed
questions, and a computer algorithm.
The average population per cluster was about 7000,
spread over an area of 60 km[2]. For every intervention
cluster we recruited one local female facilitator. Shortlists
for this role were derived from nomination by community
leaders, advertisement, and word of mouth, after which all
potential candidates were interviewed. A cluster consisted
of nine wards. The facilitator—a literate locally resident
woman—convened one women’s group meeting a month
in every ward (figure 2). Some groups set up by local
female community health volunteers already existed but
their activity was sporadic. The role of the facilitator was to
activate and strengthen groups and support them through
an action research cycle.
The intervention needed a facilitator rather than a
teacher, with abilities and training in participatory
communication techniques. She needed to have a grasp
of perinatal health issues and some knowledge of
potential interventions so she could act as a broker of
information and a catalyst for change. Although it was
important that none of the facilitators had a health
background, we gave them brief training in perinatal
health issues. Supervision, and a manual based on the
Warmi project methodology,[8] was integral to facilitator
training and support. One supervisor provided support
for every three facilitators by attending group meetings
and making regular community visits.
The first step of the intervention was to discuss
issues around childbirth and care behaviours in the
community, which allowed facilitators to develop
participatory learning skills and generated information on
pregnancy and childbirth, covering beliefs and practices
in both uncomplicated and complicated pregnancies.[27,28]

The facilitators then supported the women’s groups
through monthly meetings (table 1). This phase of ten
meetings lasted almost a year. In the next steps of the
intervention, the women’s groups implemented and
assessed their strategies. One result of the process was
that women sought more information about perinatal
health. This information was provided through the
iterative design and playing of a picture card game that
addressed prevention, treatment, and consultation for
typical problems in mothers and babies.
The form and content of discussions within women’s
groups varied, as did levels of involvement and potential
strategies. Some typical strategies were communitygenerated funds for maternal or infant care, stretcher
schemes, production and distribution of clean delivery
kits, home visits by group members to newly pregnant
mothers, and awareness raising with a locally made film
to create a forum for discussion. Throughout the
process the groups were involved in other health-related
activities in their communities.
A baseline service audit identified weaknesses in the
provision of antenatal, delivery, and newborn care in
Makwanpur district Because we aimed to test solely the


effects of the women’s group intervention, health-service
strengthening activities were undertaken in both
intervention and control areas. We decided to do this
process on ethical grounds because we hoped that it
would benefit control areas[29] and on theoretical grounds
because we thought that a degree of improvement in
services would be necessary for the success of the trial
intervention. We therefore ensured that primary health
centres in the study area were equipped with locally made
resuscitaires (open incubators that allow access to
newborn babies while keeping them warm), phototherapy
units, warm cots, and neonatal resuscitation equipment.
We remedied some shortfalls in essential neonatal drugs
once only and discussed strategies for resupply with local
health-service managers. In partnership with the District
Public Health Office, we organised training in essential
newborn care for all cadres of government health staff and
for female community health volunteers and traditional
birth attendants. Community-based workers received a
basic newborn care kit containing a rubber bulb for
suction, tube-and-mask for assisted respiration, iodine,
gauze, a baby wrapping cloth, and a pictorial manual.
We postulated that the women’s group activities might
lead to reductions in neonatal mortality rates in
intervention clusters compared with control clusters. At
the outset, we did not think perinatal mortality rates
would be affected much, since we did not envisage that
changes in home-care practices would lead to reductions
in stillbirth rates.
The primary outcome was neonatal mortality rate
(deaths in the first 28 days per 1000 livebirths).
Prospective interviews undertaken through the
surveillance system provided information on several
other outcomes, including stillbirths and maternal
deaths, uptake of antenatal and delivery services, homecare practices at delivery and postpartum, infant
morbidity, and health-care seeking. We obtained
background demographic and socioeconomic
information to investigate cluster comparability.
Surveillance coordinators observed 10% of
interviews and reviewed all questionnaires at nodal
points in the field before transmitting them for review
by data auditors. After audit and correction, sometimes
needing transfer back to the site of collection, data
were double-entered into a relational database
management system in Microsoft SQL Server 7.0
(Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). The
system further addressed data quality through
predefined acceptability constraints.
We defined miscarriage as cessation of a
presumptive pregnancy before 28 weeks of gestation
and stillbirth as fetal death after 28 weeks of gestation
but before delivery of the baby’s head, which was a
modification of the 22-week definition to meet local
practicalities. We classified neonatal death as death of a
liveborn infant within 28 completed days of birth. Early
neonatal deaths refer to deaths within 7 completed


-----

Enrolment

Allocation

Follow-up

Analysis

|21 pairs of clusters mat|ched|
|---|---|

|12 pairs of clusters rand|omly selected|
|---|---|

|Clusters randomly alloca|ted within pairs|
|---|---|

|12 clusters allocated in Median households 11 14 884 participants 12 clusters received int|tervention 33 (range 433—2838) ervention|
|---|---|

|12 clusters allocated c Median households 73 14 047 participants 12 clusters received co|ontrol 3 (range 236—3814) ntrol|
|---|---|

|3036 participants beca 2887 had one pregnan 144 had two pregnan 5 had three pregna 3190 pregnancies|me pregnant cy cies ncies|
|---|---|

|3344 participants beca 3166 had one pregnan 176 had two pregnan 2 had three pregna 3524 pregnancies|me pregnant cy cies ncies|
|---|---|

|Lost to follow-up: 0 clusters 37 participants move 73 participants misca 1 participant decline 134 participants with i|d out of study area rried before 7 months d to participate ncomplete data|
|---|---|

|Lost to follow-up: 0 clusters 1 participant died i pregnancy 52 participants mov 77 participants misc 1 participant declin 123 participants with i|n first 7 months of ed out of study area arried before 7 months ed to participate ncomplete data|
|---|---|


_Figure 3: Trial profile_


days and late neonatal deaths from 7 to 28 completed
days of birth. Perinatal death describes either a
stillbirth or an early neonatal death.
The study was approved by the Nepal Health
Research Council and the ethics committee of the
Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children, and was done in collaboration
with His Majesty’s Government Ministry of Health,
Nepal. We discussed the aims and design of the trial at
a national meeting in 1998. After this time, we held a
series of meetings with members of the Makwanpur
District Development Committee, the Chief District
Officer, and local stakeholders. In early 2000, the
chairpersons of the 24 village development committees
involved in the study gave signed consent on behalf of
their communities.
Benefits to the control clusters were improvements in
equipment and training provided at all levels of the healthcare system All community based members of the study


team were recruited locally and undertook their activities
in their home areas. When the study surveillance team
noted minor illness in mothers or infants, they
encouraged attendance at an appropriate health facility. In
the event of severe illness, team members had an ethical
responsibility to assist with rapid and appropriate
transport and treatment, irrespective of allocation. All
information provided by participants remained
confidential. Access to information was restricted to
interviewers, supervisors, data auditors, and officers, and
research staff at the analytical level. No analyses or outputs
included the names of participants.

#### Statistical analysis
To determine the number of cluster pairs to be enrolled,
we had to estimate the coefficient of variation in
outcome between clusters within matched pairs (km) and
the expected number of births per cluster over the
timescale of the study. Based on national and district
estimates, we assumed a neonatal mortality rate of
60 per 1000 livebirths, an average of 480 births per
cluster, and a _km value in the range 0·15–0·3. We_
estimated that inclusion of 12 pairs of clusters would
allow us to detect a reduction in neonatal mortality of
between 27% and 38% (37–44 per 1000 livebirths) with
80% power at a 5% significance level.[30] The
corresponding estimates of intraclass correlation are
between 0·0055 and 0·0061. Because we did not
envisage any adverse effects of the intervention at either
cluster or participant level we did not use any stopping
rules. After the first year of surveillance, we saw that
birth rates were lower than expected on the basis of
estimates. The trial steering group decided not to assess
neonatal mortality rates until we had obtained data for
2 complete years of births from introduction of the
intervention. We therefore undertook a preliminary
analysis in November, 2003, and presented the findings
to an independent data monitoring committee. The
committee considered issues of quality, confidentiality,
and analysis and recommended definitive analysis and
publication of the 2-year findings.
The analysis was undertaken as intention to treat at
both cluster and participant levels. Participants who had
begun the trial as residents of a given cluster were
retained as residents even if they had moved to another
cluster during the trial period.
Within the prospective cohort, we compared neonatal
mortality rates, stillbirth rates, and maternal mortality
ratios between control and intervention groups, taking
account of clustering and the paired nature of the data,
with hierarchical logistic models (Mlwin version 1.1).
We estimated intraclass correlation coefficients from
retrospective neonatal mortality and stillbirth data by
analysis of variance within Stata version 8. Secondary
outcomes and process indicators were compared with
adjustment for clustering. All estimates are presented
with 95% CIs This study is registered as an


-----

International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial,
number ISRCTN31137309.

#### Role of the funding source
Representatives of the UK Department for International
Development (DFID) suggested that no health-care
activities should be carried out in parallel with existing
government services and that—for sustainability
reasons—no funding should be available for women’s
group activities. Apart from these issues, the sponsors of
the study had no role in study design, data collection,
data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the
report. The corresponding author had full access to all
the data in the study and had final responsibility for the
decision to submit for publication.

### Results
Figure 3 shows the trial profile. All 24 clusters selected
for inclusion received their allocated intervention.
Between Nov 1, 2001, and Oct 31, 2003, 3190 pregnancies
happened in intervention clusters and 3524 in controls.
Presumptive miscarriage rates were 2·3% (73/3190) in
intervention clusters and 2·2% (77/3524) in control
clusters. Loss to pregnancy follow-up as a result of
migration, withdrawal of consent, or incompleteness of
surveillance data was 5·4% (172/3190) in intervention
clusters and 5·0% (176/3524) in control clusters.
2972 births (including 54 twins) were available for
analysis in intervention clusters and 3303 (including
66 twins) in control clusters.
Table 2 presents baseline characteristics of
intervention and control clusters. Although the median
number of households per cluster was lower in control
clusters, the total numbers of households and
participants who became pregnant were similar. Some
evidence exists of less poverty in intervention than
control clusters: household asset scores and participant
schooling—but not recalled annual food sufficiency—
seem to slightly favour the pooled intervention clusters.
The age breakdown does not suggest differences
between intervention and control clusters, either for
population structure or for participants who became
pregnant.
For estimated baseline mortality rates, participants in
intervention clusters recalled 11 415 livebirths and
290 neonatal deaths in the 5 years preceding our census
(neonatal mortality rate 25·4 per 1000 livebirths).
Participants in control clusters recalled 12 132 livebirths
and 304 neonatal deaths (neonatal mortality rate 25·1
per 1000 livebirths). Cluster-specific breakdown of these
pooled data showed that neonatal mortality rates were
higher in intervention than control clusters in four pairs,
similar in four pairs, and higher in control than
intervention clusters in four pairs. Although valid for
cluster comparison, the prospective findings in the same
population suggest that maternity histories substantially
underestimated actual neonatal mortality rates


Figure 4 shows within-cluster neonatal mortality rates
for each of the 12 cluster pairs. The line of equality has
been superimposed on this graph. In 11 cluster pairs,
neonatal mortality rates were lower in the intervention
group. The pooled rate in the intervention group was
nearly 30% lower than in the control group (table 3).
Hierarchical modelling—taking clustering into account—
yielded an odds ratio of 0·70 (95% CI 0·53–0·94) for
neonatal mortality in the intervention clusters compared
with the control clusters. The intraclass correlation
coefficient estimated from retrospective data was 0·00644
(95% CI 0·00004–0·0128).
Stillbirth rates did not differ between intervention and
control clusters (table 3). The intraclass correlation
coefficient estimated from the retrospective data was

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Control NMR per 1000 livebirths

_Figure 4: Neonatal mortality rates in intervention and control areas_
NMR neonatal mortality rate


-----

0·00438 (95% CI 0–0·00948) for the stillbirth rate. With
limited sample size, maternal mortality was not a
predefined outcome of the study. The maternal mortality
ratio was about 80% lower with intervention than with
control clusters (adjusted odds ratio 0·22 [95% CI
0·05–0·90]).
Table 4 presents process indicator outcomes. In
general, they suggest so-called healthier behaviours in
intervention clusters: women in these clusters were
more likely than those in the control clusters to have had
antenatal care, to have taken haematinic supplements, to
have given birth in a health facility, with a trained
attendant or a government health worker, to have used a
clean home delivery kit or a boiled blade to cut the
umbilical cord, and for the birth attendant to have
washed her hands. No differences were noted in delayed


wrapping of newborn infants, early bathing, or
breastfeeding. Rates of maternal morbidity were similar,
but women in intervention clusters were more likely
than those in control clusters to have visited a health
facility in the event of illness. Likewise, infant illness was
more likely to have led to a visit to a health facility.
The most usual causes of neonatal death were
complications of preterm birth, presumptive birth
asphyxia, and infection. The pattern of causes did not
differ between groups, but we noted that infectionrelated deaths were less frequent in intervention
clusters.

### Discussion
We have shown that an intervention in rural Nepal,
entailing women’s groups convened by a local woman
facilitator, reduced neonatal mortality by 30%. Maternal
mortality, although not a primary outcome of the trial, was
also significantly lower in intervention areas. The
intervention seemed to bring about changes in home-care
practices and health-care seeking for both neonatal and
maternal morbidity. The activities of one facilitator in a
population of 7000 rapidly reached a high proportion of
pregnant women, even in poor and remote communities.
Only 8% of married women of reproductive age ever
attended a group, but the groups attracted 37% of newly
pregnant women, and members raised awareness of
perinatal issues outside the groups themselves.
Cluster-randomised trials are susceptible to bias. The
intervention and control areas had similar retrospective
neonatal mortality rates, but some differences were
noted in literacy and poverty indicators. We do not think
these factors could account for the noted differences in
mortality rates, but they do merit further investigation.
Surveillance methods could have affected outcomes,
although this activity would have taken place in both
intervention and control areas.
Two potential effect modifiers were the convening of
women’s groups in collaboration with governmenttrained female community health volunteers and healthsystem strengthening activities across intervention and
control areas. Would work with women’s groups have
the same degree of effect in areas where no community
health volunteer was present or no training of health
workers in essential newborn care took place?
Security problems in the district escalated during the
third year of the study. Supervisory activities were
intermittently compromised in four clusters (two
intervention and two control), and although no
women’s group was disbanded, four groups had to
postpone their meetings several times.
The intervention seemed to be acceptable: 95% of
groups remained active at the end of the trial despite no
financial incentives and the opportunity costs incurred by
women spending time away from other tasks. With
appropriate investment and political commitment, we
think the intervention could be scaled up rapidly Scaling


Intervention clusters Control clusters Adjusted odds
ratio (95% CI)

Pregnancies 3190 3524
Any antenatal care 1747 (55%) 1051 (30%) 2·82 (1·41–5·62)
Any iron and folic acid supplements 1574 (49%) 1152 (27%) 1·99 (1·14–3·46)
Any perceived maternal illness from 7 months 668 (21%) 926 (26%) 0·74 (0·43–1·28)
gestation to 1 month postpartum
Visited health facility in event of illness 333 (50%) 207 (22%) 3·37 (1·78–6·37)
Deliveries 2945 3270
Institutional deliveries 201 (7%) 66 (2%) 3·55 (1·56–8·05)
Birth attended by government health provider 272 (9%) 102 (3%) 3·12 (1·62–6·03)
Specifically, doctor, nurse, or midwife 207 (7%) 69 (2%) 3·53 (1·54–8·10)
Birth attended by traditional birth attendant 199 (7%) 129 (4%) 1·70 (0·93–3·11)
Used a clean home delivery kit 550 (19%) 154 (5%) 4·59 (2·83–7·45)
Used a boiled blade to cut the cord 1580 (54%) 827 (26%) 3·47 (1·39–8·69)
Attendant washed her hands 1988 (68%) 1064 (33%) 5·5 (2·40–12·6)
Livebirths 2899 3226
Cord undressed or dressed with antiseptic 2356 (81%) 2349 (73%) 1·62 (0·58–4·55)
Baby wrapped within 30 min 1975 (68%) 2257 (70%) 0·92 (0·37–2·31)
Baby bathed within 1 h 2880 (99%) 3207 (99%) 1·11 (0·46–2·71)
Infants alive at 1 month 2823 3107
Any of three infant illnesses (cough, fever, diarrhoea) 919 (33%) 1320 (42%) 0·65 (0·36–1·20)
Taken to health facility in event of illness 219 (24%) 131 (10%) 2·84 (1·65–4·88)
Breastfed infants 2864 3181
Initiated within 1 h 1780 (62%) 1718 (54%) 1·40 (0·52–3·79)
Discarded colostrum 820 (29%) 1344 (42%) 0·55 (0·27–1·10)

_Table 4: Process indicator outcomes_


-----

up could be achieved through both government and nongovernment organisations and would not necessarily need
to be managed by health-sector personnel, although
coordination would be essential. Local rather than central
government might be preferable to lead the process for
reasons of participation, accountability, and sustainability.
A cost-effectiveness analysis was done alongside the
study. The cost per newborn life saved was US$3442
($4397 including health-service strengthening costs) and
per life year saved $111 ($142 including health-service
strengthening costs). This value compares favourably with
the World Bank’s recommendations that interventions
less than US$127 per disability-adjusted life year saved are
some of the most cost effective.[31] Our estimates probably
underestimate the programme’s cost-effectiveness. They
do not include benefits to infants born outside the closed
cohort surveillance; they ignore longer-term benefits of
the intervention to subsequent pregnancies; they exclude
benefits to infants of reduced morbidity and to mothers
from reduced morbidity and mortality; and they omit
potential savings in set-up and supervision costs if the
activities were replicated elsewhere.
Two key elements distinguished our approach from
conventional health education. First, women’s groups
looked at demand-side and supply-side issues. Second,
the approach emphasised participatory learning rather
than instruction. The women’s group strategies—the
picture card game, health funds, stretcher schemes,
production and distribution of clean delivery kits, and
home visits—also entailed interaction outside the
groups, which increased awareness of perinatal issues.
The renewed interest in community participation in
health care[32] is attributable partly to the scarcity of
resources committed to primary care and partly to the
perceived failure of conventional health education and
primary health care to deliver substantial health
benefits.[17,33,34] A major challenge has been to engage
users and enable them to adopt positive health care
behaviours. In many countries, local-health committees
have had little accountability to their communities, and
the level of representation of beneficiaries such as
women is low.[35,36] Beneficiaries themselves can be
passive in the face of service bureaucracies[37–39] because of
an absence of local ownership, different perceptions of
priorities, and capture of resources by powerful groups.
If participation is a key element of primary health care
then few controlled studies have been done of its effect
on health outcomes. Participation is typically seen as an
adjunct to implementation rather than as a primary
intervention, and the distinction between a didactic
approach to health education at community level and a
participatory approach to developing strategies is
blurred. For example, community-based health
promoters have increased exclusive breastfeeding rates
in Mexico[40] and India,[41] where diarrhoeal morbidity was
also diminished. In Ethiopia, a randomised controlled
trial of mother coordinators trained to teach other local


mothers to recognise symptoms of malaria in their
children and to promptly give chloroquine achieved a
40% reduction in under-five mortality.[42]

The procedure used to establish cause of death
suggested that infection accounted for fewer deaths in
intervention than control clusters. This finding lends
support to the noted rises in antenatal care, trained birth
attendance, clean delivery kit use, hand washing by birth
attendants, and care seeking in the event of neonatal
morbidity. These data complement the work of
SEARCH,[9] whose intervention consisted of a package of
activities. Scaling up the use of injectable antibiotics by
community health workers presents difficulties for
policy makers, and our less intensive intervention
achieved half the SEARCH mortality reduction.
The effect of the intervention on maternal mortality
was surprising in view of the size and power of the study
and obviously needs replication. If validated, the finding
would be noteworthy for the potential of this approach to
achieve Millennium Development Goals.[43] The participatory strategy could benefit other health outcomes such
as stillbirths, infant and childhood mortality, and
malaria and HIV infection in pregnancy. The absence of
effect on stillbirth rates shown in this trial does not rule
out future success if issues such as nutrition received
greater emphasis in women’s groups.[44]

The trial findings raise several issues that we intend to
address in subsequent work: differential changes in care
practices between group members and non-members,
the process of diffusion of behaviour changes within the
population, an examination of potential confounding
within the cluster-randomised design, further analysis
and refinement of the verbal autopsies, and a detailed
discussion of cost-effectiveness.
Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
for maternal and child mortality reduction has faltered.
Our findings suggest that a demand-side intervention
can achieve great reductions in neonatal and maternal
mortality in poor and remote communities. The
approach—a local woman facilitating women’s
groups—is potentially acceptable, scalable, sustainable,
and cost effective as a public-health intervention.
Assessment of demand-side interventions needs greater
attention in primary care.[5] Studies are needed to assess
how we can replicate the approach in different settings,
as are large trials to examine effects on maternal
morbidity and mortality.

Contributors
All authors contributed to the design of the study and criticised drafts of
the paper. D S Manandhar and A M de L Costello were responsible for
the conception and overall supervision of the trial. B P Shrestha
managed the project under initial guidance from J R Shrestha.
K M Tumbahangphe, S Tamang, S Thapa, D Shrestha, and B Thapa
managed data collection, field intervention, health service activities, data
entry and administration, respectively. N Mesko and J Morrison were
technical advisors on intervention and qualitative aspects of the study,
and D Osrin on quantitative aspects. J Borghi conducted the economic
analysis with help from B Thapa. M Manandhar and H Standing
advised on the facilitation process D Osrin and A Wade carried out the


-----

quantitative analysis. A M de L Costello and D Osrin wrote the first draft
of the paper and were responsible for subsequent collation of inputs
and redrafting.

Conflict of interest statement
We declare that we have no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the many individuals in Makwanpur District who gave their
time generously and without complaint, and the field staff of the MIRA
Makwanpur team. Field coordinators were Laxmi Ghimire, Rajita
Shrestha, Rita Shrestha, and Pramod Thapa for the intervention, and
Dhruba Adhikari, Biswas Aryal, Bishnu Bhandari, Surendra Bhatta,
Bharat Budathoki, Bhim Khadka, Sukra Raj Lama, Mukunda Neupane,
and Rishi Neupane for the surveillance. We thank the Makwanpur
District Development Committee and its chairman, Rameshwar Rana,
and the village development committee members for their active and
continuing support; the District Health Officer and District Public
Health Officer for their help; the MIRA executive committee in
Kathmandu; the staff of the Nepal Nutrition Intervention Project,
Sarlahi for their help and advice; the Department for International
Development, London for their creative and critical input to the project;
Ashish Shrestha and Ananta Manandhar for designing the database and
Kamala Badan for auditing the data;
Lisa Howard Grabman of Johns Hopkins School of Public Health for
her advice on the participatory intervention based on her experience in
Bolivia; members of the data monitoring committee for their time and
expertise (Patricia Hamilton, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child
Health, London; Prof Chitra Gurung, Institute of Medicine,
Kathmandu; Bishnu Prasad Pandit, Policy Planning and International
Cooperation, Ministry of Health, Kathmandu; Stephen Wall, Saving
Newborn Lives Initiative, Washington; Bharat Amatya and
Sushan Man Shrestha, Nepal Health Research Council;
Dibya Shree Malla, Nepal National Academy of Medical Science); and
Julia Fox-Rushby, Abhay Bang, Bill Musoke, Sonia Lewycka,
Prof Andrew Tomkins, Sally Hartley, Jose Martines, Hugh Moffatt,
Claire Puddephatt, Sarah Ball, Jovan Ilic, and Susie Vickery for useful
discussions during the implementation of the project. The study was
funded by DFID, with important support from the Division of Child and
Adolescent Health, WHO, the United Nations Children’s Fund, and the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities.

References
1 Saving newborn lives. State of the world’s newborns. Washington,
DC: Save the Children, 2001.
2 Paul V. Newborn care in India: a promising beginning, but a long
way to go. Semin Neonatol 1999; 4: 141–49.
3 WHO. Essential newborn care: report of a technical working
group (Trieste, April 25–29, 1994). Geneva: World Health
Organization, Division of Reproductive Health (Technical
Support), 1996.
4 Osrin D, Tumbahangphe K, Shrestha D, et al. Cross sectional,
community based study of care of newborn infants in Nepal. BMJ
2002; 325: 1063–66.
5 Ensor T, Cooper S. Overcoming barriers to health service access:
influencing the demand side. Health Policy Plan 2004; 19: 69–79.
6 Howard-Grabman L. The “autodiagnosis”: a methodology to
facilitate the maternal and neonatal health problem identification
and prioritization in women’s groups in rural Bolivia, working
paper 16A. Virginia: MotherCare, John Snow International, 1993.
7 Howard-Grabman L. “Planning together”: a methodology to
facilitate the development of strategies and actions to address
priority maternal and neonatal health problems in rural Bolivian
communities, working paper 16B. Virginia: MotherCare, John
Snow International, 1993.
8 Howard-Grabman L, Seoane G, Davenport C, MotherCare, and
Save the Children. The Warmi Project: a participatory approach to
improve maternal and neonatal health, an implementor’s manual.
Westport: John Snow International, Mothercare Project, Save the
Children, 2002.
9 Bang AT, Bang RA, Baitule SB, Reddy MH, Deshmukh MD. Effect
of home-based neonatal care and management of sepsis on
neonatal mortality: field trial in rural India. Lancet 1999; 354:
1955–61.


10 Stone L. Primary health care for whom? Village perspectives from
Nepal. Soc Sci Med 1986; 22: 293–302.
11 Carlough M, LeMaster J. How can motherhood be made safer in
Nepal? More than hospitals are needed. J Inst Med (Kathmandu)
1998; 20: 20–28.
12 Justice J. Neglect of cultural knowledge in health planning: Nepal’s
Assistant Nurse-Midwife program. In: Hahn R, ed. Anthropology
and public health: bridging differences in culture and society.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
13 Dhungel B. The qualitative community judgement: the role of the
intermediate health practitioners in Nepal’s family health services.
In: Allen M, ed. Anthropology of Nepal: peoples, problems and
processes. Kathmandu: Mandala Book Point, 1992.
14 Kutzin J. Obstacles to women’s access: issues and options for more
effective interventions to improve women’s health: Human
Resources Development and Operations Policy (HRO) working
paper no 13. Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993.
15 Tipping G, Segall M. Health care seeking behaviour in developing
countries: an annotated bibliography and literature review,
development bibliography 12. Sussex: Institute of Development
Studies, 1995.
16 Morgan L. Community participation in health: perpetual allure,
persistent challenge. Health Policy Plan 2001; 16: 221–30.
17 Bolam A, Manandhar D, Shrestha P, Malla K, Ellis M, Costello A.
The effects of postnatal health education for mothers on infant care
and family planning practices in Nepal: a randomised, controlled
trial. BMJ 1998; 134: 805–10.
18 Hobley M. From passive to active participatory forestry. Nepal. In:
Oakley P, ed. Projects with people: the practice of participation in
development. Geneva: International Labour Organisation, 1990.
19 Hobley M. Participatory forest management in South Asia: the
process of change in India and Nepal (Rural Development Forestry
Study Guide). London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI), 1996.
20 Ministry of Finance. Economic survey, fiscal year 2001/2002.
Kathmandu: His Majesty’s Government, Ministry of Finance, 2002.
21 Ministry of Health. Nepal demographic and health survey 2001.
Kathmandu: His Majesty’s Government, Ministry of Health, Family
Health Division, 2002.
22 Pradhan A, Aryal R, Regmi G, Ban B, Govindasamy P. Nepal
Family Health Survey 1996. Kathmandu: His Majesty’s
Government, Ministry of Health, 1997.
23 Central Bureau of Statistics. Statistical year book of Nepal 2001.
Kathmandu: His Majesty’s Government, National Planning
Commission Secretariat, 2001.
24 Sharma H, Goutam R, Vaidya S. District demographic profile of
Nepal. Kathmandu: Informal Sector Research and Study Center,
2002.
25 Pradhan E, Katz J, LeClerq S, West K. Data management for large
community trials in Nepal. Controlled Clin Trials 1994; 15: 220–34.
26 Osrin D, Manandhar A, Shrestha A, et al. Design of a surveillance
system for pregnancy and its outcomes in rural Nepal.
_J Nepal Med Assoc 2003; 41: 411–22._
27 Tamang S, Mesko N, Shrestha B, et al. A qualitative description
of perinatal care practices in Makwanpur district, Nepal.
_Contrib Nepalese Stud 2001; 28: 10–19._
28 Mesko N, Osrin D, Tamang S, et al. Care for perinatal illness in
rural Nepal: a descriptive study with cross-sectional and qualitative
components. BMC Int Health Hum Rights 2003; 3: 3.
29 Edwards S, Braunholtz D, Lilford R, Stevens A. Ethical issues in the
design and conduct of cluster randomised controlled trials. BMJ
1999; 318: 1407–09.
30 Hayes RJ, Bennett S. Simple sample size calculation for clusterrandomized trials. Int J Epidemiol 1999; 28: 319–26.
31 World Bank. World Development Report. Washington, DC: World
Bank, 1993.
32 WHO. Community participation: advocacy and action.
http://www.who.int/whr/2004/chapter3/en/. World Health Report.
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2004.
33 Bryce J, el Arifeen S, Pariyo G, Lanata C, Gwatkin D, Habicht J.
Reducing child mortality: can public health deliver? Lancet 2003;
**362: 159–64.**
34 Victora CG, Wagstaff A, Armstrong Schellenberg J, Gwatkin D,
Claeson M, Habicht J. Applying an equity lens to child health and


-----

mortality: more of the same is not enough. Lancet 2003; 362:
233–41.
35 Manandhar M. An exploratory study of local health committees in
Nepal. London: Centre for International Child Health, Institute of
Child Health, 1996.
36 Sepehri A, Pettigrew J. Primary health care, community
participation and community-financing: experiences of two middle
hill villages in Nepal. Health Policy Plan 1996; 11: 93–100.
37 Rifkin S. Lessons from community participation in health
programmes. Health Policy Plan 1986; 1: 240–49.
38 Rifkin S, Muller F, Bichmann W. Primary health care: on
measuring participation. Soc Sci Med 1988; 26: 931–40.
39 Rifkin S. Community participation in maternal and child
health/family planning programmes. Geneva: World Health
Organization, 1990.
40 Morrow AL, Guerrero ML, Shults J, et al. Efficacy of home-based
peer counselling to promote exclusive breastfeeding: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 1999; 353: 1226–31.


41 Bhandari N, Bahl R, Mazumdar S, et al. Effect of community-based
promotion of exclusive breastfeeding on diarrhoeal illness and
growth: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2003; 361:
1418–23.
42 Kidane G, Morrow R. Teaching mothers to provide home
treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. Lancet
2000; 356: 550–55.
43 United Nations. Millennium Development Goals.
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals (accessed July 10, 2004).
44 Ceesay SM, Prentice AM, Cole TJ, et al. Effects on birth weight and
perinatal mortality of maternal dietary supplements in rural
Gambia: 5 year randomised controlled trial. BMJ 1997; 315:
786–90.


-----

