

Carboplatin and pemetrexed with or without pembrolizumab for 
advanced, non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: a 
randomised, phase 2 cohort of the open-label KEYNOTE-021 
study 
Corey J Langer, Shirish M Gadgeel, Hossein Borghaei, Vassiliki A Papadimitrakopoulou, 
Amita Patnaik, Steven F Powell, Ryan D Gentzler, Renato G Martins, James P Stevenson, 
Shadia I Jalal, Amit Panwalkar, James Chih-Hsin Yang, Matthew Gubens, Lecia V Sequist, 
Mark M Awad, Joseph Fiore, Yang Ge, Harry Raftopoulos, Leena Gandhi, KEYNOTE-021 
investigators* 
Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA (Prof C J 
Langer MD); Karmanos Cancer Institute and Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA (Prof S M 
Gadgeel MD); Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA (H Borghaei DO); The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA (Prof V A Papadimitrakopoulou MD); 
South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics, San Antonio, TX, USA (A Patnaik MD); Sanford 
Cancer Center, Sioux Falls, SD, USA (S F Powell MD); University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA (R D Gentzler MD); University of Washington and Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, 
WA, USA (Prof R G Martins MD); Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA (J P Stevenson MD); 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA (S I Jalal MBBS); Sanford Roger 
Maris Cancer Center, Fargo, ND, USA (A Panwalkar MD); National Taiwan University Hospital 
and National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan (Prof J C-H Yang MD); University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA (M Gubens MD); Massachusetts General 
Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA (L V Sequist MD); Dana- 
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA (M M Awad MD, Prof L Gandhi MD); Laura and Isaac 
Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA (Prof L Gandhi); 
and Merck & Co Inc, Kenilworth, NJ, USA (J Fiore PharmD, Y Ge PhD, H Raftopoulos MD) 

Background—Limited evidence exists to show that adding a third agent to platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy improves efficacy in the first-line advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
setting. The anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab has shown efficacy as monotherapy in patients 
with advanced NSCLC and has a non-overlapping toxicity profile with chemotherapy. We assessed 
whether the addition of pembrolizumab to platinum-doublet chemotherapy improves efficacy in 
patients with advanced non-squamous NSCLC. 
*Investigators listed in the appendix (p 2) 
Correspondence to: Dr Corey J Langer, Department of Thoracic Oncology, Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, corey.langer@uphs.upenn.edu. 
Contributors 
CJL, SMG, JF, YG, and HR designed or planned the study. CJL, SMG, HB, YG, and HR analysed the data. JF acquired the data. CJL, 
HR, and YJG wrote the first draft. All authors interpreted the results, critically reviewed and revised the report, and approved the final 
version. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Lancet Oncol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 December 02. 


Methods—In this randomised, open-label, phase 2 cohort of a multicohort study 
(KEYNOTE-021), patients were enrolled at 26 medical centres in the USA and Taiwan. Patients 
with chemotherapy-naive, stage IIIB or IV, non-squamous NSCLC without targetable EGFR or 
ALK genetic aberrations were randomly assigned (1:1) in blocks of four stratified by PD-L1 
tumour proportion score (<1% vs ≥1%) using an interactive voice-response system to 4 cycles of 
pembrolizumab 200 mg plus carboplatin area under curve 5 mg/mL per min and pemetrexed 500 
mg/m2 every 3 weeks followed by pembrolizumab for 24 months and indefinite pemetrexed 
maintenance therapy or to 4 cycles of carboplatin and pemetrexed alone followed by indefinite 
pemetrexed maintenance therapy. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients who 
achieved an objective response, defined as the percentage of patients with radiologically confirmed 
complete or partial response according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 
1.1 assessed by masked, independent central review, in the intention-to-treat population, defined as 
all patients who were allocated to study treatment. Significance threshold was p<0·025 (one 
sided). Safety was assessed in the as-treated population, defined as all patients who received at 
least one dose of the assigned study treatment. This trial, which is closed for enrolment but 
continuing for follow-up, is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number . 
Findings—Between Nov 25, 2014, and Jan 25, 2016, 123 patients were enrolled; 60 were 
randomly assigned to the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 63 to the chemotherapy 
alone group. 33 (55%; 95% CI 42–68) of 60 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy 
group achieved an objective response compared with 18 (29%; 18–41) of 63 patients in the 
chemotherapy alone group (estimated treatment difference 26% [95% CI 9–42%]; p=0·0016). The 
incidence of grade 3 or worse treatment-related adverse events was similar between groups (23 
[39%] of 59 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 16 [26%] of 62 in the 
chemotherapy alone group). The most common grade 3 or worse treatment-related adverse events 
in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group were anaemia (seven [12%] of 59) and decreased 
neutrophil count (three [5%]); an additional six events each occurred in two (3%) for acute kidney 
injury, decreased lymphocyte count, fatigue, neutropenia, and sepsis, and thrombocytopenia. In the 
chemotherapy alone group, the most common grade 3 or worse events were anaemia (nine [15%] 
of 62) and decreased neutrophil count, pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia (two [3%] each). One 
(2%) of 59 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group experienced treatment-related 
death because of sepsis compared with two (3%) of 62 patients in the chemotherapy group: one 
because of sepsis and one because of pancytopenia. 
Interpretation—Combination of pembrolizumab, carboplatin, and pemetrexed could be an 
effective and tolerable first-line treatment option for patients with advanced non-squamous 
NSCLC. This finding is being further explored in an ongoing international, randomised, double- 
blind, phase 3 study. 


Currently, the standard first-line therapy for patients with advanced non-squamous non- 
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) without targetable genetic aberrations is platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy. With the exception of bevacizumab,1,2 and despite extensive study of 
multiple targeted and cytotoxic agents, the addition of a third agent to platinum-doublet 



chemotherapy has not been shown to improve progression-free or overall survival over 
platinum-doublet chemotherapy alone in randomised studies. 
When used as monotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC, drugs targeting programmed 
death 1 (PD-1) and its ligand, PD-L1, have shown a manageable safety profile and robust 
efficacy, including a significant prolongation of overall survival compared with docetaxel in 
patients whose disease progressed on platinum-based chemotherapy.3–10 One of these 
therapies is pembrolizumab, a humanised, monoclonal antibody against PD-1 that prevents 
PD-1 from binding to its ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2. Evidence for the efficacy and safety of 
pembrolizumab in both treatment-naive and previously treated advanced NSCLC initially 
came from the large, multicohort KEYNOTE-001 study, which showed a correlation 
between PD-L1 expression on tumour cells and response to pembrolizumab.3,4 The efficacy 
and safety of pembrolizumab monotherapy was confirmed in the international, randomised 
KEYNOTE-010 study, in which pembrolizumab yielded superior overall survival compared 
with docetaxel in patients with previously treated, PD-L1-expressing (ie, PD-L1 tumour 
proportion score ≥1%), advanced NSCLC.5 
Increasing evidence suggests that the antitumour activity of chemotherapy is mediated not 
only though cytotoxic effects, but also through immunological effects, including reducing T- 
regulatory cell activity and enhancing cross-presentation of tumour antigens.11–13 
Chemotherapy has also been shown to induce PD-L1 expression on tumour cells.14–16 
Combining immunotherapy and chemotherapy could thus synergistically improve the 
anticancer activity of anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 monotherapy.11–13 Early clinical data for 
combinations of chemotherapy with PD-117,18 and PD-L119 inhibitors have suggested that 
these regimens have manageable toxicity and promising antitumour activity as first-line 
therapy for advanced NSCLC with non-overlapping toxicity profiles. In the international, 
multi-cohort, phase 1/2 KEYNOTE-021 study (ClinicalTrials.gov number ), the safety and 
anti-tumour activity of pembrolizumab added to either carboplatin and paclitaxel (cohort A), 
carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab (cohort B), or pemetrexed and carboplatin (cohort 
C) were assessed.18 All three combinations showed promising antitumour activity 
irrespective of tumour PD-L1 expression, with manageable safety profiles observed in 
cohorts A and C. The greatest antitumour activity was observed in cohort C (N=24), where 
the combination of pembrolizumab, carboplatin, and pemetrexed resulted in 17 (71%) of 24 
patients achieving an overall response and a median progression-free survival of 10·2 
months (95% CI 6·2–15·2).18 
Based on these results and to further explore the potential synergy of combining 
chemotherapy with immunotherapy, we aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of 
pembrolizumab at a fixed intravenous dose of 200 mg plus carboplatin and pemetrexed 
versus those of carboplatin and pemetrexed alone as first-line therapy for patients with 
advanced NSCLC of non-squamous histology as part of KEYNOTE-021. 





This randomised, controlled, phase 2 study was done at 26 academic medical centres in the 
USA and Taiwan (appendix p 2). Eligibility criteria stipulated no previous systemic 
treatment for histologically or cytologically confirmed non-squamous, stage IIIB or IV 
NSCLC and the absence of targetable EGFR mutations or ALK translocations. Other 
eligibility criteria included Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance 
status of 0 or 1 (a 5-point scale where higher numbers indicate greater disability), at least 
one measurable lesion assessed per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 
version 1.120 by the investigator, life expectancy 3 months or longer, and provision of a 
tumour biopsy sample for assessment of PD-L1 expression (for full inclusion criteria, see 
the protocol [appendix p 5]). Exclusions from enrolment included receiving more than 30 
Gy of radiation to the lungs in the previous 6 months, ongoing use of systemic 
corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive treatment, active autoimmune disease requiring 
systemic treatment in the previous 2 years (excluding replacement therapy), untreated brain 
metastases (stable, treated metastases allowed), or active interstitial lung disease or a history 
of pneumonitis that required intravenous glucocorticoids (for full exclusion criteria, see 
appendix). 
The protocol and all subsequent amendments were approved by the appropriate institutional 
review board or independent ethics committee at each study centre. The study was done in 
accordance with the protocol and all amendments, Good Clinical Practice guidelines, and 
the provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients provided written informed consent 
before enrolment. 

Using an interactive voice-response system, patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to 
treatment with pembrolizumab (Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, a subsidiary of Merck & Co 
Inc, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) plus carboplatin and pemetrexed (Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA) or to carboplatin and pemetrexed alone. Randomisation 
was stratified by PD-L1 tumour proportion score (less than 1% vs 1% or greater), 
necessitating adequate tumour tissue for PD-L1 assessment. Treatment was allocated in 
blocks of four in each stratum via a schedule generated by Almac Clinical Technologies 
(Souderton, PA, USA) using a computerised randomised list generator. Patients, treating 
physicians, and representatives of the study funder were not masked to study treatment 
assignment but were masked to PD-L1 expression level. The funder was masked to 
aggregate data by treatment group during the study. 
In the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group, 4 cycles of pembrolizumab 200 mg 
administered over 30 min, pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 administered over 10 min, and 
carboplatin area under curve 5 mg/mL per min administered over 15–60 min were given 
intravenously every 3 weeks in the order listed, followed by pembrolizumab for 24 months 
and optional indefinite pemetrexed maintenance therapy. In the chemotherapy alone group, 




pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC 5 mg/mL per min were given for 4 cycles 
followed by optional indefinite pemetrexed maintenance therapy. Premedication with folic 
acid, vitamin B12, and corticosteroids was administered according to local guidelines. In the 
pembrolizumab group, pembrolizumab was given at least 30 min before chemotherapy. 
Patients in the carboplatin and pemetrexed alone group who experienced radiological disease 
progression could cross over to receive pembrolizumab monotherapy after a washout period 
of 21 days if protocol-specified safety criteria were met. Treatment was continued for the 
maximum number of cycles allowed or until disease progression, intolerable toxicity, 
physician decision, or patient withdrawal of consent, whichever occurred first. Clinically 
stable patients who were considered to be deriving clinical benefit by the investigator despite 
radiological evidence of disease progression could continue therapy until progression was 
confirmed on imaging done at least 4 weeks later. As outlined in the protocol (appendix p 5), 
pembrolizumab treatment was withheld for severe or life-threatening treatment-related 
toxicities; pembrolizumab dose reduction was not allowed. Modification of carboplatin and 
pemetrexed doses was done according to the locally approved product information. 
Tumour imaging by CT (preferred) or MRI was done at baseline, every 6 weeks for the first 
18 weeks, then every 9 weeks through the first 12 months and every 12 weeks thereafter. 
Response was assessed per RECIST version 1.1. Treatment decisions were based on 
investigator review, whereas efficacy was based on masked, independent central radiology 
review. During the treatment phase, adverse events were reviewed, physical examination and 
vital signs were obtained, a complete blood count with differential, and a comprehensive 
serum chemistry panel were assessed every 3 weeks; tri-iodothyronine, free thyroxine, and 
thyroid-stimulating hormone were assessed at baseline, week 3, and every 12 weeks 
thereafter. During the follow-up phase, patient survival was assessed every 8 weeks. All 
adverse events and laboratory abnormalities were graded per the National Cancer Institute 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0. PD-L1 expression was 
assessed in formalin-fixed tumour samples obtained from core needle biopsies, excisional 
biopsies, or resected tissue collected at the time of diagnosis of metastatic disease. 
Assessment of PD-L1 expression was done during the screening period at a central 
laboratory using the commercially available IHC 22C3 pharmDx assay (Dako North 
America, Carpinteria, CA, USA).21,22 
The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients who achieved an objective response, 
defined as the percentage of patients with radiologically confirmed complete or partial 
response according to RECIST version 1.1 assessed by masked, independent central review. 
The key secondary endpoint was progression-free survival, defined as the time from 
randomisation to RECIST-defined progression based on masked, independent central review 
or death from any cause. Other secondary endpoints included duration of response, defined 
as the time from first documentation of complete or partial response to radiological disease 
progression, overall survival, defined as the time from randomisation to death from any 
cause, safety, and the correlation between PD-L1 expression levels and antitumour activity. 
Response and progression-free survival were assessed in the intention-to-treat population, 
defined as all patients randomly allocated to treatment. Safety was assessed in the as-treated 




population, which included all patients who received at least one dose of assigned study 
treatment. 

The analysis was planned to occur at least 6 months after the last patient enrolled. As 
calculated based on an asymptotic method23 and with a planned enrolment of about 108 
patients, the study had at least 89% power to detect a 30% difference in the proportion of 
patients achieving an objective response at a one-sided α of 0·025. Assuming 68 
progression-free survival events, the study had roughly 81·5% power to detect a hazard ratio 
of 0·5 for progression-free survival at a one-sided α of 0·025. The sample size and power 
calculations were done with East 6 (Cytel, Cambridge, MA, USA). The overall type I error 
rate was strictly controlled at a one-sided α of 0·025 by a fixed-sequence, closed testing 
procedure24 that was first applied to the primary endpoint of response rate in the total 
population. If pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy showed superiority over chemotherapy 
alone at a one-sided α of 0·025, the testing procedure was then applied to the key secondary 
endpoint of progression-free survival in the total population. No α was allocated to analyses 
of overall survival or to subgroups based on PD-L1 tumour proportion score. 
The difference in the proportion of patients achieving an objective response between 
treatment groups was assessed with the stratified Miettinen and Nurminen method with 
weighting by sample size. Patients with unknown best overall response were considered 
non-responders. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate progression-free survival, 
overall survival, and duration of response. For progression-free survival, patients who were 
alive and without disease progression or who were lost to follow-up were censored at the 
time of last radiological imaging. For overall survival, patients who were alive or who were 
lost to follow-up were censored at the time of last known survival. For duration of response, 
patients with confirmed response who were without subsequent radiological disease 
progression were censored at the time of last radiological imaging. Treatment differences in 
progression-free and overall survival were assessed with a stratified log-rank test. Hazard 
ratios and associated 95% CIs were assessed with a stratified Cox proportional hazard model 
with Efron’s method of tie handling. The same stratification factor used for randomisation 
was applied to all stratified statistical analyses. Data were analysed with SAS, version 9.3. 


The study was funded by Merck & Co. Representatives of the funder, including JF, YG, and 
HR, contributed to various aspects of the study design, data analysis and interpretation, and 
preparation of the report. The study database was maintained by the funder. All authors had 
access to the data and had responsibility for the decision to submit the article for publication. 

Between Nov 25, 2014, and Jan 25, 2016, 219 patients were screened for enrolment at 23 
sites in the USA and three sites in Taiwan (figure 1). 123 (56%) of these patients met all 
eligibility criteria and were randomly assigned; 60 (49%) were allocated to pembrolizumab 



plus carboplatin and pemetrexed and 63 (51%) to carboplatin and pemetrexed alone (figure 
1). One patient in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group had deterioration in their 
ECOG performance status to a score of 2 after randomisation but before treatment started 
and therefore did not receive study therapy. One patient in the chemotherapy group withdrew 
consent before receiving treatment. Pemetrexed maintenance therapy was received by 50 
(85%) of 59 treated patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 43 (69%) 
of 62 patients in the chemotherapy group. 
Baseline demographics and disease characteristics were mostly as expected for an advanced 
NSCLC population (table 1), except that proportionally, more women were enrolled than 
men (38 [63%] of 60 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 37 [59%] 
of 63 patients in the chemotherapy group were women). Demographics and disease 
characteristics were generally balanced between groups (table 1). Most patients had stage IV 
adenocarcinoma and were current or former smokers. Although absolute differences were 
small, there were more patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group who were 
of non-white ethnic origin (11 [18%] of 60 vs five [8%] of 63 in the chemotherapy group), 
never smoked (15 [25%] of 60 vs nine [14%] of 63), and had a tumour histology of 
adenocarcinoma (58 [97%] of 60 vs 55 [87%] of 63). 
As of the cutoff date of Aug 8, 2016, median follow-up was 10·6 months (IQR 8·2–13·3). 28 
(47%) of 59 patients in the as-treated pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 19 
(31%) of 62 patients in the as-treated chemotherapy group remained on assigned study 
treatment (figure 1). The most common reason for treatment discontinuation in the as-treated 
population was progressive disease (17 [29%] of 59 patients in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group and 31 [50%] of 62 patients in the chemotherapy group). 20 (32%) of 
62 patients in the as-treated chemotherapy group crossed over to receive pembrolizumab 
monotherapy as allowed by the study protocol. Beyond the in-study crossover, at least one 
line of subsequent systemic anticancer therapy in the as-treated population was received by 
13 (22%) of 59 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 17 (27%) of 62 
patients in the chemotherapy alone group (appendix p 3). Including the in-study crossover, 
32 (74%) of the 43 patients in the chemotherapy alone group who discontinued assigned 
study treatment received subsequent anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 therapy compared with no 
patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group. 
33 (55%; 95% CI 42–68) of 60 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group 
achieved an objective responses compared with 18 (29%; 18–41) of 63 patients in the 
chemotherapy alone group; all responses were partial (table 2). Pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy significantly improved the proportion of patients who achieved an objective 
response compared with chemotherapy alone (estimated treatment difference 26% [95% CI 
9–42%]; p=0·0016). Median time to response was 1·5 months (IQR 1·4–2·8) with 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy versus 2·7 months (1·4–2·8) with chemotherapy alone. 
Responses in both groups were durable: 29 (88%) of 33 responders in the pembrolizumab 
plus chemotherapy group and 14 (78%) of 18 responders in the chemotherapy alone group 
remained alive and progression free at the time of data cutoff. Kaplan-Meier estimates of 
response duration of at least 6 months were 92% (95% CI 73–98) for responses to 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy and 81% (51–93) for responses to chemotherapy alone. 



Only two (3%) of 60 patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group had a best 
overall response of progressive disease compared with 11 (17%) of 63 patients in the 
chemotherapy alone group. Overall, 55 (98%) of 56 patients in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group and 45 (82%) of 55 patients in the chemotherapy alone group who had 
measurable disease per masked, independent central review at baseline and at least one post- 
baseline tumour assessment experienced a decrease from baseline in the sum of their target 
lesions (figure 2). Median change from baseline was −44% (IQR −62 to −27) for the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and −28% (−50 to −10) for the chemotherapy 
alone group. In the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group, 12 of 21 patients who had a 
PD-L1 tumour proportion score of less than 1% achieved a response (response rate 57%; 
95% CI 34–79), as did 21 of 39 patients who had a tumour proportion score of 1% or greater 
(response rate 54%; 37–70; appendix p 4). In the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group, 
within the tumour proportion score 1% or greater population, five (26%) of 19 patients who 
had a tumour proportion score of 1–49% and 16 (80%) of 20 patients who had a score of 
50% or greater achieved an objective response (appendix p 4). In the chemotherapy alone 
group, three of 23 patients who had a tumour proportion score of less than 1% achieved a 
response (response rate 13%; 95% CI 3–34), as did nine of 23 patients who had a score of 1– 
49% (39%; 20–61) and six of 17 patients who had a score of 50% or greater (35%; 14–62; 
appendix p 4). 
56 patients died or experienced disease progression, including 23 (38%) of 60 in the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 33 (52%) of 63 in the chemotherapy alone 
group. Progression-free survival was significantly longer with pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy compared with chemotherapy alone (HR 0·53 [95% CI 0·31–0·91]; p=0·010; 
figure 3A). Median progression-free survival was 13·0 months (95% CI 8·3 to not reached) 
for pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy and 8·9 months (4·4–10·3) for chemotherapy alone. 
Estimated 6-month progression-free survival was 77% (95% CI 64–86) for pembrolizumab 
plus chemotherapy and 63% (49–74) for chemotherapy alone. 
At the time of data cutoff, 27 patients had died, including 13 (22%) of 60 in the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 14 (22%) of 63 in the chemotherapy alone 
group. No difference in survival was noted between treatment groups (HR 0·90 [95% CI 
0·42–1·91]; nominal p=0·39; figure 3B). Estimated 6-month survival was 92% in both 
treatment groups (95% CI 81–96 for the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group; 95% CI 
82–97 for the chemotherapy group alone group); after 6 months, there is a high degree of 
censoring. 
In the as-treated population, median duration of treatment was 8·0 months (IQR 4·7–11·2) 
for the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 4·9 months (2·1–7·4) for the 
chemotherapy alone group. Six (10%) of 59 treated patients in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group and eight (13%) of 62 treated patients in the chemotherapy alone group 
discontinued study treatment because of treatment-related events. The protocol did not 
provide specific dose reductions for pemetrexed and carboplatin but rather relied on 
investigators to reduce the dose based on their local regulations and treatment guidelines, 
data for chemotherapy dose reductions were not captured in this analysis. Deaths attributed 
to study treatment occurred in one patient (1%) in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy 



group (sepsis) and two patients (3%) in the chemotherapy alone group (one case each of 
pancytopenia and sepsis). No additional adverse events led to death. Without adjustment for 
the difference in exposure, treatment-related adverse events occurred in 55 (93%) of 59 
patients in the as-treated pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group and 56 (90%) of 62 
patients in the as-treated chemotherapy alone group, including 23 (39%) and 16 (26%), 
respectively, who had events of grade 3 or worse severity (table 3). 
Treatment-related adverse events were as expected in both treatment groups of the as-treated 
population (table 3). The most common treatment-related events of any grade were fatigue 
(38 [64%] of 59 in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group vs 25 [40%] of 62 in the 
chemotherapy alone group), nausea (34 [58%] vs 27 [44%]), and anaemia (19 [32%] vs 33 
[53%]). In addition to fatigue, nausea, and anaemia, other events for which there was a 
greater than 10% difference in incidence between groups were rash (16 [27%] in the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group vs nine [15%] in the chemotherapy alone group) 
and alopecia (eight [14%] vs two [3%]). Treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or 
worse severity that occurred in three or more patients in either treatment group were 
anaemia (seven [12%] in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group vs nine (15%) in the 
chemotherapy alone group), decreased neutrophil count (three [5%] vs two [3%]), 
thrombocytopenia (two [3%] vs two [3%]), and decreased lymphocyte count, neutropenia, 
and sepsis (two [3%] vs one [2%] each). 
The incidence of adverse events of interest based on a presumed immunological mechanism 
of action, regardless of attribution to study treatment or immune relatedness by the 
investigator, in the as-treated population was 13 (22%) of 59 in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group and seven (11%) of 62 in the chemotherapy group (table 3). The only 
events of grade 3 or worse severity were grade 4 infusion reaction (one [2%] of 59 in the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group vs none in the chemotherapy alone group), grade 
3 skin reaction (one [2%] in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group vs one [2%] of 62 
in the chemotherapy group), and grade 3 pneumonitis (one [2%] in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group). The most common immune-mediated adverse events of any grade in 
the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group were hypothyroidism (nine [15%] of 59), 
hyperthyroidism (five [8%]), and pneumonitis (three [5%]). 

The addition of pembrolizumab to standard-of-care carboplatin and pemetrexed followed by 
pembrolizumab for 2 years and indefinite pemetrexed maintenance therapy significantly 
improved the proportion of patients who achieved an objective response compared with 
carboplatin and pemetrexed alone in patients with chemotherapy-naive, advanced non- 
squamous NSCLC. In addition, this combination also significantly prolonged progression- 
free survival in this non-squamous NSCLC population. These data constitute, to the best of 
our knowledge, the first published report of a randomised, controlled clinical trial in NSCLC 
to prospectively show the benefit of combination therapy with a PD-1 pathway inhibitor and 
chemotherapy in the treatment-naive setting. The rate of treatment discontinuation because 
of treatment-related adverse events was similar between groups, despite a greater incidence 



of treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or worse severity in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy treatment group. 
The proportion of patients who achieved an objective response in the pembrolizumab plus 
carboplatin and pemetrexed group (55%) in this randomised, controlled cohort was 
somewhat lower than the preliminary proportion who achieved an objective response (71%) 
in the phase 1 cohort of this study, although the confidence intervals for these response rates 
overlap.18 The proportion of patients who achieved an objective response was also similar to 
that noted in other phase 1 studies of anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 therapy added to platinum- 
doublet chemotherapy.17–19 Notably, the median time to response was around the time of the 
first radiological assessment at 6 weeks in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group, 
whereas the median time to response was around the time of the second assessment at 12 
weeks in the chemotherapy alone group. As previously reported with pembrolizumab 
monotherapy, responses in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group were durable. 
Together, these data suggest that addition of pembrolizumab to platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy could help a greater number of patients experience durable response more 
rapidly compared with standard platinum-based combination chemotherapy alone. 
Median progression-free survival in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group was 13·0 
months (95% CI 8·3 to not reached). Although caution must be used in view of the relatively 
short follow-up duration and the amount of censoring noted after 6 months, to the best of our 
knowledge, this makes KEYNOTE-021 one of the first randomised, controlled studies of 
first-line chemotherapy for advanced NSCLC in which median progression-free survival 
exceeded 1 year. Similarly, although the 8·9 month (95% CI 4·4–10·3) median progression- 
free survival noted in the chemotherapy alone group seems to exceed the 5–7 months 
observed in recent randomised studies of carboplatin and pemetrexed induction followed by 
maintenance pemetrexed,25,26 there is a large amount of censoring around the time the 
median was reached. If the longer than expected progression-free survival is confirmed with 
additional follow-up, contributing factors might include the enrolment of more women than 
men because women have better outcomes with chemotherapy27,28 and the greater use of 
pemetrexed maintenance therapy compared with that observed in the phase 3 
PARAMOUNT study.29 Because any benefit provided by these factors would probably 
extend to both treatment groups, they would not be expected to affect the relative benefit of 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy over chemotherapy alone. 
No difference in overall survival was noted over the median follow-up of 10·6 months. With 
only 27 deaths and estimated 6-month survival of more than 90% in both treatment groups, 
it is likely that survival will be longer than that which has been observed historically for 
platinum-doublet chemotherapy. Additional follow-up is planned to further assess overall 
survival, although the interpretability of these results will probably be restricted by the 
crossover design of the study and the fact that including the crossover phase, 32 (52%) of 62 
patients in the chemotherapy alone as-treated group (ie, 74% of the 43 patients who 
discontinued chemotherapy) received subsequent PD-1-pathway-directed therapy, whereas 
no patients in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group did so. 



The large, multicohort, phase 1 KEYNOTE-001 study not only established the safety and 
antitumour activity of pembrolizumab monotherapy for advanced NSCLC, but also showed 
an association between tumour PD-L1 expression and improved response to pembrolizumab. 
3 In cohort C of KEYNOTE-021, the dose-finding cohort for the combination of 
pembrolizumab plus carboplatin and pemetrexed, there was no apparent relationship 
between PD-L1 expression and response, with more than 60% of patients achieving a 
response across the PD-L1 tumour proportion score subgroups.18 In this randomised cohort 
of KEYNOTE-021, the proportion of patients who achieved an objective response was 
similar in patients with a PD-L1 tumour proportion score of less than 1% and those with a 
score of 1% or greater, with a possibly higher proportion of responses in patients with a 
tumour proportion score of 50% or greater. In view of the small sample sizes of the 
individual PD-L1 subgroups, it is not possible to conclusively determine whether there is a 
relationship between PD-L1 expression and efficacy in patients treated with pembrolizumab 
plus chemotherapy. Results of the ongoing double-blind, phase 3 KEYNOTE-189 study of 
carboplatin or cisplatin and pemetrexed with or without pembrolizumab for non-squamous 
NSCLC (ClinicalTrials.gov, number ) might provide a better opportunity to assess the 
relationship between PD-L1 expression and efficacy of pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy 
in view that the planned enrolment is 570 patients. 
The adverse event profile noted for pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy was manageable. 
With a 1·6-times longer exposure in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group, there was 
a higher incidence of chemotherapy-associated adverse events such as fatigue and nausea in 
the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy versus the chemotherapy alone group. However, 
most of the treatment-related adverse events were mild and of grade 1 or 2 severity, and rate 
of death or treatment discontinuation did not increase in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group. The incidence of potentially immune-mediated adverse events in the 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group of the as-treated population (13 [22%] of 59) was 
comparable to that noted for pembrolizumab monotherapy in KEYNOTE-010 (69 [20%] of 
339 patients in the pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg group and 64 [19%] of 343 patients in the 
pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg group).5 As previously reported for pembrolizumab monotherapy 
in patients with NSCLC,3–5 most immune-mediated adverse events were of grade 1 or 2 
severity and were manageable without treatment discontinuation. 
Limitations of our study include the relatively short duration of follow-up at the current 
analysis and the open-label design. Although the open-label design could have affected the 
reporting of adverse events, we do not believe it affected the reported efficacy because the 
number of objective responses and progression-free survival were assessed according to 
RECIST version 1.1 by independent, blinded central review. Therefore, although the treating 
physician, patient, and funder were aware of the treatment assignment for a given patient, 
the radiologists who assessed the tumour images were not. 
Data from KEYNOTE-021, along with those from studies of nivolumab and atezolizumab 
added to platinum-doublet chemotherapy, support the continued exploration of the efficacy 
and safety of addition of anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1 therapy to standard of care platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy as first-line therapy for advanced NSCLC. Ongoing randomised, double- 
blind, phase 3 studies exploring the addition of pembrolizumab to chemotherapy in the 



chemotherapy-naive setting include the aforementioned KEYNOTE-189 study and the 
KEYNOTE-407 study of carboplatin and paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel with or without 
pembrolizumab for squamous histology (ClinicalTrials.gov, number ). 
Our data suggest that the combination of pembrolizumab, carboplatin, and pemetrexed 
provides a significant and clinically relevant improvement in antitumour activity compared 
with chemotherapy alone. Combined with the manageable safety profile, these data suggest 
that pembrolizumab plus platinum-doublet chemotherapy might be an effective treatment 
option for patients with chemotherapy-naive, advanced, non-squamous NSCLC. 



This study was funded by Merck & Co (Kenilworth, NJ, USA). We thank the patients and their families and 
caregivers for participating in this study, along with all investigators and site personnel; Eli Lilly and Company 
(Indianapolis, IN, USA) for providing pemetrexed; LabCorp Clinical Trials (Los Angeles, CA, USA) for 
performing the PD-L1 screening; Keaven Anderson, Roger Dansey, Scot Ebbinghaus, and Gregory M Lubiniecki 
(all of Merck & Co, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) for critical review of the manuscript; Cong Chen (Merck & Co, 
Kenilworth, NJ, USA) for statistical guidance and support; and Robert Bachman (Merck & Co, Kenilworth, NJ, 
USA) for study support. Melanie A Leiby (Merck & Co, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) provided medical writing and 
editorial assistance funded by Merck & Co (Kenilworth, NJ, USA). 

CJL has received research support to the institution from Advantagene, Clovis, Genentech/Roche, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Inovio, and Merck; has served as an advisory board member for AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Clovis, and Genentech/Roche; and has served as a Data and Safety Monitoring Committee member for 
AbbVie, Amgen, Lilly, and Synta. SMG has served as an advisory board member for Ariad, AstraZeneca, Bristol- 
Myers Squibb, Genentech, and Pfizer. HB has received research support to the institution from Merck and has 
served as a consultant or advisory board member for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, EMD-Serono, Genentech, 
Lilly, Merck, Pfizer, and Trovogene. VAP has received research support from and served as a consultant for Merck. 
APat has received research funding from Merck. SFP has received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Genentech, Incyte Corporation, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and Novartis. RDG has received research support from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Clovis Oncology, and Merck and has served as a consultant for Ariad and Clovis 
Oncology. RGM has received research support to the institution from Merck. JPS has received research support to 
the institution from Bayer, Merck & Co, and Verastem. JC-HY has served as an adviser for Astellas, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Clovis Oncology, Eli Lilly, Merck Serono, 
Merrimack, MSD, Novartis, Ono Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech/Chugai, and Yuhan Pharmaceutical. 
MG has received research support to the institution from AbbVie, Celgene, Genentech/Roche, Merck, and 
OncoMed and served as a consultant or advisory board member for Ariad, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Calithera Biosciences, Clovis Oncolocy, Genentech/Roche, Nektar, Novartis, and Pfizer. 
LVS has served as a consultant for Ariad, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Clovis Oncology, Genentech/Roche, 
Merrimack, Novartis, and Taiho. MMA has served as a consultant for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, and 
Merck. JF, YG, and HR are employed by Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, a subsidiary of Merck & Co (Kenilworth, 
NJ, USA). YG has stock options in Merck & Co. LG has received a grant from the Bristol-Myers Squibb IION 
Foundation and has served on scientific advisory boards for AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Genentech/Roche, Merck, and 
Pfizer. APan and SIJ declare no competing interests. 




bevacizumab or placebo as first-line therapy for nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer: results 
from a randomised phase III trial (AVAiL). Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 1804–09. [PubMed: 20150572] 







5. Herbst RS, Baas P, Kim DW, et al. Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated, PD-L1- 
positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2016; 387: 1540–50. [PubMed: 26712084] 


7. Gettinger SN, Horn L, Gandhi L, et al. Overall survival and long-term safety of nivolumab (anti- 
programmed death 1 antibody, BMS-936558, ONO-4538) in patients with previously treated 
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 2004–12. [PubMed: 25897158] 




10. Fehrenbacher L, Spira A, Ballinger M, et al. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel for patients with 
previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (POPLAR): a multicentre, open-label, phase 2 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2016; 387: 1837–46. [PubMed: 26970723] 
11. Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Smyth MJ, Kroemer G. Mechanism of action of conventional and targeted 
anticancer therapies: reinstating immunosurveillance. Immunity 2013; 39: 74–88. [PubMed: 
23890065] 
12. Galluzzi L, Buque A, Kepp O, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Immunological effects of conventional 
chemotherapy and targeted anticancer agents. Cancer Cell 2015; 28: 690–714. [PubMed: 
26678337] 

the right path to achieve cancer cure? Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 1813–23. [PubMed: 25922066] 
14. Peng J, Hamanishi J, Matsumura N, et al. Chemotherapy induces programmed cell death-ligand 1 
overexpression via the nuclear factor-kappaB to foster an immunosuppressive tumor 
microenvironment in ovarian cancer. Cancer Res 2015; 75: 5034–45. [PubMed: 26573793] 
15. Grabosch S, Zeng F, Zhang L, et al. PD-L1 biology in response to chemotherapy in vitro and in 

16. Zhang P, Ma Y, Lv C, et al. The up-regulation of PD-L1 promotes the resistant response in non- 
small cell lung cancer patients with neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer Sci 2016; published 
online Sept 1. DOI:10.1111/cas.13072. 

doublet chemotherapy for first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 
2016; 34: 2969–79. [PubMed: 27354481] 
18. Gadgeel SM, Stevenson J, Langer CJ, et al. Pembrolizumab (pembro) plus chemotherpay as front- 
line therapy for advanced NSCLC: KEYNOTE-021 cohorts A-C. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2016; 
34: Abstr 9016. 
19. Camidge DR, Liu SV, Powderly JD, et al. Atezolizumab (MPDL3280A) combined with platinum- 
based chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a phase 1b study. J Thorac Oncol 
2015; 10: Abstr 02.7. 
20. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al. New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: 
revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 2009; 45: 228–47. [PubMed: 19097774] 
21. Dako. PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx [product information]. Carpinteria, CA: Dako North America 


immunohistochemistry assay for pembrolizumab therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer. Appl 
Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2016; 24: 392–97. [PubMed: 27333219] 
23. Farrington CP, Manning G. Test statistics and sample size formulae for comparative binomial trials 
with null hypothesis of non-zero risk difference or non-unity relative risk. Stat Med 1990; 9: 1447– 
54. [PubMed: 2281232] 






combination with cisplatin or carboplatin as first-line therapy for patients with locally advanced or 
metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer 2013; 14: 215–23. [PubMed: 23332288] 
26. Zinner RG, Obasaju CK, Spigel DR, et al. PRONOUNCE: randomized, open-label, phase III study 
of first-line pemetrexed + carboplatin followed by maintenance pemetrexed versus paclitaxel + 
carboplatin + bevacizumab followed by maintenance bevacizumab in patients ith advanced 
nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 134–42. [PubMed: 25371077] 
27. Wheatley-Price P, Blackhall F, Lee SM, et al. The influence of sex and histology on outcomes in 
non-small-cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of five randomized trials. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 
2023–28. [PubMed: 20332134] 

NSCLC in women versus men: analysis of recent Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
studies, with and without bevacizumab. Lung Cancer 2012; 76: 410–15. [PubMed: 22266041] 

supportive care versus placebo plus best supportive care after induction therapy with pemetrexed 
plus cisplatin for advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (PARAMOUNT): a double- 
blind, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 247–55. [PubMed: 22341744] 






We searched PubMed on Sept 4, 2016, using the following terms: “PD-1 OR PD-L1 OR 
MK-3475 OR pembrolizumab OR lambrolizumab OR Keytruda OR nivolumab OR 
BMS-936558 OR Opdivo OR atezolizumab OR MPDL3280A OR Tecentriq OR 
durvalumab OR MEDI4736 OR avelumab” AND “platinum-doublet chemotherapy OR 
triple chemotherapy OR triple therapy OR maintenance therapy OR carboplatin and 
pemetrexed OR cisplatin AND pemetrexed” AND “advanced non–small-cell lung cancer 
OR NSCLC”. The search was not limited by date, but was limited to articles and 
abstracts published in English only. We also searched the abstracts for the 2015 and 2016 
American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meetings, the 2015 European Cancer 
Congress, and the 2015 World Conference for Lung Cancer using the same search terms. 
Similar to the phase 1 cohorts of KEYNOTE-021, these two studies suggested that 
addition of anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 therapy to platinum-doublet chemotherapy had a 
manageable safety profile and promising antitumour activity. A thorough review of the 
literature showed that most large, randomised, controlled clinical studies did not show 
superior efficacy or a favourable benefit-risk profile for the addition of a third agent to 
platinum-doublet chemotherapy in the first-line advanced non-small-cell lung cancer 
setting. One notable exception is the addition of bevacizumab to platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy, which showed superior efficacy to platinum-doublet chemotherapy alone 
and a manageable safety profile in randomised, controlled clinical studies. 

Results of this cohort of KEYNOTE-021 show that addition of pembrolizumab to 
carboplatin and pemetrexed improves efficacy and has a favourable benefit-to-risk profile 
in patients with chemotherapy-naive, advanced non-squamous NSCLC. Not only do these 
data represent, to the best of our knowledge, the first published report of a randomised, 
controlled clinical trial in NSCLC to prospectively show a benefit of addition of a PD-1 
pathway inhibitor to chemotherapy, they are also among the only randomised data to 
show a benefit of adding a third agent to platinum-doublet chemotherapy. 

Our data suggest that the addition of pembrolizumab to platinum-doublet chemotherapy 
is an effective treatment option with a manageable, predictable safety profile for patients 
with chemotherapy-naive, advanced, non-squamous NSCLC. The efficacy and safety of 
addition of pembrolizumab to platinum-doublet chemotherapy as first-line therapy for 
advanced NSCLC is being further explored in two ongoing international, randomised, 
double-blind, phase 3 studies: the KEYNOTE-189 study of platinum and pemetrexed 
with or without pembrolizumab in patients with non-squamous non–small-cell lung 
cancer () and the KEYNOTE-407 study of carboplatin and paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel 
with or without pembrolizumab in patients with squamous NSCLC (). 


Figure 1: Trial profile 
*One patient allocated to pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy experienced deterioration in 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status to a score of 2 after screening but 
before receiving the first dose of treatment. One patient allocated to chemotherapy alone 
withdrew consent before receiving the first dose of study treatment. †Includes clinical 
disease progression. ‡Includes 20 patients who crossed over to receive pembrolizumab 
monotherapy as part of the study. §Patients without a completed study medication 
discontinuation form. 



Figure 2: Best percentage change from baseline in tumour size in the pembrolizumab plus 
chemotherapy group (n=56; A) and the chemotherapy alone group (n=55; B) 
Tumour size was defined as the sum of the longest diameters of target lesions. Evaluable 
patients were those who had both measurable disease per Response Evaluation Criteria In 
Solid Tumors version 1.1 by masked, independent central radiology review at baseline and at 
least one post-baseline radiological assessment. 



Figure 3: Kaplan-Meier estimates of progression-free survival (A) and overall survival (B) 
Progression-free survival assessed per Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors version 
1.1 by masked, independent central radiology review in the intention-to-treat population. 















































































Data are median (IQR) or n (%). ECOG=Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. NSCLC=non-small-cell lung cancer. TPS=tumour proportion 
score. 

Other ethnic origins in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group included one patient (2%) who was American Indian or Alaska Native and 
one patient (2%) who did not define their ethnic origin. 

One patient (2%) in the pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy group had an ECOG performance status of 2; this patient did not receive study 
treatment. 

 
 
 


Responses assessed per RECIST version 1.1 by masked, independent central review in the intention-to-treat 
population 






























































































































































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








































































































































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
