Peritoneal Dialysis International, Vol.18, pp 311-316 0896-8608/98 $300 + 00
Printed in Canada All rights reserved Copyright &copy; 1998 International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis
PERITONEAL DIALYSIS IS NOT A RISK FACTOR FOR PRIMARY VASCULAR GRAFT
THROMBOSIS AFTER RENAL TRANSPLANTATION
Miguel perez Font&aacute;n, Ana Rodr&iacute;guez-Carmona, Teresa Garc&iacute;a Falcon, Carlos Tresancos,
Pablo Bouza, and Francisco Vald&eacute;s
Division of Nephrology, Hospital Juan Canalejo, A Coru&ntilde;a, Spain
.Objective:To find out if patients undergoing peritoneal has been claimed that patients on PD present lower rates of
dialysis (PD) have an increased risk of primary vascular delayed graft function (9,10). Peritonitis and catheter-related
thrombosis of the renal allograft, compared with patients on
disorders may complicate the course ofRTx in PD patients,
hemodialysis (HD).
but they do not seem to have a detrimental effect on the
.Design: Observational, retrospective cohort study.
overall results of therapy (1).
.Setting:Tertiary care hospital, covering an approximate
Vascular thrombosis (V cT) is one of the most feared
population of 2000000. Extensive use of suboptimal donors
for renal transplantation. early complications ofRTx (11), its incidence oscillating
.Patients and Methods:The study included 827 patients between 0.5 and 8% in different studies. It occurs
receiving a cadaveric renal transplantation (RTx) in our predominantly during the first 2 weeks after RTx, resulting
center between 1988 and 1997 (700 on HD and 127 on PD). in graft failure in the vast majority of cases, although
We searched for a potential difference in the incidence of
sporadic, but well documented, cases of graft salvage have
graft thrombosis, according to the pretransplant dialysis
been reported, especially after venous thrombosis (11).
modality and taking into consideration the main reported risk
Graft thrombosis is a natural endpoint in the course of
factors for this complication of RTx.
complications such as ongoing, irreversible acute rejection
.Results: The accumulated incidence of primary graft
thrombosis was 4.7% in PD patients, and 6.1% in HD pa- or renal artery stenosis (11,12), but may also present as a
tients (NS). Arterial and venous thrombosis were also simi- seemingly primary complication ofRTx. The list offactors
lar in both groups. Logistic regression analysis demon- that have been associated with an increased risk of primary
strated that extremes of age of the donor, use of the right V cT of the renal allograft is extensive, including
kidney, protracted cold ischemia, delayed graft function, and cyclosporine (CsA) (13) and OKT3 (14) therapy, and also
transplantation to a hypersensitized recipient independently
technical, immunological, and donor/recipient mismatch-
predicted graft thrombosis. Peritoneal dialysis was not
related factors (Table 1) (15-18). The role ofhyperco-
independently associated with the complication under study
agulability syndromes (19) in the pathogenesis of this
(adjusted odds ratio HD/PD = 2.5, 95% CI = 0.8 7.7).
complication has not yet been established, although it has
.Conclusions: Peritoneal dialysis is not associated with an
increased risk of primary vascular thrombosis of the renal been suggested that thrombophilia may predispose to early
allograft. graft failure (20).
Recently, at least two studies have associated PD therapy
KEY WORDS: Renal transplantation; graft thrombosis; with an increased risk of primary graft thrombosis after RTx
hemodialysis. (21,22). A preliminary survey, carried out in Spain in 1996
and specifically addressing this question (23), could not
confirm this association. We have performed an in-depth
analysis of the risk profile for early primary V cT of the
I t is generally accepted that the global results of renal
renal allograft in a wide population transplanted in our
transplantation (RTx) are similar in uremic
center between 1988 and 1997, with the specific aim of
patients, whether they have been previously treated with
assessing the potential relation between this complication
peritoneal dialysis (PD) or hemodialysis (HD) (1). Early
reports ofpoor graft survival in PD patients (2) have not and the pretransplant dialysis modality.
been confirmed (3-9). The incidence of acute rejection is
PATIENTS AND METHODS
similar in both populations, while it
Correspondence to: M. Perez Font&aacute;n, Division of The study population included 827 cadaveric RTx
Nephrology, Hospital Juan Canalejo, Xubias de Arriba 84, performed in our unit between January 1988 and July
15006 A Coru&ntilde;a, Spain
Received 12 December 1997; accepted 6 March 1998.
1997. Of these, 700 patients (84.6%) were treated with HD, suppression schedule, preservation fluid, recipient
and 127 (15.4%) with PD. Immunosuppression was based instability during the peritransplant period [estimated by
on CsA in all cases, although four different protocols were performance of a hemodialysis session immediately
used during the study period: CsA + prednisone (Pred) before RTx, peritransplant blood transfusion, first central
(15.5%), CsA + Pred + azathioprine (66.3%), CsA + Pred + venous and systolic blood pressures after RTx surgery,
mycophenolate mofetil (10.5%), and OKT3 (5 mg/day for and severe complications (infections, bleeding) during
10 days) + CsA + Pred + azathioprine (7. 7%). Our center the first week after RTx], immediate versus delayed graft
takes extensive advantage of suboptimal donors, including function (dialysis required during the first week after
non-heartbeating (12.6%), pediatric (5.4% 5 years old or RTx), and CsA profile during the first days after RTx,
younger), and elderly (9.1% older than 60 years) donors. with special emphasis on delays in achieving therapeutic
Primary V cT of the renal allograft was diagnosed CsA levels after RTx surgery.
according to standard criteria (11). Clinical evaluation,
STATISTIC
isotopic scan, duplex-Doppler sonography and, in some
cases, arteriography were the usual steps in diagnosis.
S
Surgical exploration was carried out as soon as a
presumptive diagnosis was established. In spite of this,
graft salvage was not possible in any instance, and graft Univariate analysis was based on chi-square test,
nephrectomy specimens confirmed the di agnosis in all Student's t-test (two-tailed, unpaired), and the Mann-
Whitney test. Independent predictors of primary V cT were
cases. We excluded from the analysis cases of definite
identified using enter, forward, and stepwise logistic
secondary graft thrombosis (basically due to irreversible
regression analysis. Dialysis modality was included in the
rejection), and also episodes occurring beyond the first
general, best theoretical, and best-fit models, correcting for
month after RTx.
confounding variables and significant interactions. Risk
The following variables were considered for analysis:
measures are presented as odds ratios (OR), with 95%
confidence intervals (CI). The SPSS 6.1.3 software (SPSS
Donor-related: age, sex, blood group, cause of death,
Inc, Chicago, IL, U.S.A.) was used for analysis.
hemodynamic instability, non-heartbeating, multiorgan
involvement (versus renal), and serum creatinine.
RESULTS
Recipient-related: age, sex, blood group, basal disease, time
on dialysis, residual diuresis, basal hypertension
There were 49 episodes of primary V cT of the renal
(antihypertensive drugs required), significant
allograft (accumulated incidence 5.9%). Thrombosis was
atherosclerosis (clinical diagnosis), pretransplant blood
arterial in 19 cases, venous in 28 cases, and arterial and
transfusions, degree of sensitization against the
venous in 2 cases. As previously stated, graft nephrectomy
lymphocyte pannel (current), first versus second/third
specimens confirmed the diagnosis of V cT in all cases.
graft, and hematocrit, platelet count, and cholesterol and
However, in 13 cases associated rejection could not be
albumin values at the time ofRTx.
positively excluded, due to massive graft infarction and, in
Transplant-related: cold and warm ischemia, vascular
2 other cases, findings were equivocal, disclosing mild
anomalies of the graft, need for vascular reconstructive
signs ofrejection, which were considered not to be severe
surgery, use of right/left kidney, HLA (human leukocyte
enough to establish a diagnosis of immunologic V cT.
antigen) mismatches, immuno
Graft thrombosis was diagnosed a mean of 6.1 days after
RTx (range 1 30), 41% of the episodes occur
ring during the first 3 days, and 90% during the first 10 Pretransplant poly transfusion and mycophenolate mofetil-
days, after surgery. Arterial thrombosis occurred later than based immunosuppression did not reach statistical
venous thrombosis (mean 7 vs 5 days, p = 0.015, Mann- significance as independent predictors of VcT, but were
Whitney). Twenty-four patients suffering V cT were maintained in the final equation as confounding variables
retransplanted later, and the complication recurred in only because they improved the predictive power of the model
one case (4.2%). and influenced the regression coefficient of the study
The accumulated incidence ofVcT was 4.7% in PD variable (dialysis modality). Most importantly for this study,
patients (n = 6), and 6.1% in HD patients (n = 43) (NS). PD was not an independent predictor of graft thrombosis. In
Also, there was no significant difference in the incidence of fact, the risk was somewhat, albeit not significantly, higher
arterial (2.3% PD vs 2.3% HD) or venous thrombosis (2.4% in HD patients.
PD vs 3.6% HD) between both groups.
Table 2 shows the main differences between PD and HD DISCUSSION
patients, regarding the variables studied. Table 3 presents
the main results of the univariate analysis of risk factors for The results of our study do not support those of Murphy
the complication under study. et al. (21) or van der Vliet et al. (22). Although we are not
There were 49 patients on PD (39%) who did not present aware of other studies specifically addressing this question,
immediate graft function; 25 of these (51 %) were treated other groups have found a similar risk of graft thrombosis in
with HD, and 20 (41 %) with PD, during the first days after patients treated with PD and HD (18). The reasons for this
RTx, while in 4 cases (8%) irreversible graft failure was discrepancy are not clear. The study by Murphy et al. (21)
diagnosed before posttransplant dialysis was initiated. Graft was carried out on a relatively small population, and a
V ct occurred in 4 patients (16%) while being treated with multivariate statistical approach was not attempted, which
HD, in 1 while being treated with PD (5%), and in 1 before limits the reliability of their conclusions. Sample size and
any dialysis was performed (NS). No instance ofVcT statistic methodology provide more consistent support to the
affected initially functioning grafts in the PD group. results ofvan der Vliet et al. (22), although it is surprising
Multivariate analysis (Table 4) confirmed previous that pretransplant PD therapy was the only independent
reports on the association of graft thrombosis with factors predictor of graft V cT. Our study has taken into
such as extremes of age of the donor, use of the right consideration all factors commonly considered to playa
kidney, protracted cold ischemia, or delayed graft function. potential pathogenic role in graft thrombosis (Table 1), and
The excess risk detected in hypersensitized recipients may the multivariate approach did not detect even a minor trend
indicate a role for undetected rejection in some cases of to a higher incidence ofVcT in our patients on PD.
apparently primary V cT. Frequent transfusions before RTx exerted some
protection against graft VcT in our study (Table 3). This
may reflect a potential role for concealed rejection in the
genesis of some cases of so-called primary V cT of the renal
allograft. As patients on HD were more frequently
transfused (Table 2), this factor may have provided some
protection against V cT in this group. However, the
magnitude of the effect is probably small, and the
introduction of erythropoietin therapy has minimized the
differences in the transfusion rates between PD and HD
patients. On the other hand, and in agreement with previous
reports (18), we found that delayed graft function was
strongly associated with graft V cT. Peritoneal dialysis has
been associated with a lower incidence of acute renal failure
after RTx compared with HD (Table 2) (9,10). This could
confer on PD patients some advantage against VcT.
However, the pathogenic significance of this factor is
unclear because the relationship between delayed graft
function and V cT may be bidirectional. (Delayed function
could favor graft thrombosis, but the latter may also be a
cause of acute renal failure after RTx.)
Why should PD therapy induce an increased risk of graft OKT3) (13,14), or present more technical or donorrecipient
VcT? Nothing indicates that patients undergoing PD may mismatch problems, than their counterparts undergoing
receive a more thrombogenic immunosuppression schedule HD. On the other hand, even if we exclude from analysis
(with higher doses of CsA or graft thrombosis secondary to
acute rejection, immunologic events may yet playa role in in patients on PD and HD, have not yet been established. These
this complication, as suggested by the association of points may deserve consideration, because recurrent vascular
seemingly primary VcT with factors such as pretransplant access thrombosis is a cause for switching from HD to PD, and
blood transfusions, hypersensitization, or retransplant (17, thus patients with hypercoagulability disorders could be
present study). However, it is now clear that, in overrepresented in PD units. Given the small overall incidence of
disagreement with earlier reports (2), the incidence of acute graft thrombosis after RTx, a minor difference in the prevalence of
rejection is not increased in patients on PD (1). hypercoagulability syndromes between PD and HD could have a
Does PD therapy result in a more thrombogenic significant impact on the comparative incidence ofVcT.
hemostatic pattern than HD? Hemostasis is, seemingly, In conclusion, our results do not support the contention that
peritoneal dialysis is associated with an increased risk of primary
better preserved in PD than in HD patients. Peritoneal
vascular thrombosis of the renal allograft.
dialysis therapy has been classically associated with a lower
spontaneous tendency to anemia and a higher degree of
REFERENCES
hemoconcentration, as also with higher blood levels of
some procoagulant factors, such as fibrinogen and
1. Winchester JF, Rotellar C, Goggins M, Robino D, Alijani MR,
apolipoprotein (a), compared with HD (24). However, the
Rakowski TA, et al. Transplantation in peritoneal dialysis and
real thrombogenic potential of these differences is unclear
hemodialysis. Kidney Int 1993; 43(Suppl 40):101-5.
and, moreover, some of them may have been eliminated or
2. Guillou PJ, Will EJ, Davison AM, Giles GR. CAPD -A risk
minimized by the introduction of erythropoietin therapy
factor in renal transplantation? Br J Surg 1984; 71:878-80.
(25). Furthermore, blood levels of natural coagulation inhibi
3. Donnelly PK, Lennard TW, Proud G, Taylor RMR, Henderson
tors may be higher in PD patients than in HD patients
R, Fletcher K, et al. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal
(26,27) leading, theoretically, to a lower risk of thrombosis
dialysis and renal transplantation: a five-year experience. Br
in the former. Overall, there is no evidence linking PD to an
Med J 1985; 291:1001-4.
increased incidence of thrombotic events, compared with
4. Evangelista JB, Bennett-Jones D, Cameron JS, Williams DG,
HD. Taube DH, Neild G, et al. Renal transplantation in patients
We are not aware of studies showing differences in the treated with hemodialysis and short term and long term
coagulation patterns of PD and HD patients after RTx. Even CAPD. Br Med J 1985; 291:1004 7.
if there were differences, the posttransplant dialysis 5. Diaz-Buxo JA, Walker PJ, Burgess WP, Farmer CD, Chandler
technique (in the case of delayed graft function) could have JT, Faircloth W, et al. The influence ofperitoneal dialysis on
at least as much impact on the post transplant hemostatic the outcome of transplantation. Int J Artif Organs 1986;
pattern (and, eventually, on the risk of graft thrombosis) as 9:359-62.
did the pre transplant mode of treatment. Our results do not 6. Heyka R, Schreiber MJ, Steinmuller DR, Novick AC, Streem
support this hypothesis; PD patients with delayed graft SB, Cunningham RJ, et al. Renal transplantation in patients
function and treated temporarily with HD showed a trend to on CAPD. In: Khanna R, Nolph KD, Prowant BF,
suffer more V cT than those treated throughout with PD, Twardowski ZJ, Oreopoulos DG, eds. Advances in CAPD.
although the difference was not significant. Toronto: Peritoneal Dialysis Bulletin, 1987; 3:49-55.
7. O'Donoghue D, ManosJ, PearsonR, ScottP, BakranA, Johnson
Hypercoagulability syndromes are not rare in the general
R, et al. CAPD and renal transplantation: a ten-year
population, representing a significant risk factor for venous
experience in a single center. Perit Dial Int 1992; 12:242-9.
and arterial thrombosis (28). Factor V Leiden mutation is
8. Kyll&ouml;nen L, Helanter&auml; A, Salmela K, Ahonen J.
probably the most frequent of these disorders and has been
Dialysis method and kidney graft survival. Transplant Proc
implicated in the pathogenesis of native renal artery
1992; 24:354.
thrombosis (29). In dialysis patients, more attention has
9. Perez Font&aacute;n M, Rodr&iacute;guez-Carmona A,
been given to anti cardiolipin antibodies. These are fre-
Falcon TG, Moncali&aacute;n J, Oliver J, Vald&eacute;s F.
quently present in certain diseases, potentially causing renal
Renal transplantation in patients undergoing chronic
failure, particularly systemic lupus erythematosus, but have
peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial Int 1996; 16:48-51.
also been detected with increased frequency in the general
10. Lambert MC, Bernaert P, Vijt D, de Smet R, Lameire N.
population on dialysis (30). The presence of anticardiolipin
CAPD -Arisk factor in renal transplantation? ARF after
antibodies has been associated with an increased risk of transplantation. Perit Dial Int 1996; 16(Suppl 1):495-8.
thrombosis of the vascular access for HD (31). The role 11. Gray DWR. Vascular and lymphatic complications af
ofhypercoagulability syndromes in the pathogenesis of renal ter renal transplantation. In: Morris PJ, ed. Kidney
allograft thrombosis, and their comparative prevalence
transplantation. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1994:314-29. FGM. Increased incidence of renal allograft thrombosis after
12. Kooijmans-Coutinho MF, Bruijn JA, Hermans J , Schindler R, continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Clin Transpl1996;
Frei U, Schrama E, et al. Interstitial rejection, vascular 10:51-4.
rejection and diffuse thrombosis of renal allografts. 23. Escu&iacute;n F, del Peso G, perez Font&aacute;n M,
Predisposing factors, histology, immunohistochemistry and Carmona AR, Martinez A, Lanuza M, et al. A comparative
relation to outcome. Transplantation 1996; 61:1338-44. survey of the incidence of kidney graft primary vascular
13. Remuzzi G, Bertani T. Renal vascular and thrombotic effects thrombosis among CAPD and haemodialysis patients (Let-
of cyclosporine. Am J Kidney Dis 1989; 13:261-72. ter). Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11:1896-7.
14. Abramowicz D, Goldman M, Mat O, Estermans G, 24. Sagripanti A, Barsotti G. Bleeding and thrombosis in
CrusiauxA, Vanherweghem JL, et al. OKT3 serum levels as a chronic uremia. Nephron 1997; 75:125-39.
guide for prophylactic therapy: A pilot study in kidney 25. Eschbach JW. Hematological problems ofrenal failure. In:
transplant recipients. Transpl Int 1994; 7:258-63. Jacobs J, Kjellstrand CM, Koch KM, and Winchester JF, eds.
15. Brunkwall J, Bergqvist D, Bergentz SE, Bornmyr S, Husberg Replacement of renal function by dialysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer
B. Postoperative deep venous thrombosis after renal Academic, 1996:1059 76.
transplantation. Transplantation 1987; 43:647-9. 26. Vaziri ND, Shah GM, Winer RL, Gonzales E, Patel B,
16. Penny MJ, N ankivell BJ, Disney APS, Byth K, Chapman JR. Alikhani S, et al. Coagulation cascade, fibrinolytic system
Renal graft thrombosis. Transplantation 1994; 58:565-9. antithrombin III, protein C and protein S in patients
17. SinghA, Stablein D, TejaniA. Risk factors for vascular maintained on continuous ambulatory peritonal dialysis.
thrombosis in pediatric renal transplantation. Transplantation Thromb Res 1989; 53:173-80.
1997; 63:1263-7. 27. Bertoli SV, di Belgiojoso GB, Trezzi M, Scorza D, Borone
18. Bakir N, Sluiter WJ, Ploeg RJ, van Son WJ, Tegzess AM. MT, Poggio M, et al. Reduced blood levels of coagulation
Primary renal allograft thrombosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant inhibitors in chronic hemodialysis compared with CAPD. In:
1996; 11:140-7. Khanna R, ed. Advances in peritoneal dialysis. Toronto:
19. Thomas DP, Roberts HR. Hypercoagulability in venous and Peritoneal Dialysis Publications, 1995; 11:127-30.
arterial thrombosis. Ann Intern Med 1997; 126:638-44. 28. Thomas DP, Roberts HR. Hypercoagulability in venous and
20. Fischereder M, G&ouml;hring P, Schneeberger H, Lohse P, arterial thrombosis. Ann Intern Med 1997; 126:638-44.
von Appen K, Samtleben W, et al. Early loss of renal 29. Le Moine A, Chauveau D, Gr&uuml;nfeld JP. Acute renal
transplants in patients with thrombophilia (Abstract). J Am artery thrombosis associated with factor V Leiden mutation.
Soc Nephrol1997; 8:682A. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11:2067-9.
21. Murphy BG, Hill CM, Douglas JF, McNamee PT. Increased 30. Garc&iacute;a-Mart&iacute;n F, de Arriba G, Carrascosa T,
renal allograft thrombosis in CAPD patients. Nephrol Dial Moldenhauer F, Mart&iacute;n-Escobar E, Val J, et al. Anti-
Transplant 1994; 9:1166-9. cardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant in endstage
22. van der Vliet JA, Barendregt WB, HoitsmaAJ , Buskens renal disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991; 6:543 7.
31. Prakash R, Miller CC, Suki WN. Anticardiolipin antibody in
patients on maintenance hemodialysis and its association with
recurrent arteriovenous graft thrombosis. Am J Kidney Dis
1995; 26:347-52.
