Postoperative Range of Motion Following 
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction 
Using Autograft Hamstrings 
Background: There is a common belief that surgical reconstruction of an acutely torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) should be 
delayed for at least 3 weeks because of the increased incidence of postoperative motion loss (arthrofibrosis) and suboptimal clin- 
ical results. 
Hypothesis: There is no difference in postoperative range of motion or stability after ACL reconstructions performed either 
acutely or delayed. 
Methods: Patients with an acute ACL tear were prospectively randomized to either early (within 21days) or delayed (beyond 6 
weeks) reconstruction using autograft hamstring tendon. Previous knee surgery on the index extremity and a multiligamentous 
injury were exclusionary criteria. Surgical technique and postoperative rehabilitation were identical for all patients. Postoperative 
assessments included range of motion and KT-1000 arthrometer measurements compared with the contralateral knee. 
Standardized outcome measures were used including single assessment numeric evaluation (SANE), Lysholm, and Tegner 
Activity Score. 
Results: Seventy consecutive patients were enrolled, and 1 patient was dropped after a postoperative infection. Sixty-nine 
patients (34 acute, 35 delayed) with an average age of 27 years composed the study cohort. The mean time from injury to sur- 
gery was 9 days (range, 2-17 days) for patients in the early group and 85 days (range, 42-192) for those in the delayed group. 
The average follow-up from surgery was 366 days (range, 185-869). Articular cartilage and meniscal injuries were comparable 
between the 2 groups. There were no significant differences between the 2 treatment groups in degrees of extension or flexion 
lost relative to the nonoperative side, operative time, KT-1000 arthrometer differences, or subjective knee evaluations. 
Conclusion: Excellent clinical results can be achieved after ACL reconstructions performed soon after injury using autograft 
hamstrings. Although the authors do not advocate that all reconstructions should be performed acutely, they found that early 
ACL reconstructions do not result in loss of motion or suboptimal clinical results as long as a rehabilitation protocol emphasiz- 
ing extension and early range of motion is employed. 
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the most common 
completely torn ligament injury in the knee.17 The typical 
treatment for a young athlete with a complete ACL tear is 
a surgical reconstruction. More than 100 000 ACL recon- 
structions are performed in the United States annually.18 
More ACL reconstructions are performed on young male 
athletes than female athletes because males participate in 
sports that are at high risk for ACL injuries in greater 
numbers. However, female athletes have a 2.4 to almost 10 
times greater risk to tear their ACL than males when 

*Address correspondence to Craig R. Bottoni, MD, Qatar Orthopaedic 
& Sports Medicine Center, PO Box 29222, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: craig.bottoni@ 
aspetar.com). 




The American Journal of Sports Medicine, Vol. 36, No. 4 
DOI: 10.1177/0363546507312164 
© 2008 American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine 
A Prospective, Randomized Clinical Trial of Early Versus 
Delayed Reconstructions 
Craig R. Bottoni,*† MD, Travis R. Liddell,‡ MD, Timothy J. Trainor,‡ MD, 
David M. Freccero,‡ MD, and Kenneth K. Lindell,‡ MD 
From †Aspetar Orthopaedic & Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar, 
and ‡Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii 





competing in the same sport.18 An ACL injury in most cases 
prevents an athlete from returning to sports requiring pivot- 
ing or cutting maneuvers. Although many factors can con- 
tribute to the timing of an athlete’s return to sports after an 
ACL reconstruction, most surgeons prohibit their patients 
from returning to at-risk activities for 4 to 6 months.1,3, 4, 8 
a full range of motion. Their surgery was scheduled at a 
minimum of 6 weeks from the date of injury. The patients 
in group 2 were not permitted to return to full active duty 
or recreational sports during their rehabilitation before 
surgery. If a concomitant MCL injury was present, a 
hinged knee brace was prescribed that allowed sagittal 
plane motion but limited valgus motion and protected the 
medial ligament. 
A thorough history was obtained and a physical examina- 
tion performed on all patients at their initial evaluation. 
Information collected included date and mechanism of 
injury, prior knee injuries, and surgery on either knee. A 
maximum manual side-to-side KT-1000 arthrometer 
(MEDmetric, San Diego, Calif) assessment was conducted 
to quantify and to compare the anterior translation in the 
injured knee to that of the contralateral knee. A battery of 
subjective knee evaluation instruments were completed by 
all patients preoperatively and then at 6-month intervals 
postoperatively. Specifically the single assessment numeric 
evaluation (SANE), Tegner Activity Score, and Lysholm 
evaluation were used. The SANE score consists of a single 
subjective evaluation score from 1 to 100, where 100 is con- 
sidered “normal function.”25 The Lysholm score was origi- 
nally designed to assess ligament injuries of the knee.14 The 
Lysholm score is a condition-specific instrument that con- 
sists of 8 domains: limp, locking, pain, stair climbing, use of 
supports, instability, swelling, and squatting. An overall 
score of 100 is possible and indicates the highest possible 
function. The tabulated scores correspond with the following 
outcomes: 95 to 100, excellent; 84 to 94, good; 65 to 83, fair; 
and <65, poor. The Tegner Activity Score is a numerical score 
from 1 to 10 that subjectively assesses a patient’s current 
level of activity, with each number corresponding to partici- 
pation in sporting activities at various levels.23 The highest 
score of 10 corresponds to participation in sports such as 
football, soccer, or rugby at an elite level. A score of 6 corre- 
sponds with participation in sports at a recreational level, 
and a score of 0 would represent an individual on sick leave 
or disability due to his or her knee. 
General anesthesia via endotracheal or laryngeal mask was 
used in all patients. All knees were examined under anesthe- 
sia to assess and to grade ligamentous injuries. All patients 
received prophylactic intravenous antibiotics. The operative 
time was calculated from the first incision to the closure of all 
wounds. An arthroscopic evaluation was first performed in all 
patients to assess intra-articular pathoanatomy, to confirm 
the ACL tear, and to assess meniscal and chondral injuries as 
well as reparability of these injuries. 
Meniscal tears were repaired or debrided based on well- 
established criteria,9,13,21 the primary determinants being 
residual rim width and configuration of the tear. Using an 
inside-out technique as described by Bottoni and Arciero,6 
all meniscal repairs were performed using double-armed 
nonabsorbable meniscal sutures (0-Ethibond, Ethicon Inc, 
Once an acute ACL tear was diagnosed and the patient 
consented to study participation, the patients were ran- 
domized to either the early (group 1) or delayed (group 2) 
surgery group. Randomization was performed via study 
design using sealed envelopes that identified the timing of 
surgery to be employed. The patients randomized to group 
1 were scheduled for surgery at the earliest possible date. 
No exceptions were made for swelling, limitations in range 
of knee motion, or pain. Patients randomized to group 2 
were enrolled in our physical therapy program, where they 
began a supervised rehabilitation protocol that empha- 
sized quadriceps muscle strengthening and restoration of 
The timing of an ACL reconstruction after an acute 
injury is an issue of considerable debate. In a landmark 
study, Shelbourne and Patel19 recommended waiting at 
least 3 weeks from injury before proceeding with an ACL 
reconstruction because of the risk of arthrofibrosis and 
suboptimal clinical results. Several studies subsequently 
corroborated this recommendation.10,20,24 In contradistinc- 
tion, a few studies have found no loss of motion with sur- 
gery performed proximate to injury.2,12,15,16 Patellar tendon 
autografts were used for the ACL reconstructions in nearly 
all of these studies. There have been no studies that we 
have identified that prospectively evaluated patients with 
an acute ACL tear who have been randomized to either 
early or late reconstructions using hamstring autografts. 
The purpose of this study was to prospectively compare 
the postoperative range of motion, stability, and early clin- 
ical results in a similar group of young athletes with an 
acute ACL tear after randomization to either acute or 
delayed surgical reconstruction. Because the primary out- 
come measure was restoration of normal range of motion, 
a minimum of 6 months of follow-up was determined to be 
adequate. Although in some patients, some improvement 
may still be gained at 6 months, if a patient has regained 
their preinjury range of motion, they should be at minimal 
risk to lose motion thereafter. 

The study was approved by our Institutional Review 
Board, and all participants consented to randomization. 
Only military patients or their family members were eligi- 
ble for treatment at our hospital. Patients of at least 18 
years of age who were seen with an acute ACL tear were 
given the option of participating in the study. An MRI was 
obtained on all knees to confirm the diagnosis and provide 
additional information regarding meniscal and concomi- 
tant ligamentous injuries. Exclusion criteria included any 
prior ligamentous surgery on the index knee or a concomi- 
tant posterior cruciate, fibular collateral, or posterolateral 
corner ligamentous knee injury. Concomitant medial col- 
lateral ligament (MCL) injuries of any grade were not 
exclusionary in either group. 




Somerville, NJ) in a vertical mattress configuration. 
Meniscal debridement, when repair was not feasible, was 
performed with a disposable shaver (4.0-mm Tomcat, 
Stryker Endoscopy, San Jose, Calif). 
rehabilitation closely supervised within our military phys- 
ical therapy system. Our rehabilitation protocol empha- 
sizes early mobilization and maintenance of extension. 
Slight modifications by the therapists were permitted 
based on each patient’s individual progress. For patients 
with meniscal repair or microfracture, partial weightbear- 
ing with crutches for 4 weeks was mandated. The drop-lock 
brace applied in the operating room was used continuously 
for 4 to 6 weeks until good quadriceps control was restored. 
Subsequently, no functional bracing was used for any 
patient. Return to sports or full active military duty was 
permitted at 4 to 6 months depending on individual 
progress. 
All patients were evaluated at 3 days, 2 weeks, and then 
monthly during the first 6 months postoperatively. 
Thereafter, patients were evaluated every 6 months. Passive 
range of motion knee measurements were recorded using a 
goniometer and compared with the patient’s nonoperative 
side. A physical therapist who was not part of the surgical 
team performed all range of motion and stability measure- 
ments. Allowing gravity as the only force, passive exten- 
sion was recorded while the patient was prone. The 
measurements were then compared with those of the 
uninvolved knee. Subjective evaluations were made using 
established outcome measures at the postoperative visits. 
SANE, Tegner Activity Score, and Lysholm evaluation 
scores were used. 
Descriptive statistics were summarized for subject demo- 
graphic data. The SANE scores were analyzed with a 2 × 2 
(group × time) analysis of variance with repeated meas- 
ures for time. The Lysholm and Tegner Activity scores were 
analyzed with separate independent t tests. Differences 
between groups regarding postoperative range of motion 
were also analyzed with separate independent t tests. 
Alpha level for all statistical tests was set at .05. Microsoft 
Excel (Office 2000, Microsoft, Redmond, Wash) and SPSS 
for Windows (version 11.5) software (SPSS Science Inc, 
Chicago, Ill) were used for statistical analysis. 
Seventy consecutive patients with an acute ACL tear were 
enrolled in our study (Figure 1). By study design, they 
were evenly split between the acute and delayed surgery 
groups. Fifty-eight were men, and the average age was 27 
years (range, 18-43). Noncontact, pivoting injuries during 
sports participation accounted for the majority (70%) of the 
ACL tears. There were no statistically significant differ- 
ences between groups for all demographic characteristics 
(Table 1). The mean time from injury to surgery was 9 days 
(range, 2-18) in the early group and 85 days (range, 42-192) 
in the delayed group. Based on the established criteria, no 
patients were excluded for prior knee surgery on the index 
knee, a multiligamentous knee injury, or locked knee due 
to an entrapped meniscal tear. One patient who met all 
Postoperatively, patients from both groups followed the 
same closely supervised rehabilitation protocol. All 
patients were admitted overnight and then initiated their 
Chondral injuries were graded according to the modified 
Outerbridge classification7 and documented. The depth 
and size of the articular cartilage injury determined its 
classification. The more superficial injuries (grades I and 
II) and the more extensive lesions (grades IIII and IV) 
were combined for study evaluations. Any loose chondral 
flaps were debrided. 

All knees were reconstructed using a quadrupled hamstrings 
autograft. The technique used was described by Bottoni.5 The 
gracilis and semitendinosus tendons were harvested through 
a vertical incision over the pes anserinus. The tendons were 
released from the tibia together, secured with a heavy-gauge 
nonabsorbable suture (#5 Ethibond, Ethicon Inc), and then 
stripped to the musculotendinous junctions with an open- 
ended tendon stripper (Tendon Harvester, Linvatec Cor- 
poration, Largo, Fla). All remaining muscle was removed 
from the tendons, and then the free ends were secured with 
a locking Krackow stitch of #5 Ethibond. The quadrupled 
tendons were sized and placed on 15 lb of tension 
(GraftMaster, Smith & Nephew, Andover, Mass) until needed 
for the ACL reconstruction. 
Soft tissue was debrided using a disposable shaver (5.5- 
mm Tomcat, Stryker Endoscopy) and bipolar electrocautery 
device (TurboVac 90, Arthrocare Corporation, Sunnyvale, 
Calif) to allow for visualization of the over-the-top position. 
The posterior aspect of the tibial footprint of the ACL was 
used to determine the proper position for the tibial tunnel. A 
tibial guide set at 65° (Arthrex Inc, Naples, Fla) was used to 
ensure proper orientation of the femoral tunnel as described 
by Howell et al.11 A femoral tunnel was created using a 5-mm 
over-the-top guide (Arthrex Inc) using a transtibial tech- 
nique. The graft was secured on the femoral side with a 50- 
mm metallic cross pin (TransFix, Arthrex Inc). The graft was 
secured with a resorbable interference screw (Full Thread 
Bio-Interference Screw, Arthrex Inc) that was the same 
diameter as the tibial tunnel. The knee was placed at 20° to 
30° of flexion and a posterior force applied to the tibia while 
securing the graft on the tibial side. In all cases, the tibial fix- 
ation was augmented by a 6.5-mm screw and spiked washer. 
The knee was then examined to ensure elimination of the 
anterior tibial laxity. All incisions were closed with subcuta- 
neous interrupted absorbable sutures and a subcuticular 
skin closure (2-0 Vicryl and 4-0 Monocryl, Ethicon Inc). 
Cryotherapy via a compression sleeve (Cryo/Cuff, Aircast/ 
DJO, Vista, Calif) was applied over a thigh-high compressive 
stocking (TED hose, Kendall-LTP, Chicopee, Mass). The knee 
was immobilized in a brace locked in extension (Telescoping 
Cool ELS, DJO). 







study criteria and underwent an acute ACL reconstruction 
(group 1) was dropped after he sustained a postoperative 
intra-articular infection that necessitated graft removal. 
There were no other perioperative complications. Two 
patients (2.9%), 1 from each group, sustained a traumatic 
retear of their ACL graft. One patient sustained a reinjury 
at 8 months playing basketball and the other at 11 months 
during military training. Both of these patients had 
returned to full military duty and recreational sports 
before their reinjuries. As these patients were available for 
follow-up evaluations for a minimum of 6 months, their 
range of motion and clinical scores are included until they 
sustained their reinjury. Follow-up for all patients aver- 
aged 1 year (range, 180-708 days). 
in the acute group, 18 (56%) were found in the lateral 
meniscus and none were reparable. Most of these were 
small radial posterior horn injuries. Of the 14 tears in the 
medial meniscus in knees of group 1, 8 (57%) were repara- 
ble. In contrast, of the 15 medial meniscal tears in the 
knees from group 2, only 4 (27%) were reparable. These 
data are shown in Table 3. 
The average postoperative range of motion loss as meas- 
ured by the deficits in flexion and extension compared with 
the contralateral knee is shown in Table 4. There was only 
1 patient in the delayed group and none in the early group 
with >10° loss of extension. If that outlier was dropped, the 
extension deficit would be 0.8° compared with 0.6° average 
loss in the acute group. There were 2 patients in the 
delayed group and 1 patient in the early surgery group 
who had 5° to 10° loss of extension. There were only 2 
patients in the delayed group and 1 in the early group with 
>10° loss of flexion. There were 5 patients in the delayed 
group and 5 patients in the early surgery group who had 
5° to 10° loss of flexion. There were no statistically 
significant differences in extension or flexion deficits 
Chondral injuries were found in a minority of the 
patients. Nine of the knees in group 1 (25%) and 5 of the 
knees in group 2 (14%) had chondral injuries. None of these 
injuries required microfracture. The specific locations and 
classification of these lesions are listed in Table 2. 
Meniscal tears were found in 32 of the knees in group 1 
(91%) and 24 of the knees in group 2 (69%). Of the 32 tears 
Pt with an acute ACL injury 
(n = 70 ) 
Excluded (n = 0 ) 
Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 5) 
Multiligamentous injuries 



Excluded from analysis (n = 1) 
Pt noted above 
Lost to follow-up (n = 1) 
Sustained a postoperative infection 
which required graft removal. 
Therefore, pt dropped from study 
Discontinued intervention 
 (n = 0) 



(n = 35) 
Did not receive allocated intervention 
(n = 0) 

Discontinued intervention 
 (n = 0) 





(n = 35) 
Did not receive allocated intervention 
(n = 0) 







TABLE 1 
Demographics of the Patient Populationa 
In this study, our primary objective was to compare the post- 
operative knee motion and stability after reconstruction in 2 
groups of young athletic patients with an acute tear of the 
ACL. Half the patients were randomized to receive their sur- 
gery acutely and the others delayed. We purposefully did not 
exclude patients based on clinical criteria such as limited 
preoperative range of motion or persistent hemarthrosis, 
both of which, if present, have been identified as criteria to 
delay surgery. By not preselecting those patients with an opti- 
mal condition for knee surgery and thus biasing our results, 
we sought to determine whether reconstructing the ACL in 
an acutely injured knee, irrespective of its preoperative sta- 
tus, would be problematic with regard to postoperative 
TABLE 2 
Chondral Injuries 
TABLE 4 
Range of Motion Deficit and Stability (Compared With 
Contralateral Side)a 




Extension 
Deficit 
0.6° 
0-7° (1.6) 
1.5° 
0-22° (4.2) 
.27 
Flexion 
Deficit 
Stability 
(KT-1000) 
2.1° 
0-10° (3.9) 
2.6° 
0-15° (4.8) 
.19 
1.2 mm 
0-7 mm (1.8) 
0.88 mm 
0-3 mm (1.1) 
.17 


TABLE 3 
Meniscal Injuries 
9 (7/2) 
.025 (.005/.49) 
between knees in groups 1 or 2 when compared with the 
contralateral knee. Similarly, there was no statistically sig- 
nificant difference in stability as measured by the average 
maximum manual KT-1000 arthrometer between knees in 
groups 1 or 2. 
Clinical outcome scores were comparable for both groups 
(Table 5). The patients in the acute group rated their knees 
with the SANE score slightly better, on average, than those 
in the delayed group. However, using the Lysholm scores, 
the average for the patients in the delayed group was 
slightly better. Using the Tegner Activity Score, the 
patients in the acute group rated their activity level at the 
latest follow-up on average higher by almost a full level 
than the patients in the delayed group. 
TABLE 5 
Average Clinical Outcome Scores 
SANEa 
Lysholm 
Tegner 

Medial 
Femoral 
Condyle 
Lateral 
Femoral 
Condyle 






























15 (11/4) 
1.0 



83.1 
80.6 
5.8 
81.4 
83.4 
4.9 
.66 
.61 
.34 


No. of patients 
Gender 
Male 
Female 
Mean age (y) 
Range (SD) 


Total operative time ± SD (min) 
Mechanisms of injury 
Sports participation 
Fall, trip, or awkward landing from a jump 
Military training accident 
Motocross/ATV accident 





29 
6 
26.4 
18-40 (6.8) 
9.0 
2-8 (4.4) 
64.0 ± 25.5 

29 
6 
27.5 
19-43 (6.0) 
84.8 
42-192 (38.2) 
61.5 ± 23.9 

58 
12 
27.3 
18-43 (6.4) 
49 
13 
4 
4 


motion or clinical outcome. To the contrary, we found those 
patients reconstructed early quickly regained their prein- 
jury range of motion and, subjectively, felt better faster. We 
believe that the reason for this is the theory of a “second 
hit.” If the surgery is performed proximate to the injury, 
the body has just one “trauma” from which to heal. In con- 
tradistinction, when the surgery is delayed, the knee 
recovers from the first injury. The hemarthrosis resolves, 
and motion is restored. However, the subsequent surgery is 
then perceived by the body as a “second hit” from which 
healing must again commence. 
and 21 days (group II) fared significantly better when this 
“more accelerated” protocol was employed. 
Our early group was defined as a reconstruction within 
21 days of injury (Shelbourne et al’s groups I and II), but 
our goal was to perform the surgery as soon as possible. 
Our average time from injury to surgery in our early group 
was 9 days. Moreover, nearly half (15 of 34) of the patients 
in this early group had their reconstruction within a week 
of their injury (equivalent to group I in Shelbourne et al’s 
study). Only a few of these patients demonstrated any loss 
of flexion or extension. 
One theoretical advantage of early surgery is a faster 
return to full activities. Patients in group 1, whose surgery 
was performed acutely, were able to return to sports earlier 
because there was no initial delay in beginning their reha- 
bilitation. Another theoretical advantage of an early recon- 
struction is the avoidance of further meniscal or chondral 
injuries that may occur if an athlete returns to some level of 
activities with an ACL-deficient knee. Wasilewski et al24 
reported a significantly higher incidence of chondral injuries 
(44% vs 17%) in knees that underwent delayed ACL recon- 
struction compared with those performed acutely. However, 
they reported a higher incidence of meniscal tears in their 
acute group. This correlates with our findings of a high inci- 
dence of posterior horn lateral meniscal tears noted in our 
acute group (18 vs 9). However, most of these were small 
radial tears that required minimal debridement. None of the 
knees in the acute group required lateral meniscal repairs, 
compared with 2 that required repairs in the delayed group. 
Although the incidence of medial meniscal tears was com- 
parable (14 vs 15), twice as many (8 vs 4) of these medial 
meniscal tears were reparable in the acute group. The delay 
in surgery and probable increased trauma sustained by the 
meniscus could account for the inability to repair these 
meniscal tears. 
Relatively low subjective outcome scores were found for 
patients in both the acute and delayed groups. The average 
Lysholm scores for both groups categorize the results as fair. 
The scores are consistent across different outcome instru- 
ments. We believe the reason for the relatively low scores is 
the relatively short clinical follow-up (<2 years, as is stan- 
dard for clinical outcome studies) and possibly the expecta- 
tions of the servicemen and servicewomen that make up our 
study population. The high demands placed on these patients 
and the activities required magnify any limitation in func- 
tion. The subjective evaluation scores obtained for compari- 
son are considered inadequate for clinical comparisons and 
thus should not be used as such. Our primary objective was 
to ascertain the patients’ assessment of their progress. 
One limitation of our study is the fact that none of the 
patients in our acute group were given the chance to demon- 
strate that they could have functioned without an ACL recon- 
struction. Our justification, however, is that the activities 
required of active duty servicemen and servicewomen, in the 
vast majority of cases, preclude functioning with an ACL- 
deficient knee. In addition, the inability of junior enlisted per- 
sonnel to make autonomous decisions as to their activity level 
precludes a “wait and see” approach. They are expected to 
participate in training and unit sporting activities unless 
given specific limitations defined in a “medical profile” writ- 
ten by a physician or physician’s assistant. Anecdotally, we 
The landmark study by Shelbourne et al22 is the primary 
source for the recommendation to delay an ACL recon- 
struction by at least 3 weeks. This work was a retrospec- 
tive review of 169 ACL reconstructions followed for 13 
weeks. They stratified the patients based on the time from 
injury to surgery. Group I was less than 8 days; group II, 8 
to 21 days; and group III, >21 days. The authors reported a 
significantly increased incidence of arthrofibrosis in 
patients reconstructed acutely (group I) when compared 
with those reconstructed at 21 days or longer (group III). 
The authors also reported that an accelerated rehabilita- 
tion program resulted in significantly less arthrofibrosis in 
group II patients than when a slower rehabilitation proto- 
col was employed. In designing our protocol, we used their 
study as our model. However, several salient differences 
are apparent. Shelbourne et al used an ipsilateral bone- 
tendon-bone autograft inserted via a mini-open, 2-incision 
technique. The graft was secured on both the femoral and 
tibial sides with heavy sutures tied over a polypropylene 
ligament button. In contrast, we used an autograft ham- 
string via a single-incision arthroscopic technique. 
Theoretically, the additional trauma from the arthrotomy 
in the mini-open technique could have contributed to the 
increased arthrofibrosis reported in their study. Shelbourne 
et al did not perform any concomitant meniscal repairs in any 
of their patients requiring ACL reconstructions. Additionally, 
only some of their patients were rehabilitated with an accel- 
erated protocol with an emphasis on extension and early 
restoration of motion. The patients reconstructed between 8 
The concept of a cyclops lesion as a cause of arthrofibro- 
sis is also, in our opinion, flawed. As long as any residual 
stump of the torn ACL is adequately resected, no tissue 
should remain that blocks extension. In our experience, 
any loss of active extension noted preoperatively was due 
to a limitation secondary to pain. In nearly all cases, on ini- 
tiation of anesthesia, full knee motion was demonstrated. 
Our emphasis on extension immediately postoperatively 
prevented loss of terminal hyperextension in either the 
early or delayed surgical group in the vast majority of our 
patients. The 1 patient with the greatest loss of motion 
postoperatively was randomized to the delayed group. 
Preoperatively, she had difficulty regaining her full 
motion. Despite regaining full extension and flexion at sur- 
gery, she had a difficult time in maintaining her full range 
of motion postoperatively. Despite aggressive physical 
therapy, she ended up with a significant loss of extension 
and a suboptimal clinical result. This patient may have 
had a fibrotic diathesis and experienced difficulty with 
postoperative range of motion irrespective of when she 
underwent reconstruction. 


have found that those who continue to attempt to perform at 
the high level required of an active duty service member 
with an ACL-deficient knee often do considerably more 
damage to their knees before their reconstruction. 
3. Beck PR, Nho SJ, Balin J, et al. Postoperative pain management after 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Knee Surg. 2004;17:18-23. 
4. Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Abate JA, Fleming BC, Nichols CE. 
Treatment of anterior cruciate ligament injuries: part I. Am J Sports 
Med. 2005;33:1579-1602. 


7. Cameron ML, Briggs KK, Steadman JR. Reproducibility and reliability 
of the Outerbridge classification for grading chondral lesions of the 
knee arthroscopically. Am J Sports Med. 2003;31:83-86. 
9. Hantes ME, Zachos VC, Varitimidis SE, Dailiana ZH, Karachalios T, 
Malizos KN. Arthroscopic meniscal repair: a comparative study 
between three different surgical techniques. Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc. 2006;14:1232-1237. 
10. Harner CD, Irrgang JJ, Paul J, Dearwater S, Fu FH. Loss of motion 
after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 
1992;20:499-506. 
11. Howell SM, Gittins ME, Gottlieb JE, Traina SM, Zoellner TM. The rela- 
tionship between the angle of the tibial tunnel in the coronal plane and 
loss of flexion and anterior laxity after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 2001;29:567-574. 
12. Hunter RE, Mastrangelo J, Freeman JR, Purnell ML, Jones RH. The 
impact of surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability fol- 
lowing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy. 
1996;12:667-674. 
13. Klimkiewicz JJ, Shaffer B. Meniscal surgery 2002 update: indications 
and techniques for resection, repair, regeneration, and replacement. 
Arthroscopy. 2002;18(9 Suppl 2):14-25. 
14. Lysholm J, Gillquist J. Evaluation of knee ligament surgery results 
with special emphasis on use of a scoring scale. Am J Sports Med. 
1982;10:150-154. 
15. Majors RA, Woodfin B. Achieving full range of motion after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 1996;24: 
350-355. 
16. Marcacci M, Zaffagnini S, Iacono F, Neri MP, Petitto A. Early versus 
late reconstruction for anterior cruciate ligament rupture: results after 
five years of followup. Am J Sports Med. 1995;23:690-693. 
17. Muneta T, Sekiya I, Yagishita K, Ogiuchi T, Yamamoto H, Shinomiya K. 
Two-bundle reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament using 
semitendinosus tendon with endobuttons: operative technique and 
preliminary results. Arthroscopy. 1999;15:618-624. 

19. Shelbourne K, Patel D. Timing of surgery in anterior cruciate ligament- 
injured knees. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 1995;3:148-156. 
20. Shelbourne KD, Johnson GE. Outpatient surgical management of 
arthrofibrosis after anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Am J Sports 
Med. 1994;22:192-197. 

22. Shelbourne KD, Wilckens JH, Mollabashy A, DeCarlo M. 
Arthrofibrosis in acute anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the 
effect of timing of reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med. 
1991;19:332-336. 
24. Wasilewski SA, Covall DJ, Cohen S. Effect of surgical timing on 
recovery and associated injuries after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 1993;21:338-342. 
The results from this study in a military population may 
not be applicable to a community orthopaedic practice. The 
captive population and relatively quick referrals allowed us 
to perform surgery acutely. Additionally, the military popu- 
lation allowed us to adequately protect those patients in the 
delayed group from resuming activities that may have 
resulted in further injury to their ACL-deficient knees. 
Another limitation is the relatively short postoperative 
follow-up. However, unlike clinical outcome studies, our pri- 
mary outcome measure was postoperative range of motion. 
We chose 6 months as a minimum period of follow-up. Because 
most patients return to sports at or before this time, any post- 
operative motion gained by this point should not be lost 
unless another injury occurs. Although some improvement in 
range of motion could be feasible after 6 months, it is not 
likely in most cases. Shelbourne et al reported their results at 
3 months (13 weeks) postoperatively when it was conceivable 
that additional improvement could still be achieved. Using 
similar logic, laxity assessments using KT-1000 arthrometer 
side-to-side measurements taken at 6 months should not 
change unless reinjury occurs. 
Another difference of our study from the study of 
Shelbourne et al was that we used autograft hamstring 
tendons and they used autograft bone–patellar tendon– 
bone grafts. The fixation techniques were also different. 
However, all patients in both studies were treated with the 
same graft. Therefore, the dependent variable was the tim- 
ing of the surgery. 
Our study demonstrated that comparable knee flexion and 
extension can be achieved with either early or delayed surgi- 
cal reconstruction of a torn ACL. Our early results do not 
demonstrate any clinical differences in postoperative range 
of motion, stability, or early subjective outcome measures 
between knees reconstructed acutely or those that are 
delayed. Although we do not recommend that the ACL 
should be reconstructed acutely, our study demonstrates that 
surgery need not be delayed to obtain satisfactory clinical 
results. We believe that it is permissible to proceed with an 
ACL reconstruction soon after injury and delaying the sur- 
gery for some arbitrary period of time is not necessary. 

We acknowledge and thank Arthrex Inc for its unrestricted 
research grant to assist us with study coordination and 
data collection. 



2. Bach BR Jr, Jones GT, Sweet FA, Hager CA. Arthroscopy-assisted ante- 
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction using patellar tendon substitution: 
two- to four-year follow-up results. Am J Sports Med. 1994;22: 
758-767. 


8. Freedman KB, D’Amato MJ, Nedeff DD, Kaz A, Bach BR Jr. Arthroscopic 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a metaanalysis comparing 
patellar tendon and hamstring tendon autografts. Am J Sports Med. 
2003;31:2-11. 




25. Williams GN, Taylor DC, Gangel TJ, Uhorchak JM, Arciero RA. 
Comparison of the single assessment numeric evaluation method and 
the Lysholm score. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000;373:184-192. 
