
A Randomized Trial of Treatment for Acute 
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Tears 
Richard B. Frobell, Ph.D., Ewa M. Roos, P.T., Ph.D., Harald P. Roos, M.D., Ph.D., 
Jonas Ranstam, Ph.D., and L. Stefan Lohmander, M.D., Ph.D. 

BACKGROUND 
The optimal management of a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) of the knee is 
unknown. 
METHODS 
We conducted a randomized, controlled trial involving 121 young, active adults 
with acute ACL injury in which we compared two strategies: structured rehabilita- 
tion plus early ACL reconstruction and structured rehabilitation with the option of 
later ACL reconstruction if needed. The primary outcome was the change from 
baseline to 2 years in the average score on four subscales of the Knee Injury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) — pain, symptoms, function in sports and 
recreation, and knee-related quality of life (KOOS4; range of scores, 0 [worst] to 100 
[best]). Secondary outcomes included results on all five KOOS subscales, the Medi- 
cal Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey, and the score on the Tegner 
Activity Scale. 
RESULTS 
Of 62 subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruction, 1 did not 
undergo surgery. Of 59 assigned to rehabilitation plus optional delayed ACL recon- 
struction, 23 underwent delayed ACL reconstruction; the other 36 underwent reha- 
bilitation alone. The absolute change in the mean KOOS4 score from baseline to 
2 years was 39.2 points for those assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL recon- 
struction and 39.4 for those assigned to rehabilitation plus optional delayed recon- 
struction (absolute between-group difference, 0.2 points; 95% confidence interval, 
−6.5 to 6.8; P = 0.96 after adjustment for the baseline score). There were no signifi- 
cant differences between the two treatment groups with respect to secondary out- 
comes. Adverse events were common in both groups. The results were similar when 
the data were analyzed according to the treatment actually received. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In young, active adults with acute ACL tears, a strategy of rehabilitation plus early 
ACL reconstruction was not superior to a strategy of rehabilitation plus optional 
delayed ACL reconstruction. The latter strategy substantially reduced the frequency 
of surgical reconstructions. (Funded by the Swedish Research Council and the 
Medical Faculty of Lund University and others; Current Controlled Trials number, 
ISRCTN84752559.) 
From the Department of Orthopedics, 
Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden (R.B.F., H.P.R., J.R., L.S.L.); 
and the Institute of Sports Science and 
Clinical Biomechanics, University of South- 
ern Denmark, Odense, Denmark (E.M.R.). 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Frobell at 
the Department of Orthopedics, Lund Uni- 
versity Hospital, SE-22185 Lund, Sweden, 
or at richard.frobell@med.lu.se. 
This article (10.1056/NEJMoa0907797) was 
updated on August 25, 2010, at NEJM.org. 
N Engl J Med 2010;363:331-42. 
Copyright © 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society. 









ligament (ACL) is a serious knee injury 
that affects mainly physically active young 
people. The injury is characterized by joint insta- 
bility that leads to decreased activity, unsatisfac- 
tory knee function, and poor knee-related quality 
of life in the short term,1,2 and it is associated with 
an increased risk of osteoarthritis of the knee.3 
Surgical reconstruction of the torn ligament 
has been regarded as critical for a good outcome 
and is commonly performed, particularly in those 
wishing to resume sports activities.2,4,5 Despite a 
lack of evidence from high-quality randomized, 
controlled trials comparing ACL reconstruction 
with other treatments,2,3,6-8 at least 200,000 ACL 
reconstructions are performed each year in the 
United States, with estimated direct costs of 
$3 billion (in U.S. dollars) annually.9 Structured 
rehabilitation supervised by a physical therapist 
is a central aspect of treatment,10 although it is 
not always offered to patients. 
We conducted a randomized, controlled trial 
involving young, active adults with an acute tear 
of the ACL to determine whether a strategy of 
structured rehabilitation plus early ACL recon- 
structive surgery is superior to a strategy of struc- 
tured rehabilitation with delayed ACL reconstruc- 
tion offered to subjects who continue to have 
symptomatic knee instability. 

Study Design and Participants 
We conducted the trial (the Knee Anterior Cruci- 
ate Ligament, Nonsurgical versus Surgical Treat- 
ment [KANON] Study) in Lund, Sweden, with 
subjects recruited from the Department of Or- 
thopedics at both Helsingborg Hospital and Lund 
University Hospital. Details of the recruitment 
have been reported previously.11 The protocol was 
approved by the Lund University ethics commit- 
tee. The study was performed in accordance with 
the protocol, and all subjects provided written 
informed consent. 
Subjects 18 to 35 years of age who presented 
to the emergency department with recent knee 
trauma were screened for eligibility. Eligible sub- 
jects had rotational trauma to a previously un- 
injured knee within the preceding 4 weeks, ACL 
insufficiency as determined by clinical examina- 
tion, and a score of 5 to 9 on the Tegner Activity 
Scale (TAS)12 before the injury (scores range from 
1 to 10, with a score of 5 indicating participation 
in recreational sports, and a score of 9 indicating 
participation in competitive sports on a nonpro- 
fessional level). Major exclusion criteria were a 
total collateral ligament rupture and a full-thick- 
ness cartilage lesion visualized on magnetic reso- 
nance imaging (MRI). (Additional exclusion crite- 
ria can be found in Table A in the Supplementary 
Appendix, available with the full text of this ar- 
ticle at NEJM.org.) 
All eligible subjects received standardized in- 
formation about the trial orally, in writing, and 
by DVD.11 They were randomly assigned by 
computer-generated random numbers in permut- 
ed blocks of 20 to undergo either structured re- 
habilitation plus early ACL reconstruction (referred 
to as the early-reconstruction group) or struc- 
tured rehabilitation with the option of delayed 
ACL reconstruction for those with symptomatic 
knee instability who met specific protocol guide- 
lines (referred to as the optional delayed-recon- 
struction group) (see the Supplementary Appen- 
dix). An investigator who was not involved in the 
randomization procedure prepared all sequential- 
ly numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes contain- 
ing the assigned interventions to ensure that the 
sequence was concealed. For the subjects’ conve- 
nience, MRI was performed at the time of ran- 
domization, but the results were not available 
until 2 to 3 days later, at which time the MRI 
findings were used to confirm that the inclusion 
criteria were met, including the presence of acute 
ACL tears (see the Supplementary Appendix). 
Randomization was performed without knowl- 
edge of the MRI findings, and the MRI scans 
were assessed without knowledge of the assigned 
intervention. None of the study funders had any 
role in data collection, storage, or analysis; in 
the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to submit the manuscript for publication. 
Study Treatments 
All subjects followed a rehabilitation protocol con- 
sistent with the consensus in the literature13 (see 
Appendix A in the Supplementary Appendix). Re- 
habilitation was initiated before or at the time of 
randomization and was supervised by experienced 
physical therapists at nine outpatient clinics. The 
protocol included goals for range of motion, 
muscle function, and functional performance at 
each of four levels, and these goals had to be met 
before a subject could progress to the next high- 
er level. Slower progression was expected in the 
subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus ACL re- 







construction. Pain and swelling slowed progres- 
sion, and subjects in whom these problems per- 
sisted were scheduled to see the treating clinician. 
In the subjects randomly assigned to struc- 
tured rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruc- 
tion, surgery was performed within 10 weeks 
after the injury by one of four senior knee sur- 
geons, each of whom performed more than 40 
ACL reconstructions annually. The choice of pro- 
cedure depended on the surgeon’s preference. 
The patella–tendon procedure,14 used in 25 sub- 
jects, involves the central third of the ipsilateral 
patellar tendon as an autograft with fixation of 
the bone blocks within the tibia and femur; the 
hamstring–tendon procedure,15 used in 36 sub- 
jects, involves a four-layer autograft made up of 
folded-over gracilis and semitendinosus muscle 
tendons. In randomized trials, these two methods 
have resulted in similar outcomes.16,17 Surgery 
was performed while the patients were under 
general anesthesia, and meniscal surgery was 
carried out as needed, followed by ACL recon- 
struction. The subjects randomly assigned to 
structured rehabilitation plus optional delayed 
ACL reconstruction followed the rehabilitation 
protocol. Subjects in this group were referred for 
delayed ACL reconstruction, performed by the 
same surgeons who performed the surgical pro- 
cedures in the early-reconstruction group, if they 
chose surgery and if prespecified criteria were met 
(self-reported symptomatic instability caused by 
ACL insufficiency and a positive pivot shift test 
[as described in Table B in the Supplementary 
Appendix]). 
Other Treatments 
Baseline MRI verified ACL rupture, meniscal 
tears, and other injuries (Table 1, and the Supple- 
mentary Appendix). In both groups, meniscal 
tears were treated with partial resection or fixa- 
tion when indicated by MRI findings and clinical 
signs (see the Supplementary Appendix). In sub- 
jects assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL 
reconstruction, additional meniscal surgery was 
performed if unstable meniscal tears were identi- 
fied during the baseline surgery. Meniscocapsu- 
lar separations of less than 10 mm were treated 
with arthroscopic fixation. Fixation of larger me- 
niscal tears required a change in the postopera- 
tive rehabilitation regimen and therefore resulted 
in exclusion from the study (Fig. 1, and the Sup- 
plementary Appendix). During follow-up, 24 sub- 
jects had signs of a meniscal tear and were treat- 
ed by means of arthroscopic surgery (Table D in 
the Supplementary Appendix). 
Outcome Measures 
Subjects were evaluated 3, 6, 12, and 24 months 
after randomization. At each visit, subjects com- 
pleted the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Out- 
come Score (KOOS), Medical Outcomes Study 36- 
Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), and TAS 
questionnaires before seeing the clinician. 
The primary outcome was the change from 
baseline to 2 years in the average score for four 
of the five KOOS subscales, covering pain, symp- 
toms, difficulty in sports and recreational activi- 
ties, and quality of life (KOOS4), with scores 
ranging from 0 (worst) to 100 (best).19,20 KOOS 
has been validated and is used for patients un- 
dergoing ACL reconstruction.19,20,22-24 Prespecified 
secondary outcomes included results on all five 
KOOS subscales (the fifth scale being activities 
of daily living), the scores on the SF-36 physical 
and mental components (range, 0 [worst] to 100 
[best]),21 results on the TAS,12 the area under the 
curve (AUC) for the development of absolute 
scores (KOOS4 score per visit × time to follow-up 
[in days]) from baseline to 2 years, and the per- 
centage of subjects with a KOOS quality-of-life 
score below 44 (a prespecified cutoff value con- 
sistent with a report of more than moderately 
decreased knee-related quality of life) between 
6 months and 2 years. Subjects reported their 
preinjury TAS score at baseline and their score at 
each follow-up visit; we compared scores between 
groups as well as the percentage of subjects in 
each group whose TAS score at 2 years was at 
least as high as their preinjury score. 
Exploratory outcomes included knee stability, 
as determined with the use of the Lachman test; 
results on the pivot shift test; and findings on 
KT1000 (MEDmetric) arthrometry, an instrument- 
ed test to assess anteroposterior translation of 
the knee. These assessments were performed by 
one of two experienced clinicians, both of whom 
were aware of the treatment assignments. 
We performed a post hoc analysis based on the 
treatment received: rehabilitation plus early ACL 
reconstruction, rehabilitation plus delayed ACL re- 
construction, or rehabilitation alone. 
Adverse Events 
Clinic records were reviewed for all study visits 
and for appointments that took place outside the 
study. The computerized medical records system 





















Rehabilitation plus Early 
ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 62) 
Rehabilitation plus Optional 
Delayed ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 59) 



































† Details are provided in Table C in the Supplementary Appendix. 
‡ The Lachman test was used to assess anteroposterior laxity of the knee at rest in a semiflexed position. Scores range 
from 0 to 3, with 0 indicating normal laxity and 3 indicating severely increased laxity. Knees with increased laxity 
(scores 1 to 3) are represented. 






** Meniscal injury was classified as increased signal extending to at least one articular surface of the meniscal body.18 
Knees could have more than one meniscal injury reported within the meniscal body. Details are provided in Table C 
in the Supplementary Appendix. 
†† For all five subscales, the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) ranges from 0 to 100, with higher 
scores indicating better results. Results at 2 years are shown for KOOS4, which includes four subscales: pain, symp- 
toms, function during sports and recreation, and knee-related quality of life.19,20 

































































69 Were assigned to undergo rehabilitation 
 and early ACL reconstruction 
72 Were assigned to undergo rehabilitation and 
optional delayed ACL reconstruction 










180 Had intact ACL 
79 Had injury that was too old 
45 Were too young or too old 
35 Had activity level too high or too low 
64 Had previous knee injury 
31 Had MCL or LCL injury grade III 
6 Had fracture 
6 Had other reason 
4 Were excluded because 
of MRI findings 
2 Had intact ACL on MRI 
2 Had MCL injury grade 

3 Were excluded at surgery 
2 Had extensive menis- 


8 Were excluded because 
of MRI findings 
6 Had intact ACL on MRI 
1 Did not have acute 



5 Were excluded at surgery 
owing to extensive 
meniscal fixation 

59 Had data available 
0 Underwent delayed ACL reconstruction 







23 (37%) Underwent delayed ACL reconstruction 
59 Participated in rehabilitation 

62 Had data available 
61 (98%) Underwent early ACL reconstruction 







61 (98%) Underwent early ACL reconstruction 
60 Participated in rehabilitation 


Figure 1. Enrollment and Randomization of Subjects. 
ACL denotes anterior cruciate ligament, LCL lateral collateral ligament, MCL medial collateral ligament, and MRI 
magnetic resonance imaging. 




for the health care region was searched for any 
patient visit to any health care facility during the 
2-year follow-up period, and any adverse events 
were identified. Anesthesia and surgery records 
were retrieved for all surgical procedures, includ- 
ing the initial study treatment. At the 2-year study 
visit, the subjects filled out questionnaires to re- 
port any adverse events, illnesses, and medication 
use since the start of the study. Physical therapists 
involved in the study reported any adverse event 
that interfered with rehabilitation (Table 2, and 
the Supplementary Appendix). 
Statistical Analysis 
All subjects who were assigned to treatment, ex- 
cluding the 20 who were deemed ineligible after 
randomization, were included in the efficacy 
analyses. Between-group comparisons of the pri- 
mary end point were made with the use of analy- 
sis of covariance stratified by site and adjusted 
for baseline KOOS4 scores. A confidence interval 
excluding differences greater than 10 units be- 
tween groups was interpreted as indicating the 
absence of a clinically meaningful difference.25 
Other end points were analyzed with the use 
of analysis of covariance (KOOS and SF-36 scores), 
the Mann–Whitney U test and the Kruskal– 
Wallis test (TAS score and KOOS4 AUC, respec- 
tively, for the two groups in the intention-to- 
treat analysis and the three groups in a post hoc 
as-treated analysis), and the chi-square test (fre- 
quency of a return to preinjury TAS score, posi- 
tive Lachman and pivot shift tests, and severely 
decreased knee-related quality of life). The fre- 
quencies of meniscal resection, procedures re- 
quiring general anesthesia, and the distribution 
of adverse events were compared between the 
two groups with the use of the binomial test for 
two Poisson-distributed variables. 
The initial sample-size calculation was based 
on a plan to stratify according to the preinjury 
TAS score (5 to 7 [moderate activity level] vs. 8 or 
9 [high activity level]). Assuming a standard 
deviation of 15 points for the primary outcome 
(change from baseline in the KOOS4 score) and 
allowing for a 20% dropout rate, we estimated 
that 168 patients would be needed to provide 80% 
statistical power to detect a 10-point difference 
between the two groups. When 25% of the sub- 
jects in the originally estimated sample had been 
randomly assigned to a treatment group, a second 
sample-size calculation that included empirical 
data was performed by an independent statisti- 
cian without breaking the code. Again based on 
a plan for separate analyses for subjects with 
high and those with moderate preinjury activity 
levels, inclusion of 120 patients was considered 
sufficient to provide 80% power to detect the 
requisite 10-point difference. The plan to stratify 
according to activity level was abandoned short- 
ly thereafter owing to low recruitment of sub- 
jects with moderate activity levels. This further 
reduced the necessary sample size. No interim 
analysis was performed. All reported P values 
are two-sided and were not adjusted for multiple 
comparisons. 

Characteristics of the Subjects 
Enrollment took place from February 2002 through 
June 2006, and the 2-year follow-up was conclud- 
ed in June 2008. Of 642 subjects screened for eli- 
gibility (Fig. 1), 446 were ineligible for inclusion, 
and 55 of the 196 eligible subjects declined par- 
ticipation; thus, 141 subjects underwent random- 
ization. The characteristics of the subjects who 
declined participation were similar to those of the 
subjects assigned to a treatment group.11 Sixty-nine 
subjects were randomly assigned to undergo re- 
habilitation plus early ACL reconstruction, and 72 
to undergo rehabilitation plus optional delayed ACL 
reconstruction. After randomization but before 
treatment, 20 of the initially eligible subjects were 
excluded because of findings on MRI (in 12) or 
baseline arthroscopy (in 8) (exclusion criteria are 
described in Table A in the Supplementary Appen- 
dix). Consequently, these subjects were not in- 
cluded in the analyses, leaving 62 subjects in the 
early-reconstruction group and 59 in the optional 
delayed-reconstruction group. The subjects who 
were excluded after randomization were similar 
to those assigned to treatment with respect to age, 
average KOOS4 score (39.5 and 37.0, respectively), 
scores on the SF-36 physical and mental compo- 
nents (data not shown), and median TAS score 
(8 for both groups). The subjects in the optional 
delayed-reconstruction group had fewer rehabili- 
tation visits than did those in the early-recon- 
struction group (mean, 53 vs. 63; P = 0.05) (Table 
D in the Supplementary Appendix). In addition, 
there were no differences in baseline character- 
istics among the three as-treated groups (Table F 
in the Supplementary Appendix). 


















Rehabilitation plus Early 
ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 62) 
Rehabilitation plus Optional 
Delayed ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 59) 






















result in significant disability or incapacity; those requiring inpatient or outpatient hospital care; and those considered 
to prolong hospital care, to be life-threatening, or to result in death. 
‡ Events in the early-treatment group included acute lower back pain with root symptoms and inpatient care (in 1 sub- 
ject) and anterior shoulder-joint dislocation and surgery (in 1); those in the delayed-treatment group included lower 
back pain with lumbar disk hernia (in 1) and back pain following traffic accident (in 2). 


¶ Events in the early-treatment group included acute appendicitis with surgery (in 1); those in the delayed-treatment 
group included gastritis with inpatient care (in 1), acute appendicitis with surgery (in 1), and Crohn’s disease with 
inpatientcare (in 1). 
 

tongue (in 1), incision of atheroma of the ear (in 1), concussion with inpatient observation (in 1), metal foreign body 
in the eye (in 1), and diabetes mellitus (1); those in the delayed-treatment group included head contusion (in 1). 

as determined by the Lachman test (grade 1 or higher), or rotational instability, as determined by the pivot shift test 
(grade 1 or higher). 

suspected compartment syndrome (in 1), discomfort from distal-graft fixation (in 1), loose body (in 1), locking (in 1), 
and bone fragment (in 1); those in the delayed-treatment group included clicking (in 1), distortion (in 1), and swell- 
ing (in 1). 


Both treatment groups had improvement over the 
2-year period (Fig. 2A and Table 3). There were no 
significant differences in the change in the 
KOOS4 score from baseline to 2 years between 
the group assigned to rehabilitation plus early 
ACL reconstruction and the group assigned to 
rehabilitation plus optional delayed ACL recon- 









































struction (mean scores, 39.2 and 39.4, respec- 
tively; absolute difference, 0.18; 95% confidence 
interval, −6.5 to 6.8; P = 0.96, adjusted for base- 
line KOOS4 score). Of the 59 subjects in the op- 
tional delayed-reconstruction group, 23 underwent 
ACL reconstruction an average of 11.6 months 
after randomization. Of these 23 subjects, 22 met 
specific protocol guidelines and 1 chose delayed 
ACL reconstruction without reporting symptom- 
atic instability (Table B in the Supplementary Ap- 
pendix). 
Secondary and Other End Points 
There were no significant between-group differ- 
ences for any patient-reported secondary outcomes 
at 2 years, including knee-related outcomes, health 
status, and return to preinjury activity level (Ta- 
ble 3). Subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus 
early ACL reconstruction had greater knee stabil- 
ity at 2 years (Table 3). The post hoc as-treated 
analysis likewise showed no significant differ- 
ences between the three treatment groups at the 
2-year follow-up (Fig. 2, and Table G in the Sup- 
plementary Appendix). 

Subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL 
reconstruction had a higher frequency of menis- 
cal surgery at study initiation and a lower fre- 
quency of delayed meniscal surgery than did sub- 
jects assigned to rehabilitation plus optional 
delayed ACL reconstruction. Overall, the number 
of meniscal operations in the two groups totaled 
40 and 50, respectively (P = 0.20) (see the Supple- 
mentary Appendix). 
Safety 
Adverse events were common in both study 
groups (Table 3, and Table E in the Supplemen- 
tary Appendix). The frequency of serious adverse 
events involving the index knee did not differ sig- 
nificantly between the groups (P = 0.06). Three 
ACL graft ruptures and one case of arthrofibrosis 
were reported among subjects randomly assigned 
to rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruction, 
and one ACL graft rupture was reported in a sub- 
ject assigned to rehabilitation plus optional de- 
layed ACL reconstruction. A total of 80 surgical 
procedures (requiring anesthesia) were performed 





Rehabilitation plus early 
ACL reconstruction (n=60) 
Rehabilitation plus delayed 
ACL reconstruction (n=23) 



















Rehabilitation plus delayed 
ACL reconstruction (n=59) 
Rehabilitation plus early 
ACL reconstruction (n=61) 
A Full Analysis 
100 




Figure 2. Mean KOOS4 Scores during the 2-Year Study Period, According to Treatment Group. 
Panel A shows results of the full analysis for 61 subjects in the group assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruction and for 59 sub- 
jects in the group assigned to rehabilitation plus optional delayed ACL reconstruction. Data were not available at two interim visits for 1 
subject in the early-reconstruction group, so these results are not included. Panel B shows the results of the post hoc as-treated sub- 
group analysis for 60 subjects who underwent rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruction, 23 subjects who underwent rehabilitation 
plus delayed ACL reconstruction, and 36 subjects who underwent rehabilitation alone. Two subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus early 
ACL reconstruction completed fewer than 10 rehabilitation visits, so their results are not included. Delayed ACL reconstruction was per- 
formed between 5.5 and 19 months after randomization, so that some follow-up visits took place shortly before or after ACL surgery. 
The I bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. KOOS4 denotes Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score for four subscales (pain, 
symptoms, function in sports and recreation, and knee-related quality of life). 





 Rehabilitation plus Early 
ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 62) 
Rehabilitation plus Optional 
Delayed ACL Reconstruction 
(N = 59) 


























Total KOOS4 area under curve (in 
days × points)*** 














‡ KOOS ranges from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better results.19,20 
§ Scores on the SF-36 range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better results.21 
¶ Data were missing for one subject. 
‖ The Tegner Activity Scale assesses activity level with specific emphasis on the knee. Scores range from 1 (least strenuous 

** Subjects were those with a score at 2 years that was the same as or higher than the preinjury score. 
†† The KT1000 Arthrometer (MEDmetric) assesses the extent of anteroposterior laxity of the knee in millimeters. The 

‡‡ Data were missing for three subjects. 
§§ The Lachman test assesses anteroposterior laxity of the knee at rest in a semiflexed position. Results range from 0 

¶¶ Data were missing for two subjects. 
‖‖ The pivot shift test assesses rotational stability of the knee at rest. Results range from 0 (normal stability) to 3 (severely 

*** Results of the total area-under-the-curve analysis are shown, with higher scores indicating better results. 
††† These subjects had a self-reported KOOS quality-of-life score below 44 at any visit between 6 months and 2 years of 

















































in the early-reconstruction group and 61 in the 
delayed-reconstruction group (P = 0.19) (see the 
Supplementary Appendix). 

The results of this randomized, controlled trial 
involving physically active adults with an acute 
ACL rupture indicate that a strategy of early ACL 
reconstruction plus structured rehabilitation was 
not superior to a strategy of rehabilitation with 
the option of delayed ACL reconstruction when 
needed. Early reconstruction as compared with 
the option of delayed reconstruction did not re- 
sult in a significant improvement in the primary 
outcome — the change in the KOOS4 score be- 
tween baseline and 2 years — or in any of the 
prespecified secondary outcomes, which includ- 
ed pain, symptoms, function in activities of daily 
living, function in sports and recreation, knee- 
related quality of life, KOOS4 AUC, general health 
status, activity level, and return to preinjury ac- 
tivity level at 2 years. 
We are aware of two prior randomized, con- 
trolled trials comparing surgical and nonsurgi- 
cal treatment of ACL injuries,26,27 but both as- 
sessed surgical repair (not reconstruction) of the 
torn ACL, and one26 was limited by inconsisten- 
cies in treatment assignment and treatment in- 
dications for the surgical group.6 Thus, high- 
level evidence is lacking to support the contention 
that outcomes are better with routine early ACL 
reconstruction than with an initial strategy of 
nonsurgical treatment.6 Two observational stud- 
ies showed similar outcomes for patients who 
underwent ACL reconstructive surgery and those 
who received nonoperative treatment of the rup- 
tured ACL,28,29 but the observational design pre- 
cludes conclusions about cause and effect.3,30 
Both groups in our study had substantial im- 
provement over the 2-year follow-up period. The 
overall KOOS result at 2 years was similar to that 
in other studies of ACL reconstruction20,22,23,31-33 
and to KOOS4 results 2 years after surgery for 
patients of similar age included in the Swedish 
National ACL Register (Ageberg E: personal com- 
munication).34 The median activity scores 2 years 
after ACL reconstruction in our study were also 
similar to those reported by other investiga- 
tors.35-38 In addition, rates of normal results on 
Lachman and pivot shift tests at 2 years among 
the subjects treated with early ACL reconstruc- 
tion in our trial were similar to those reported 
in a meta-analysis of studies of ACL reconstruc- 
tion.39 These similarities in outcomes between 
our results and those reported elsewhere suggest 
that our findings are generalizable. 
With the strategy of providing structured re- 
habilitation alone initially instead of structured 
rehabilitation plus early ACL reconstruction, sur- 
gical reconstruction was avoided in 61% of the 
subjects without compromising the results. Our 
post hoc as-treated analysis identified no sig- 
nificant differences in self-reported outcomes at 
2 years among the subjects treated with rehabili- 
tation plus early ACL reconstruction, those treat- 
ed with rehabilitation plus delayed ACL reconstruc- 
tion, and those treated with rehabilitation alone 
(Table G in the Supplementary Appendix). 
Small meniscal tears diagnosed by MRI at 
baseline were managed more aggressively in the 
subjects assigned to rehabilitation plus early ACL 
reconstruction and were more likely to be left 
untreated in the subjects assigned to rehabilita- 
tion plus optional delayed ACL reconstruction; 
this difference probably explains the greater fre- 
quency of meniscal surgery during follow-up in 
the latter group. Although the rate of adverse 
events in our study was higher than the reported 
rates in other studies of patients with ACL rup- 
ture, we believe this difference reflects our more 
comprehensive approach to collecting such infor- 
mation.40 
Our study had certain limitations. First, we 
did not include a sham-surgery control group; 
however, the use of sham surgery as a control 
would have tended to bias the results in favor of 
early surgery. Second, assessors were aware of 
the treatment assignments, but they measured 
only knee stability. Third, we were unable to 
stratify study groups according to activity level, 
and our conclusions are best generalized to young 
adults who have high preinjury activity levels but 
are not professional athletes. Fourth, it cannot 
be assumed that rehabilitation programs that 
differ from the supervised program used in our 
study would result in similar findings. Finally, 
continued follow-up is warranted to assess longer- 
term outcomes, including the risk of knee osteo- 
arthritis.3 
In summary, our findings indicate that in 
young, active adults with an acute ACL tear, a 
strategy of structured rehabilitation plus early ACL 
reconstruction did not result in better patient- 







reported outcomes at 2 years than a strategy of 
rehabilitation plus optional delayed ACL recon- 
struction in those with symptomatic instability. 
With the use of the latter strategy, more than 
half the ACL reconstructions could be avoided 
without adversely affecting outcomes. 
Supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council and 
the Medical Faculty of Lund University (to Drs. Lohmander and 
E.M. Roos), the Skåne Regional Council (to Drs. Lohmander, 
Frobell, and E.M. Roos), the Thelma Zoegas Fund (to Drs. Frobell 
and H.P. Roos), the Stig and Ragna Gorthon Research Founda- 
tion (to Dr. Frobell), the Swedish National Center for Research 
in Sports (to Drs. Lohmander and Frobell), and Pfizer Global 
Research (to Dr. Lohmander). 

other potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was 
reported. 
We thank all the subjects who participated in this trial; the 
physiotherapists and clinic staff members who managed the reha- 
bilitation, including Marianne Roos in Ängelholm, Hanspeter 
Borgman in Eslöv, Mats Gustavsson at Davidshalls Rehab, and 
Tina Magnusson at Fysiocenter in Malmö, and the staff at Hö- 
ganäs Fysio, Idrottshälsan in Lund, Idrottskliniken and Idrott- 
skadecentrum in Helsingborg, Idrottsskademottagningen in 
Landskrona, Kupolen in Klippan, and Rehab and Friskvårdshuset 
in Staffanstorp; Ola Olsson in Helsingborg, Lars Wahlström in 
Ängelholm, and Fredrik Nyquist in Malmö, for performing sur- 
gical interventions; and Kerstin Åkesson for study management 
and categorization of adverse events, Björn Slaug and Ludvig 
Dahl for database management, Jan-Åke Nilsson for statistical 
analysis, Torsten Boegård for radiologic advice and assessment, 
and Anette W. Dahl for categorization of adverse events. 

Spindler KP, Warren TA, Callison JC 
1. 
Jr, Secic M, Fleisch SB, Wright RW. Clini- 
cal outcome at a minimum of five years 
after reconstruction of the anterior cruci- 
ate ligament. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2005; 
87:1673-9. 
Spindler KP, Wright RW. Anterior cru- 
2. 
ciate ligament tear. N Engl J Med 2008; 
359:2135-42. 
Lohmander LS, Englund PM, Dahl LD, 
3. 
Roos EM. The long-term consequence of 
anterior cruciate ligament and meniscus 
injuries: osteoarthritis. Am J Sports Med 
2007;35:1756-69. 
Thorstensson CA, Lohmander LS, 
4. 
Frobell RB, Roos EM, Gooberman-Hill R. 
Choosing surgery: patients’ preferences 
within a trial of treatments for anterior 
cruciate ligament injury: a qualitative 
study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2009; 
10:100. 
Swirtun LR, Eriksson K, Renström P. 
5. 
Who chooses anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction and why? A 2-year pro- 
spective study. Scand J Med Sci Sports 
2006;16:441-6. 
Linko E, Harilainen A, Malmivaara A, 
6. 
Seitsalo S. Surgical versus conservative 
interventions for anterior cruciate liga- 
ment ruptures in adults. Cochrane Data- 
base Syst Rev 2005;2:CD001356. 
Kapoor B, Clement DJ, Kirkley A, 
7. 
Maf fulli N. Current practice in the man- 
agement of anterior cruciate ligament in- 
juries in the United Kingdom. Br J Sports 
Med 2004;38:542-4. 
Maffulli N, Longo UG, Denaro V. 
8. 
Anteriorcruciate ligament tear. N Engl J 
 
Med 2009;360:1463. 
Brophy RH, Wright RW, Matava MJ. 
9. 
Cost analysis of converting from single- 
bundle to double-bundle anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 
2009;37:683-7. 
Risberg MA, Holm I, Myklebust G, 
10. 
Engebretsen L. Neuromuscular training 
versus strength training during first 
6 months after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction: a randomized clinical trial. 
Phys Ther 2007;87:737-50. 
Frobell RB, Lohmander LS, Roos EM. 
11. 
The challenge of recruiting patients with 
anterior cruciate ligament injury of the 
knee into a randomized clinical trial com- 
paring surgical and non-surgical treat- 
ment. Contemp Clin Trials 2007;28:295- 
302. 
Tegner Y, Lysholm J. Rating systems 
12. 
in the evaluation of knee ligament injuries. 
Clin Orthop Relat Res 1985;198:43-9. 
Risberg MA, Lewek M, Snyder-Mack- 
13. 
ler L. A systematic review of evidence for 
anterior cruciate ligament rehabilitation: 
how much and what type? Phys Ther Sport 
2004;5:125-45. 
Jones KG. Reconstruction of the ante- 
14. 
rior cruciate ligament using the central 
one-third of the patellar ligament. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am 1970;52:838-9. 
Aglietti P, Buzzi R, Menchetti PM, 
15. 
Giron F. Arthroscopically assisted semi- 
tendinosus and gracilis tendon graft in 
reconstruction for acute anterior cruciate 
ligament injuries in athletes. Am J Sports 
Med 1996;24:726-31. 
Biau DJ, Tournoux C, Katsahian S, 
16. 
Schranz P, Nizard R. ACL reconstruction: 
a meta-analysis of functional scores. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res 2007;458:180-7. 
Spindler KP, Kuhn JE, Freedman KB, 
17. 
Matthews CE, Dittus RS, Harrell FE Jr. 
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc- 
tion autograft choice: bone-tendon-bone 
versus hamstring: does it really matter? 
A systematic review. Am J Sports Med 
2004;32:1986-95. 
Khanna AJ, Cosgarea AJ, Mont MA, 
18. 
et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
knee: current techniques and spectrum of 
disease. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2001;83-A: 
Suppl 2:128-41. 
Roos EM, Roos HP, Ekdahl C, Loh- 
19. 
mander LS. Knee injury and Osteoarthri- 
tis Outcome Score (KOOS) — validation of 
a Swedish version. Scand J Med Sci Sports 
1998;8:439-48. 
Roos EM, Roos HP, Lohmander LS, 
20. 
Ekdahl C, Beynnon BD. Knee injury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) — 
development of a self-administered out- 
come measure. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 
1998;28:88-96. 
Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 
21. 
36-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36). 
I. Conceptual framework and item selec- 
tion. Med Care 1992;30:473-83. 
Granan LP, Bahr R, Steindal K, Furnes 
22. 
O, Engebretsen L. Development of a na- 
tional cruciate ligament surgery registry: 
the Norwegian National Knee Ligament 
Registry. Am J Sports Med 2008;36:308- 
15. 
Lind M, Menhert F, Pedersen AB. The 
23. 
first results from the Danish ACL recon- 
struction registry: epidemiologic and 2 year 
follow-up results from 5,818 knee liga- 
ment reconstructions. Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc 2009;17:117-24. 
Ageberg E, Forssblad M, Herbertsson 
24. 
P, Roos EM. Sex differences in patient- 
reported outcomes after ACL reconstruc- 
tion — data from the Swedish Knee Liga- 
ment Register. Am J Sports Med 2010 
April 21 (Epub ahead of print). 
Roos EM, Lohmander LS. The Knee 
25. 
injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score 
(KOOS): from joint injury to osteoarthri- 
tis. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2003;1:64. 
Andersson C, Odensten M, Good L, 
26. 
Gillquist J. Surgical or non-surgical treat- 
ment of acute rupture of the anterior cru- 
ciate ligament: a randomized study with 
long-term follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
1989;71:965-74. 
Sandberg R, Balkfors B, Nilsson B, 
27. 
Westlin N. Operative versus non-operative 
treatment of recent injuries to the liga- 
ments of the knee: a prospective random- 
ized study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1987;69: 
1120-6. 
Meuffels DE, Favejee MM, Vissers 
28. 
MM, Heijboer MP, Reijman M, Verhaar 
JA. Ten year follow-up study comparing 
conservativeversus operative treatment 
 







of anterior cruciate ligament ruptures: 
a matched-pair analysis of high level ath- 
letes. Br J Sports Med 2009;43:347-51. 
Moksnes H, Risberg MA. Performance- 
29. 
based functional evaluation of non-opera- 
tive and operative treatment after anterior 
cruciate ligament injury. Scand J Med Sci 
Sports 2009;19:345-55. 
Morshed S, Tornetta P III, Bhandari 
30. 
M. Analysis of observational studies: 
a guide to understanding statistical 
methods. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2009;91: 
Suppl 3:50-60. 
Aglietti P, Giron F, Buzzi R, Biddau F, 
31. 
Sasso F. Anterior cruciate ligament recon- 
struction: bone-patellar tendon-bone com- 
pared with double semitendinosus and 
gracilis tendon grafts: a prospective, ran- 
domized clinical trial. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am 2004;86-A:2143-55. 
Beynnon BD, Uh BS, Johnson RJ, et al. 
32. 
Rehabilitation after anterior cruciate liga- 
ment reconstruction: a prospective, ran- 
domized, double-blind comparison of pro- 
grams administered over 2 different time 
intervals. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:347- 
59. 
Nau T, Lavoie P, Duval N. A new gen- 
33. 
eration of artificial ligaments in recon- 
struction of the anterior cruciate ligament: 
two-year follow-up of a randomised trial. 
J Bone Joint Surg Br 2002;84:356-60. 
The Swedish National ACL Database 
34. 
home page. (Accessed June 28, 2010, at 
http://www.aclregister.nu.) 
Ejerhed L, Kartus J, Sernert N, Kohler 
35. 
K, Karlsson J. Patellar tendon or semiten- 
dinosus tendon autografts for anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction? A pro- 
spective randomized study with a two-year 
follow-up. Am J Sports Med 2003;31:19- 
25. 
Eriksson K, Anderberg P, Hamberg P, 
36. 
et al. A comparison of quadruple semi- 
tendinosus and patellar tendon grafts in 
reconstruction of the anterior cruciate 
ligament. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2001;83: 
348-54. 
Jansson KA, Linko E, Sandelin J, Ha- 
37. 
rilainen A. A prospective randomized 
study of patellar versus hamstring tendon 
autografts for anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 2003;31: 
12-8. 
Laxdal G, Kartus J, Hansson L, Heidvall 
38. 
M, Ejerhed L, Karlsson J. A prospective 
randomized comparison of bone-patellar 
tendon-bone and hamstring grafts for 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. 
Arthroscopy 2005;21:34-42. 
Biau DJ, Tournoux C, Katsahian S, 
39. 
Schranz PJ, Nizard RS. Bone-patellar ten- 
don-bone autografts versus hamstring 
autografts for reconstruction of anterior 
cruciate ligament: meta-analysis. BMJ 
2006;332:995-1001. 
Goldhahn S, Sawaguchi T, Audige L, 
40. 
et al. Complication reporting in orthopae- 
dic trials: a systematic review of random- 
ized controlled trials. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am 2009;91:1847-53. 
Copyright © 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society. 



receive immediate notification when 
a journal article is released early 
To be notified when an article is released early 
on the Web and to receive the table of contents 
of the Journal by e-mail every Wednesday evening, 
sign up through our Web site at 
NEJM.org. 



