

Functional outcome of an early anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction in comparison to delayed: Are we waiting in vain?$ 
Rajeev Raj Manandhara,*, Karthik Chandrashekharb, Vinay Kumaraswamyc, 
Santosh Sahanandd, David Rajand 
a Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital, Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal 
b Arathana Hospital, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu, India 
c Department of Orthopaedics, Kempegowda Institute of Medical Sciences, KR Road, VV Puram, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 
d Ortho One, Orthopaedic Specialty Centre, 657, Trichy Road, Singanallur, Coimbatore-5, Tamil Nadu, India 



Article history: 
Received 5 September 2016 
Accepted 2 March 2017 
Available online 18 March 2017 
Keywords: 
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction 
Early 
Delayed 
Results 

Background: Surgical techniques of ACL reconstruction (ACLR) have evolved over the past three decades 
along with debate regarding timing of reconstruction. It was a widespread belief that the timing of 
surgery was an important factor in determining the resulting stiffness after ACLR. Delayed rather than 
early reconstruction of the ACL is the current recommended treatment since it is thought to give a better 
functional outcome. However, there is no consensus in the literature regarding the optimal time of 
surgical intervention. The purpose of this study was to compare the range of motion and functional 
outcome in patients who underwent ACLR early with those that were delayed. 
Materials and Methods: The patients were randomized into two groups; patients who underwent the 
procedure within three weeks were kept in Group I (Early) and those patients who were reconstructed 
after six weeks were categorized as Group II (Delayed). Hamstring grafts were used and a standard 
protocol of surgery and physiotherapy was followed. The range of motion, IKDC and Tegner scores were 
compared. 
ﬁfty-three patients were grouped as Group I 
Results: A hundred and four patients underwent ACLR; 
ﬁfty one as Group II (Delayed). The range of motion of both groups was comparable. The IKDC 
(Early) and 
and Tegner scores were also comparable for early (Group I) ACLR and the patients who had their ACL 
reconstructed after a delay of at least 6 weeks (Group II). 
Conclusion: There are no clinical differences in terms of range of motion and functional results between 
early and delayed ACLR. 

The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the most commonly 
injured ligament of the knee.1,2 Arthroscopic reconstruction is the 
usual treatment for younger athletes or those with occupational or 
sporting pursuits since 
the 
prospective for progressive degeneration and long-term instability 
of the knee.3,4 Surgical techniques of ACL reconstruction (ACLR) 


$ Study performed at Ortho One, Orthopaedic Specialty Centre, Coimbatore, 
Tamil Nadu, India. 

E-mail addresses: rajeevrajmanandhar@gmail.com (R.R. Manandhar), 
karthikwillbe@gmail.com (K. Chandrashekhar), maildrvinay@gmail.com 
(V. Kumaraswamy), sahanand@gmail.com (S. Sahanand), davidvrajan@gmail.com 
(D. Rajan). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2017.03.001 
0976-5662/© 2017 Delhi Orthopedic Association. All rights reserved. 
have evolved over the past three decades along with debate 
regarding timing of reconstruction.5 
It was a widespread belief that the timing of surgery was an 
important factor 
in determining the resulting stiffness after 
ACLR.6,7 In a landmark publication, Shelbourne et al. recommended 
delaying surgery for at least 3 weeks would result in considerable 
decrease of arthroﬁbrosis.5 
Delaying surgical intervention was thought to allow optimiza- 
tion of pre-operative knee range of motion and recovery of 
surrounding soft tissues from the initial injury potentially reducing 
the incidence of post-operative arthroﬁbrosis and wound com- 
ﬁrst injury. 
plications.5,8 The knee would have recovered from the 
However, the ensuing surgery is then perceived by the body as a 
“second hit” 
 from which healing must again commence. On the 
contrary, if the surgery is performed early, there is just one 





trauma.9 Early surgery also hastens return to sporting and work 
with considerable economic consequences. 
Francis et al.,10 conducted a national survey in the UK. 81% 
reported that they considered the ideal time span from injury to 
operation to be between 1 and 6 months, although 
it was 
acknowledged that only 35% of ACL reconstructions are performed 
within this time-frame.11 
Delayed reconstruction is the current recommended treatment 
since it is thought to give a better functional outcome.12 Recent 
random controlled trials suggest that early surgery does not affect 
post-op range of motion. Meta-analysis of 6 studies found no 
difference in clinical outcome between patients who underwent 
early and delayed ACL reconstruction.13 Hence, there 
is no 
consensus in the current literature regarding the optimal time 
of surgical intervention. 


The purpose of this study was to compare the range of motion 
and 
in patients undergoing arthroscopic 
assisted ACL reconstruction early within 3 weeks and delayed 
after 6 weeks. 

A randomized prospective study was performed on adult 
patients who underwent arthroscopic assisted ACL reconstruction 
from January 2014 to January 2015 for a period of one year. Patients 
insufﬁciency with or without associated chondral 
with ACL 
(Outerbridge I &II) injuries, meniscal injuries, which required 
partial meniscectomy or debridement, were included. The patients 
were randomized into two groups; patients who underwent the 
procedure within three weeks were kept in Group I (Early) and 
those patients who were reconstructed after six weeks were 
catergorized as Group II (Delayed). The patients were randomized 
into two groups on the basis of odd and even hospital numbers. The 
odd numbers were placed in Group 1 (Early) and the even in Group 
ﬂexion of at 
2 (Delayed). The prerequisite for surgery was knee 
least 120(cid:1). Ethical clearance for the study was obtained and 
informed consent was taken from all patients. 
All patients underwent physiotherapy, and surgery in the early 
ﬂexion of 120 (cid:1) was achieved. The 
group was performed as soon as 
patients in the delayed group were placed on a physiotherapy 
program where the quadriceps was strengthened and the range of 
motion restored to 120 (cid:1) of 
ﬂexion and they were operated after 6 
weeks. Those patients who had undergone previous knee surgery, 
multi ligament injuries, associated chondral injuries > Grade III, IV 
(Outerbridge classiﬁcation), associated meniscal injuries requiring 
repair and patients in whom BPTB and Quadriceps grafts were used 
were excluded. 

An examination under anaesthesia was performed to conﬁrm 
ﬁndings and an anterolateral parapatellar viewing portal and 
the 
accessory anteromedial parapatellar working portals were made. 
Diagnostic arthroscopy was done. The hamstring graft was then 
harvested making a vertical incision below and medial to the tibial 
tuberosity in between the tibial tuberosity and the medial tibial 
ﬂare. After the hamstring tendons were palpated the skin was 
incised, the fat was pushed away using a gauze piece and the 
sartorius fascia was visualized. A transverse incision was made in 
the fascia in between the gracilis and semitendinosis tendons and 
the semitendinosis was isolated initially using a 90 (cid:1) right angled 
artery forceps. The tendon was removed from its insertion on the 
tibia and held by a luggage tag suture.14 A closed end tendon 
stripper was used to strip the tendon. Then the gracilis was 
removed. Ethibond no 2 whipstitches were applied at the ends and 
a quadrupled graft construct was made. 
The femoral tunnel was made using the transportal technique. 
The knee was placed in about 130 (cid:1) of 
ﬂexion. The transportal guide 
wire was placed 30–45 (cid:1) in the sagittal plane and horizontal to the 
ﬂoor via the accessory anteromedial portal.15 Then a 4.5 mm 
cannulated drill was used to drill a tunnel and the length was 
measured. Then the femoral tunnel was made larger as needed 
ﬂower head tipped drills. 
according to the width of the graft with 
The entrance to the femoral tunnel was widened and smoothened 
to help graft passage with a curette and rasp. 
The tibial tunnel was made using the ACL jig. The graft was 
ﬁxed proximally with CL loop endobutton. Impinge- 
passed and 
ment was checked and cyclical loading done and then distal 
ﬁxation was done with a bioscrew. Placement of the screw was 
conﬁrmed under arthroscopic guidance, the 
in the 
reconstructed ligament was checked using a probe and Lachman 
test. 

The knee was placed in a knee brace. Mobilization and partial 
weight bearing with a pair of crutches as tolerated was started the 
next day, but their range of motion was restricted to 0–90 (cid:1) of 
ﬂexion for the 
ﬁrst three weeks. The patients were discharged on 
the second post-operative day. Partial weight bearing with a pair of 
crutches was advised for two weeks. After two weeks, the operated 
side crutch was removed. Recumbent cycling was started at three 
weeks and the second crutch was discontinued to be used in 
crowded places 
if necessary. Half squats were started. Slow 
walking and jogging was allowed and speed and duration was 
increased. 
After three months, swimming and side running progressing to 
zig zag running was advised. Single leg presses and single half 
squats were also taught. The balance training was started at the 
end of the fourth month, using wobble board. Plyometrics and skill 
ﬁfth month. The patient was 
exercises were taught at the 
encouraged to start playing gradually after six months. The 
patients were followed up at intervals of three, six and twelve 
weeks postoperatively, then at six months and thereafter at six- 
monthly intervals. 
Passive range of motion was measured and compared with the 
opposite knee. A physiotherapist performed the range of motion 
assessments using a goniometer. The heel was elevated on a 
ﬁnal 
support to assess the total amount of extension. The 
assessment was carried out on patients who had completed six 
months of their rehabilitation. Their pre-operative and present 
IKDC (International Knee Documentation Committee) and Tegner 
scores and range of motion were compared. 
Statistical analysis was done using SPSS version 20. The mean 
pre-operative and post-operative IKDC and Tegner scores were 
compared using paired samples t-test. The mean scores in the two 
ﬁnal assessment at 6 months were compared using 
groups at the 
independent samples t-test. A p value of less than 0.05 was 
considered to be statistically signiﬁcant. 

A total of one hundred and ten patients underwent ACLR from 
January 2014 to January 2015. Six patients were lost to follow up 
and could not be contacted and were excluded from the study. Of 
ﬁfty-three patients were 
the remaining hundred and four patients, 
ﬁfty-one as Group II (Delayed). The 
grouped as Group I (Early) and 
time period from injury to surgery was 11.20 days (Range: 4- 
21 days) in Group I and 48 days (Range: 42-60 days) in Group II. The 
mean age was 30 years (Range: 18–55 years). 
There were 21 female and 83 male patients. The right side was 
involved in 64 and left in 40 patients. The commonest mode of 


injury was sports related in 73 patients (70.19%) followed by road 
trafﬁc accidents (26 patients). The patients were young profes- 
sionals leading active lives employed in various professions. 
In Group I, 22 patients had meniscal injuries: 12 involving the 
lateral meniscus and 6 the medial meniscus and in four patients 
both menisci were involved. In Group II, 34 patients had meniscal 
tears, 8 
involving medial 
meniscus and in 6 patients both were torn (Table 1). All identiﬁed 
tears were either debrided or underwent partial excision. The 
incidence of chondral injuries was higher in Group II (28 patients) 
compared to Group I (10 patients). 


The range of motion of both groups was comparable. The 
ﬂexion following surgery was reduced in both groups 
amount of 
ﬁrst three months (Table 2). There 
for measurements made in the 
was no statistical difference between the two groups. The pre- 
operative and post-operative 
IKDC and Tegner scores were 
ﬁnal assessment was performed at 6 months and 
recorded. The 
the 
ﬁnal IKDC and Tegner scores were compared (Table 3). 
The mean IKDC score in GI (Early) was 69.68 and in GII 
(Delayed) was 67.14, the difference not being statistically signiﬁ- 
cant (p = 0.077). The mean Tegner activity level scale in GI was 4.15 
and in GII was 3.72, difference was not statistically signiﬁcant 
(p = 0.064). Thus, the functional outcome after early ACL recon- 
struction and delayed ACL reconstruction is comparable based on 
the IKDC score and Tegner activity score. 



The timing of reconstruction after an ACL injury is a subject of 
extensive debate. The assumption that early reconstruction would 
lead to an increased incidence of arthroﬁbrosis was widespread 
after a landmark paper published by Shelbourne et al.,5 where a 
retrospective review of 169 patients was performed. The patients 
were followed for 13 weeks, and three groups were made on the 
basis of time from injury to surgery. Group I was less than 8 days, 
Group II from 8 to 21 days and Group III more than 21 days. They 
found a signiﬁcant increase of arthroﬁbrosis in patients recon- 
structed acutely (Group I) when compared with those after 3weeks 
(Group III). They also reported that an accelerated rehabilitation 
program resulted in signiﬁcantly less arthroﬁbrosis in group II 
patients than when a slower rehabilitation protocol was employed. 
An ipsilateral bone tendon-bone autograft inserted via a mini open, 
two incision technique was employed. The graft was held with 
heavy sutures tied over a polypropylene ligament button. In 
contrast, we used an autograft hamstring via a single-incision 
arthroscopic 
loop 
endobutton on the femur and bioscrew in the tibia following a 
modern operative technique. Theoretically, the additional trauma 
from the arthrotomy in the mini open technique could have 
contributed to the increased arthroﬁbrosis reported in their study.9 
Hunter et al.16 conducted a prospective study to determine the 
impact of surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability 
following ACLR. 185 patients were entered into four separate 
groups based on the time interval from injury to surgery. No 
arthrotomy or surgical 
ligamentous 
intervention 
structures was performed. No statistical difference in restoration 



Table 1 
Meniscal tears: Total no. 56 patients. 





GI (Early) 
GII (Delayed) 
6 
20 
12 
8 
4 
6 
22 
34 
Table 2 
Post- op Range of motion. 





GI (Early) 
GII (Delayed) 
10–80 
8–82 
6–100 
5–110 
2–120 
2–122 
(cid:3)1 to 134 
(cid:3)1 to 135 
Table 3 
Final IKDC and Tegner scores at 6 months. 

IKDC 
Tegner 


69.68 
(cid:4) 
4.15 



67.14 
3.72 
(cid:4) 
(cid:4) 
 6.08 
 1.34 

0.077 
0.064 
ﬂexion in any group at any time point was found. 
of extension or 
They concluded that by using modern arthroscopic surgical 
techniques and an aggressive postoperative physical therapy 
protocol, motion and stability can be restored in a high percentage 
of patients and that surgical success is independent of the timing of 
surgery. 
Many studies have investigated the effect of the timing of 
surgical reconstruction on patient outcomes. There is signiﬁcant 
heterogeneity in terms of surgical technique, graft material, graft 
ﬁxation devices, rehabilitation protocols and outcomes measured. 
This has made it difﬁcult to clearly identify the isolated effect of 
time to surgery on the risk of postoperative stiffness.13 Our study 
has uniformity in terms of surgical technique, graft material, 
ﬁxation devices and rehabilitation protocol and outcomes meas- 
ures. 

ﬂexion following surgery was 
ﬁrst three months. Almekinders and 
reduced in both groups for the 
colleagues17 studied 70 adults who underwent ACLR using bone 
patella tendon bone autograft. Patients who underwent recon- 
struction less than one month from injury had limitations in knee 
range of motion early in rehabilitation; however, after one year, 
there was no difference 
in motion between patients who 
underwent early or delayed surgery. 
The meniscal and chondral injuries were found in both groups 
but they were more in the delayed group. Several authors have 
reported an increased risk of developing meniscal and chondral 
lesions with the lengthening of time from injury to surgery.18 The 
odds for a cartilage lesion increased by nearly 1% for each month 
that elapsed from the time of injury till surgery and that cartilage 
lesions were nearly twice as frequent if there was a concurrent 
meniscal tear and vice versa.19 Restoring knee stability would 
minimize the risk of further meniscal and chondral damage which 
may lead to premature degenerative joint changes. 

lack of consensus regarding the 
deﬁnitions of early and delayed ACLR. Various studies have used 
their own deﬁnition of early and delayed. Church and Keating used 
12 months as a marker to distinguish between early and delayed. 
Bottoni et al9 deﬁned early reconstruction as occurring at the 
earliest possible date from injury and delayed reconstruction as a 
minimum of 6 weeks from the date of injury. In our study the two 
groups have been constructed according to the landmark paper 
published by Shelbourne. 
Post-operative rehabilitation has changed substantially as 
surgical techniques have 
improved. The modern arthroscopic 
assisted transportal ACL reconstruction technique utilized allowed 
accelerated rehabilitation with emphasis on early mobilization, 
weight bearing and lower extremity strength training. There was 
no difference in the range of motion in between our two groups 
ﬁrst three 
although both groups had reduced 
months. 



In our study, as the transportal technique was used, physio- 
therapy was advised and the knee had to achieve a pre-operative 
ﬂexion of 120(cid:1). Mayr et al.,20 found evidence that preoperative 
synovitis of the knee with limited range of motion was highly 
signiﬁcant in terms of occurrence of arthroﬁbrosis after ACLR. 70% 
of their patients, who had a swollen, inﬂamed knee at the time of 
reconstruction developed postoperative arthroﬁbrosis. Thus, the 
interval between knee trauma and ACL reconstruction was not the 
determining factor. 

The results of early and delayed arthroscopic ACLR using 
hamstring autograft are comparable. There are no clinical differ- 
ences in terms of range of motion and functional results. One can 
proceed with the surgery early rather than waiting and delaying 
surgery once patient has regained 120 (cid:1) of knee 




We acknowledge Dr Umesh Aryal and Dr Krishna Khanal for 
their support with the statistical data management and prepara- 
tion for the study 


anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the effect of timing of 
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med. 1991;19:332–336. 
6. Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Abate JA, Fleming BC, Nichols CE. Treatment of 
anterior cruciate ligament injuries: part I. Am J Sports Med. 2005;33:1579– 
1602. 


8. Mohtadi NG, Webster-Bogaert S, Fowler PJ. Limitation of motion following 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. A case–control study. Am J Sports 
Med. 1991;19:620–625. 
9. Bottoni CR, Liddell TR, Trainor TJ, Freccero DM, Lindell KK. Postoperative range 
of motion following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using autograft 
hamstrings: a prospective, randomized clinical trial of early versus delayed 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 2008;36:656–662. 

reconstruction surgery and rehabilitation: a nation-wide survey of current 
practice. Knee. 2001;8:13–18. 

ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2010;18:304–311. 
12. Raviraj A, Anand A, Kodikal G, Chandrashekar M, Pai S. A comparison of early 
and delayed arthroscopically-assisted reconstruction of the anterior cruciate 
ligament using hamstring autograft. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010;92:521–526. 
13. Kwok CS, Harrison T, Servant C. The optimal timing for anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction with respect to the risk of postoperative stiffness. 
Arthroscopy. 2013;29(3):556–565. 



Determinants of femoral tunnel length in anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction: CT analysis of the inﬂuence of tunnel orientation on the 
length. Knee Surg Relat Res. 2013;25(4):207–214. 
16. Hunter RE, Mastrangelo J, Freeman JR, Purnell ML, Jones RH. The impact of 
surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability following anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy. 1996;12(6):667–674. 

following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc. 1995;3(2):78–82. 



2. Meighan AS, Keating JF, Will E. Outcome after reconstruction of the anterior 
cruciate ligament in athletic patients. A comparison of early versus delayed 
surgery. J Bone Joint Surg. 2003;85-B:521–524. 
3. Amis AA, Dawkins GP. Functional anatomy of the anterior cruciate ligament. 
Fibre bundle actions related to ligament replacements and injuries. J Bone Joint 
Surg. 1991;73-B:260–267. 
4. Jomha NM, Borton DC, Clingeleffer AJ, Pinczewski LA. Long term osteoarthritic 
changes in anterior cruciate ligament reconstructed knees. Clin Orthop Relat 
Res. 1999;358:188–193. 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: correlation with surgical timing 
and with patient age, sex, and body mass index. Am J Sports Med. 2015;43 
(12):2966–2973. 
19. Granan LP, Bahr R, Lie SA, Engebretsen L. Timing of anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstructive surgery and risk of cartilage lesions and meniscal tears. Am J 
Sports Med. 2009;37(5):955–961. 



