A comparison of early and delayed 
arthroscopically-assisted reconstruction of 
the anterior cruciate ligament using 
hamstring autograft 
A. Raviraj, 
A. Anand, 
G. Kodikal, 
M. Chandrashekar, 
S. Pai 
From Wockhardt 
Hospitals, Bangalore, 
India 
(cid:132) A. Raviraj, DOrtho, 
DNB(Ortho), MNAMS, 
Consultant Orthopaedic 
Surgeon 
(cid:132) A. Anand, DNB, MS(Ortho), 
Consulant Arthroscopy and 
Sports Medicine Specialist 
(cid:132) G. Kodikal, MS(Ortho), 
Senior Consultant Arthroscopy 
and Sports Medicine Specialist 
(cid:132) M. Chandrashekar, DOrtho, 
DNB(Ortho), MNAMS, 
Consultant Orthopaedic 
Surgeon 
(cid:132) S. Pai, MS(Ortho), Senior 
Consultant Orthopaedic 
Surgeon and Chief of 
Orthopaedic Services 
Arthroscopy and Sports 
Medicine Services, Department 
of Orthopaedic Surgery 
154/9 Wockhardt Hospitals, 
Opposite IIMB, Bannerghatta 
Road, Bangalore - 560076, 
India. 
Correspondence should be sent 
to Dr A. Raviraj; e-mail: 
orthoraviraj@yahoo.com 
©2010 British Editorial Society 
of Bone and Joint Surgery 
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.92B4. 
22973 $2.00 
J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 
2010;92-B:521-6. 
Received 23 June 2009; 
Accepted after revision 14 
January 2010 

Delayed rather than early reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament is the current 
recommended treatment for injury to this ligament since it is thought to give a better 
functional outcome. We randomised 105 consecutive patients with injury associated with 
chondral lesions no more severe than grades 1 and 2 and/or meniscal tears which only 
required trimming, to early (< two weeks) or delayed (> four to six weeks) reconstruction of 
the anterior cruciate ligament using a quadrupled hamstring graft. All operations were 
performed by a single surgeon and a standard rehabilitation regime was followed in both 
groups. The outcomes were assessed using the Lysholm score, the Tegner score and 
measurement of the range of movement. Stability was assessed by clinical tests and 
measurements taken with the KT-1000 arthrometer, with all testing performed by a blinded 
uninvolved experienced observer. A total of six patients were lost to follow-up, with 
48 patients assigned to the delayed group and 51 to the early group. None was a 
competitive athlete. The mean interval between injury and the surgery was seven days 
(2 to 14) in the early group and 32 days (29 to 42) in the delayed group. The mean follow-up 
was 32 months (26 to 36). 

(p = 0.86), Tegner activity score (p = 0.913) or the range of movement (p = 1). Similarly, no 
distinction could be made for stability testing by clinical examination (p = 0.56) and 
measurements with the KT-1000 arthrometer (p = 0.93). 
Reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament gave a similar clinical and functional 
outcome whether performed early (< two weeks) or late at four to six weeks after injury. 
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the pri- 
mary stabiliser of the knee against anterior 
translation of the tibia relative to the femur and 
is important in counteracting rotational and 
valgus stresses.1-3 It is the most commonly torn 
ligament in the knee and is a more common 
injury in female patients.4,5 Reconstruction of 
the ACL-deficient knee is accepted as standard 
treatment for young and active patients. 
Reconstruction of the ACL allows the patient 
to resume sporting activities and is reported to 
delay the onset of osteoarthritis which is associ- 
ated with loss of meniscal function.6-11 There is 
uncertainty regarding the timing of surgery with 
both early and late reconstruction being advo- 
cated. Shelbourne and Patel12 recommended 
reconstruction after three weeks to prevent the 
occurrence of arthrofibrosis, and this view has 
been expressed by others.13-15 One report found 
an increased incidence of arthrofibrosis if sur- 
gery was performed within a week and recom- 
mended that surgery be delayed for at least three 
weeks.14 Post-operative stiffness has been well 
documented by various studies.16-18 A number 
of authors have suggested that early surgery 
adversely affected the outcomes.19-24 Two stud- 
ies using hamstring tendons for reconstruction 
of the ACL compared the outcome after early or 
delayed reconstruction.25,26 Meighal, et al25 rec- 
ommended that there was no functional advan- 
tage following early reconstruction of the ACL. 
Botoni et al26 and did not observe any loss of 
motion following early reconstruction. Daniel 
et al28 have reported a higher incidence of 
arthritis of the knee after surgical treatment. 
We have compared the clinical and functional 
outcome of arthroscopically-assisted recon- 
struction of the ACL using a quadrupled ham- 
string autograft performed early (< two weeks) 
with that performed late (> four to six weeks) 
after injury. 
Patients and Methods 
Our study was approved by the institutional 
review board and informed consent was 
obtained from all the patients. We included 



patients who presented to the emergency department of our 
hospital and were diagnosed with a torn ACL as seen on an 
MR scan. We excluded those with concomitant ligamen- 
tous injuries, ipsilateral long-bone injuries and the require- 
ment of an additional procedure such as meniscal repair on 
the same knee, aged under 18 years, any previous injuries 
or operations on the same knee, and Outerbridge grade-3 
and grade-4 chondral injuries detected intra-operatively. 
Patients requiring meniscal trimming or trimming of chon- 
dral injuries of less than grade 3 on the O’Connors classifi- 
cation system29 were not excluded. 
Between August 2004 and November 2006, 115 patients 
presented with rupture of the ACL. Of these, ten were 
excluded because of the presence of grade-3 or grade-4 
chondral lesions or repairable meniscal injuries. The 
remaining 105 patients were randomly allocated into one 
of two groups using a computer-generated randomisation 
sequence. The patients who were selected for early surgery 
had the procedure within one day. Those in the delayed sur- 
gery group underwent a pre-operative rehabilitation pro- 
gramme which included range-of-movement exercises on 
the knee and hamstrings and quadriceps strengthening 
exercises. Additionally, a hinged brace was applied which 
was locked in extension for walking, with weight-bearing 
allowed as tolerated. When not walking they were allowed 
a full range of knee movement in the brace. 
At the initial evaluation a detailed clinical history was 
obtained regarding the mechanism of injury. The surgical 
procedure was standardised for all patients and was carried 
out by the same surgeon, (GK). All were operated on under 
bupivacaine epidural anaesthesia. 
An examination under anaesthesia was performed before 
inflation of the tourniquet and included the Lachman, ante- 
rior-drawer and pivot-shift tests. Cefuroxime (1 g) was given 
intravenously as prophylaxis. An initial arthroscopy was 
undertaken to confirm the diagnosis and to assess any associ- 
ated injuries with chondroplasty and any meniscal trimming 
performed as required. A quadrupled hamstring graft was 
fashioned from harvested semitendinosis and gracilis tendons 
in all patients. A Biotransfix system (Arthrex, Naples, Florida) 
was employed for femoral fixation and a Biointerference 
screw (Arthrex) was used on the tibial side. The rehabilitation 
protocol was the same in both groups. Non-steroidal anti- 
inflammatory drugs were not administered for the first two 
weeks after surgery. 
Operative technique. The hamstring autograft was har- 
vested using a tendon stripper through a small incision near 
the insertions of gracilis and semitendinosis. A quadruple 
construct was made and held with Ethibond stitches on 
either side. 
After preparing the tibial tunnel using a standard guide, a 
transtibial technique was used to make the femoral tunnel. 
This was accomplished using a 7 mm offset guide (Arthrex) 
with the femoral tunnel made up to a length of 40 mm. The 
Biotransfix system guide was used to make a slot for the 
proximal fixation of the graft with a Biotransfix screw. A 
nitinol wire was passed through this slot and was subse- 
quently pulled out into the tibial tunnel by the standard 
guide system. This wire was then used to draw the autograft 
into the femoral tunnel. Once in the tunnel care was taken to 
make sure that there was a smooth passage of the wire over 
the graft. 
The Biotransfix screw was passed over the nitinol wire 
and tightened. The graft was pulled distally to ensure that 
fixation was complete. The nitinol wire was removed and the 
knee cycled 20 times to eliminate any creep in the graft. Dis- 
tal fixation of the graft to the tibia was carried out using a 
Biointerference screw with the knee in 20° of flexion. Place- 
ment of the screw was confirmed under arthroscopic guid- 
ance, the tension in the reconstructed ligament was checked 
using a probe and a Lachman test performed. The knee was 
irrigated and the portals and medial tibial wounds were 
closed. No drains were used at the site of the tibial incision. 
The knee was injected with 10 ml of lidocaine (2% plain) 
and 10 ml of bupivacaine (0.5% plain). 
Post-operative analgesia was provided with tramadol for 
24 hours. A single dose of subcutaneous fondaparinux 
(2.5 mg) was given six hours post-operatively. The patient 
was mobilised and discharged on the first post-operative day. 
Post-operative rehabilitation. Post-operatively, the patients 
were placed in a hinged knee brace and touch weight-bearing 
was allowed for two weeks, during which time the range of 
movement was restricted to 0° to 90° of flexion. Subse- 
quently, they progressed to weight-bearing as tolerated with 
the range of movement no longer restricted, but with wear- 
ing of the brace for six weeks. 
Rehabilitation consisted of a progression through range-of- 
movement exercises, patellar mobilisation, electrical stimula- 
tion if needed, and proprioceptive and closed-chain strength- 
ening exercises during the first three months after operation. 
This was followed by straight-line jogging and exercises spe- 
cific to the patients’ preferred sport. The patients were fol- 
lowed up at intervals of two, six and 12 weeks post- 
operatively, then at six months and thereafter at six-monthly 
intervals. They were allowed to return to their pre-injury 
sporting leisure activities at a minimum of six months after 
reconstruction, using a custom-made brace which was dis- 
carded nine months post surgery. 
Clinical evaluation of joint function and stability. The range 
of movement of the knee was measured with a goniometer 
with the patient supine using fixed anatomical landmarks 
and taking the mean of three values. The heel was elevated 
on a support to determine if there was passive hyperexten- 
sion while active knee extension was measured by asking 
the patient to perform a straight-leg raise against gravity. 
The range of movement was recorded for both the involved 
and normal sides. Examination for laxity included the 
Lachman, pivot-shift, anterior-drawer, and varus/valgus 
stress tests. The assessment of clinical function and joint 
laxity was undertaken by a single blinded observer, who 
was a physiotherapist with 15 years experience and had not 
been involved in the surgery. 






Male 
Female 






25 
26 

26 
22 
Mean age in yrs (range) (SD) 
Duration since injury in days mean 
(range) 
Operative time in mins, mean (SD) 
Day of suture removal 
31.6 (5.3) 
 7 (2 to 14) 
31.2 (5.3) 
32 (29 to 42) 
0.693 
 - 
64.9 (7.8) 
14 
64.2 (7.8) 
14 
0.688 
1.0 

Left 
Right 

Self fall 
Sports injury 
Traffic accident 

Soccer 
Cricket 

29 
22 
23 
21 
 7 
12 
12 
22 
26 
15 
24 
 9 
12 
15 
The Lachman test was graded as normal if there was 
side-to-side difference of < 5 mm and abnormal if this was 
> 5 mm. The pivot-shift test was graded as normal in the 
absence of a clunk or abnormal if a clunk was felt. Anterior 
tibial translation was measured using the KT 1000 
arthrometer (MEDmetric Corporation, San Diego, Califor- 
nia) with the knee positioned in 25° to 30° of flexion. Both 
knees were measured and the side-to-side difference in ante- 
rior tibial translation was determined. The Lysholm and 
Tegner activity scores30 were also recorded. 
Statistical analysis. Considering the proportion of patients 
of at least 70% to be significantly different with the primary 
outcome between the two groups and a null value of 50, it 
was estimated that 47 patients per group were required with 
an α-level of 0.05 and a power of 80%. The outcome scores 
in both the groups were compared using the independent 
Student’s t-tests. The Bonferroni31 correction was used to 
correct for multiple testing at the different time intervals. The 
chi-squared test was used for the comparison of categorical 
data. The data are presented as the mean (SD) and the sta- 
tistical analysis performed using SPSS version 14 software 
for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). A p-value ≤ 0.05 
was considered to be statistically significant. 
Results 
Of the 105 patients entered into the study, six were lost to 
follow-up. Of the remaining 99, 51 were in the early and 
48 in the delayed group. Their mean age was 31.4 years 
(19 to 38). The mean period between injury and the oper- 
ation was seven days (2 to 14) in the early group and 
32 days (29 to 42) in the delayed group. The mean follow- 
up was 32 months (26 to 36). The distribution of age, gen- 
der and mechanism of injury for each group is given in 
Table I. None was a competitive athlete who had partici- 
pated in sport at state or national level. The sporting 
activities in both the groups were similar (cricket; early 
group-12, delayed group-15. Soccer; early group-12, 
delayed group-14). Of the 99 patients 60 had chondral 
and 73 had meniscal injuries. The distribution of these 
injuries in both the early and delayed groups were compa- 
rable (Table II). All the meniscal tears identified were 
either debrided or underwent partial excision. The chon- 
dral injuries were either Outerbridge grade 1 or grade 2. 
The recovery of the range of movement at various inter- 
vals showed no statistical difference between the two groups 
(Table III). No statistically significant difference was found 
for the Lysholm score (p = 0.86) and Tegner activity score 
(p = 0.913). Stability testing by clinical examination 
(p = 0.56) and measurements on the KT-1000 arthrometer 
(p = 0.93), were comparable in both groups (Table IV). 
Complications. Two patients in the early group had a 
superficial wound infection around the site of the tibial 
tunnel, which responded to treatment with oral anti- 
biotics. One patient in the delayed group had pain at the 
site of insertion of the tibial screw at six weeks which had 
resolved at the 12-week follow-up. 










Medial femoral condyle 
Lateral femoral condyle 
Patella 
Femoral trochlea 

Medial 
Lateral 
 8 
 12 
 6 
 3 
 18 
-20 
 9 
10 
 8 
 4 
13 
22 
< 0.05 
< 0.05 
< 0.05 
< 0.05 
< 0.05 
< 0.05 


Flexion loss 
Extension loss 

Flexion loss 
Extension loss 

Flexion loss 
Extension loss 




17 (15 to 19) 
 7 (6 to 8) 
15 (14 to 17) 
 5 (6 to 8) 
12 (10 to 13) 
 5 (4 to 7) 
10 (8 to 11) 
 3 (0 to 5) 
 5 (0 to 7) 
 0 
 5 (0 to 7) 
 0 









Lysholm score (range) 
Tegner score (range) 



83.1 (80 to 90) 
 6.1 (5 to 8) 
84.2 (82 to 90) 
 5.9 (5 to 8) 
0.860 
0.913 
Discussion 
Our findings show that arthroscopically-assisted recon- 
struction of the ACL using a quadrupled hamstring 
autograft gives a similar clinical and functional outcome 
irrespective of the timing of the procedure. Furthermore, no 
significant differences were found between the groups for 
the recovery of the range of movement. This finding sug- 
gests that reconstruction can be reasonably undertaken at 
any time within six weeks of injury without compromising 
the outcomes. 
There are no criteria which define the timing of early or 
late surgery for reconstruction of the ACL. Bottoni et al,26 
classified early as within 21 days and delayed as beyond 
six weeks. Meighan et al,25 described early as less than 
two weeks and delayed between eight and 12 weeks. 
Majors and Woodfin23 considered early to be one to 
14 days, delayed between 15 and 28 days and late more 
than 28 days. 
Stiffness of the knee is a well-recognised complication 
after reconstruction of the ACL. Early reconstruction has 
been associated with an increased incidence of stiffness and 
prolonged rehabilitation.13-15 However, the post-operative 
rehabilitation has varied and in some series there have been 
associated injuries which have required reconstruction and 
which may have compromised the ultimate range of move- 
ment.15 Only one prospectiv6 study has supported early 
reconstruction. Bottoni et al26 reported an excellent outcome 
after reconstruction within three weeks of injury and sug- 
gested that as long as aggressive rehabilitation was followed 
the outcome would not be compromised. Meighan et al25 in 
a prospective study using hamstring tendons reported that 
there was no advantage in early reconstruction of isolated 
tears of the ACL, but found a higher rate of complications. In 
their study, delayed surgery was reported to give a rapid 
return of movement and muscle function. However, one year 
after surgery there was no difference between early and 



delayed reconstruction in terms of muscle function, range of 
movement and the functional outcome. 
We found that there was no significant difference in the 
recovery of the range of movement at any interval 
(Table III). Additionally, the final follow-up Tegner and 
Lyshom scores were comparable in both the groups, indi- 
cating that the functional outcome was similar in early and 
delayed reconstruction. 
It has been reported that delayed reconstruction of the 
ACL is associated with an increase in the incidence of asso- 
ciated damage to the menisci and articular cartilage.27,32-34 
Our delayed patients were treated before two months after 
injury unlike the delayed patients reported elsewhere.32 
However, the increased incidence of meniscal damage with 
delayed surgery has not been found in every series.26 
In our study the inclusion criteria were strict so that only 
isolated injuries of the ACL and meniscal injuries which 
required only limited debridement were included. Chondral 
injuries more severe than grade 3 or grade 4 were excluded. 
The classical report of O’Donoghue35 described the asso- 
ciation of medial meniscal injury with tears of the ACL. In 
our study both groups had a greater number of lateral menis- 
cal than medial meniscal tears although this difference was 
not statistically significant (Table II). The predominance of 
tears of the lateral meniscal has been observed elsewhere.36,37 
In our study a goniometer was used by a blinded single 
observer to measure the range of movement as was 
described by Meighan et al.25 Criticism of the goniometer 
method was made by Austin, Phornphutkul and Wojtys38 
because of the level of the interobserver difference. Read- 
ings with a goniometer were taken by an experienced phys- 
iotherapist since this is a simple and inexpensive method of 
measuring the joint angle. A set protocol was followed and 
the same anatomical landmarks were used. 
Accelerated protocols of knee rehabilitation with early 
movement after reconstruction of the ACL are now com- 
mon and have not been associated with an increase in com- 
plications or morbidity.39 We believe that the early 
mobilisation and rehabilitation of our patients accounted 
for the prompt recovery of movement. Our findings are 
similar to those of Hunter et al22 who also concluded that 
by using modern arthroscopic surgical techniques and an 
aggressive post-operative protocol of physiotherapy, move- 
ment and stability could be restored in a high proportion of 
patients and that surgical success was independent of the 
timing of surgery. 
The strength of our study is the large number of patients 
included, the prospective documentation of the data, strict 
inclusion criteria, and minimal loss to follow-up. We recog- 
nise that the exclusion of patients with coexistent grade-3 
and grade-4 chondral injuries and meniscal injuries requir- 
ing repair, meant we had selected patients who were likely 
to have a more favourable outcome. Theoretically those 
injuries might have detracted from the results since the 
rehabilitation would have had to have been tailored accord- 
ing to these additional injuries. 


A further opinion by Dr C. Frank is available with 
the electronic version of this article on our website at 

No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commer- 
cial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. 





3. Jomha NM, Pinczewski LA, Clingeleffer A, Otto DD. Arthroscopic reconstruction of 
the anterior cruciate ligament with patellar-rendon autograft and interference screw fixa- 
tion: the results at seven years. J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 1999;81-B:775-9. 








8. Jørgenson U, Sonne-Holm S, Lauridsen F, Rosenklint A. Long-term follow-up of 
meniscectomy in athletes: a prospective longitudinal study. J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 
1987;69-B:80-3. 




11. Marder RA, Raskind JR, Carroll M. Prospective evaluation of arthroscopically assisted 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: patellar tendon versus semitendinosus and gra- 
cilis tendons. Am J Sports Med 1991;19:478-84. 






15. Wasilewski SA, Covall DJ, Cohen S. Effect of surgical timing on recovery and associ- 
ated injuries after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 
1993;21:338-42. 


17. Mohtadi NG, Webster-Bogaert S, Fowler PJ. Limitation of motion following anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction: a case-control study. Am J Sports Med 1991;19:620-4. 
18. Hughston JC. Complications of anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Orthop Clin North Am 





21. Bach BR Jr, Jones GT, Sweet FA, Hager CA. Arthroscopy-assisted anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction using patellar tendon substitution: two- to four-year follow-up 
results. Am J Sports Med 1994;22:758-67. 
22. Hunter RE, Mastrangelo J, Freeman JR, Purnell ML, Jones RH. The impact of sur- 
gical timing on post-operative motion and stability following anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Arthroscopy 1996;12:667-74. 


24. Marcacci M, Zaffagnini S, Iacono F, Neri MP, Petitto A. Early versus late reconstruc- 
tion for anterior cruciate ligament rupture: results after five years of follow-up. Am J 
Sports Med 1995;23:690-3. 
25. Meighan AA, Keating JF, Will E. Outcome after reconstruction of the anterior cruciate 
ligament in athletic patients: a comparison of early versus delayed surgery. J Bone Joint 
Surg [Br] 2003;85-B:521-4. 
26. Bottoni CR, Liddell TR, Trainor TJ, Freccero DM, Lindell KK. Postoperative range of 
motion following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using autograft hamstrings: a 
prospective, randomized clinical trial of early versus delayed reconstructions. Am J Sports 
Med 2008;36:656-62. 


27. Kennedy J, Jackson MP, O’Kelly P, Moran R. Timing of reconstruction of the ante- 
rior cruciate ligament in athletes and the incidence of secondary pathology within the 
knee. J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 2010;92-B:362-6. 
34. Millett PJ, Willis AA, Warren RF. Associated injuries in pediatric and adoles- 
cent anterior cruciate ligament tears: does a delay in treatment increase the risk 
of meniscal tear? Arthroscopy 2002;18:955-9. 




30. Wright RW. Knee injury outcome measures J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2009;17:31-9 
31. Abdi H. Bonferroni and Šidák corrections for multiple comparison. Iyn: Salkind NJ, 
ed. Encyclopaedia of measurements and statistics. S. J. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2007. 
32. Slauterbeck JR, Kousa P, Clifton BC, et al. Geographic mapping of meniscus and 
cartilage lesions associated with anterior cruciate ligament injuries. J Bone Joint 
Surg [Am] 2009;91-A:2094-103. 


36. Shelbourne KD, Nitz PA. The O’Donoghue triad revisited: combined knee inju- 
ries involving anterior cruciate and medial collateral ligament tears. Am J Sports 
Med 1991;19:474-7. 

38. Austin JC, Phornphutkul C, Wojtys EM. Loss of knee extension after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction: effects of knee position and graft tensioning. J 
Bone Joint Surg [Am] 2007;89-A:1565-74. 
33. Karlsson J, Kartus J, Magnusson L, et al. Subacute versus delayed reconstruction 
of the anterior cruciate ligament in the competitive athlete. Knee Surg Sports Trau- 
matol Arthrosc 1999;7:146-51. 
39. Noyes FR, Mangine RE, Barber S. Early knee motion after open and 
arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 
1987;15:149-60. 

