
Intermittent preventive therapy for malaria with monthly 
artemether–lumefantrine for the post-discharge management 
of severe anaemia in children aged 4–59 months in southern 
Malawi: a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled trial 

Summary 
Background Young children with severe malarial anaemia in Africa are at high risk of readmittance to hospital or 
death within 6 months of discharge. We aimed to assess whether 3 months of chemoprevention with artemether– 
lumefantrine reduced this risk. 
Methods We did a randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial in four hospitals in Malawi testing the eﬃ cacy 
and safety of intermittent preventive therapy post-discharge (IPTpd) in children aged 4–59 months admitted for severe 
malarial anaemia. All convalescent children who had completed a blood transfusion received artemether–lumefantrine 
at discharge and were randomly assigned by a computer-generated sequence to receive placebo or artemether– 
lumefantrine at 1 month and 2 months after discharge, providing about 1 month and 3 months of protection, 
respectively. Patients and study staﬀ were masked throughout the study. The primary endpoint was a composite of 
all-cause mortality or hospital readmittance because of all-cause severe anaemia or severe malaria between 
1 and 6 months after enrolment. This trial is registered, number ISRCTN89727873. 
Results Of 1414 children enrolled, 708 were assigned to receive placebo and 706 the intervention. By 6 months, 
192 children (14%) had died or were readmitted with severe malaria or severe anaemia. 1–6 months after randomisation, 
109 primary events occurred in 85 children in the placebo group and 86 in 74 children in the intervention group 
(adjusted protective eﬃ cacy [PE] 31%, 95% CI 5–50; absolute rate reduction 11·7 per 100 children years, 95% CI 
1·8–18·9; p=0·024). The protective eﬀ ect was greatest during the IPTpd period (1–3 months), when 58 primary events 
occurred in 49 children in the placebo group and 37 in 34 children in the intervention group (PE 41%, 10–62; p=0·01), 
but was not sustained after the third month (4–6 months, PE 17%, –27 to 45; p=0·395). When episodes in the ﬁ rst 
month were included—ie, before the ﬁ rst dose of IPTpd, when both groups beneﬁ ted from the post-treatment 
prophylactic eﬀ ect of artemether–lumefantrine provided at discharge—the overall cumulative PE by 6 months was 
26% (–2 to 46; p=0·06). 
Interpretation In areas with intense malaria transmission, chemoprevention with IPTpd given to children with severe 
malarial anaemia might reduce rates of readmittance to hospital for severe anaemia or malaria. Studies to conﬁ rm 
these ﬁ ndings and to investigate diﬀ erent delivery mechanisms and cost-eﬀ ectiveness are needed. 
Funding The Netherlands African Partnership for Capacity Development and Clinical Interventions Against Poverty 
Related Diseases, the UBS-Optimus Foundation, and the Gates Malaria Partnership. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2012; 
12: 191–200 
Published Online 
December 14, 2011 
DOI:10.1016/S1473- 
3099(11)70320-6 

Community Health 
Department (K Phiri PhD, 
M Esan MD), MLW Clinical 
Research Programme (K Phiri, 
M Esan), College of Medicine, 
University of Malawi, Blantyre, 
Malawi; The Amsterdam 
Institute for Global Health and 
Development, Emma Children’s 
Hospital (M Esan, 
M Boele van Hensbroek PhD) 
and Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Tropical Medicine & 
AIDS (Prof F O ter Kuile PhD), 
Academic Medical Centre, 
University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands; and 
Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Liverpool, UK 
(C Khairallah MSc, 
B Faragher PhD, 
Prof F O ter Kuile) 
Correspondence to 
Prof Feiko ter Kuile 
Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Pembroke Place, 
Liverpool L3 5QA, UK 
terkuile@liv.ac.uk 
Introduction 
Severe anaemia is a major cause of hospital admissions 
in sub-Saharan Africa and contributes substantially to 
paediatric mortality, particularly among young children 
in areas of high malaria transmission. Previous studies 
in western Kenya and southern Malawi indicate that not 
only are young children admitted to hospital for severe 
anaemia at high risk of in-hospital mortality, but also an 
additional 10–16% of patients die or are readmitted in the 
 rst 3–6 months after discharge.1–6 
ﬁ 
In children who have recovered from severe malarial 
anaemia, the initial rise in haemoglobin resulting from 
blood transfusions is likely to be negated by subsequent 
episodes of new or recrudescent malaria infections after 
discharge. Recovery from malaria-associated anaemia is 


slow—full haematological recovery takes at least 6 weeks 
and 
in patients with 
recrudescence or reinfection,7,8 with infections with other 
pathogens, or with prolonged nutritional deﬁ ciencies.9 
Although continued destruction of unparasitised 
erythrocytes after radical clearance of parasitaemia is a 
contributing factor, persistent dyserythropoiesis and 
bone-marrow suppression can persist for much longer.9 
We postulated that interventions that result in radical 
cure and prevention of subsequent malaria episodes 
could provide a time-window during which the bone 
marrow of recently transfused children can recover, 
allowing haemoglobin to be restored and reducing the 
risk of readmittance to hospital because of severe malaria 
or recurrence of severe anaemia. 



The standard treatment for severe malaria anaemia in 
Malawi and many other countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
is a blood transfusion and intravenous quinine, then 
artemether–lumefantrine when children can switch to 
oral medication, but no policy exists to address the high 
risk of morbidity and mortality after discharge. The 
lumefantrine component in artemether–lumefantrine 
can 
post-treatment 
prophylaxis.10 



Intermittent preventive therapy is the administration of 
full treatment courses of long-acting antimalarial drugs at 
pre-deﬁ ned time intervals, irrespective of whether patients 
are known to have malaria. Such therapy clears existing 
infections and provides prolonged periods of prophylaxis 
against new infections after each treatment course.11 This 
strategy can prevent clinical malaria and malaria- 
associated severe anaemia in pregnant women,12 infants,13 
and children,14 and could be cost-eﬀ ective for the 
management of children with severe malarial anaemia 
after discharge.15 We designed a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial to test the eﬃ cacy and safety of 
intermittent preventive therapy post-discharge (IPTpd) in 
the management of young children admitted for severe 
malarial anaemia requiring a blood transfusion. 
Methods 
Participants 
We recruited children aged 4–59 months from four 
hospitals in southern Malawi, the Queen Elizabeth Central 
Hospital (Blantyre) and three hospitals within an hour 
drive of Blantyre: Chikwawa and Thyolo District Hospitals, 
and Zomba Central Hospital. This area has moderate to 
intense perennial malaria transmission. All children had 
been admitted with severe malarial anaemia, had received 
a blood transfusion, and had completed the in-hospital 
course of intravenous quinine. Convalescent children 
surviving this initial in-hospital phase were eligible for 
inclusion if after transfusion they had haemoglobin 
concentrations of more than 5 g/dL, weighed more than 
5 kg, were able to switch to oral medication, and could sit 
unaided. Children with blood loss due to trauma, 
haematological malignancy, a known bleeding disorder, or 
known sickle-cell disease were excluded. Other exclusion 
criteria were known hypersensitivity to artemether– 
lumefantrine, treatment with artemether–lumefantrine 
within the week before admission, non-residency in the 
study area, previous participation in the study, participation 
in another clinical trial, known need for medication 
prohibited during the intervention period, and surgery 
scheduled during the study. Written, informed consent 
was obtained. The study was approved by the research 
ethics committees of the College of Medicine (Malawi) 
and the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (UK). 
Procedures 
Eligible children in both groups received six doses as part 
of the standard 3 day course of artemether–lumefantrine 
(Novartis, 20 mg artemether, 120 mg lumefantrine) in 
hospital. Children weighing less than 15 kg received one 
tablet and those weighing 15 kg or more received two 
tablets, about once every 12 h for 3 days. They were then 
randomly assigned during convalescence to receive 
either IPTpd with the same 3 day course of artemether– 
lumefantrine or placebo (Lab-Allied, Nairobi, Kenya) at 
1 month and 2 months after discharge (ﬁ gure 1). 
The ﬁ rst daily doses of IPTpd or placebo at 1 month 
and 2 months after discharge were provided in the 
community by study team members who visited each 
home in the morning for 3 days; the second daily dose 
was left with the parents or guardian to give in the 
evening. Adherence was assessed the next morning. 
Children were followed up for 6 months by passive 
case detection. 
The observation time was divided into three periods: 
the ﬁ rst month after discharge before IPTpd, the IPTpd 
period starting at 1 month after discharge when children 
received the ﬁ rst course of IPT or placebo and ended at 
3 months (1 month after the second IPTpd dose), and the 
extended follow-up period (4–6 months) to assess whether 
any initial beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect of IPTpd was sustained beyond 
the intervention period. Parents and guardians were 
asked to take children to a study clinic if they had fever or 
were unwell. At these visits clinical information was 
recorded on standardised forms, the axillary temperature 
and haemoglobin concentrations measured, and a malaria 
blood smear taken. Children with a positive malaria 
smear were treated with 5 days of quinine during the ﬁ rst 
3 months after discharge or with a standard 3 day course 
Figure 1: Study treatment and follow-up 
A cross-sectional survey was done 6 months after randomisation. AL=artemether–lumefantrine. IPTpd=intermittent preventive therapy post-discharge. 













AL for both groups 
at discharge 
Two AL courses as IPTpd or two courses 
placebo 











Figure 2: Trial proﬁ le 
IPTpd=intermittent preventive therapy post-discharge. *Four patients diagnosed with sickle cell disease after randomisation. †The original design included a third 
group (436 patients) of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine at discharge, then placebo at 1 and 2 months (according to the national policy in Malawi in 2006) and used 
mean haemoglobin concentrations at 3 months as the primary endpoint. However, shortly after the trial started, the national policy changed to artemether– 
lumefantrine, so the sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine group was discontinued. By that time 40 patients had been recruited. Recruitment in the other two groups was 
continued with a new randomisation list. The primary endpoint was changed to the composite endpoint by 6 months. Masking was maintained throughout trial and 
the 13 patients in the sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine group were identiﬁ ed after closure of all datasets and breaking of the study code. 
of artemether–lumefantrine during the extended follow- 
up period. Children with severe disease were admitted to 
hospital. Children with recurrent severe anaemia received 
a blood transfusion. Bacterial and other infections were 
treated at the discretion of clinicians. All children were 
seen at 6 months for assessment of haemoglobin 
concentrations and malaria parasitaemia. 
Haemoglobin was measured at point-of-care with the 
HemoCue B-haemoglobin analyser. Malaria infection was 
deﬁ ned as the presence of asexual Plasmodium falciparum 
in a blood smear. HIV testing was done according to 
WHO guidelines with two rapid tests (Determine and 
Uni-Gold). Discordant results and reactive results in 
children younger than 18 months were resolved by PCR. 
The primary outcome was a composite of all-cause 
mortality and hospital readmission because of all-cause 
severe anaemia or severe malaria between 1 and 
6 months. Severe anaemia was deﬁ ned as a haemoglobin 
concentration of less than 5 g/dL or a clinical indication 
for blood transfusion. Severe malaria was deﬁ ned as 
readmittance to hospital because of conﬁ rmed malaria 
treated with parenteral quinine. Secondary endpoints 
were all-cause mortality, hospital readmission because of 
all-cause severe anaemia or severe malaria, all-cause 
hospital admission, all-cause sick-child clinic visits, and 
clinic visit because of microscopically conﬁ rmed non- 
severe malaria. 
Randomisation and masking 
The trial statistician in Liverpool generated the random 
numbers by computer to allocate children to groups. The 
randomisation sequence was stratiﬁ ed by hospital and 










4 screening failures* 
13 sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine arm† 




5 withdrew consent 
3 moved out of study area 
8 unknown reason 


2 died 
9 lost to follow-up 
1 withdrew consent 
2 moved out of study area 
6 unknown reason 


3 died 
6 lost to follow-up 
1 withdrew consent 
3 moved out of study area 
2 unknown reason 


5 died 
4 lost to follow-up 
1 withdrew consent 
1 moved out of study area 
2 unknown reason 




4 withdrew consent 
3 moved out of study area 
5 unknown reason 


1 died 
6 lost to follow-up 
4 moved out of study area 
2 unknown reason 



6 moved out of study area 
3 unknown reason 


8 died 
8 lost to follow-up 
4 withdrew consent 
1 moved out of study area 
3 unknown reason 

weight group (<15 kg and 15 kg or more) in randomly 
varying block sizes of two, four, or six. An independent 
statistician in Blantyre assigned the labels A and B to 
either the active drug or placebo and oversaw the packaging 
and coding of sequentially numbered drug envelopes by a 
pharmacist. When children meeting the enrolment 
criteria were able to switch to oral medication they were 
allocated to one of the two study groups by the coordinating 
clinician in each hospital in order of their study 
identiﬁ cation number by drawing successive envelopes 
from the box corresponding to each weight stratum. 
Statistical analysis 
A composite endpoint, rather than all-cause mortality 
only, was used to decrease the sample size needed for a 
given power by increasing the observed event rate. The 
individual components were judged to have similar 
patho physiological pathways with substantial potential 
for overlap.16 
The study was designed to detect a 40% reduction in 
the cumulative incidence of the primary endpoint from 
9·75% in the placebo group to 5·85% in the IPTpd group, 
with 80% power and a two-sided signiﬁ cance threshold 
of 5%. The 40% reduction in primary endpoint was based 
on the average protective eﬃ cacy (43%) from four 
completed studies of intermittent preventive therapy in 
infants.17 The anticipated risk of 9·75% in the control 
group was chosen on the basis of preliminary results of 
observational studies in Malawi, in which the researchers 
reported a risk of about 16%.1 During these studies 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine was the treatment of choice 
to complete intravenous quinine in hospitals. Malawi 
changed to artemether–lumefantrine in 2006 because of 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine resistance. We anticipated 
that recrudescent infection had contributed substantially 
to morbidity after discharge, therefore we assumed that 
replacing sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine with artemether– 
lumefantrine would reduce the risk of morbidity after 
discharge by 40%, from 16% to 9·75%. Assuming 10% 
loss 
recruit 
1650 participants (825 patients per group) or until 
126 primary events had occurred. 




Analysis was stratiﬁ ed by time period (ﬁ gure 1). We 
anticipated that artemether–lumefantrine would provide 
prophylaxis for about 1 month after each course and that 
children in the IPTpd group would therefore be protected 
from malaria for the ﬁ rst 3 months after discharge, 
whereas children in the placebo group, who only received 
artemether–lumefantrine at discharge, would be 
protected for 1 month. Because both groups received 
artemether–lumefantrine at discharge, no eﬀ ect was 
expected in the period 0–1 month after discharge. The 
main treatment eﬀ ect was anticipated at 1–3 months. 
However, an extended 
follow-up period between 
4 and 6 months was included in the primary time period 
of interest, because any potential rebound eﬀ ect resulting 
from a delayed acquisition of protective immunity to 
malaria once the direct pharmacological protective eﬀ ect 
has waned, would decrease the public health signiﬁ cance 
of the intervention. 0–6 months after discharge was also 
analysed because an IPTpd strategy is likely to be 
considered for policy only if it substantially adds beneﬁ t 
to the eﬀ ect of artemether–lumefantrine at discharge. 
























































































































































 

Role of the funding source 
The sponsors of the study had no role in the study design, 
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. KP, FOtK, CK, and BF had full 
access to all the data in the study. All authors reviewed the 
manuscript and had ﬁ nal responsibility for the decision 
to submit for publication. 
Furthermore, any intervention starting 1 month after 
discharge is likely to be arranged with carers around the 
time of discharge. 
Analysis was by intention to treat and done with SAS 
(version 9.2) and STATA (version 11). The predictive 
analytics software missing values module was used to 
create ﬁ ve datasets in which any missing values were 
imputed with the fully conditional speciﬁ cation, which is 
an iterative Markov chain Monte Carlo method (ten 
iterations for each of the ﬁ ve imputations; done with 
PASW version 18). 13% of parents withheld consent to test 
their child for HIV; therefore, no HIV status was imputed 
and a separate category for missing HIV status was used. 
The primary analyses included all events.18 Endpoints 
with overlap (eg, a child with severe malaria who also had 
severe anaemia) were counted as a single event. We 
counted events as distinct if the child had been discharged 
before the next event and a minimum of 3 days had passed 
since the diagnosis of the earlier event. We calculated 
protective eﬃ cacy adjusted for prognostic factors at 
baseline, calculated as 100 multiplied by (1–hazard ratio). 
Hazard ratios were calculated by Cox regression for 
repeated events with robust standard error estimation 
methods to account for correlation between episodes 
within children. All covariates with a p value less than 0·2 
in the univariate Cox-regression models and other 
potential predictors identiﬁ ed in our previous observational 
studies1 were entered into the initial multivariate model. 
These covariates were maternal education, presence of 
electricity in the household, number of siblings in 
household, the child’s age, sex, HIV status, use of a bednet, 
history of previous hospital admissions and blood 
transfusion, disease severity at admission, presence of 
malaria parasitaemia and haemoglobin concentrations at 
randomisation (ie, post-transfusion), and study dose 
(mg/kg). The unadjusted absolute rate reduction was 
calculated as incidence in the placebo group minus 
incidence in the IPTpd group. The adjusted absolute rate 
reduction was calculated as the adjusted hazard ratio 
multiplied by incidence per person-year in the placebo 
group. We also calculated unadjusted incidence rates per 
person-year. Poisson regression was used to assess the 
eﬀ ect of the intervention on anaemia and malaria at the 
survey at the end of the 6 months observation period and 
results expressed as adjusted prevalence ratios. 
Prespeciﬁ ed subgroup analyses were done to test to 
what extent the magnitude of treatment eﬀ ects depended 
on age, HIV status, and use of insecticide-treated nets, 
and exploratory subgroup analysis by history of previous 
hospital admissions, baseline haemoglobin concentration, 
presence of malaria parasites at randomisation, season, 
and study site. Because the study was not powered to test 
eﬀ ect modiﬁ cation, we used the magnitude of the 
diﬀ erence in treatment eﬀ ect between subgroups as well 
as the corresponding p value of the interaction terms to 
analyse interactions. The trial is registered with Current 
Controlled Trials, number ISRCTN89727873. 



Number of 
events 
(number of 
children) 
Incidence 
per 100 
person-years 

Number of 
events 
(number of 
children) 
Incidence 
per 100 
person-years 















Follow-up ranges are months since randomisation. PE computed by univariate Cox regression for repeated events with the 
exception of the eﬀ ect on mortality, which included time to ﬁ rst event only. Total number of children at the start of each 
follow-up period and corresponding follow-up time (in person-days) for 0–1, 1–3, and 4–6 months: placebo, 708 (21 057), 
687 (40 490), 669 (64 122); IPTpd, 706 (21 213), 685 (40 396), 669 (64 352). PE=unadjusted protective eﬃ cacy. 
ARR=unadjusted absolute rate reduction per 100 person-years. IPTpd=intermittent preventive therapy post-discharge. 




































































































































































































































Figure 3: Adjusted treatment eﬀ ect by endpoint and time period 
PE=adjusted protective eﬃ cacy. ARR=adjusted absolute rate reduction per 100 children years. 
*Protective eﬃ cacy (1–6 months) for severe anaemia was 25% (95% CI –13 to 50, p 0·165) and for severe malaria 
28% (–3 to 50, p=0·072). 
Results 
Between June, 2006, and August, 2009 (when the required 
number of events was reached), 1414 eligible children aged 
4–59 months were randomly assigned to receive placebo 
or intervention (ﬁ gure 2); 1310 children (93%) completed 
the 6 months follow-up, and 34 (2%) died during this 
period. These percentages were much the same in the two 
groups (ﬁ gure 2). 15 deaths (44%) occurred within 1 month 
of discharge. Demographic characteristics were similar 
between groups, but the occurrence of HIV, cerebral 
malaria, and some other markers of disease severity were 
slightly higher in the IPTpd group than in the placebo 
group (table 1). Only six HIV-infected patients (5%) were 
receiving co-trimoxazole prophylaxis. 
Overall, 192 (14%) of 1414 children had 235 primary 
events. Between 1 and 6 months after randomisation 
more primary events had occurred in the placebo group 
than had in the intervention group (table 2). Adjusted 
protective eﬃ cacy [PE] was 31% (95% CI 5–50); the 
absolute rate reduction was 11·7 per 100 children years 
(95% CI 1·8–18·9; p=0·024; ﬁ gure 3). The protective 
eﬀ ect was greatest during the IPTpd period (1–3 months; 
PE 41%, 95% CI 10–62; p=0·01), but was not sustained 
after the third month (17%, –27 to 45; p=0–395; ﬁ gure 3). 
Inclusion of the pre-IPTpd period showed that IPTpd 
prevented about one in four primary events up to 
6 months (ﬁ gure 3). The eﬀ ect did not diﬀ er between age 
groups, by HIV status, bednet use, baseline haemoglobin 
concentration, or the presence of active malaria infection 
at enrolment (ﬁ gure 4). 
IPTpd reduced the number of all-cause hospital 
admissions (ﬁ gure 3), a result of the reduced admissions 
because of severe malaria and severe anaemia; mortality 
was not aﬀ ected signiﬁ cantly (ﬁ gure 3). IPTpd also 
reduced the number of clinic visits resulting from non- 
severe clinical malaria, which was most evident during 
the IPTpd period (ﬁ gure 3). Pooling of artemether– 
lumefantrine courses showed that episodes of clinical 
malaria became evident from day 19 after the start of 
artemether–lumefantrine, with a substantial increase 
from day 23 onwards. At the ﬁ nal 6 months follow-up 
visit, treatment groups did not diﬀ er for the prevalence 
of malaria parasitaemia (151 of 653 patients [23%; IPTp] 
vs 162 of 657 patients [25%; placebo]; prevalence ratio 
[PR] 0·96 [95% CI 0·79–1·16]; p=0·654), moderate 
anaemia (haemoglobin concentration <8 g/dL; 79 of 
653 patients [12%] vs 80 of 657 patients [12%]; PR 0·98 
[0·73–1·30]; p=0·870), and mean haemoglobin (10·6 g/dL 
vs 10·6 g/dL; adjusted mean diﬀ erence 0·12 g/dL 
[95% CI 0·09–0·39]; p=0·291). No drug-related serious 
adverse events were reported. 
Discussion 
Compared with a standard single course of artemether– 
lumefantrine at discharge, which provides a maximum 
of 1 month of post-treatment prophylaxis, provision of an 
additional 2 months of chemoprevention by two full 
treatment courses of artemether–lumefantrine at 1 month 
and 2 months after discharge prevented 40% of deaths or 
hospital admissions because of recurrence of severe 
anaemia or severe malaria 1–3 months after discharge. 
IPTpd also halved the number of clinic visits needed 
because of uncomplicated malaria. The protective eﬀ ect 
was not sustained after 3 months, when the direct 
pharmacodynamic eﬀ ect of the drugs had waned.19 No 
rebound eﬀ ect occurred in the intervention group in the 
4–6 months period, and the overall cumulative protective 
eﬃ cacy up to 6 months, although smaller than that seen 
at 3 months, was still in favour of IPTpd. Importantly, the 
beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect of chemoprevention occurred in addition 
to the eﬀ ect of untreated or treated nets, consistent with 

















































































































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4: Subgroup analyses for primary outcome (death or readmittance to hospital for severe malaria or 
severe anaemia between 1 and 6 months) 
Interaction p values calculated from interaction term Cox regression models. For HIV status, the p value of the 
interaction term was calculated for the model that excluded children with missing HIV status. *Numbers in 
parentheses are based on the incidence of clinical malaria recorded in the placebo group in each site, which serves 
as a proxy indicator of malaria transmission intensity. †Malaria transmission season based on the monthly 
incidence of clinical malaria in the placebo group. 
strategy when the study was designed, but trials of 
piperaquine have since shown the drug to be very eﬀ ective 
for intermittent preventive therapy in children, either as 
monotherapy or combined with dihydro artemisinin.29,30 
Five previous trials, two including children with 
severe anaemia15,31 and three including children with 
mild anaemia,32–34 provide some guidance on the 
generalisability of our ﬁ ndings (panel). The three trials 
providing monthly IPT with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
for mild anaemia each showed that IPT roughly halved 
the frequency of clinical malaria, as in our trial, but the 
eﬀ ect on haematological recovery beyond the eﬀ ect of a 
the eﬀ ect of seasonal IPT in children14 and in addition to 
the initial eﬀ ect obtained from the ﬁ rst course of 
artemether–lumefantrine provided at discharge. 
The protective eﬀ ect was much the same irrespective of 
HIV infection, despite the potentially diﬀ erent aetiology 
of anaemia, which in HIV-infected children tends to be 
more related to persistent bone-marrow suppression 
associated with a chronic state of inﬂ ammation.20,21 HIV- 
infected and HIV-exposed children were 
included 
because antiretroviral 
therapy and co-trimoxazole 
prophylaxis in this population were only scaled up to a 
national level at the end of the recruitment period. 
Therefore, our data are insuﬃ cient to test whether co- 
trimoxazole prophylaxis had a modifying eﬀ ect. IPTpd 
might provide less beneﬁ t in children already protected 
by co-trimoxazole than in those in our study because co- 
trimoxazole has antimalarial properties and is highly 
eﬀ ective for prevention of malaria in HIV-infected adults, 
children, and pregnant women including in areas with 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine resistance.22,23 
Intermittent preventive therapy for pregnant women and 
infants diﬀ ers from seasonal intermittent preventive therapy 
in children and IPTpd. The current regimens are two or 
three courses given over 3–6 months for intermittent 
preventive therapy in pregnant women and three courses 
given over 7 months for intermittent preventive therapy in 
infants, leaving individuals unprotected between doses, 
which allows reinfection and the acquisition of protective 
immunity. By contrast, seasonal intermittent preventive 
therapy for children and IPTpd aim to maintain therapeutic 
drug concentrations for several months throughout the 
period of greatest malaria risk. The prophylactic eﬀ ect is a 
key component of all these strategies and requires the use 
of long-acting drugs. Artemether–lumefantrine provided 
roughly 3 weeks of post-treatment prophylaxis, after which 
episodes of clinical malaria became apparent. The reduced 
protection at the end of the month could account for the 
50% protective eﬃ cacy against clinical malaria during the 
IPTpd period, which is more modest than the 80–90% 
reported for a combination of amodiaquine and sulfadoxine– 
pyrimethamine when used for monthly intermittent 
preventive therapy in children in the same age group in 
west Africa,14 where sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine is still 
highly eﬀ ective.24 The slightly shorter period of post- 
treatment prophylaxis with artemether–lumefantrine than 
with sulfadoxine–pyri methamine is also consistent with the 
results of com parative trials of amodiaquine–sulfadoxine– 
pyri methamine or dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine.10,25,26 
We used artemether–lumefantrine because it was the only 
long-acting drug produced according to good manu facturing 
standards that was widely available in Malawi and other 
parts of sub-Saharan Africa, and because high-grade 
resistance to sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine was widespread 
in Malawi in 2006. Meﬂ oquine, another long-acting anti- 
malarial, was not used because it is associated with high 
in young children.19,27,28 Dihydro- 
rates of vomiting 
artemisinin–piperaquine had not been assessed for any IPT 




























































































single course of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine or iron 
supplementation was small. Thus, IPTpd is likely to be 
particularly beneﬁ cial in severely anaemic children and 
in settings where malaria is an important contributing 
factor to severe morbidity after discharge. Although 
further conﬁ rmatory studies are required, our results 
might also apply beyond areas with moderate to intense 
perennial malaria transmission and include areas with 
highly seasonal malaria transmission, such as the Sahel 
region in west Africa. Two trials in The Gambia (panel) 
showed that in children with severe malarial anaemia, 
chemoprevention, as intermittent preventive therapy15 
or prophylaxis,31 
the malaria 
transmission season also halved the rate of clinical 
malaria and in one trial reduced all-cause hospital 
readmittance by 78%, and in the other trial reduced 
recurrence of severe anaemia by 78%. 

A potential limitation of our study is the focus on 
children who had severe anaemia and malaria. Although 
most children admitted to hospital with severe anaemia 
had malaria, they may have a higher risk of exposure to 
malaria after discharge than severely anaemic children 
who do not have concomitant malaria. Thus, whether 
our ﬁ ndings can be generalised to the latter group is 
unclear. 
Overall, 14% of children had a primary event, 
conﬁ rming the high morbidity and mortality after 
discharge previously reported.1 However, in our trial 
mortality in the placebo group was much lower than that 
reported for 2002–06 (2% vs 8%), likely reﬂ ecting the 
switch from use of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine to 
artemether–lumefantrine at discharge and the scale-up 
of antiretroviral therapies for children with HIV at the 
end of the study. Another factor is the intensive care 
provided to children in this study. Therefore, our results 
might underestimate the true potential eﬀ ect of IPTpd, 
because artemether–lumefantrine provided prophylaxis 
for just less than a month, and because of the high degree 
of care provided to participants. 
The lower than anticipated mortality and the absence 
of a consistent eﬀ ect on all-cause mortality also shows 
the potential limitation of the use of composite endpoints 
in clinical trials when they include components of 
unequal clinical importance (eg, mortality vs non-fatal 
hospital admissions) and heterogeneity in treatment 
eﬀ ect between these components is observed.16,35 Analysis 
of the individual components of our primary endpoint 
showed that the beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect was largely due to a 
reduction in hospital admissions because of severe 
malaria and anaemia. We used the composite endpoints 
because we anticipated that this would increase the 
power of the study by increasing the event rates. However, 
our ﬁ ndings do not show that this occurred, which is 
consistent with a systematic review35 of the role of 
endpoint selection, which reported that trials using 
composite endpoints are less likely to generate positive 
results than are those that do not. A possible explanation 
proposed by the authors is that a disproportionately high 
percentage (81%) of trials using a composite endpoint 
include mortality as part of the endpoint, and the 
mortality endpoints in many trials were associated with 
negative or neutral results. 
Although IPTpd is a relatively simple intervention, its 
delivery 
implementation 
mechanisms. By contrast with intermittent preventive 





Systematic review 
We searched PubMed up to October 26, 2011 for reports in 
English (no other restrictions) with the search terms 
“anaemia” and “malaria”, and “children” and “treatment” or 
“prevention” or “control”. This search was supplemented with 
references obtained from the primary citations. We found no 
systematic reviews of the control of morbidity or mortality 
during the management of children with severe malarial 
anaemia after discharge. Two trials from The Gambia tested 
the eﬀ ect of malaria chemoprevention provided during the 
malaria transmission season on subsequent morbidity in 
children with severe or moderate to severe anaemia. One was 
a placebo-controlled trial of children admitted to hospital 
with severe malarial anaemia (haematocrit <15%) showing 
that weekly malaria prophylaxis with pyrimethamine– 
dapsone reduced clinical malaria by 53% and all-cause 
readmittance by 78% (p=0·02).31 The second trial assessed 
monthly sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine during the transmission 
season, in children with a haemoglobin concentration less 
than 7 g/dL.15 Risk of uncomplicated clinical malaria was 
halved and the incidence of severe anaemia during the rainy 
season decreased by 78% (p=0·055). Treatment group and 
bednet use were not related.6 The rate of readmittance to 
hospital or deaths in the latter study were lower than those in 
Malawi and western Kenya, but this could partly be a result of 
the inclusion of children with moderate anaemia, who 
constituted about half of the sample.15 Three other trials 
provided monthly intermittent preventive therapy with 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for children with mild 
anaemia,32–34 each conﬁ rming that intermittent preventive 
therapy roughly halved the frequency of clinical malaria, but 
the eﬀ ect on haematological recovery beyond the eﬀ ect of a 
single course of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine or iron 
supplementation was small. 
Interpretation 
Children with severe malarial anaemia have a substantially 
increased risk of subsequent life-threatening morbidity and 
malaria is an important contributor to morbidity after 
discharge in this group. Strategies that focus on the adequate 
treatment and prevention of malaria in the ﬁ rst 3 months after 
discharge could have a large eﬀ ect on the risk of readmittance 
to hospital because of severe malaria or severe anaemia. This 
eﬀ ect may be particularly evident in areas with stable perennial 
malaria transmission, but has also been noted during the rainy 
season in areas of highly seasonal transmission. 

Malaria Epidemiology Unit of the Child and Reproductive Health group, 
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine held by FOtK. We thank Novartis 
(Basel, Switzerland) for provision of the study drug and Lab-Allied 
(Nairobi, Kenya) for provision of the placebo. We also thank the parents 
and guardians of the children who participated in this study. We thank 
Sarah White from the College of Medicine who was the independent 
statistician and held the study code and coordinated the preparation of 
the study drugs and envelopes. We thank Charlotte Adamczick for her 
helpful contribution to the coordination and clinical care of patients in 
the paediatric ward of Zomba Central Hospital. We also thank 
Elizabeth Molyneux for being the independent safety monitor of the trial, 
and the members of the data safety monitoring committee: 
Geoﬀ rey Targett, Paul Milligan, and Enitan Carrol for their valuable 
comments and independent review of the safety data, protocol, and 
analytical plan. We would also thank Victor Mwapasa, Neil French, and 
Malcolm Molyneux who were the independent chair and members of the 
trial steering committee, respectively. Lastly, we thank Malcolm Molyneux 
and Robert Heyderman, the previous and current directors of the 
Malawi–Liverpool Wellcome Clinical Research programme, and Peter 
Winstanley, the previous director of the Wellcome Trust Tropical Centre, 
for hosting the study and for providing invaluable logistic and 
administrative support. 
References 
1 

Phiri KS, Calis JC, Faragher B, et al. Long term outcome of severe 
anaemia in Malawian children. PLoS One 2008; 3: e2903. 
Lackritz EM, Campbell CC, Ruebush TK 2nd, et al. Eﬀ ect of blood 
transfusion on survival among children in a Kenyan hospital. Lancet 
1992; 340: 524–28. 
3 Marsh K, Forster D, Waruiru C, et al. Indicators of life-threatening 
malaria in African children. N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 1399–404. 
Biemba G, Dolmans D, Thuma PE, Weiss G, Gordeuk VR. Severe 
anaemia in Zambian children with Plasmodium falciparum malaria. 
Trop Med Int Health 2000; 5: 9–16. 




6 Zucker JR, Lackritz EM, Ruebush TK 2nd, et al. Childhood 
mortality during and after hospitalization in western Kenya: 
eﬀ ect of malaria treatment regimens. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1996; 
55: 655–60. 
Price RN, Simpson JA, Nosten F, et al. Factors contributing to 
anemia after uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2001; 65: 614–22. 
Bloland PB, Lackritz EM, Kazembe PN, Were JB, Steketee R, 
Campbell CC. Beyond chloroquine: implications of drug resistance 
for evaluating malaria therapy eﬃ cacy and treatment policy in 
Africa. J Infect Dis 1993; 167: 932–37. 
Looareesuwan S, Merry AH, Phillips RE, et al. Reduced erythrocyte 
survival following clearance of malarial parasitaemia in Thai 
patients. Br J Haematol 1987; 67: 473–78. 



Artemisinin-based combination therapy for treating uncomplicated 
malaria. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009; 3: CD007483. 
11 White NJ. Intermittent presumptive treatment for malaria. 

PLoS Med 2005; 2: e3. 
ter Kuile FO, van Eijk AM, Filler SJ. Eﬀ ect of sulfadoxine– 
pyrimethamine resistance on the eﬃ cacy of intermittent preventive 
therapy for malaria control during pregnancy: a systematic review. 
JAMA 2007; 297: 2603–16. 

intermittent preventive treatment with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
for malaria in African infants: a pooled analysis of six randomised, 
placebo-controlled trials. Lancet 2009; 374: 1533–42. 
14 Wilson AL. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the eﬃ cacy 
and safety of intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in 
children (IPTc). PLoS One 2011; 6: e16976. 

recurrence of anaemia in Gambian children following discharge 
from hospital. PLoS One 2010; 5: e11227. 

Methodologic discussions for using and interpreting composite 
endpoints are limited, but still identify major concerns. 
J Clin Epidemiol 2007; 60: 651–57. 

therapies in infants and pregnant women, which are 
the expanded programme on 
delivered 
immunisation and antenatal clinics, systems for the 
delivery of IPTpd would need to be established, as was 
done for intermittent preventive therapy in children. 
Studies in rural areas in west Africa have shown that 
delivery of intermittent preventive therapy to children 
through community health workers is feasible and well 
accepted.36,37 Several countries, including Malawi, have 
systems of community health workers that could be used 
to deliver IPTpd or to arrange scheduled visits after 
discharge to clinics or hospital outpatient departments. 
One advantage of IPTpd is that it is targeted at a very high- 
risk group of hospitalised children who have already had 
contact with the health-care system, providing a potential 
point of entry. The optimum delivery mechanism could 
vary with the available health infrastructure and should 
be explored in future studies, ideally using mobile 
telephone technology where appropriate. 
IPTpd should be assessed in other settings with either 
regimens of artemether–lumefantrine given every 
3 weeks or less frequent regimens of other long-acting 
artemisinin-based combination therapies. Data are also 
needed to compare diﬀ erent delivery mechanisms and to 
test the cost-eﬀ ectiveness of IPTpd. Although malaria 
was a major contributor, severe anaemia is often caused 
by a combination of aetiological factors that result in 
persistent failure to produce red blood cells. Interventions 
that target a broader range of aetiologies, including 
bacterial infections (a major cause of severe anaemia in 
this group),11 micronutrient deﬁ ciencies, and hookworm,5 
might provide an even greater beneﬁ t that can be 
sustained for longer.21 Our study clearly shows that a 
proactive approach to the management of transfused 
children after discharge could provide important public 
health beneﬁ ts. Urgent attention should be given to this 
neglected issue. 
Contributors 
KP, MBvH, and FOtK conceived the concept of intermittent preventive 
therapy post-discharge. FOtK, KP, MBvH, and BF designed the study. 
KP coordinated the ﬁ eld work with support from ME. CK did the 
analysis with statistical support from BF. KP, MBvH, BF, and FOtK 
interpreted the data. FOtK and KP wrote the ﬁ rst draft of the 
manuscript; all authors reviewed and revised the ﬁ nal version. 
Conﬂ icts of interest 
The authors declare that they have no conﬂ icts of interest. 
Acknowledgments 
The study was co-funded by a grant from the Netherlands African 
Partnership for Capacity Development and Clinical Interventions against 
Poverty Related Diseases, and part of the College of Medicine Malawi 
Amsterdam Liverpool programme, a collaborative research and training 
grant to the College of Medicine in Blantyre, the University of 
Amsterdam (Netherlands), and the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine 
(UK). Funding was also provided by the UBS Optimus Foundation and 
by a re-entry grant to KP from the Gates Malaria Partnership, London 
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (UK), which received support 
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. FOtK and CK thank the US 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for salary support through a 
cooperative agreement between the Division of Parasitic Diseases and 
Malaria (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA) and the 




ter Kuile FO, Steketee RW. Intermittent preventive treatment in 
infants—adjusting expectations and seeing opportunity. J Infect Dis 
2006; 194: 269–72. 

intervention eﬀ ects using ﬁ rst or multiple episodes in clinical trials: 
the Andersen-Gill model re-examined. Stat Med 2010; 29: 328–36. 

against clinical malaria provided by three regimens of intermittent 
preventive treatment in Tanzanian infants. PLoS One 2010; 5: e9467. 
20 Calis JC, Phiri KS, Vet RJ, et al. Erythropoiesis in HIV-infected and 
uninfected Malawian children with severe anemia. Aids 2010; 
24: 2883–87. 

Pathophysiological mechanisms of severe anaemia in Malawian 
children. PLoS One 2010; 5: e12589. 

prophylaxis, antiretroviral therapy, and insecticide-treated bednets 
on the frequency of malaria in HIV-1-infected adults in Uganda: a 
prospective cohort study. Lancet 2006; 367: 1256–61. 

dihydrofolate reductase and dihyropteroate synthase mutations and 
the use of trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis among 
persons infected with human immunodeﬁ ciency virus. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010; 82: 766–71. 

preventive treatment of malaria in African infants. Parasitology 2011; 
138: 1469–79. 
25 Zongo I, Dorsey G, Rouamba N, et al. Randomized comparison of 
amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine, artemether– 
lumefantrine, and dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine for the 
treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 
Burkina Faso. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45: 1453–61. 
26 Zongo I, Dorsey G, Rouamba N, et al. Artemether–lumefantrine 
versus amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine for 
uncomplicated falciparum malaria in Burkina Faso: a randomised 
non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2007; 369: 491–98. 

safety of three antimalarial regimens for intermittent preventive 
treatment for malaria in infants: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2009; 374: 1521–32. 

for Plasmodium falciparum malaria in children under 5 years of age 
in Malawi: in vivo/in vitro eﬃ cacy and correlation of drug 
concentration with parasitological outcome. 
Bull World Health Organ 1990; 68: 53–59. 

with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine or dihydroartemisinin for malaria 
intermittent preventive treatment in children. PLoS One 2009; 
4: e7164. 
30 Bojang K, Akor F, Bittaye O, et al. A randomised trial to compare 
the safety, tolerability and eﬃ cacy of three drug combinations for 
intermittent preventive treatment in children. PLoS One 2010; 
5: e11225. 

Greenwood BM. Management of severe malarial anaemia in 
Gambian children. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1997; 91: 557–61. 
32 Desai MR, Mei JV, Kariuki SK, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of 
daily iron supplementation and intermittent sulfadoxine– 
pyrimethamine for the treatment of mild childhood anemia in 
western Kenya. J Infect Dis 2003; 187: 658–66. 

Randomized intervention study comparing several regimens for the 
treatment of moderate anemia among refugee children in Kigoma 
Region, Tanzania. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001; 64: 164–71. 
34 Verhoef H, West CE, Nzyuko SM, et al. Intermittent administration 
of iron and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine to control anaemia in 
Kenyan children: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2002; 
360: 908–14. 

absolute) risk reporting in published medication trials. 
J Gen Intern Med 2011; 26: 1246–52. 

Chandramohan D. Options for the delivery of intermittent 
preventive treatment for malaria to children: a community 
randomised trial. PLoS One 2009; 4: e7256. 
37 Bojang KA, Akor F, Conteh L, et al. Two strategies for the delivery 
of IPTc in an area of seasonal malaria transmission in the Gambia: 
a randomised controlled trial. PLoS Med 2011; 8: e1000409. 


