











 
 
 
 
Impact of labor and delivery unit policy modiﬁcations on 
maternal and neonatal outcomes during the coronavirus 
disease 2019 pandemic 

BACKGROUND: 
In response to the coronavirus disease 2019 
pandemic, hospitals nationwide have implemented modiﬁcations to labor 
and delivery unit practices designed to protect delivering patients and 
healthcare providers from infection with severe acute respiratory syn- 
drome coronavirus 2. Beginning in March 2020, our hospital instituted 
labor, and delivery unit modiﬁcations targeting visitor policy, use of per- 
sonal protective equipment, designation of rooms for triage and delivery of 
persons suspected or infected with coronavirus disease 2019, delivery 
management, and newborn care. Little is known about the ramiﬁcations of 
these modiﬁcations in terms of maternal and neonatal outcomes. 
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether labor 
and delivery unit policy modiﬁcations we made during the coronavirus 
disease 2019 pandemic were associated with differences in outcomes for 
mothers and newborns. 
STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of all 
deliveries occurring in our hospital between January 1, 2020, and 
April 30, 2020. Patients who delivered in January and February 2020 
before labor and delivery unit modiﬁcations were instituted were 
designated as the preimplementation group, and those who delivered 
in March and April 2020 were designated as the postimplementation 
group. Maternal and neonatal outcomes between the pre- and 
postimplementation groups were compared. Differences between the 
2 groups were then compared with the same time period in 2019 and 
2018 to assess whether any apparent differences were unique to the 
pandemic year. We hypothesized that maternal and newborn lengths 
of stay would be shorter in the postimplementation group. Statistical 
analysis methods included Student’s t-tests and Wilcoxon tests for 
continuous variables and chi-square or Fisher exact tests for cate- 
gorical variables. 
RESULTS: Postpartum length of stay was signiﬁcantly shorter after 
implementation of labor unit changes related to coronavirus disease 2019. 
A postpartum stay of 1 night after vaginal delivery occurred in 48.5% of 
patients in the postimplementation group compared with 24.9% of the 
preimplementation group (P<.0001). Postoperative length of stay after 
cesarean delivery of (cid:1)2 nights occurred in 40.9% of patients in the 
postimplementation group compared with 11.8% in the pre- 
implementation group (P<.0001). Similarly, after vaginal delivery, 49.0% 
in the post- 
of newborns were discharged home after 1 night 
implementation group compared with 24.9% in the preimplementation 
group (P<.0001). After cesarean delivery, 42.5% of newborns were 
discharged after (cid:1)2 nights in the postimplementation group compared 
with 12.5% in the preimplementation group (P<.0001). Slight differences 
in the proportions of earlier discharge between mothers and newborns 
were due to multiple gestations. There were no differences in cesarean 
delivery rate, induction of labor, or adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes 
between the 2 groups. 
CONCLUSION: Labor and delivery unit policy modiﬁcations to protect 
pregnant patients and healthcare providers from coronavirus disease 
2019 indicate that maternal and newborn length of stay in the hospital 
were signiﬁcantly shorter after delivery without increases in the rate of 
adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes. In the absence of long-term 
adverse outcomes occurring after discharge that are tied to earlier 
release, our study results may support a review of our discharge protocols 
once the pandemic subsides to move toward safely shortening maternal 
and newborn lengths of stay. 
Key words: coronavirus disease 2019, labor management, severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
Introduction 
By March 2020, coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19), the illness caused by 
syndrome 
severe 
coronavirus 
(SARS-CoV-2), was 
spreading widely in many regions in the 
United States. Against the backdrop of 
recommendations 
rapidly 




Cite this article as: Greene NH, Kilpatrick SJ, Wong MS, 
et al. Impact of labor and delivery unit policy modiﬁcations 
on maternal and neonatal outcomes during the corona- 
virus disease 2019 pandemic. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 
2020;2:100234. 
2589-9333/$36.00 
ª 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100234 
from the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), hospital leader- 
ship in regions expecting a surge of 
COVID-19 cases implemented changes 
to accomplish the following 2 major 
goals: to ensure adequate capacity to 
safely care for infected patients and to 
prevent unaffected patients, 
families, 
and hospital staff from contracting the 
virus.1e5 
California issued a statewide stay-at- 
home order on March 19, 2020, and 
shortly after, the Society for Maternal- 
Fetal Medicine and Society for Obstet- 
ric Anesthesiology and Perinatology 
issued guidelines on safe delivery of 
obstetrical care during the COVID-19 
pandemic.6 In light of 
these recom- 
mendations, a multidisciplinary team of 
obstetricians, maternal-fetal medicine 
specialists, pediatricians, anesthesiolo- 
gists, infectious disease specialists, and 
nursing leadership was assembled at our 
institution to create guidelines 
for 
maternal and neonatal care during this 
time period. These guidelines addressed 
the use of personal protective equip- 
ment, designation of rooms for triage 
and delivery of persons suspected or 
infected with COVID-19, 
delivery 
management, and newborn care. Pa- 
were 
tients 





Why was this study conducted? 
This study aimed to examine downstream effects of labor and delivery unit policy 
modiﬁcations implemented to reduce the risk of infection of patients and staff 
with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. 
Key ﬁndings 
Postpartum lengths of stay for mother and newborn were markedly shorter 
without differences in rates of cesarean delivery and adverse obstetrical outcomes. 
What does this add to what is known? 
Because rapid implementation in labor and delivery unit policy modiﬁcations is a 
recent concept in response to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, little is 
known about associated short- and long-term effects of these practice changes 
and of the pandemic overall. 
permitted 1 support person during de- 
livery and no visitors postpartum. This 
policy was modiﬁed on April 20, 2020, to 
allow a single support person during the 
postpartum stay. 
The objective of this study was to 
compare maternal and neonatal out- 
the imple- 
comes before and after 
mentation of stay-at-home orders and 
our institutional COVID-19 obstetrical 
and neonatal policy changes in the labor 
and delivery unit. Given that efforts to 
protect staff and patients from infection 
with SARS-CoV-2 would aim to reduce 
face-to-face exposure time, we hypoth- 
esized that the COVID-19 labor and 
delivery modiﬁcations 
directed 
at 
reducing the in-hospital 
transmission 
rate would be associated with shorter 
lengths of stay for mothers and new- 
borns compared with mothers and 
newborns delivered before the modiﬁ- 
cations were made. 
Materials and Methods 
This study was performed at a tertiary 
care, academic hospital with approxi- 
mately 6200 deliveries a year staffed by 
130 academic and community physi- 
cians. Certiﬁed nurse midwives, resi- 
dents, and fellows are involved with 
intrapartum care, and all deliveries are 
performed under the supervision of an 
attending physician. The labor and de- 
livery unit policy modiﬁcations made in 
response to COVID-19 at Cedars-Sinai 
implemented 
Medical Center were 
beginning March 2020 (Box). 
To assess the impact of these changes 
on delivery outcomes, we conducted a 
retrospective cohort study of all de- 
liveries occurring in our hospital be- 
tween January 1, 2020 and April 30, 
2020. We divided the cohort into the 
following 2 groups: patients who deliv- 
ered before implementation of 
these 
guidelines in January and February 2020 
(preimplementation) and patients who 
delivered during or after their implan- 
tation in March and April 
2020 
(postimplementation). 
Maternal demographic information, 
delivery information, and maternal and 
neonatal outcome data were extracted 
from the medical record and compared 
between the preimplementation and the 
postimplementation groups. Obstetrical 
outcomes included time to delivery, de- 
livery analgesia, mode of delivery, in- 
dications 
for cesarean delivery, and 
compliance with the American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists/So- 
ciety 
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine 
(ACOG/SMFM) Guidelines for when 
cesarean delivery was performed for ar- 
labor.7 The ACOG/SMFM 
rest of 



2. A COVID-19 treatment team was designated at the start of each shift, and included a group of nurses, physicians, and operating room staff. 
3. Patients admitted with or suspected to have COVID-19—designated persons under investigation—were not permitted visitors during the 





6. Patients with COVID-19 and persons under investigation were advised to undergo a temporary separation from the newborn after delivery. If they 
declined, protective measures were recommended including isolette care in the room and wearing gloves and mask during any handling of the 
newborn. 




COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019. 
Greene et al. Labor unit modiﬁcations and COVID-19. AJOG MFM 2020. 


BOX 
Labor and delivery unit modiﬁcations made in response to COVID-19 



Age (cid:4)35 y 
Age (cid:4)40 y 






BMI, mean (SD) 
BMI >30 kg/m2 
Gestational age, mean (SD) 
Gestational age <37 wk 




Preimplementation 
(Jan.eFeb., 2020) n¼1016 
Postimplementation 
(MarcheApril, 2020) n¼920 










































Data are presented as number (percentage) unless indicated otherwise. 
BMI, body mass index; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; SD, standard deviation. 
Greene et al. Labor unit modiﬁcations and COVID-19. AJOG MFM 2020. 
Guidelines provide deﬁnitions for arrest 
of labor in the ﬁrst and second stages of 
labor, 
and compliance with these 
guidelines was determined by indepen- 
dent review of each nulliparous term 
singleton vertex (NTSV) cesarean de- 
livery record by a trained departmental 
quality assessor. These data are routinely 
gathered as part of our institutional 
quality improvement program aimed at 
safely lowering the NTSV cesarean rate. 
Postpartum outcomes included length of 
stay, opioid use, and exclusive breast- 
feeding on discharge. Adverse outcomes 
included markers of severe maternal 
morbidity (deﬁned as transfer to an 
intensive care unit or transfusion of 4 or 
more units of packed red cells), rate of 
transfusion of any number of units of 
packed red cells, and readmission within 
30 days. Neonatal outcomes included 
intensive care unit (NICU) 
neonatal 
scores, neonatal 
admissions, Apgar 
hypoglycemia, abnormal cord blood gas 
(pH <7 or base excess <(cid:3)13), unex- 
pected term newborn complications 
(The Joint Commission Perinatal Core 
Measure 06),8 neonatal length of stay, 
and readmission within 28 days. 
To account for yearly variation in our 
outcomes, we compared the identiﬁed 
and post- 
differences between pre- 
implementation outcomes during the 
pandemic year to the same time period 
(JanuaryeApril) in 2018 and 2019. To 
identify potential differences 
in post- 
partum or postoperative lengths of stay 
owing to changes to our hospital visitation 
policy on April 20, 2020, we compared the 
lengths of stay for deliveries in the post- 
implementation period between March 1, 
2020, and April 19, 2020, to the same from 
April 20, 2020, through April 30, 2020, the 
end of our study period. 
Statistical methods included the use of 
Student’s t-test or Wilcoxon tests for 
continuous variables and chi-square or 
Fisher’s exact tests for categorical vari- 
ables, as appropriate. To correct 
for 
multiple comparisons, a Bonferroni 
correction was applied (corrected sig- 
niﬁcance probability value of <0.0016). 
Statistical analysis was performed using 
SAS (version 9.4, Cary, NC). This study 
was approved by the Cedars-Sinai Insti- 
tutional Review Board (Study 00000768, 
approved June 15, 2020). 
We included all patients in the 2020 
study period, regardless of laboratory- 
conﬁrmed SARS-CoV-2 
status. We 
accounted for potential differences in 
outcomes attributable to infection status 
rather than labor and delivery unit prac- 
tice modiﬁcations by rerunning analyses 
without laboratory test-positive cases. 
Results 
During the study period of January 1, 
2020, to April 30, 2020, 1936 deliveries 

TABLE 1 
Demographic and clinical characteristics in patients delivering before and after implementation of the COVID-19 
guidelines 



Preimplementation 
(Jan.eFeb., 2020), n¼1016 
Postimplementation 
(MarcheApril, 2020), n¼920 P valuea 













Trial of labor after cesarean rate 
VBAC rateb 
VBAC success rateb 
NTSV cesarean rate 
Compliance with ACOG/SMFM Dystocia Guidelinesc (NTSV) 









2 
(cid:4)3 



4 
(cid:4)5 
































































occurred at our institution, with 1016 de- 
liveries during the preimplementation 
period and 920 deliveries during the 
postimplementation period. Baseline de- 
mographic characteristics of 
the study 
population in the preimplementation and 
postimplementation time periods are 
described in Table 1. There were no de- 
mographic differences between the 2 
groups. 
Postpartum length of stay was signiﬁ- 
cantly shorter in the postimplementation 
group. A postpartum stay of 1 night after 
vaginal delivery occurred in 48.5% of pa- 
tients in the postimplementation group 
compared with 24.9% of 
the pre- 
implementation group (P<.0001). Post- 
operative length of stay after cesarean 

TABLE 2 
Delivery outcomes in patients delivering before and after implementation of the COVID-19 guidelines 


Postpartum urinary catheter removal (h), mean (SD) 
Postpartum opioid use per day,d median (IQR) 










Preimplementation 
(Jan.eFeb., 2020), n¼1016 
Postimplementation 
(MarcheApril, 2020), n¼920 P valuea 



























Data are presented as number (percentage) unless indicated otherwise. 
ACOG/SMFM, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists/Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; ICU, intensive care unit; IQR, interquartile range; 
NTSV, nulliparous term singleton vertex; pRBC, packed red blood cells; SD, standard deviation; TOLAC, trial of labor after cesarean; VBAC, vaginal birth after cesarean. 
a Corrected signiﬁcant P value <.0016 after Bonferroni adjustment; b The VBAC rate is number of VBAC divided by the number of patients with prior cesarean deliveries eligible for TOLAC. The VBAC 
success rate is the number of VBAC divided by number of patients who underwent TOLAC; c Denominator is NTSV patients with cesarean deliveries for which the sole indication was arrest of labor; 
d Units: morphine equivalents per postpartum day; e Severe maternal morbidity deﬁned as ICU admission and/or receiving (cid:4)4 units packed red blood cells. 


delivery of (cid:1)2 nights occurred in 40.9% of 
patients in the postimplementation group 
compared with 11.8% in the pre- 
(P<.0001) 
implementation 
(Table 2). The proportion of patients 
transfused (cid:4)1 unit of packed red 
blood cells was higher 
in the post- 
implementation group than in the pre- 
implementation group (3.3% vs 1.6%), 
but this was no longer statistically different 
after correction for multiple comparisons. 
There were no other differences 
in 
obstetrical, maternal, or adverse outcomes 
between the preimplementation and 
postimplementation groups (Table 2). 

stay was also 
signiﬁcantly shorter after implementation 
of practice modiﬁcations compared with 
the preimplementation group. After 
vaginal delivery, 49.0% of newborns were 
discharged home after 1 night in the 
postimplementation group 
compared 
with 24.9% in the preimplementation 
group (P<.0001, Table 3). After cesarean 
delivery, 42.5% of newborns were dis- 
charged after (cid:1)2 nights in the post- 
implementation group compared with 
12.5% in the preimplementation group 
(P<.0001). There were no differences in 
NICU admissions, abnormal cord blood 
gas, neonatal hypoglycemia, unexpected 
newborn complications, and newborn 
readmission within 28 days between the 2 
time periods. 
When comparing postpartum length 
of stay after easing of visitor restrictions 
on April 20, 2020, there were no differ- 
ences in maternal postpartum length of 
stay after vaginal delivery (1.6 vs 1.5 
nights; P¼.25) or after cesarean delivery 
(2.8 vs 2.7 nights; P¼.6). Newborn 
length of stay after cesarean delivery was 
shorter after easing the visitor policy (4.4 
vs 3.2 nights; P¼.02), and there was no 
difference after vaginal delivery (1.9 vs 
2.8 nights; P¼.48). 
To adjust for month-to-month varia- 
tion in length of postpartum hospitali- 
zation for the mother and the newborn, 
we compared the proportion of patients 
who were discharged home after 1 night 
following vaginal delivery and after (cid:1)2 
nights following cesarean delivery in the 
pandemic year to the patients who 
delivered during the same time period in 
2018 and 2019 (Figure). There were no 

signiﬁcant differences in neonatal or 
stay between 
maternal 
JanuaryeFebruary and MarcheApril in 
2018 and 2019, regardless of the mode of 
delivery. 
The ﬁrst SARS-CoV-2 tests in our 
hospital were reported on March 21, 
2020. There were 2 laboratory test- 
positive cases during the study period. 
When excluding these 2 cases from the 
length of stay analyses, the reduction in 
postpartum and postoperative maternal 
stays and newborn lengths of 
stay 
after vaginal and cesarean deliveries 
remained signiﬁcant (P<.0001 for all 
comparisons). 
Structured Discussion or 
Comment 
Principal ﬁndings 
Similar to many hospitals nationwide, 
our labor unit instituted internal practice 
modiﬁcations intended to protect pa- 
tients and healthcare providers from 
COVID-19 in March 2020. In this study, 
we found that maternal and newborn 
lengths of stay were signiﬁcantly shorter 
after implementation of these changes to 

TABLE 2 
Delivery outcomes in patients delivering before and after implementation of the COVID-19 guidelines (continued) 


NICU admissions 
5-minute Apgar <7 
Cord blood gas testing performed 
Abnormal cord blood gasb 

Unexpected severe term newborn complications 
per 1000 birthsc 
Unexpected moderate term newborn complications 
per 1000 birthsc 


2 
(cid:4)3 



4 
(cid:4)5 

Preimplementation 
(Jan.eFeb., 2020, n¼1033) 
Postimplementation 
(MarcheApril, 2020, n¼941) 









































Data are presented as number (percentage) unless indicated otherwise. 
COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit. 
a Corrected signiﬁcant P value of <.0016 after Bonferroni adjustment; b Cord blood gas with pH <7 or base excess <(cid:3)12; c Unexpected term newborn complications deﬁned by The Joint 


the labor unit, and that shorter lengths of 
stay in March and April were not seen in 
previous years when compared with 
January and February in the same year. 
We did not ﬁnd an increase in adverse 
maternal or neonatal outcomes despite 
the shorter postpartum lengths of stay 
for mother and newborn. 



Clinical and research implications 
As hospitals nationwide work 
to 
and 
protect 
effectively 
healthcare providers from COVID-19, 
it 
to determine 
whether labor and delivery practice 
modiﬁcations 
reduce 
designed 
transmission 
are 
of 
associated with adverse maternal and 
neonatal outcomes. A recent compre- 
international 
hensive 
practice modiﬁcations 
obstetrical 




indicates that professional societies in 
USA, Italy, and Spain are encouraging 
early postdelivery discharge.9 In our 
hospital, 
early discharge was not 
among the practice modiﬁcations we 
made. Nevertheless, our study results 
revealed discharge after 1 or 2 nights for 
vaginal and cesarean deliveries, respec- 
tively, and this allowed us to study po- 
tential short-term adverse outcomes that 
could be associated with the shorter 
lengths of stay. Our labor and delivery 
practice modiﬁcations aimed at reducing 
COVID-19 transmission to patients and 
staff were not associated with time from 
admission to delivery, altered rates of 
induction of 
labor, delivery analgesia, 
cesarean delivery, vaginal birth after ce- 
sarean, operative delivery, compliance 
for 
with ACOG/SMFM guidelines 
reducing cesarean delivery because of 

dystocia, 
or 
exclusive breastfeeding at discharge. The 
policy modiﬁcations in the labor and 
delivery unit in our institution during 
the COVID-19 epidemic were associated 
with a signiﬁcant reduction in post- 
stay 
partum and neonatal 
without an increase in the rate of 
maternal and neonatal complications. 

The reasons for this reduction in 
postpartum length of stay are likely 
multifactorial but may be attributed 
partially to changes to our visitor policy 
enacted in early March, which allowed 
only a single support person during la- 
bor and delivery and prohibited any 
postpartum visitors. Although this pol- 
icy was later liberalized on April 20, 
2020, to allow for 1 healthy visitor on the 
it is likely that the 
postpartum unit, 
initial restrictions may have motivated 
TABLE 3 
Outcomes in newborns delivered before and after implementation of COVID-19 guidelines 

Short length of stay was deﬁned as discharge after 1 night after vaginal delivery (postpartum day 1) and discharge after (cid:1)2 nights after cesarean delivery 
(postoperative day 1 or 2). There was a signiﬁcant increase in short lengths of stay for both mothers and neonates after both types of delivery with 
implementation of the guidelines in the era of COVID-19 (year 2020, all P values <.0001). There were no signiﬁcant differences in neonatal or maternal 
lengths of stay between January to February and March to April in 2018 and 2019, regardless of mode of delivery (P values, .35e.93). 
COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019. 
Greene et al. Labor unit modiﬁcations and COVID-19. AJOG MFM 2020. 
patients and providers toward an earlier 
discharge. This study suggests that it is 
reassuring that these early discharges 
were not associated with an increased 
rate of 
readmissions or postpartum 
medical complications, although future 
studies are needed to determine what 
long-term effects the shorter stay might 
have on other outcomes 
such as 
maternal mental health, bonding, and 
ongoing breastfeeding. 
Strengths and limitations 
The strength of this study was the timely 
the impact of rapidly 
evaluation of 
implemented labor unit 
alterations 
focused on reducing COVID-19 trans- 
mission on mothers and their infants at a 
single institution. As a large-volume 
labor and delivery unit, we have the 
capability to assess outcomes on a scale 
that would be challenging with fewer 
numbers of total deliveries. 
This study is not without limitation. It 
is possible that this study was under- 
powered to assess differences in less 
common but severe adverse outcomes, 
including severe maternal morbidity or 
stillbirth. Our patient population may 
also not be generalizable to patients 
admitted to other labor and delivery 
units. 
It is plausible that the reduction in 
postpartum hospital stay was a random 
event, owing to normal month-to- 
month variation. However, the marked 
reduction in length of stay seen in 2020 
compared with no such change in the 
same months of 2018 and 2019 lends 
for the association between 
support 
shorter 
stay and either 
lengths of 
COVID-19 practice modiﬁcations or 
related to the 
unmeasurable factors 
including the 
pandemic as a whole, 
statewide lockdown. 
Conclusions 
Labor and delivery unit policy modiﬁ- 
cations implemented to protect preg- 
nant patients and healthcare providers 
from COVID-19 at Cedars-Sinai Medi- 
cal Center in Los Angeles indicate that 
maternal and newborn length of stay in 
the hospital were signiﬁcantly shorter 
after delivery without increases in the 
rate of adverse maternal or neonatal 
n 
outcomes. 

FIGURE 
Short length of stay by implementation periods and prior years 

References 
1. Boelig RC, Manuck T, Oliver EA, et al. Labor 
and delivery guidance for COVID-19. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol MFM 2020;2:100110. 
2. Palatnik A, McIntosh JJ. Protecting labor and 
delivery personnel from COVID-19 during the 
second stage of labor. Am J Perinatol 2020;37: 
854–6. 
3. Covid-19 and pregnancy. BMJ 2020;369: 
m1672. 
4. Chen D, Yang H, Cao Y, et al. Expert 
consensus for managing pregnant women and 
neonates born to mothers with suspected or 
conﬁrmed novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infec- 
tion. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2020;149:130–6. 
5. Donders F, Lonnée-Hoffmann R, Tsiakalos A, 
et al. 
ISIDOG recommendations concerning 
COVID-19 and pregnancy. Diagnostics (Basel) 
2020;10:243. 
6. Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Society 
for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology. La- 
bor and delivery COVID-19 considerations. 
2020. Available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/ 
cdn.smfm.org/media/2277/SMFM-SOAP_ 
COVID_LD_Considerations_3-27-20_(ﬁnal)_PDF. 
pdf. Accessed March 27, 2020. 
7. American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Caughey AB, 
al. Safe 
the primary cesarean de- 
prevention of 
livery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;210: 
179–93. 
8. Joint Commission. Speciﬁcations manual for 
Joint Commission national quality measures. 
Perinatal Care (PC)-06 version 2018B. 2018. 
Available at: https://manual.jointcommission.org/ 
releases/TJC2018B/MIF0393.html. 
Accessed 
March 27, 2020. 

9. Narang K, Ibirogba ER, Elrefaei A, et al. 
SARS-CoV-2 in pregnancy: a comprehensive 
summary of current guidelines. J Clin Med 
2020;9:1521. 
Author and article information 
From the Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Depart- 
ment of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA (Drs Greene, Kilpatrick, Wong, 
Ozimek, and Naqvi). 


This paper is part of a supplement that represents a 
collection of COVID-related articles selected for publica- 
tion by the editors of AJOG MFM without additional 
ﬁnancial support. 
The authors report no conﬂict of interest. 
Corresponding author: Naomi Greene, PhD. Naomi. 


