Danish premature birth rates during the 
COVID-19 lockdown 
Gitte Hedermann ,1 Paula Louise Hedley,1 Marie Bækvad- Hansen,1,2 
Henrik Hjalgrim,3,4 Klaus Rostgaard,3 Porntiva Poorisrisak,5 Morten Breindahl,5 
Mads Melbye,3,6,7 David M Hougaard,1,2 Michael Christiansen,1,8 
Ulrik Lausten- Thomsen 5 
ABSTRACT 
To explore the impact of COVID-19 lockdown on 
premature birth rates in Denmark, a nationwide register- 
based prevalence proportion study was conducted on all 
31 180 live singleton infants born in Denmark between 
12 March and 14 April during 2015–2020. 
The distribution of gestational ages (GAs) was 
significantly different (p=0.004) during the lockdown 
period compared with the previous 5 years and was 
driven by a significantly lower rate of extremely 
premature children during the lockdown compared with 
the corresponding mean rate for the same dates in the 
previous years (OR 0.09, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.40, p<0.001). 
No significant difference between the lockdown and 
previous years was found for other GA categories. 
The reasons for this decrease are unclear. However, the 
lockdown has provided a unique opportunity to examine 
possible factors related to prematurity. Identification of 
possible causal mechanisms might stimulate changes in 
clinical practice. 
INTRODUCTION 
COVID-19 was declared a pandemic on 12 March 
2020, which led to an almost global lockdown. 
Beyond controlling transmission of the virus, the 
lockdown has affected virtually all branches of 
medicine and brought about changes in patterns 
of hospital contacts for other conditions. Although 
perinatal death has been reported, most severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS- 
CoV-2)- positive neonates appear to be only mildly 
affected,1 and the majority of SARS- CoV-2- infected 
pregnancies do not develop major complications.1 
Prematurity is a complex and challenging patho- 
physiological condition associated with increased 
risk of long- term morbidity and mortality, and it 
is the leading cause of death in children under 5 
years of age.2 Global prematurity rates are approx- 
imately 10% but vary from 4%-5% in some Euro- 
pean countries to 15%-18% in some parts of Africa 
and Asia.2 The aetiology of premature birth and 
preterm labour is multifaceted and linked to a wide 
range of sociodemographic, medical, obstetric, 
foetal, psychosocial and environmental factors.3 
Still, approximately two- thirds of premature births 
occur without an evident risk factor.3 
In Denmark, a nationwide 
lockdown was 
declared on 12 March 2020. Effective from that 
date, childcare facilities, schools and universities 
were closed; all non- essential public servants were 
sent home; private employers were urged to ensure 
that as many people as possible worked from home; 
gatherings of over 10 people were prohibited; 
and the borders were closed to foreign visitors. A 
gradual lifting of lockdown restrictions began on 15 
April 2020. 
Anecdotal observations from neonatal intensive 
care units suggested fewer extremely premature 
births during the lockdown period. This study 
aimed to elucidate, if the lockdown itself—with its 
changes in work environment, social interactions 
and focus on hygiene (effectively reducing expo- 
sure to infectious agents)—impacted premature 
birth rates. 
METHODS 
We performed a nationwide prevalence proportion 
study with premature births as cases, term preg- 
nancies as controls and birth during the lockdown 
period as exposure. Children born in Denmark 
during the most rigorous part of the lockdown 
period (12 March–14 April 2020) and in the 
previous 5 years (2015–2019) were identified from 
the Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank (DNSB). 

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article. 
Correspondence to 
Dr Michael Christiansen, Statens 
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; mic@ ssi. dk and 
Dr Ulrik Lausten- Thomsen, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; 
ulrik.lausten- thomsen@ regionh. 
 
dk 
GH and PLH contributed equally. 
MC and UL- T contributed 
equally. 
GH and PLH are joint first 
authors. 
MC and UL- T are joint senior 
authors. 
Received 19 June 2020 
Revised 17 July 2020 
Accepted 20 July 2020 
Published Online First 
11 August 2020 
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2021. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published 
by BMJ. 


To cite: Hedermann G, 
Hedley PL, Bækvad- Hansen 
M, et al. Arch Dis Child Fetal 
Neonatal Ed 2021;106:F93– 
F95. 

 ► Prematurity, particularly extreme prematurity, 
has a high morbidity, and is considered the 
primary cause of mortality in children under 5 
years old. 

approximately 10%, but a large regional 
variation exists. 
 ► The aetiology of preterm labour and premature 
birth is multifaceted and linked to a wide range 
of sociodemographic, medical, obstetric, foetal, 
psychosocial and environmental factors. 



 ► Elements of the lockdown (eg, reduced infection 
load and reduced physical activity) are possibly 
beneficial for reducing extreme prematurity and 
potentially reducing infant mortality. 
We also identified children from the period of 20 January–22 
February, for years 2015–2020 (n=32 070), to analyse a period 
before COVID-19 had been reported in Denmark. 
To limit the influence of other determinants of premature 
birth, we considered only singletons. Gestational age (GA) at 
birth was categorised in completed weeks (table 1). 
Likelihood ratio- based tests, estimates and CIs regarding 
changes in composition of GA at birth categories between 
the lockdown period and the consolidated reference period 
for 2015–2019 were obtained from a series of logistic regres- 
sions. First, we made an assessment of the odds of being born 
during lockdown by GA category; that is, did the proportions in 
different GA categories vary by time? Second, on finding such 
variation, we estimated ORs of being in lockdown between each 
GA category and the rest, to possibly pinpoint GA categories 
with big relative changes. Frequency plots were used to illustrate 
variations in GA between the birth cohorts studied. Statistical 
analyses were run in SAS V.9.4 and R V.3.6.1. 
RESULTS 
We included 31 180 live singleton infants born in Denmark from 
12 March to 14 April during 2015–2020. Births were distributed 
into GA categories (table 1). The total number of singleton births 
during lockdown in 2020 (n=5162) did not differ statistically 
significantly from the other years (mean births per year: 5203.6, 
SD ±221.4; p=0.24). We identified 1566 singleton premature 
infants (5.02%). 
Logistic regression analyses demonstrated that the distri- 
bution of GA in 2020 differed significantly from the previous 
years (p=0.004). The proportion of extremely and very prema- 
ture births (figure 1) was significantly different between the 
2020 nationwide lockdown and the same calendar period from 
the previous 5 years (p=0.003). However, the difference was 
driven by a reduction in extremely premature to 0.19/1000 
births during the 2020 nationwide lockdown compared with an 
average of 2.19/1000 births for the previous years (p<0.001) 
(table 1 and figure 1). No differences in birth rates were noted in 
the January and February periods (figure 1, inset). 
DISCUSSION 
We report a potential effect of a nationwide lockdown on 
extremely premature birth rates. Although it is too early to 
draw definitive conclusions, we believe that these findings and 
their potential implications merit immediate dissemination. 
The COVID-19 lockdown has drastically changed our lives by 
changing our working environment, reducing physical interac- 
tions and increasing our focus on hygiene. This unusual situa- 
tion is likely to have influenced several risk factors for premature 
birth. 
Increased systemic maternal inflammation is an element of 
several risk factors, which, along with other immunologically 
mediated processes, are believed to play a part in the preterm 
birth syndrome.4 Possibly, the increased focus on hygiene, strict 
physical distancing and home confinement have influenced the 
overall inflammatory state of pregnant women. 
The literature on a potential link between work and prema- 
ture birth is contradictory.5 Although we currently have no 
national details of their occurrences, the potential reduced 
physical demands associated with work, travel and even reduc- 
tions in minor accidents or other traumas could all be possible 
contributors. 
We found no significant differences in the rates of the very 
premature, moderate premature, term or post- term births, which 









 
 
 
 
 
 
the world. Future studies should also aim to elucidate potential 
causalities. 
Author affiliations 
1Department for Congenital Disorders, Danish National Biobank and Biomarkers, 
Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark 
2Danish Center for Neonatal Screening, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark 
3Department of Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark 
4Department of Haematology, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
5Department of Neonatology, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
6Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 
7Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
United States 
8Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark 
Correction notice This paper has been amended since it was published online. 
The provenance and peer review of this article has been changed to externally peer 
reviewed. 
Acknowledgements This research was conducted using the Danish Neonatal 
Screening Biobank and the Danish National Biobank resource, funded by the Novo 
Nordisk Foundation. 
Contributors GH, PLH, DMH, MC and UL- T designed the study. GH and MB- H 
collected the data. PLH, KR, MC and UL- T performed statistical analyses. GH, PLH, 
MC and UL- T co- wrote first draft. All authors contributed to the interpretation of the 
data and critically revised the manuscript, had full access to tables and figures in the 
study, and take responsibility for the integrity of the data. 
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not- for- profit sectors. 


Ethics approval Statens Serum Institut has approval from the Danish Data 
Protection Agency (DPA) to conduct register- based studies, and the current study 
was approved by the DPA officer (approval no: 20/04753) at Statens Serum Institut. 
Studies based solely on register data do not require further ethics committee 
approval as per Danish laws and regulations. 

Data availability statement Data are available upon reasonable request. The 
process of accessing data from the Danish National Biobanks is detailed online 
(https://www. dani shna tion albi obank. com/ access). No additional data are available. 
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See: http:// creativecommons. org/ licenses/ by- nc/ 4. 0/. 
ORCID iDs 
Gitte Hedermann http:// orcid. org/ 0000- 0001- 8853- 0986 
Ulrik Lausten- Thomsen http:// orcid. org/ 0000- 0003- 1136- 4347 
REFERENCES 
1Yu N, Li W, Kang Q, et al. Clinical features and obstetric and neonatal outcomes of 
 
pregnant patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective, single- centre, 
descriptive study. Lancet Infect Dis 2020;20:559–64. 
2Chawanpaiboon S, Vogel JP, Moller A- B, et al. Global, regional, and national estimates 
 
of levels of preterm birth in 2014: a systematic review and modelling analysis. Lancet 
Glob Health 2019;7:e37–46. 
3 Vogel JP, Chawanpaiboon S, Moller A- B, et al. The global epidemiology of preterm birth. 
 

4 Goldenberg RL, Culhane JF, Iams JD, et al. Epidemiology and causes of preterm birth. 
 

5Snijder CA, Brand T, Jaddoe V, et al. Physically demanding work, fetal growth and 
 
the risk of adverse birth outcomes. the generation R study. Occup Environ Med 
2012;69:543–50. 
Figure 1 Proportion of extremely premature and very premature 
births (permille of all births in the time period) during the lockdown 
period (12 March–14 April 2020) compared with aggregated birth data 
for the previous 5 years during the same date range (12 March–14 April 
2015–2019). Inset graph: a comparison of extremely premature and 
very premature births born between 20 January and 22 February 2020 
and an aggregate from that date range for the previous 5 years (20 
January–22 February 2015–2019). Extremely premature (before 28+0 
weeks’ gestation) and very premature (28+0–31+6 weeks’ gestation). 
Error bars represent 95% CIs. 
may reflect that no such differences exist, or that the differences 
are too subtle to be detected. However, it is noteworthy that 
we observed a non- significant but slightly increased number of 
very premature births. It is possible that the impact lockdown 
had on risk factors for premature birth, served to simply post- 
pone extremely preterm labour in some high- risk pregnancies, 
although this impact was not sufficient to avoid premature births 
altogether. 
Our study has several strengths. Centralised neonatal screening 
has an uptake rate of nearly 100% in Denmark. Screening is 
performed within 3 days of birth, at the DNSB, which registers 
relevant clinical data pertaining to the birth, based on reliable, 
real- time, mandatory reporting. It is unlikely that the absence 
of extremely premature children is due to a decline in the rate 
of data transmission during the lockdown as no changes were 
detected in the other age categories. Because exposure (the 
lockdown) is independent of the recorded outcome, differential 
misclassification is not considered to be an issue. It is, however, 
possible that a larger than usual number of pregnancies resulted 
in intrauterine death, or that some extremely premature babies 
are missing due to early neonatal demise before registration with 
DNSB. Also, despite being a national study, the actual number of 
premature children remains small and must be interpreted with 
caution. 
Importantly, this study is observational, and the association 
between the decreased number of extremely premature children 
and nationwide lockdown is not necessarily causal. As such, 
these data need to be confirmed in other countries, although 
international discrepancies regarding changes in premature birth 
rates could reflect the variation in baseline premature birth rates, 
as well as differences in implementation of lockdowns around 



