2017 IEEE-RAS 17th International Conference on
Humanoid Robotics (Humanoids)
Birmingham, UK, November 15-17, 2017
A Pilot Study on Using an Intelligent Life-like Robot as a Companion
for Elderly Individuals with Dementia and Depression
1 1 2 1,2
Hojjat Abdollahi , Ali Mollahosseini , Josh T. Lane , and Mohammad H. Mahoor
Abstract—This paper presents the design, development, peoplewithdementia.Thereisanemergingresearchfieldin
methodology, and the results of a pilot study on using an roboticsthataimstousesocialrobotstoengageeffectivelyin
intelligent, emotive and perceptive social robot (aka Compan-
socialandconversationalinteractionwithelderlyindividuals
ionbot) for improving the quality of life of elderly people with
with dementia to improve their socio-emotional behaviors,
dementiaand/ordepression.RyanCompanionbotprototypedin
this project, is a rear-projected life-like conversational robot. cognitive functions and well-being. We conducted a pilot
Ryan is equipped with features that can (1) interpret and study to demonstrate the feasibility of using Ryan Compan-
respond to users’ emotions through facial expressions and ionbot, a perceptive and empathic conversational humanoid
spoken language, (2) proactively engage in conversations with
robot, to improve the quality of life of elderly individuals
users, and (3) remind them about their daily life schedules
with moderate dementia and/or depression. In this study,
(e.g. taking their medicine on time). Ryan engages users in
cognitive games and reminiscence activities. We conducted a we are using spoken dialog combined with a rich list of
pilotstudywithsixelderlyindividualswithmoderatedementia other stimuli such as eye gaze, head movement, and facial
and/or depression living in a senior living facility in Denver. expressions as the primary form of communication between
Each individual had 24/7 access to a Ryan in his/her room for
the subject and the robot. Specifically, the objective of this
a period of 4-6 weeks. Our observations of these individuals,
study is to evaluate the following fundamental research
interviewswiththemandtheircaregivers,andanalysesoftheir
interactions during this period revealed that they established questions:
rapport with the robot and greatly valued and enjoyed having 1) Long-Term Companionship: Would enriching the
a Companionbot in their room. robot with a number of different features keep the
subjects engaged over an extend period of time?
I. INTRODUCTION
2) Likability and Acceptance: Is interacting with SAR
Developing and studying robots as an assistive tool for enjoyable for elderly individuals and do they accept a
health-care professionals is a growing area of research due robot as a companion?
to the rapid growth in the number of elderly people and 3) RobotFeatures:Dotheresultsofthepilotstudyshow
the demand for specialized caregivers. Socially Assistive that each individual looked for different features (e.g.,
Robotics (SAR) [1] focus on improving elderly people’s spoken dialog system, cognitive games, family photo
quality of life, mental health, and socio-emotional well- album narration, music playing, etc.) in the robot?
being.Socialrobotsareusedascompanions[2]ortherapeu-
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
tic play partners [3]. The essential feature that defines SAR
Section II reviews the related work on SAR and employing
isusingsocialinteractionsratherthanphysicalinteractionto
social robots in elder care. Section III introduces Ryan
help the user [4]. The focus of this paper is on SAR and the
Companionbot, and explains the software and hardware
companionship it provide for elderly people with moderate
aspect of Ryan. Section IV explains the experiment setting
depression and/or dementia.
and the methodology of our pilot study to evaluate the
Dementia is an overall term for diseases that deterio-
above fundamental research questions. Section V presents
rate individuals’ memory and other mental skills. Dementia
the results and analysis of the experiments. The results are
can significantly reduce elderly individuals’ ability to live
categorized in four subsection: long-term companionship,
independently and safely in their homes. It is one of the
likability and acceptance, caregivers’ feedback, and robot
costliest diseases and requires hours of specialized care-
features. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
giving for each person [5]. Associated to the decline in
cognitive abilities, depression is one of the symptoms of II. RELATEDWORK
dementia [6]. UsingSARtohelpelderlyindividualshasrecentlybecome
There is thus a critical and growing demand in the more relevant due to the increase in the number of elderly
community to find effective ways to provide care for elderly people,thedecreaseinthecostoftechnology,andtherecent
advances in artificial intelligence [7]. Residents of nursing
Emailaddresses:HojjatAbdollahi:habdolla@du.edu,AliMollahosseini: homes are living alone with disabilities while in most cases
ali.mollahosseini@du.edu, Josh T. Lane: josh.lane@dreamfacetech.com,
their cognitive abilities are degrading due to old age or
MohammadH.Mahoor:mmahoor@du.edu
various type of dementia [8]. Studies suggest that social
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of support for elderly individuals could improve their cognitive
Denver,CO,USA
2DreamFace Technologies, LLC., Lone Tree, CO, USA function [9]. Using SARs with a focus on the socialization
http://dreamfacetech.com/ aspect of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) is a viable option
978-1-5386-4678-6/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 541
to reduce the burden on caregivers while providing compan-
ionshipforelderlypeople,improvingtheirqualityoflife,and
avoiding depression and further degradation of their mental
abilities.
Wada et al. [10] used the robot Paro to study the long-
term effect of social robots on residents of a senior care
center.Theresultsindicatedthatelderlyresidentsestablished
a relationship with the robot, developed stronger social ties
among themselves, and also maintained a lower stress level.
However, Paro lacks the ability to talk and communicate. It
is shown that for a social robot to be accepted more easily Fig. 1: Ryan hardware
itshould becommunicative[11]and mustemploya formof
communication with which humans are habituated [12].
Another key aspect to having a robot as a companion, is robotafterhislatewife.Leavingtherobotinelderlypeople’s
continuous (uninterrupted) companionship, meaning having home and having 24/7 access to the robot may cause them
access to the robot at all times. Autonomy plays a crucial to lose motivation. To provoke subjects to act on intrinsic
role in achieving an uninterrupted companionship. Most of motivation, we had to define tasks and modify Ryan to be
the studies carried out with social robots on elder care are enjoyable and not repetitive.
eitherdoneinaWizard-Of-Oz(WOO)manner[13],orwere After a while that the human exhausts all of the features
limited to a specific scenario [14]. Vardoulakis et al. [13] of the robot, they will lose interest in interacting with the
designedanexperimenttostudylong-termsocialcompanion robot. Itis shownthat the noveltyeffect ofSARs disappears
for older adults. They used a WOO method, and the subject quickly [19]. As the novelty aspect wears off, the social
hadarobotathis/herhomeforoneweek.Butsincetherobot effect might decrease as well [20]. By endowing Ryan
wascontrolledremotelybyanoperator,thesubjectinteracted with a character and a sense of humor on top of various
withtherobotforonlyonehoureveryday.EmployingWOO other features implemented into Ryan, we keep the subjects
methodforcesthesubjectstousetherobotataspecifictime interested to interact with the robot for a long period.
ofthedayforashortperiodwhichresemblesvisitingafriend In the next sections, we will explain the hardware and
thanhavingacompanionathome.SocialrobotssuchasParo software aspect of the Ryan.
are autonomous and provide continuous companionship, but
A. Hardware
lack the ability of having a robust social interaction such as
spoken dialog and an expressive face. RyanCompanionbothardwareisdesignedwiththreemain
Deep social interaction is required when dealing with components(Figure1):1)theheadprojectionsystem,2)the
elderly individuals with dementia. Different robots such as neck mechanism, and 3) the torso.
Aibo,Paro,andBandithavebeenusedinstudiesonthecare 1) Head Projection System: Using a large number of
ofelderlypeoplewithdementia[15].Mostoftherobotsthat actuators to build a human-like robotic face capable of
have been used in these studies have not been built with showing different emotions and visual speech is difficult
the social aspect in mind. But to be able to communicate and expensive [21]. To avoid tremendous effort required to
with elderly people with dementia and try to engage them develop a robotic head capable of having accurate visual
in conversations and games, we need a robot that has been speech, state-of-the-art character animation technology was
designed to accomplish these social goals. In the following used to produce an avatar. Using rear projection optics, the
section, we will introduce a robot designed to be social. head projection system displays the animated avatar onto
a mask. This system also allows us to further customize
III. RYAN,THECOMPANIONBOT
the appearance of the robot. Please consult the work by
The robot used in this study is Ryan Companionbot [16] Mollahosseini et al. [21] for more details on the projection
which is based on the Expressionbot [17]. Ryan has been system.
developedinDreamFaceTechnologies,LLC.withthesocial 2) Neck Mechanism: The movement of the head for
aspectofHRIinmind.Thisrobothasanemotiveandexpres- tracking faces and head gestures is controlled by the neck
sive face with accurate visual speech. Ryan can maintain a mechanism, a two degree of freedom pan/tilt unit. Having
spoken dialog, recognize expressions on the user’s face, and only two degrees of freedom keeps the system simple and
it is equipped with a screen on its torso with features such suffices for face tracking. The neck has a range of motion
as cognitive games, music player, narrated photo album, and of 30◦of flexion and extension (±30◦ pitch) and 180◦lateral
video player. rotation (±90◦yaw). This range allows the head to track the
To keep the subject engaged for an extensive period of user anywhere in front of the robot.
time, SARs must be personalized [18]. Thus, Ryan was 3) Torso: The main computer, a RGBD camera, a touch
customizedforeachsubject.Toincreaseintimacyandinvoke screendisplay,andthepowersuppliesareenclosedinsidethe
rapport, subjects were allowed to choose the name for the torso.Addingatouchscreentotherobotaddedanewwayof
robot. It is worth mentioning that one subject named the interactingwithRyan(touch)andalsoitaddedthefeatureto
542
(a)MainMenu (b)HearingEar (c)ShapeUp
Fig. 3: A subject interacting with the robot in her home.
Fig. 2: Cognitive Games
and the users could answer the questions either via voice
be able to display more information to the user. The display
commands or by pushing the buttons on the screen.
was used for cognitive games, music player, video player,
There is evidence that life story, photo albums, and
and the narrated photo album. The RGBD camera enables
reminiscence work, particularly when done one-on-one, can
us to have a 3D view of the environment for better tracking
improvemood,well-beingandsomementalabilitiessuchas
the user and also for future studies on activity recognition.
memory[26].Foreachsubjectwecollectedabout15-20old
photos and the stories about the event in the photos either
B. Software
from the participant or their close relatives. The photos are
To make Ryan an intelligent and sociable robot that can
shown on the torso screen one-by-one and the robot reads
understand human language and can communicate through
the story back to the user. Sometimes simple questions are
spoken dialog, a series of features have been implemented
asked to engage the user in the conversation.
on the robot. Ryan must be able to find the user in the
Reminiscence and memory work also involves talking
environment, read the user’s facial expression, understand
about things from the past, using prompts such as photos,
user’s speech, generate an appropriate response, and say it
familiarobjectsorplayingmusic.Avideoplayerapplication
to the user through audio, accompanied with visual speech
was created to randomly select and play videos from a list
while showing a relevant expression on the face. Ryan is
of YouTube video clips. The list contained URLs of short
also able to communicate with the users through the touch
(4-5 minutes) YouTube videos queried based on the users’
screen on the torso.
topics of interests (e.g. healthy foods, sports, and nature).
The Microsoft Kinect sensor V2.0 [22] acts as the eyes
of the system to constantly monitor user’s activities and IV. PILOTSTUDY
its face detection feature enables Ryan to find the subject To assess Ryan’s feasibility as a Companionbot, we con-
in the room. For facial emotion recognition, Ryan uses ductedapilotstudywithsixelderlyindividualswithdemen-
the Intel RealSense SDK [23] which provides seven basic tia and depression living in the Eaton Senior Community in
facial expressions. Intel RealSense SDK is also used as Denver, Colorado [28].The robotwas leftin theirhome and
the speech to text engine. Ryan uses the speech emotion they had access to the robot at all times. Figure 3 shows a
recognition Aylien [24] system which is an online natural subject interacting with the robot.
language processing service for sentiment analysis of the
A. Subjects
user’s speech. A retrieval-based open dialog management
systems available on the web (ChatBot/Pandorabots [25]) is A group of six volunteered elderly individuals were se-
used as the dialog manager. lected for this study. The selection criteria included those
To reduce subjects’ cognitive abilities deterioration, we elderly who live alone, were in the early-mild stage of
equipped Ryan with cognitive games focused on patients dementia and may suffer from depression. Other selection
with dementia. Drugs are not the only method to treat criteria included the availability for a period of at least four
mental diseases such as dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and weekstohouseandinteractwiththerobot.Selectedsubjects
depression. There exist alternative therapeutic methods such wereconsentedpriortoparticipatinginthestudyandfamily
as talking therapies, life story and reminiscence work, and members of the subjects were also informed to insure they
cognitive stimulation therapy for these diseases [26]. are aware of the study.
We designed four games (Figure 2). These games are The Saint Louis University Mental Status (SLUMS) Ex-
based on the Montessori-based activities [27] to help people amination [29] and the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-
suffering from dementia combat the disease. These visual 9) [30] were completed by each patient and scored by
games are simple and interactive with different levels of the caregiver prior to the experiment. The SLUMS, devel-
complexity. The game instructions were given by Ryan oped at the Division of Geriatric Medicine, Saint Louis
543
TABLE I: Participants demographics, SLUMS and PHQ-
250
9 Scores. Highlighted cells mean that the symptoms (i.e.
200
Dementia and Depression) exist in the patient.
150
100
SLUMS PHQ-9 Living
Sbj Age Gender Score Score Resident 50 Series1
1 63 F 19 17 Independent 0
1 7 14 21 28
2 86 M 21 1 Independent
3 78 F 29 15 Independent
Fig. 4: The average number of dialogs between participants
4 73 F 17 3 Assisted
5 71 F 25 7 Assisted and Ryan has not decayed over a period of four weeks (One
6* 79 F 28 16 Assisted subject interacted with the robot for three weeks).
*Subject6participated24dayssinceshebecameillandhospitalized
attheendofpilotstudy
topics such as sports, emotional states, technology, or other
University School of Medicine, is a favorable screening topics. Each conversation contains several dialogs between
tool for detecting mild cognitive impairment. The PHQ-9 thesubjectsandRyan.Wedefinedadialogasanexchangeof
contains nine questions and is a brief and useful instrument one inquiry and response between the subject and Ryan. On
for screening, monitoring, and measuring the severity of average the subjects and Ryan had 198 (σ=49.2) dialogs per
depression. The SLUMS scores for people with high school day, with the average length of 9.2 words per each dialog.
educations are interpreted as follows: 27-30: Normal, 21- Figure 4 shows the average number of dialogs of all
26: Mild Neurocognitive Disorder, 1-20: Dementia. The participantsovertheperiodoffourweeks.SinceSN6became
PHQ-9 severity scores are mapped as the following: score ill and hospitalized at the end of the pilot study, she only
5-9: Minimal Symptoms, score 10-14: Minor depression, participated 24 days. Therefore, the average shown for the
score15-19:Majordepression,moderatelysevere,score>20: last 4 days are data from 5 subjects. The average number
Majordepression,severe.TableIshowsthedemographicsof of dialogs time series (shown in Fig. 4) is then smoothed
the patients that participated in our pilot studies. using a moving average with the window size of five, due to
variation between consecutive days and subjects schedule.
B. Method
As shown, the average number of dialogs per day for all
In order to measure how effectively Ryan can provide subjects did not decay over four weeks. In other words, The
companionship for elderly individuals with dementia, we subjectskepttheirinterestinhavingconversationswithRyan
conducted a one-on-one (robot vs human) pilot study in the even after a long period of time.
Eaton Senior Community Center. Three Ryan Companion- The subjects also spent approximately two hours and ten
botsweremanufacturedforthestudy.Eachsubjecthad24/7 minutesperdayinteractingwithRyanindifferenttaskssuch
access to Ryan in their rooms for a period of 4-6 weeks. as playing cognitive games, having conversations, viewing
The robot was left in the room of the elderly participant, family photo albums, listening to music, etc. Taking into
and he/she treated Ryan Companionbot as his/her guest. To account that although the subjects were living in a senior
avoid any maintenance issues, the research team monitored living facility, where the residents had regular wellness pro-
the status of the robots remotely. gramsandgroupactivities(suchasplayinggames,excessing,
Each subject was interviewed to obtain their daily sched- occupationalandphysicaltherapy),theystillwereinterested
ules, a set of photos for the album, topics of interest for in spending time with Ryan, and five of them asked for
YouTube video search, and a collection of favorite music having Ryan in their room for a more extended time. The
andsongs.Ryanswerecustomizedforeachparticipant.They result of our pilot study indicated that elderly individuals
could call the robot with any name at their preferences. were interested in having a robot as their companion. They
Participants’dailyschedule,includingreminderstotaketheir have spent great amount of time with the robot and their
medications, were set manually for each subject. interests in speaking with the robot did not decay over time.
During the study, all subjects’ interactions with Ryan, the
facial emotion of the users, the conversations between Ryan B. Likability and Acceptance
and the participants as well as the sentiment of the speech At the end of the study, we asked each participant to
were logged. We analyzed the log files and computed a completeanexitsurveyof16questionsabouttheexperiences
measurement to evaluate user interactions with Ryan during they had with Ryan according to the 5-point Likert scale
the pilot study. (1-Strongly disagree, 5-Strongly agree). These included six
questions about user interaction and companionship of Ryan
V. RESULTS
(i.e., how enjoyable they found interacting and having con-
A. Long-Term Companionship versations with the robot), and ten questions about features
In order to measure whether Ryan can be a companion of of Ryan (e.g., ability to show facial expressions, cognitive
elderly individuals in long-term, the conversations between games, memory photo album, music and video players).
Ryan and the participants were recorded over the period Table II shows the exit survey questions and participants’
of the experiment. The conversations were on different averageandstandarddeviationscoresaccompaniedbyCron-
544
TABLE II: The mean rank and questions of the exit survey evaluating users’ likability and acceptance of interacting with
Ryan and its features (1-strongly disagree, 5-strongly agree)
Avg.Score Cronbach’s
Question ±(STD) alpha
Q1.Ienjoyedinteractingwiththerobot. 4.17±0.75
Q2.Theconversationwiththerobotwasinteresting. 4.00±0.89
QuestionsAbout Q3.Talkingwiththerobotwasliketalkingtoaperson. 3.00±1.54
UserInteraction Q4.IfeelhappierwhenIhadtherobotasmycompany. 3.67±1.03 0.930
withRyan Q5.Iwouldliketohavethisrobotinmyhomeagain. 3.33±1.50
Q6.Ifeellessdepressedaftertalkingtotherobot. 3.33±1.36
Q7.Ilikedtherobot’sfacialexpressions. 4.17±0.75
Q8.Ilikedtherobotmirroringmyfacialexpressions. 3.50±1.04
Q9.Therobotreminderhelpedmetobeonschedule. 4.00±0.63
Q10.Ienjoyedtherobotplayingmyfavoritemusic. 4.17±0.40
QuestionsAbout Q11.Ienjoyedtherobotplayingvideosforme. 3.83±0.75
FeatureofRyan Q12.Thevideoswereeffectiveandaffectedmylifestyle. 3.50±1.51 0.924
Q13.Ienjoyedplayingthegames. 3.33±1.50
Q14.Thegameshelpedmetrainmybrain,thoughtheyweresimple. 3.17±1.32
Q15.Thegameswerechallenging. 2.00±1.54
Q16.Ienjoyedwatchingmyphotoalbumshownbytherobot. 4.33±0.81
bach’s Alpha [31] score for the internal consistency and
reliability of each category of questions.
It can be seen that participants gave strong positive re-
sponses (score > 3.5) to most questions on interacting with
Ryan, such as “I enjoyed interacting with the robot”, “The
conversation with the robot was interesting.” As expected,
the participant did not believe that “talking with the robot
was like talking to a person” with an average score of 3±
1.54, however, overall felt happier when they had the robot
as their company with an average score of 3.67± 1.03.
Fig.5:Percentage(%)oftimeeachuserspentinthedifferent
The survey also indicated that the participants liked the
robot’s features such as its facial expression (4.17 ± 0.75), activities.
reminder(4.00±0.63),playingmusic(4.17±0.40),playing
videos (3.83 ± 0.75) and watching their photo album (4.33
± 0.81) . The games were not challenging enough for the C. Caregiver’s Feedback
participants with the average score of 2.00 ± 1.54, but they The users’ caregiver, a licensed practical nurse with 20
still found value in playing them, since they “helped me years of experience, provided feedback on the outcome of
train my brain.” The games were designed for elderly in the pilot study for each participant. The caregiver closely
a high level of dementia based on the Montessori-based monitored SN1, SN3 and SN6 who were diagnosed with
activities to help people suffering from dementia combat the depression. She confirmed that Ryan elevated the users
disease. The authors believe that the games were simple and mood.Inherwords:“SN6hasbeensomuchhappier”,“SN4
interactive,buttheybecameboringforthepeoplewithearly- wouldbreakoutinabigsmilewhenweaskedherabouther
mild stages of dementia (See Table I for the SLUM score of experiences”, and “You can see the improvement in [SN3’s]
the participants). level of depression after the hip surgery thanks to that sassy
In summary, the survey revealed that the subjects liked roommate [Ryan]”. The caregiver noted that the robot was
interactingwithRyanandacceptedtherobotasacompanion able to establish a deep connection with the subjects.
although it cannot replace human companionship. They also
D. Robot Features
believed the robot helped them maintain their schedule,
improved their mood, and stimulated them mentally. The In order to analyze users’ interactions and measure which
common sentiment among users after the pilot study was feature were most appealing for the users, the usage of
bestdescribedbyoneuser’scomment,“She[Ryan]wasjust robot’s features were recorded over time. Figure 5 shows
enjoyable. We were SAD to see her go.” The Eaton staff the percentage of time that each subject spent with different
and family members expressed enthusiastic support for the activities (i.e. Games, Conversation, Video, Photo Album,
project because it had a consistently positive impact on each and Music).
of the individuals who interacted with Ryan. For instance, Asthefigureshows,eachparticipanthadvariousinterests
the son of one of the participants said “[Ryan] has brought and found value in different activities, as supported by the
colorandlaughterintomymom’slife.Shelaughswhenever users’ self-report and caregivers’ observations. For example,
she talks about it!” subjectsSN6andSN3preferredthemusicplayerwhileSN2,
545
SN4, and SN5 enjoyed the conversation with the robot the [10] K.Wada,T.Shibata,T.Saito,andK.Tanie,“Effectsofrobotassisted
most. On average, each user spent approximately two hours activity to elderly people who stay at a health service facility for
the aged,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2003.(IROS 2003).
andtenminutesperdayinteractingwithRyan;timethatthey
Proceedings. 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, vol. 3.
otherwise would have likely spent alone. IEEE,2003,pp.2847–2852.
[11] M. Heerink, B. Kro¨se, B. Wielinga, V. Evers, et al., “Studying the
VI. CONCLUSION acceptanceofaroboticagentbyelderlyusers,”InternationalJournal
ofAssistiveRoboticsandMechatronics,vol.7,no.3,pp.33–43,2006.
This paper presented the design, development, and suc-
[12] N. C. Kra¨mer, A. von der Pu¨tten, and S. Eimler, “Human-agent
cessfulintegrationofaCompanionbottoimprovethequality and human-robot interaction theory: similarities to and differences
of life of elderly individuals with dementia and depres- fromhuman-humaninteraction,”inHuman-computerinteraction:The
agencyperspective. Springer,2012,pp.215–240.
sion. Three fundamental research questions were posed and
[13] L.P.Vardoulakis,L.Ring,B.Barry,C.L.Sidner,andT.Bickmore,
addressed in this paper: 1) Long-Term Companionship: “Designing relational agents as long term social companions for
Wouldenrichingtherobotwithanumberofdifferentfeatures olderadults,”LectureNotesinComputerScience(includingsubseries
LectureNotesinArtificialIntelligenceandLectureNotesinBioinfor-
keep the subjects engaged over an extend period of time?
matics),vol.7502LNAI,p.289302,2012.
2) Likability and Acceptance: Would elderly individuals [14] J. Pineau, M. Montemerlo, M. Pollack, N. Roy, and S. Thrun,
accept a robot as a companion? Is interaction with the robot “Towardsroboticassistantsinnursinghomes:Challengesandresults,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 42, no. 3-4, p. 271281, Mar
enjoyable to them? 3) Robot Features: Do the results of
2003. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8890(02)
thepilotstudyshowthateachindividuallookedfordifferent 00381-0
features in the robot? Our experimental results and analysis [15] E. Mordoch, A. Osterreicher, L. Guse, K. Roger, and G. Thompson,
“Useofsocialcommitmentrobotsinthecareofelderlypeoplewith
of the collected data indicated that elderly individuals were
dementia: A literature review,” Maturitas, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 14–20,
interested in having a robot as their companion and their 2013.
interest did not decay over time. The subjects liked inter- [16] “Dreamface technologies — social robotics.” [Online]. Available:
http://dreamfacetech.com/ryan-2/
acting with Ryan and accepted the robot as a companion
[17] A. Mollahosseini, G. Graitzer, E. Borts, S. Conyers, R. M. Voyles,
although it cannot replace human companionship. The pro- R.Cole,andM.H.Mahoor,ExpressionBot:Anemotivelifelikerobotic
posed emotionally intelligent conversational Companionbot faceforface-to-facecommunication. IEEE,Nov2014,p.10981103.
[18] G. Castellano, R. Aylett, K. Dautenhahn, A. Paiva, P. W. McOwan,
with a variety of engaging activities can fully engage users
and S. Ho, “Long-term affect sensitive and socially interactive com-
and be a promising tool to improve the quality of life of panions,”inProceedingsofthe4thInternationalWorkshoponHuman-
elderly individuals with dementia and depression. ComputerConversation,2008.
[19] Z.-J. You, C.-Y. Shen, C.-W. Chang, B.-J. Liu, and G.-D. Chen, “A
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT robotasateachingassistantinanenglishclass,”inAdvancedLearning
Technologies,2006.SixthInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2006,
ThisresearchispartiallysupportedbygrantsIIP-1548956
pp.87–91.
and CNS-1427872 from the National Science Foundation. [20] Y.Fernaeus,M.Hkansson,M.Jacobsson,andS.Ljungblad,Howdo
youplaywitharobotictoyanimal?Along-termstudyofPleo. ACM
REFERENCES Press,2010,p.3948.
[21] A. Mollahosseini, G. Graitzer, E. Borts, S. Conyers, R. M. Voyles,
[1] D.Feil-SeiferandM.J.Mataric,“Definingsociallyassistiverobotics,” R. Cole, and M. H. Mahoor, “Expressionbot: An emotive lifelike
in Rehabilitation Robotics, 2005. ICORR 2005. 9th International robotic face for face-to-face communication,” in Humanoid Robots
Conferenceon. IEEE,2005,pp.465–468. (Humanoids), 2014 14th IEEE-RAS International Conference on.
[2] W. Taggart, S. Turkle, and C. D. Kidd, “An interactive robot in a IEEE,2014,pp.1098–1103.
nursing home : Preliminary remarks field setting : Nursing homes,” [22] “Kinect for windows sdk,” http://kinectforwindows.org, accessed:
Towards Social Mechanisms of Android Science: A COGSCI Work- 2017-10-05.
shop,p.16,2005. [23] “Intel realsense sdk for windows,” https://software.intel.com/en-us/
[3] I.Leite,S.Mascarenhas,C.Martinho,R.Prada,andA.Paiva,“why intel-realsense-sdk,accessed:2017-10-05.
cant we be friends? an empathic game companion for long-term [24] “Aylientextapi.”[Online].Available:http://aylien.com/text-api
interaction,”p.315321,2010. [25] “Pandorabots.”[Online].Available:http://www.pandorabots.com/
[4] S.M.Rabbitt,A.E.Kazdin,andB.Scassellati,“Integratingsocially [26] V. Lawrence, J. Fossey, C. Ballard, E. Moniz-Cook, and J. Murray,
assistive robotics into mental healthcare interventions: Applications “Improving quality of life for people with dementia in care homes:
andrecommendationsforexpandeduse,”ClinicalPsychologyReview, making psychosocial interventions work,” The British Journal of
vol.35,p.3546,2015. Psychiatry,vol.201,no.5,pp.344–351,2012.
[5] A.Abbott,“Dementia:aproblemforourage,”Nature,vol.475,no. [27] K. S. Judge, C. J. Camp, and S. Orsulic-Jeras, “Use of montessori-
7355,pp.S2–S4,2011. based activities for clients with dementia in adult day care: Effects
[6] P. Marti, M. Bacigalupo, L. Giusti, C. Mennecozzi, and T. Shi- on engagement,” American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, vol. 15,
bata, “Socially assistive robotics in the treatment of behavioural and no.1,pp.42–46,2000.
psychological symptoms of dementia,” in Biomedical Robotics and [28] “Eaton senior communities,” http://www.eatonsenior.org/, accessed:
Biomechatronics, 2006. BioRob 2006. The First IEEE/RAS-EMBS 2017-03-09.
InternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2006,pp.483–488. [29] S. Tariq, N. Tumosa, J. Chibnall, H. Perry III, and J. Morley, “The
[7] I. Leite, “Long-term interactions with empathic social robots,” AI saintlouisuniversitymentalstatus(slums)examinationfordetecting
Matters,vol.1,no.3,pp.13–15,2015. mild cognitive impairment and dementia is more sensitive than the
[8] A. A. Kotwal, J. Kim, L. Waite, and W. Dale, “Social function mini-mentalstatusexamination(mmse)–apilotstudy,”AmJGeriatr
and cognitive status: Results from a us nationally representative Psychiatry,vol.14,no.11,pp.900–10,2006.
survey of older adults,” Journal of General Internal Medicine, [30] K. Kroencke, R. Spitzer, and J. Williams, “The phq-9: validity of
vol. 31, no. 8, p. 854862, Apr 2016. [Online]. Available: a brief depression severity measure [electronic version],” Journal of
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11606-016-3696-0 GeneralInternalMedicine,vol.16,no.9,pp.606–13,2001.
[9] M. Zamora-Macorra, E. F. A. de Castro, J. A. A´vila-Funes, B. S. [31] L.J.Cronbach,“Coefficientalphaandtheinternalstructureoftests,”
Manrique-Espinoza,R.Lo´pez-Ridaura,A.L.Sosa-Ortiz,P.L.Shields,
psychometrika,vol.16,no.3,pp.297–334,1951.
andD.S.M.delCampo,“Theassociationbetweensocialsupportand
cognitivefunctioninmexicanadultsaged50andolder,”Archivesof
GerontologyandGeriatrics,vol.68,pp.113–118,2017.
546
