ComputersinHumanBehavior128(2022)107100
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers in Human Behavior
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comphumbeh
Is chatting with a sophisticated chatbot as good as chatting online or FTF
with a stranger?
Michelle Drouina,b,*, Susan Sprecherc, Robert Nicolaa, Taylor Perkinsd
aDepartment of Psychology, Purdue University Fort Wayne, 2101 E. Coliseum Blvd., Fort Wayne, IN, 46805, USA
bParkview Mirro Center for Research and Innovation, 10622 Parkview Plaza Dr., Fort Wayne, IN, 46845, USA
cDepartment of Sociology, Illinois State University, Normal, IL, 61790, USA
dDepartment of Psychology, Ball State University, 2000 W University Ave, Muncie, IN, 47306, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Emotionally-responsive chatbots are marketed as agents with which one can form emotional connections. They
Chatbots can also become weak ties in the outer layers of one’s acquaintance network and available for social support. In
Dyadic interactions this experiment, which was designed to study the acquaintance process, we randomly assigned 417 participants
Affect
into three conditions: face-to-face (FTF) chat with a human, online chat with a human, and online chat with a
Computer-mediated communication
commercially-available, emotionally-responsive chatbot, Replika. After a 20-min getting-acquainted chat, par-
Conversational dynamics
ticipants reported their affective state and relational evaluations of the chat. Additionally, all chats were
Human-computer interaction
recorded and text analyzed using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) program. In all conditions,
participants reported moderate levels of positive emotions and low levels of negative emotions. Those who
chatted FTF with a human reported significantly more negative emotions than those who chatted with a bot.
However, those who chatted with a human also reported more homophily with and liking of their chat partner
and that their partner was more responsive. Meanwhile, participants had fewest conversational concerns with the
chatbot. These findings have implications for future computer-mediated interaction studies: conversations with
chatbots appear to have different affordances and effects on chatter enjoyment and conversational concerns in
getting-acquainted contexts. These results may help designers improve reception and marketability for chatbots
in consumer markets.
1. Introduction acquaintances who exist in the outer layers of one’s social networks.
Chatbots, or conversational agents built to interact with humans using
Although close relationships are critically important for people’s life natural language (Shawar & Atwell, 2007), are among the most so-
satisfaction, health, and longevity, acquaintances and weak ties also phisticated of these interactive technologies. They are also incredibly
have benefits for health and well-being (Holt-Lundstad, Smith, & Lay- prevalent. Pandora Bot, a platform devoted to the development of
ton, 2010). Recent research indicates that people can experience chatbots, boasts that more than 325,000 chatbots have been created by
enhanced positive feelings and a sense of belonging through brief in- more than 275,000 developers in their forum alone (www.pandorabots.
teractions with acquaintances (Hirsch & Clark, 2019), including with com, 2021). Although the general public might encounter some of these
students in classes (Sandstrom & Dunn, 2014a), a barista in a coffee shop chatbots during everyday e-commerce interactions (Carter & Knol,
(Sandstrom & Dunn, 2014b), a shuttle driver (Gunaydin, Oztekin, Kar- 2019; Ivanov & Webster, 2017; Kumar, 2019), chatbots are being
abulut, & Salman-Engin, 2020), and strangers in a laboratory developed for deeper conversations and to provide social interaction and
getting-acquainted interaction (Vittengl & Holt, 2000). Today, people support for users’ mental health issues and other health-related concerns
also have another option for a weak tie confidant – a sophisticated (Cameron et al., 2017; Miner, Milstein, & Hancock, 2017).
chatbot (van Wezel, Croes, & Antheunis, 2020). Because intelligent chatbots can learn information about their users
Human-computer interaction is becoming commonplace (Ivanov & to refer to in later conversations (Pereira, Coheur, Fialho, & Ribeiro,
Webster, 2017) and can fill some of the same needs as human 2016), there is hope that these conversational agents will soon provide
* Corresponding author. Department of Psychology, Neff 388, Purdue University Fort Wayne, 2101 E. Coliseum Blvd., Fort Wayne, IN, 46805, USA.
E-mail address: drouinm@pfw.edu (M. Drouin).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.107100
Received 30 December 2020; Received in revised form 4 November 2021; Accepted 15 November 2021
Availableonline16November2021
0747-5632/©2021ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
personalized social support to a variety of users (Miner et al., 2017). Most people own a variety of technological devices and are already
Research suggests this is promising: a recent literature review by van using computers and social media applications to navigate social in-
Wezel et al. (2020) showed that users do garner some social support teractions (Dale, 2016; Pew Research Carter & Knol, 2019). Addition-
from their interactions with existing forms of social chatbots. Moreover, ally, some people are already using chat-based programs to seek social
evidence suggests that chatbots are perceived as conversationally support from other humans online in times of crisis (e.g., 7 Cups of Tea
competent and credible (Edwards, Edwards, Spence, & Shelton, 2014), and Crisis Text Line) (Miner et al., 2017; Toscos et al., 2018, 2019).
and people do not appear to be overly suspicious of the software, as they Perhaps for these reasons, individuals also appear to be comfortable
disclose equally often to a conversational partner they think is a bot as to interacting with chatbots online. However, research has revealed several
one they think is human (Ho, Hancock, & Miner, 2018). Regarding their obstacles to seamless human-chatbot interactions.
functionality, there are even competitions wherein expert judges find it One obstacle is chatbot functionality. More specifically, chatbots are
difficult to decipher whether they are chatting with humans or chatbots not yet sophisticated enough to have spontaneous (i.e., non-scripted)
(e.g., the Loebner Prize competitions). However, the artificial intelli- fluent conversations. According to Shawar and Atwell (2007), early it-
gence that fuels these conversational agents is still nascent, and current erations of chatbots were built for fun, but with innovations in machine
versions of chatbots occasionally make errors when answering questions learning and the expansion of data mining and linguistic databases,
or change the subject when they do not have scripted responses to a chatbots should be able to communicate effectively enough to fill a
user’s questions, which might detract from conversational quality variety of roles in a number of sectors, including education and com-
(Pereira et al., 2016; Shawar & Atwell, 2007) and cause user frustration merce. That said, even more than a decade after Shawar and Atwell’s
(van Wezel et al., 2020). These conversational inadequacies might turn assertions, chatbots’ linguistic capabilities are still limited. These issues
users away from the technology instead of encouraging them to create related to chatbot functionality have been apparent since early attempts
social bonds with the chatbots. at integrating chatbots into simple interactions. As an example, Jia
In support of this suggestion, Croes and Ahthenuis (2021) showed (2003) introduced a chatbot interface (ALICEBOT) with foreign lan-
recently that social attraction to a chatbot, Mitsuku, waned over repeated guage learners who were naïve to the fact that they were communicating
exposures. In their study, individuals were instructed to interact with with a chatbot. Jia found that many of the users deserted the sessions
Mitsuku seven times over three weeks. Participants’ ratings of most so- quickly because the chatbot’s responses were irrelevant or the chatbot
cial processes (e.g., self-disclosure and social attraction) were signifi- did not “understand the language at all” (p. 1201). More recently, Per-
cantly higher at first exposure than subsequent exposures. In other eira et al. (2016) highlighted some of the limitations of the best chatbots
words, the highest ratings occurred when the participants were just of today’s world (i.e., that pass the Turing Test and convince an expert
getting acquainted with Mitsuku. Moreover, the best ratings at that time judge that it is a human). However, even these sophisticated chatbots
were just above the midpoint on an agreement scale for even the sometimes give unwanted answers, switch topics so that they can guide
highest-ranking social process (social attraction). Their study, however, the conversation back to their scripted programs, or provide answers
did not have a condition in which participants interacted with humans, that are not relevant to the conversational context (Pereira et al., 2016).
and thus it was not possible to compare “getting acquainted” reactions as An additional obstacle is the oft-cited phenomenon of the uncanny
a function of whether the interaction was with a chatbot or a human. valley, which refers to the idea that people are uncomfortable when
This gap leads to the following question: In the getting-acquainted robots are too human-like (Mori, 1970). Mori (1970) suggested that
process, do individuals rate interactions with a sophisticated, there is tendency for humans to develop greater affinity to robots the
socially-responsive chatbot as positively as they rate interactions with more they resemble humans; however, this trend reverses as robots get
another human? too human-like. In other words, when robots get very close to human
As the process of acquaintance-forming is complex and based at least form but do not completely replicate it (like with prosthetic hands that
partially on positive experiences (Dunbar, 2018), first interactions are look real but are cold and limp to the touch), affinity dips, and an eerie
critical for the acquaintance process. Therefore, the goal of the current feeling might overshadow any feelings of affinity. Until recently, the
research was to examine the initial conversational experiences of in- idea of the uncanny valley was associated mainly with robots in their
dividuals getting acquainted with a popular emotionally-responsive physical form, but recently, researchers have examined the extent to
chatbot, Replika, versus getting acquainted with a human and under which these negative feelings might be present in interactions with
two possible modes of communication (face-to-face vs. online chatbots. For example, Ciechanowski, Przegalinska, Magnuski, and
messaging). Replika is a chatbot with more than 7 million users world- Gloor (2019) examined this experimentally and found that individuals’
wide advertised as “an AI that you can form an actual emotional feelings of discomfort and negative affect were higher when they were
connection with” (Replika, 2021). interacting with an avatar versus a simple chatbot. Like Mori (1970),
Ciechanowski et al. suggested that when robots are too human-like, it
1.1. Technological issues in interactions between humans and chatbots spurs an eerie or uncomfortable feeling, possibly because it challenges
our uniqueness as humans. Despite this, results from another study
As their basis for existence, chatbots rely on interactions with suggest that even very human-like conversations with sophisticated
humans. To be more precise, chatbots’ conversational databases are “chatbots” (in this case, confederates posing as chatbots) may not cause
derived from natural language inputted by humans via text or voice-to- negative affect. Ho et al. (2018) found that individuals who thought they
text software (Radziwill & Benton, 2017; Shawar & Atwell, 2007). Using were self-disclosing to a chatbot had equivalent emotional outcomes (e.
their intelligent, adaptive system, sophisticated chatbots can then g., level of negative mood), relational outcomes (e.g., perceived partner
engage in novel interactions with other humans, which, in turn, further warmth), and process outcomes (e.g., disclosure intimacy) as those who
populate and enrich their database for future communication (Carpen- thought they were self-disclosing to a person.
ter, n. d.; Pereira et al., 2016). Additionally, so that they more closely Considering both studies together, perhaps the negative reactions the
mimic humans and perhaps even to cover up some of their deficiencies, participants reported in Ciechanowski et al.‘s study arose because they
many chatbots are built to have a personality and affective qualities, had higher expectations of functionality for the humanized avatar than
such as warmth and interest (Banchs, 2017; Pereira et al., 2016; Rad- for the simple chatbot, which left unfulfilled expectations and frustra-
ziwill & Benton, 2017). Thus, even in their current state, sophisticated tions with the avatar. Clearly, this was not an issue in the Ho et al.
chatbots might provide humans with a responsive and interesting con- (2018) study where individuals were actually chatting with a human
versation partner, able to discuss a variety of topics especially light and no such negative feelings were reported. Alternatively, it is possible
conversational topics. that the uncanny valley is not relevant to conversations that occur via a
Innovations in chatbot technology have arrived at a convenient time. chat forum (with no avatar involved), and only highly humanized
2
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
representations spur this negative reaction. comparison purposes, Hill et al. used the same LIWC conversational
categories (e.g., social words, emotion words, total word count) as those
1.2. Humans and chatbots getting acquainted Lortie and Guitton (2011) used in their analysis of humans who were
judged as robots in the Loebner Prize competition. Hill et al. found that
Recently, the acquaintance process has received renewed attention when communicating with chatbots as compared to with humans,
in part because of the interest in the influence of social media and new people used fewer words but sent more messages, and those messages
communication technologies on the formation of relationships. were more likely to contain profanity and sexual topics. This suggests
Although most of this research has focused on human-human interaction that individuals may be less concerned about self-presentation when
(literature that will be reviewed in a later section), as chatbots have they are chatting with chatbots as compared to with humans. However,
become increasingly sophisticated, research attention has turned to the in comparing the acquaintance process of humans with chatbots versus
conversational qualities of humans interacting with a chatbot and how with humans, it is important to consider that today, technology also aids
those conversations compare to humans interacting with another and influences the acquaintance process between humans. Next, we turn
human. to a discussion of how the intrapersonal and interpersonal outcomes of
In the typical experiment to examine the differences in communi- the acquaintance process can depend on modality of communication.
cation with a chatbot versus a human, participants have been randomly
assigned to communicate through text messages with either a human 1.3. Human-human interactions in different technological modalities
(who is sometimes a confederate of the experiment) or a chatbot in a
getting-acquainted scenario. In the chatbot condition, however, a Interaction with a chatbot occurs online, and thus it is important to
Wizard of Oz method is frequently used in which participants are told consider the literature that has compared the intrapersonal and inter-
that their conversation partner is a computer, but the experimenter (a personal outcomes of human-human interaction as a function of
“wizard”) is actually behind the scenes providing scripted responses whether the interaction occurs through text-based computer-mediated
(Dahlba¨ck, Jo¨nsson, & Ahrenberg, 1993, pp. 258–266). In one such communication (CMC) versus face-to-face (FTF). When CMC first
study (Ho et al., 2018), university students were told that they were to became available, research focused on the effects of CMC on efficiency
have a 25-min conversation with either another person or a chatbot in work settings (Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984) and found that CMC
(described as “a computer program that can have a conversation with could lead to negative outcomes including impersonal and disinhibited
people, and is being built and refined by researchers at the university”). styles of communication. An early theory about the effects of CMC – the
Meanwhile, the “person” was introduced as a fellow university student, cues-filtered-out perspective (e.g., Culnan & Markus, 1987) – argued
but was actually a confederate who was blind to whether the participant that the reduced nonverbal and contextual cues in CMC can reduce
believed they were talking to a chatbot or a person. The key finding was people’s ability to have meaningful connection through this form of
that there were no differences in the participants’ emotional (e.g., communication because of the reduction of social presence.
mood), psychological (e.g., self-affirmation), and relational (e.g., More recently, researchers have studied the effects of CMC on the
enjoyment of interaction, liking) outcomes as a function of believing interpersonal outcomes of zero-history dyads who interact for the pur-
they were chatting with a chatbot versus another student (human). pose of becoming acquainted. Many of these studies, particularly when
Moreover, other process variables (e.g., perceived understanding) did they are conducted in university laboratories in limited-time sessions,
not differ between the two conditions. In sum, individuals had equally have found a lower degree of positive outcomes in CMC-text than in FTF,
positive getting-acquainted experiences regardless of whether they including lower levels of satisfaction, closeness, perceived self-
thought they were chatting with a human or a chatbot. However, these disclosure, affection for each other, and enjoyment of the interaction
results speak to user perceptions of chatbots only, as no conversations (Bente, Ruggenberg, Kramer, & Eschenburg, 2008; Mallen, Day, &
with chatbots actually occurred. Green, 2003; Okdie, Guadagno, Bernieri, Geers, & Mclarney-Vestoski,
Other experimental studies have examined intrapersonal and inter- 2011; Ramirez & Burgoon, 2004; Sprecher, 2014; Sprecher & Hamp-
personal outcomes of getting-acquainted communication with an actual ton, 2017).
chatbot. In one study (Schuetzler, Grimes, Giboney, & Nunamaker, Some studies, however, have had more extended get-acquainted in-
2018), participants answered a set of questions in three conditions: (1) teractions and have found no differences in participants’ reactions as a
FTF with a 34-year old male who asked the questions and had minimal function of communication mode (McKenna, Green, & Gleason, 2002) or
verbal and nonverbal responses, (2) through an online survey, or (3) in some cases (especially when extra time is given to those who interact
through a conversational agent (chatbot), which was represented either over CMC), have found the communication to lead to more positive
by an embodied avatar that had an animated face or the questions outcomes in CMC than in FTF (Antheunis, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2007).
appeared in a textbox. The key dependent variable was the degree to This has been explained by social information processing theory
which the participants gave socially desirable responses, particularly for (Walther, 1992), which states that people can adjust to the modality and
the sensitive questions (e.g., drinking behavior). The researchers compensate for the lack of cues with more intimate written communi-
concluded that conversational agents who gave more relevant responses cation. In addition, the hyperpersonal model (Walther, 1996, 2011) – an
to the participants’ disclosures elicited more socially desirable responses extension of the social information processing perspective – argues that
(e.g., less truth) from the participants, suggesting that individuals may asynchronous CMC can lend itself to intimate self-disclosure, strategic
be more conscious of their self-presentation in conversations wherein self-presentation, and idealization.
chat partners are perceived to be more humanlike. However, a limita- Some research has focused on the social affordances offered by
tion of this work is that both the human and the conversational agent different communication technologies. For example, Fox and McEwan
had their responses scripted to be minimal or generic; thus, the study did (2017) measured people’s perceptions of several social affordances (e.g.,
not compare real-world interactions between humans-chatbots and synchronicity, social presence, anonymity, personalization, conversa-
humans-humans. tional control) that can be offered to varying degrees in various types of
Still other studies have contrasted the conversational qualities of communication channels. Although FTF communication is often iden-
humans-chatbots and humans-humans by analyzing conversations via tified as more desirable and optimal than other forms of communication
linguistic analysis. For example, Hill, Ford, and Farreras (2015) (Turkle, 2015), Fox and McEwan found that FTF was not viewed to be
compared human-human interactions (100 instant messages) with a superior to the other channels on all of the social affordances that they
similar number of interactions between humans and a popular chatbot measured. For example, text and email were viewed to be higher in
(Cleverbot) using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count program accessibility (easily achieving communication), persistence (the ability
(LIWC; Pennebaker, Chung, Ireland, Gonzales, & Booth, 2007). For to have a record of the communication), editability, conversational
3
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
control, and anonymity. Although Fox and McEwan focused on the so- mental processes and conversational dynamics. In support of this
cial affordances provided in human-human interaction (and not inter- proposition, studies across a wide range of disciplines have shown that
action with a computer or device), chatbots can offer some of the same individuals’ proportional use of certain word categories, like pronouns,
affordances that people believe are important, including accessibility, vary based on characteristics such as gender, honesty, status, and social
persistence, editablity, and anonymity. interest (see Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010, for review). Thus, a goal of
the current work was to use the LIWC categories as an analytical
1.4. The current study framework for differentiating the linguistic patterns present in different
modalities.
Today, people can develop acquaintances exclusively online. In a
similar CMC-text format, people can become “acquainted” with a so- 2. Method
phisticated chatbot. The purpose of this study was to compare human-
chatbot getting-acquainted interaction with human-human getting- 2.1. Participants
acquainted interaction, with the human-human interaction being con-
ducted either FTF or via online chat. Participants were 417 individuals (297 women, 120 men) recruited
This study contributes not only to the literature on the get- from an introductory psychology participant pool at a midsized U.S.
acquainted process, but also to the very recent scientific investigation midwestern university. From an original sample of 446, 29 participants
of the functionality of chatbots and artificial intelligence more gener- were omitted because they reported that they were an acquaintance or a
ally. Fast-paced development and innovator interest is driving the friend with their human chat partner. Additionally, for analyses, one
chatbot industry forward. As society moves toward integrating chatbots additional individual was excluded because they reported interacting
into more and more online interaction forums (including ecommerce with their chat partner once or twice before that day (their chat partner
and mental health and wellness), initial user impressions are key to reported never interacting with the person before and was retained) and
uptake and long-term sustainability. However, issues with chatbot five individuals were excluded because they were under 18. Thus, the
functionality may stymie getting-acquainted interactions, which may final sample included participants from 63 dyads in the FTF condition,
turn people away from these potentially valuable tools. The prior studies participants from 78 dyads in the online chat with human condition, and
that have compared individuals’ interactions with humans and actual 133 participants in the online chat with Replika condition. The mean age
chatbots have limitations. For instance, Schuetzler et al. (2018) exam- of the participants was 19.82 (SD =3.41). With regard to ethnicity, most
ined the degree of self-disclosure to chatbots as compared to a human, participants were White, not Hispanic (66.4%), followed by Hispanic
and Hill et al. (2015) compared content differences in chats with (12.2%), African American (10.6%), Asian (4.3%), Biracial (3.6%) and
humans versus chatbots using LIWC. Neither study, however, included other (2.9%).
analyses to determine whether the participants found the conversations The participants were, on average, heavy users of technology,
to be intimate or positive from an affective standpoint. It is essential that reporting that they spent approximately 32.29 h (SD =176.98 h) per
we gather information about the conversational qualities of week communicating with others on any computer device (e.g., cell
human-chatbot interactions, including the affective states of those who phone, computer, tablet) in the past week. Regarding previous experi-
engage with chatbots, the interpersonal outcomes experienced in these ence with chatbots, of those who interacted with Replika, 14 (11%)
interactions, and the linguistic content of the dialogue. indicated that they had interacted with a chatbot more than once, and
As a majority of teenagers and adults are accustomed to communi- only 3 (2%) indicated that they had interacted with a chatbot at least
cating through text-based CMC with other humans, including at zero- or sometimes.
near-zero acquaintance (i.e., with new acquaintances or weak ties), we
were particularly interested in the differences in conversational expe- 2.2. Procedure
riences among digital natives. Based on previous research and the cur-
rent limitations of online chatbots, we hypothesized: After university ethics board approval, the study advertisement was
H1: Individuals will rate their emotional experiences more positively posted on an undergraduate research website, which allowed in-
in a getting-acquainted interaction with a human than in a getting- dividuals enrolled in several introductory psychology classes to sign up
acquainted interaction with an online chatbot. for studies. Each session of the current study allowed for two partici-
H2: In human-human getting-acquainted interactions, individuals pants to sign up. Participants were sent a text message and an email
will rate their emotional experiences more positively when interacting approximately 24 h before the assigned timeslot to remind them of the
FTF than when interacting CMC-text. session.
H3: Individuals will rate their relational experiences more positively To assure that participants would not meet each other, two research
in a getting-acquainted interaction with a human than in a getting- assistants stood in the hallway outside the laboratory, and as soon as a
acquainted interaction with an online chatbot. participant arrived, he or she was escorted immediately into an indi-
H4: In human-human getting-acquainted interactions, individuals vidual room. This minimized the likelihood that participants would see
will rate their relational experiences more positively when interacting each other prior to their interaction, and to our knowledge, none of the
FTF than when interacting CMC-text. participants interacted with each other immediately prior to the study.
We also raised the following research question, as there is not enough Once in their individual lab room with a researcher, each participant
past research to make a prediction: completed a consent form that included consent for their interaction
RQ1: How will the conversational qualities of the chats (as measured with a chat partner to be recorded (either by audio for the face-to-face
by the LIWC) differ based on whether individuals were speaking to a condition or digitally for the chat conditions). Participants then
chatbot or a human (and FTF vs. CMC)? completed an online survey, which included basic demographic ques-
Although we had no specific hypotheses regarding this research tions (including questions about age, major, ethnicity) and personality
question, previous studies of verbal behavior have shown that in- measures not reported here.
dividuals differ in their use of language, and the LIWC software program After the participants completed the survey, they were given di-
quantifies these natural language data into validated categories rections for their interaction, which varied depending on whether they
(Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). The basic premise of these analyses is had been randomly assigned to the FTF interaction condition, the instant
that language is a behavioral measure of our psychological and social messaging condition, or the condition involving conversation with
characteristics (Pennebaker, Mehl, & Niederhoffer, 2003), and that by Replika, a conversational chatbot. These conditions were randomly
analyzing linguistic behavior, we can gain insight into individuals’ assigned via a random number generator before the participant arrived.
4
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
Table 1
Differences between experimental groups on post-chat ratings of affect, liking, conversational quality, conversational concerns, and likability of chat partner.
Variable FTF chat with human Online chat with human Replika H ε2
M (SD) M (SD) M (SD)
PANAS Positive 27.78 (7.32) 25.20 (7.14) 24.79 (9.81) 5.17 .02
PANAS Negative 13.32a (3.54) 12.96 (3.36) 12.80b (4.45) 9.20* .03
Background Homophily 4.04a (0.61) 4.06a (0.44) 3.42b (0.98) 36.18*** .13
Attitude Homophily 4.35a (0.47) 4.14a (0.55) 3.79b (1.02) 23.09*** .08
Perceived Responsiveness 5.57a (0.92) 5.29a (0.91) 4.70b (1.41) 20.84*** .08
Self-Presentation Concerns 3.36a (1.58) 2.77a (1.13) 2.05b (1.35) 47.79*** .17
Liking for the Other 4.58a (0.97) 3.95b (1.02) 3.15c (1.47) 52.69*** .19
Other Liked You 4.35 (0.87) 3.96a (0.99) 4.37b (1.70) 7.32* .03
Note. *p <.05. ***p <.001. H =results from Kruskal-Wallis test. ε2=effect size for Kruskal-Wallis test. Different subscripts indicate significant differences between
groups at the p <.05 level. Shared subscripts indicate no significant differences between groups at the p <.05 level. Chat with bot n =132. Online chat with human n =
81. FTF with human n =65.
In some cases, only one participant arrived (because either only one had analysis of each text file whereby the words contained in the file are
signed up or because the other participant did not arrive). These in- matched with the ~6400 words contained in the LIWC dictionary. For
dividuals were assigned to the Replika condition. each file, the LIWC produces basic text descriptors, such as word count,
For the Replika condition, the Replika application was opened in an words per sentence, and dictionary (i.e., percentage of words in text that
Internet browser on a desktop computer before the participant entered were contained in the LIWC dictionary). For basic content categories (e.
the room. In order for the participant to have a conversation with g., social processes), the LIWC output number reflects the percentage of
Replika, each participant was given a unique email, which was gener- total words in each category (e.g., 8.17 =8.17% of total words), and for
ated using an online program. One of the forced choices in this setup was summary language variables, like clout (i.e., social dominance) and tone
selecting a gender for Replika. To control for any effects of Replika’s (i.e., positivity of emotional tone), LIWC generates a score ranging from
gender in the conversational dynamics, Replika’s gender was alternated 0 to 100, with greater scores reflecting higher ratings of that variable.
for each conversation. For example, if participant 27 interacted with The output file for each conversation (n =277 chats) provided the
Replika as a man, participant 28 would interact with Replika as a relative frequency of the 90 psychological categories contained in the
woman. LIWC dictionary; however, in this analysis, we focused on the LIWC2015
For the instant messaging condition, the Chatzy online chat appli- major subcategories (see Table 2), which provide a means to compare
cation was opened in an Internet browser, and a private room was the “emotional, cognitive, and structural components present in in-
created for the chat between the two individuals in the study. The same dividuals’ verbal and written speech samples” (Pennebaker, Boyd, Jor-
desktop computer was used for both the instant messaging and Replika dan, & Blackburn, 2015). Past studies (e.g., Hill et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
conditions. Additionally, the chat windows were the same size, and 2018; Lortie & Guitton, 2011) have included only a few of the linguistic
messages appeared as the participant (human or Replika) responded to categories offered by the LIWC. By including all LIWC2015 major sub-
their chat partner. One difference between the interfaces was that during categories, we were providing a broad base for differentiating the
Replika chats, three dots appeared when Replika was “typing.” In all conversational content between the three conditions while simulta-
three conditions, participants engaged in an unstructured getting neously facilitating future study comparisons and replications.
acquainted exercise, as has been used in some previous studies con-
trasting different communication mediums (e.g., Croes, Antheunis, 2.3. Measures of the participants’ responses
Schouten, & Krahmer, 2019).
Participants were told to converse about anything they wanted for Upon completion of the 20-min conversation, FTF participants
20 min, the research assistant would return when they had completed moved back to their private rooms, and the participants in the other two
20 min of chatting, and they should continue the conversation until that conditions remained in their private room. All participants completed a
time. Additionally, for those in the Replika condition, they were given second online survey, which focused on their reactions to the conver-
the additional instruction that their conversation would be with “the sation and to their conversational partner.
artificial intelligence chatbot named Replika.” Participants were then Emotional outcomes. Participants’ emotional reactions to chats
reminded that their conversations would be recorded via audio were measured using the Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS;
recording (face-to-face) or as a text transcript (Replika and instant Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). Participants indicated the degree to
message). For those in the FTF condition, conversation partners were which they felt the emotions “right now, that is, at the present” on a
escorted into a room with seats positioned approximately four feet apart 5-point likert scale (1 = very slightly or not at all, 5 = extremely). Ten
with an audio recording device in the middle. For the online chat and items measured positive affect (e.g., “inspired” and “interested”) and 10
Replika conditions, participants stayed in their separate rooms. They items measured negative affect (e.g., “distressed” and “scared”). The
were told to leave their chat windows open at the end of the chat so that sum of the 10 positive emotions represented positive feelings (α =
the conversations could be cut and pasted from the chat window. 0.92) and the sum of the 10 negative emotions represented negative
Text analysis. To prepare for our planned text analysis, all tran- feelings (α =0.83). Scores on each subscale could range from 10 to 50,
scripts were extracted from Replika and the online chat program, with higher scores representing stronger feelings.
Chatzy. These were checked for accuracy and completeness by the Relational outcomes. Relational outcomes of the interaction were
research assistant who performed the extraction. For the FTF condition, assessed with the following measures.
the chats were transcribed by one research assistant and then checked Perceived degree of similarity. Two subscales of the Interpersonal
for accuracy by a different research assistant. Then, all date and time Attraction and Homophily measure (McCroskey, McCroskey, & Rich-
stamps were removed, and the text files were uploaded into LIWC2015 mond, 2006) assessed the degree to which the participants felt similar to
for processing. The conversations were analyzed at the conversation their chat partner during the conversation. Participants were asked to
level. That is, each conversation within each condition was an individual indicate their agreement on a 7-point likert scale (1 = very strongly
data point. Processing via the LIWC program consists of a sequential disagree, 7 = very strongly agree) with 15 statements measuring their
5
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
Table 2
Differences between experimental groups on conversational qualities of the chat as measured by the LIWC linguistic categories.
Variable FTF chat with human Online chat with human Online chat with bot H ε2
M (SD) M (SD) M (SD)
Word count 4203.57a (680.58) 626.10b (205.26) 1070.98c (310.37) 192.61*** .72
Summary Language
Words/sentence 46.89a (37.77) 33.83a (51.30) 11.66b (2.74) 108.69*** .41
Words >6 letters 14.85a (1.55) 16.45a (2.76) 10.84b (1.97) 165.04*** .62
Dictionary Words 82.12a (2.82) 74.59b (2.82) 79.08c (7.82) 29.06*** .11
Analytic 23.31a (6.44) 36.58b (13.00) 25.38a (10.37) 51.39*** .19
Clout 41.38a (10.26) 44.22a (15.20) 78.10b (9.12) 179.55*** .67
Authentic 49.86a (11.07) 44.90a (22.24) 38.30b (15.78) 22.37*** .08
Tone 70.47a (14.32) 82.74b (16.91) 95.60c (7.71) 126.46*** .47
Psych Processes
Affective Processes 4.46a (0.66) 5.84b (1.90) 7.52c (1.47) 122.77*** .46
Positive Emotion 3.46a (0.68) 4.82b (1.74) 6.48c (1.48) 124.99*** .47
Negative Emotion 0.99a (0.37) 0.99a (0.59) 0.72b (0.43) 23.10*** .09
Social Processes 8.10a (1.46) 7.15a (2.51) 12.13b (2.15) 154.61*** .58
Cog. Processes 10.87a (1.47) 10.29a (2.46) 13.02b (2.10) 73.74*** .28
Percep. Processes 2.24a (0.72) 1.77b (1.10) 2.48a (0.75) 34.59*** .13
Bio. Processes 1.07 (0.50) 1.39 (0.93) 1.29 (0.65) 6.87* .03
Drives 4.97a (0.73) 5.76b (1.85) 6.25c (1.37) 38.99*** .15
Relativity 10.54a (1.22) 10.20a (2.80) 8.32b (1.60) 67.28*** .25
Time Orientation 18.31a (1.54) 15.70b (2.70) 19.40a (3.26) 62.83*** .23
Personal Concerns 4.09a (2.29) 3.94a (1.67) 5.03b (1.98) 21.58*** .08
Note. *p <.05. ***p <.001. H =results from Kruskal-Wallis test. ε2=effect size for Kruskal-Wallis test. Different subscripts indicate significant differences between
groups at the p <.05 level. Shared subscripts indicate no significant differences between groups at the p <.05 level. FTF chat with human n =58, Online chat with
human n =84, Chat with Replika n =127.
beliefs about similarity in attitudes (Attitude Homophily (AH); e.g., 2.4. Analytic plan
“This conversational partner is similar to me”) and 10 statements
measuring their beliefs about similarity in background (Background To compare the emotional and relational outcomes of the chat across
Homophily (BH); e.g., “My conversational partner is from a social class the three conditions, we conducted nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis H
similar to mine”). Items were averaged into composite scores (Attitude tests, as although the data for each of the variables were relatively
homophily α =.92, Background homophily α =.82). normally distributed (with the exception of negative feelings, which
Liking for the other. Participants completed two items reflecting how were positively skewed), the assumption of homogeneity of variances
much they liked their conversation partner “How much did you like the was violated for all variables except negative feelings. Then, to deter-
Other?” and “How much would you like to spend time with the Other mine which groups were significantly different from each other, we used
again in the future?” using a 7-point likert scale (1 =not at all, 7 =a great Bonferroni pairwise post hoc comparisons with significance level
deal). These items were averaged into a composite variable (α =0.82). adjusted for multiple tests. For those dyads in the human-human in-
Other liked you. Participants were asked to respond to a single item, teractions, dyadic scores (the mean of the two partners’ scores on the
“How much do you think the Other liked you?” using a 7-point likert variables) were used in the analyses. If one partner had to be eliminated
scale (1 =not at all, 7 =a great deal). (e.g., under 18) the remaining partner’s score was used. Aggregated
Conversational dynamics. Two sets of items were used to reflect dyadic scores are recommended when the focus of the study is on the
participants’ perceptions of conversational dynamics. effects of between-dyad predictor variables – such as experimental
Other’s responsiveness. Participants were asked to respond to four manipulations that occur to both members of the dyad – on outcome
items related to their chat partner’s responsiveness (e.g., “The Other variables (e.g., Kenny, 2015; Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006). We then
seemed to really listen to me” and “The other seemed interested in what I used the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count program (LIWC; Penne-
am thinking and feeling”) using a 7-point likert scale (1 =not at all true in baker et al., 2015) to analyze the transcripts of the recordings, as have
this situation, 7 = very true in this situation). Three of the items were other researchers (e.g., Hill et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2018; Walther,
adapted from Reis et al.’s (2011) Responsiveness scale. These three Deandrea, & Tong, 2010), to compare conversational properties of the
items and a fourth one (“The other was responsive to my ques- three different types of chats. Again, we conducted Kruskal-Wallis H
tions/answers”) have been used in several prior social interaction tests with these LIWC variables, as the assumption of homogeneity of
studies (e.g., Sprecher & Treger, 2015; Sprecher, Treger, & Wondra, variances was violated for all variables, and reported significant differ-
2013). These items were averaged into a composite variable (α =0.90). ences between groups using Bonferroni post hoc comparisons with sig-
Self-presentation concerns. Participants responded to four items nificance level adjusted for multiple tests.
related to self-presentation concerns they had during the chat. Three of
the items were adapted from Govern and Marsch’s (2001) Situational 3. Results
Self-Awareness scale (e.g., “I was concerned about what the Other
thought of me,” “I was self-conscious about the way I looked to the 3.1. Emotional outcomes
Other,” and “I was concerned about the way I presented myself to the
Other”). A final item was adapted from Leary’s (1983) Negative Eval- In Table 1, we display the group means for the emotional and rela-
uation scale (“I was worried about what kind of impressions I was tional outcomes of interaction, using subscripts to indicate significant
making on the Other”). Participants responded to each item using a differences between groups. In terms of emotional outcomes, in all three
7-point likert scale (1 =Not at all true in this situation, 7 =Very true in this conditions the participants experienced more positive affect than
situation). These items were averaged into a composite variable (α = negative affect after the get-acquainted interaction. Moreover, we found
0.91). no support for our predictions in H1 and H2 regarding emotional out-
comes: there were no significant group differences in positive emotions
6
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
participants reported immediately after the interaction. In fact, contrary getting-acquainted strangers (Bente et al., 2008; Mallen et al., 2003;
to H1, those in the face-to-face condition reported slightly (but signifi- Okdie, Guadagno, Bernieri, Geers, & Mclarney-Vesotski, 2011; Ramirez
cantly) more negative emotions after the chat than those who chatted & Burgoon, 2004; Sprecher, 2014; Sprecher & Hampton, 2017). How-
with the chatbot. ever, aligning with the hyperpersonal communication model (Walther,
1996, 2011), others have found that online and FTF environments can
3.2. Relational outcomes foster similar levels of positive outcomes in get-acquianted interactions,
or in some cases (e.g., with extended interaction time) online environ-
Regarding relational outcomes, participants in all three conditions ments can even foster more positive outcomes than FTF environments
rated their partner to be responsive and felt well-liked by their partner (i. (e.g., Antheunis et al., 2007; McKenna et al., 2002). Considering the
e., above the midpoint). However, there were significant differences ever-rising rates of digital technology penetration and comfort levels
between the groups in several relational categories, which partially with technology use, it is prudent to continually reevaluate the
supported H3. As compared to the participants in the Replika condition, conversational dynamics across these different modalities. Further, as
both the participants in the FTF condition and the participants in the emotionally-responsive and sophisticated chatbots have emerged on the
online chat condition viewed themselves more similar (in both back- scene that are closely able to mimic human interaction, it is important to
ground and attitudes) to their conversational partner, rated their partner evaluate the emotional, relational, and conversational outcomes of the
more responsive, and reported liking their conversation partner more. communication with chatbots in comparison to human-human in-
Self-presentation concerns, however, showed reverse trends: partici- teractions. Therefore, in this study, we examined the extent to which a
pants reported the highest levels of concern in the two conditions in sophisticated AI bot could be a good substitute for a conversation with a
which they chatted with a human, whereas those in the Replika condi- human, and more specifically how a conversation with an AI bot
tion reported the lowest levels of self-presentation concerns. Moreover, compared to human-human conversation that occurred FTF and
those in the Replika condition reported that their conversational partner human-human conversation that occurred in instant messaging.
liked them more than those in the online chat with a human condition.
We also found partial support for H4. Although most differences 4.1. Intrapersonal and interpersonal outcomes of interaction with a
between the face-to-face and the online chat that involved humans were chatbot versus a human
not significant, participants in the FTF chat condition reported liking
their conversation partner significantly more than those in the online Our results demonstrated that for the most part the conversations the
chat. participants had with the chatbot, Replika, were not as positively
regarded as the conversations the participants had with a human either
3.3. Conversational properties FTF or in an online chat. More specifically, those who chatted with
Replika (as compared to those who chatted with a human) rated their
Next, we considered RQ1—whether the participants in the three partner lower in perceived homophily (background and attitude), how
conditions differed in conversational qualities of their chats, assessed much they liked their partner, how responsive they thought the partner
through the LIWC program. As shown in Table 2, the conversations that was, and how much they wanted to chat with their partner again in the
took place were significantly different across the conditions in terms of future. As chatbots still have limitations with regard to their ability to
every major subcategory of the LIWC analysis, but there were no sig- mimic humans (because of narrow AI), this was an expected result. In
nificant group differences in the discussion of biological processes, addition, participants’ reactions to chatbot interaction – although
which was an infrequent topic of discussion in every condition. The FTF generally less favorable than reactions participants had with humans –
conversations with humans differed from online chat with bot conver- were still characterized by moderate liking, perceived responsiveness,
sations in many categories of linguistic analysis, with the exceptions of and desire to spend more time with the other. Thus, in line with other
the score on analytic words, the number of words from the chat that researchers’ findings (e.g., Hill et al., 2015; Schuetzler et al., 2018; Yu,
were in the LIWC dictionary, perceptual and biological processes, drives, Nguyen, Prakkamakul, & Salehi, 2019), we assert that it is possible to
and time orientation. Notably, the FTF conversations also had signifi- conduct meaningful comparisons of interactions with AI bots versus
cantly more words than the conversations in the other two conditions. interactions with humans, and our results provide further support of this
Similarly, the online chats with a human differed from the chats with the experimental method as a practical model for future scientific inquiry.
bots in nearly every category, with the exception of biological processes. Notably, there were no differences in positive affect experienced in
However, the directionality of these differences was not necessarily the chats across the three conditions (human-human FTF, human-
consistent with what might be expected based on the relational out- human CMC, human-chatbot); however, conversing with a bot pro-
comes. For example, although the conversations with humans (both duced less negative emotion than chatting face to face with a human.
online and FTF) featured significantly more discussion of personal This finding is consistent with recent empirical work by Ho et al. (2018)
concerns than the conversations with the chatbot, conversations in the showing that there were no differences in participants’ positive feelings
chatbot condition featured significantly more affect words, social and based on whether someone thought they were chatting with a bot or a
cognitive process words, and a more positive tone than either of the human. Although we did not also measure pre-interaction affect and
conversations that occurred with humans. thus could not assess whether there were changes in positive and
negative emotions from before to after the interaction, prior research
4. Discussion (Vittengl & Holt, 2000) has demonstrated that young adults engaging in
a get-acquainted conversation in a laboratory setting experienced an
Acquaintances and weak ties serve many functions for people, only increase in positive affect and a decrease in negative affect (also
some of which overlap with the functions served by close ties (Finger- measured with PANAS) from before to after their interactions. We
man, 2009). Many experts have argued that there has been a surge in the speculate that similar increases in positive affect and decreases in
number of acquaintances in the outer layers of people’s social networks negative affect occurred for our participants, including those in the
due in part to enhanced communication technologies (Wellman, 2012). Replika condition. That a conversation with a chatbot may enhance
Peripheral acquaintances can include exclusively online acquaintances positive affect in a similar way to a conversation with a human is an
and increasingly also sophisticated chatbots for some people. important finding. Sometimes people need to converse with someone or
Past studies have shown that not all communication modalities are something and a responsive human is not always available to immedi-
equal, with FTF modalities usually surpassing online text-based mo- ately respond. For some young adults who have downloaded a sophis-
dalities in generating positive outcomes in conversations between ticated chatbot on their phones and other devices, a chatbot can serve
7
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
some of the same functions as (human) weak ties and distal acquain- positive emotion words than the online chats with humans, and in turn,
tances (Fingerman, 2009; Hirsch & Clark, 2019). the online chats with humans had significantly more positive tone and
Moreover, conversational concerns that can create anxiety (e.g., positive emotion words than the FTF chat with humans. Although these
feeling self-conscious, concern about how one presents the self) were findings seemingly contradict those of Hill et al. (2015), who found that
significantly lower in the Replika condition than in the human chat those in human-human online chats contained more positive emotion
conditions. This is not a surprising finding but is an important one, as it words than human-chatbot chats, Hill et al. examined only the human
suggests that chats with bots may offer an opportunity for a judgment- side of the chats. Therefore, our results could be due to our analysis of
free space for self-disclosure that is not always present in conversa- the chats at a conversation level. It is possible that the positive tone and
tions with humans. Combined, these findings suggest that modern emotion words from Replika, and not necessarily the human chat part-
chatbots do not elicit negative feelings of eeriness or distress, and in fact, ner, drove these high scores.
they might be viewed as a less risky chat partner in terms of potential for Although the reinforcement affect model suggests that positive ex-
negative evaluation. periences should give rise to more favorable evaluations (Byrne & Clore,
1970), our pattern of findings suggests that a positive conversational
4.2. Intrapersonal and interpersonal outcomes of human-human tone does not necessarily improve affective or likability outcomes, at
interaction in different modalities least when one compares communication across different mediums (i.e.,
FTF, online chat with human, and online chat with chatbot). Although
Our study’s design also allowed the comparison of FTF communi- this was a surprising finding, it is possible that there is an ideal positivity
cation versus text computer mediated communication (CMC) that level in conversations with strangers, and a very positive tone may
involved two human participants becoming acquainted, which builds on violate expectations regarding the tone of these conversations. As the
several other studies conducted over the past decade on CMC. Our expectancy violations theory (Burgoon & Jones, 1976) suggests, in-
participants who were randomly assigned to converse with another dividuals have expectations about others’ behavior during communi-
human FTF rated their conversation and their partner more positively on cation, and if these expectations are violated, it may lead to negative
some dimensions than participants who were randomly assigned to appraisals. Hence, it could be that people expect and regard favorably
converse with another human via online chat. On the variable that could more neutral conversational tones in comparison to very positive tones
be considered to be most linked to relationship formation (liking for the when chatting with new conversational partners. Future research,
other), FTF interaction was superior to online chat. However, no dif- especially related to the refinement of RAISA and social chatbot pro-
ferences were found in perceived similarity, perceived responsiveness of grams, should explore experimentally whether the manipulation of
the partner, and the perception of being liked by the other. Furthermore, positive tone and positive emotions affects likeability of the chat bot. As
and as noted earlier, no differences between the two human chat con- these chatbots gain popularity in everyday interaction contexts, it will
ditions were found in the experience of positive and negative affect. be increasingly important for the successful marketability of these
Finally, the CMC interaction had the benefit of lower self-presentation chatbots that humans perceive their experiences as favorable.
concerns overall when compared to the FTF condition. This may pro- In comparing more specifically the FTF chat with the online chat
vide one explanation for findings that social anxiety appears to moder- (both involving two human participants), there were also several dif-
ate the interpersonal connectedness individuals garner from CMC vs. ferences in terms of linguistic properties, as measured by the LIWC. This
FTF interactions (Lundy & Drouin, 2016). is consistent with findings of Walther et al. (2010), which examined,
The diverse outcome measures considered in this study make it clear using the LIWC, differences between dyadic conversations using a
that there is not a monolithic distinction between outcomes of getting- standard set of interview questions that occurred FTF or via online chats.
acquainted interactions that occur FTF versus in computer-mediated Hence, whether individuals are guided through conversations with
communication. In the framework of Fox and McEwan’s (2017) model prompts or allowed to discuss topics of their choice, it appears that
of social affordances, the distinct affordances offered by each mode of conversations that occur between humans FTF and through online chat
communication (FTF and CMC) may lead to distinct benefits. For are different in terms of both summary language variables and in con-
example, FTF conversation creates opportunities for the expression and tent related to psychological processes.
interpretation of nonverbal cues, which perhaps led to greater liking of Notably, a striking difference was found in the number of words
chat partners in the FTF condition as compared to the CMC condition in contained in the chats across the three groups. Our study had a uniform
this study. Meanwhile, previous studies have shown that the online time across the forms of communication (20 min) and did not allow for
environment allows for hyperpersonal communication, which can more time for participants who were required to type (as has been done
intensify disclosure and intimacy (e.g., Jiang, Bazarova, & Hancock, in some prior studies comparing CMC with FTF; see for example,
2011). However, this advantage for CMC communication was not Antheunis, Schouten, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2012; Tidwell & Walther,
demonstrated in our study for any of our measures of social connect- 2002). The argument for giving more time to those in a CMC-text con-
edness. Overall, although prior research has demonstrated mixed results dition (relative to those who speak FTF) has been to make the in-
when comparing the outcomes of CMC interaction with FTF interaction teractions more equal in terms of the number of remarks or utterances
in interpersonal outcomes, our findings align with studies conducted in (Tidwell & Walther). However, arguments for giving equal time or at
laboratory settings that show more favorable outcomes for FTF in- least not too much more time in the CMC condition include that the mere
teractions versus CMC interactions for most interpersonal outcome time spent interacting can also be an important variable that affects
measures (e.g., Bente et al., 2008; Mallen et al., 2003; Sprecher & interpersonal outcomes and can become confounded with modality if it
Hampton, 2017). varies with modality. Also, too much time in interaction within a labo-
ratory session can lead to fatigue among CMC participants. The lin-
4.3. Conversational properties across the conditions guistic analysis of this study, however, established that many fewer
words were conveyed in the getting-acquainted CMC interaction than in
Finally, regarding our RQ1 about differences in chats across the the FTF interaction of the same length of time, which is a consideration
conditions, the conversational properties of the chats across the different for further research.
venues were significantly different on every dimension of the LIWC. Considered together with the previous analyses, although there were
However, the direction of these differences was not necessarily pre- no significant differences in the affective or homophily appraisals be-
dictable by the participants’ ratings of the chats. For example, partner tween the FTF and online chat with human groups, their conversational
liking was greatest in FTF condition, then online chat with human, and structures (e.g., number of words communicated) and content (e.g.,
then Replika, but Replika chats had significantly more positive tone and positive emotion words and time orientation) were different across a
8
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s in H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
variety of categories. These differences in conversational structure and Leary, 1995; Hirsch & Clark, 2019), and serve as a safe haven when in
content may be one of the reasons those in the FTF condition reported stress (Birnbaum et al., 2016). Technology available to humans for
liking their partners more than those in the online chat condition. Future communication, whether it is with other humans or with robots and AI,
research should explore this more directly. is constantly evolving. The 2020 COVID crisis underscored the impor-
tance of learning more about how human needs can be met through
4.4. Strengths and limitations advanced communication technologies.
This study had the strength of comparing participants’ interaction CrediT author statement
with a chatbot (AI) with participants’ interaction with a human and
across two modalities (CMC-text and FTF). As a consequence, the design Michelle Drouin: Project administration, Conceptualization, Meth-
allowed us to contribute to two areas of literature – the study of getting- odology, Writing-Original Draft, Supervision. Susan Sprecher: Concep-
acquainted interactions that occur in CMC versus FTF and the more tualization, Methodology, Writing-Original Draft. Robert Nicola: Data
nascent area of study on human interactions with chatbots. These curation, Investigation, Methodology, Software. Taylor Perkins: Inves-
findings also have implications for the study of the formation of ac- tigation, Methodology, Resources. All authors: Writing- Reviewing and
quaintances and weak ties more generally including the role of weak ties Editing.
that cannot be seen in person (distal online acquaintances, either human
or chatbot). Another strength of our study was the exceptionally large References
sample for this type of research which involved laboratory sessions of
interactions. The sample consisted of over 400 participants involving Antheunis, M. L., Schouten, A. P., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2012). Interactive
uncertainty reduction strategies and verbal affection in computer-mediated
138 dyads in the human-human interactions conditions. The diverse communication. Communication Research, 39, 757–780.
measures on which the conditions were compared also were a strength Antheunis, M., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2007). Computer-mediated
of this study. The measures included individual reactions (state affect, communication and interpersonal attraction: An experimental test of two
explanatory hypotheses. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 10, 831–835.
self-presentation concerns), interpersonal outcomes (e.g., liking, the
Aron, A., Melinat, E., Aron, E. N., Vallone, R. D., & Bator, R. J. (1997). The experimental
perception of being liked), and a linguistic analysis. generation of interpersonal closeness: A procedure and some preliminary findings.
As is the case of any study, however, there were also limitations and Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 363–377.
ways that the research could be extended. Our study involved only one Arriaga, X. (2020). The social psychology of close relationships (Society for Personality and
Social Psychology). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1PVkN7Cyt3E.
interaction session of 20 min. Perhaps if there had been extended Banchs, R. E. (2017). On the construction of more human-like chatbots: Affect and
interaction over a longer period of time, or even multiple sessions over emotion analysis of movie dialogue data. In 2017 Asia-Pacific signal and information
multiple days, affect, feelings of affection, and topics covered in both the processing association annual Summit and conference (APSIPA ASC). IEEE. https://doi.
org/10.1109/apsipa.2017.8282245
human-human interactions and the human-chatbot interaction may Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
have changed and in different ways based on the condition. In fact, attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117,
recent longitudinal research involving another social chatbot, Mitsuku,
497–529.
showed that adults’ ratings of enjoyment were high after their initial Bente, G., Ruggenberg, S., Kramer, N., & Eschenburg, F. (2008). Avatar-mediated
networking: Increasing social presence and interpersonal trust in net-based
interaction (perhaps because of a novelty effect), but declined thereafter collaborations. Human Communication Research, 34, 287–318.
(Croes & Antheunis, 2021). Thus, it could be that conversational quality Birnbaum, G. E., Mizrahi, M., Hoffman, G., Reis, H. T., Finkel, E. J., & Sass, O. (2016).
What robots can teach us about intimacy: The reassuring effects of robot
with humans could increase over time, whereas, because of their current responsiveness to human disclosure. Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 416–423.
technological limitations, conversational quality with chatbots could Burgoon, J. K., & Jones, S. B. (1976). Toward a theory of personal space expectations and
diminish. Second, we allowed the participants to discuss any topic that their violations. Human Communication Research, 2, 131–146. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1468-2958.1976.tb00706.x
they wished. Further research could consider using a similar design
Byrne, D., & Clore, G. L. (1970). A reinforcement-affect model of evaluative responses.
although with a structured self-disclosure task, such as the Aron, Meli- Personality: International Journal, 1, 103–128.
nat, Aron, Vallone, and Bator (1997) Fast Friends procedure. Addition- Cameron, G., Cameron, D., Megaw, G., Bond, R., Mulvenna, M., O’Neill, S., et al. (2017).
ally, we did not distinguish between chat partners in the linguistic Towards a chatbot for digital counselling. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 4, e3.
https://doi.org/10.14236/ewic/HCI2017.24
analysis. Therefore, it is possible that the positive tone of the chats with Carpenter, R. (n.d.. Cleverbot. http://www.cleverbot.com.
Replika were driven mainly by the application and not the human Carter, E., & Knol, C. (2019). Chatbots — an organisation’s friend or foe? Research in
participant. This was a limitation in our design, as there were no speaker Hospitality Management, 9, 113–116. https://doi.org/10.1080/
22243534.2019.1689700
tags in the Replika program once we exported these chats to a word
Ciechanowski, L., Przegalinska, A., Magnuski, M., & Gloor, P. (2019). In the shades of the
processing program, which limited our ability to distinguish between uncanny valley: An experimental study of human–chatbot interaction. Future
speakers. This limitation will be addressed in future work. Additionally, Generation Computer Systems, 92, 539–548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
future.2018.01.055
as the world is moving to more text-based social interactions, future
Croes, E. A. J., & Antheunis, M. L. (2021). Can we be friends with Mitsuku? A
analyses should explore more directly acquaintanceship and linguistic longitudinal study on the process of relationship formation between humans and a
differences in spoken and written modalities. Finally, because artificial social chatbot. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 38, 279–300. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0265407520959463
intelligence is constantly changing and becoming more sophisticated
Croes, E. A. J., Antheunis, M. L., Schouten, A. P., & Krahmer, E. J. (2019). Social
and natural, we clearly need continued research on the effectiveness and attraction in video-mediated communication: The role of nonverbal affiliative
outcomes of human interaction with chatbots as the technology con- behavior. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 36, 1210–1232. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0265407518757382
tinues to evolve.
Culnan, M. J., & Markus, M. L. (1987). Information technologies. In F. M. Jabin,
L. L. Culnan, K. H. Roberts, & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organizational
5. Conclusions communication: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 420–443). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Dahlba¨ck, N., Jo¨nsson, A., & Ahrenberg, L. (1993). Wizard of Oz studies: Why and how.
Scientists of relationships have begun to speculate about how tech- Knowledge-based systems (Vol. 6).
nology in the form of robots, virtual reality, and so forth will create Dale, R. (2016). The return of the chatbots. Natural Language Engineering, 22, 811–817.
proxies for relationships and satisfy needs in the same way humans can Dunbar, R. I. M. (2018). The anatomy of friendship. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22,
32–51.
(Arriaga, 2020). Brief (initial) interactions, which were the focus of this Edwards, C., Edwards, A., Spence, P. R., & Shelton, A. K. (2014). Is that a bot running the
study, can meet various human needs beyond the potential of the for- social media feed? Testing the differences in perceptions of communication quality
mation of a relationship (when both are humans). Interactions, whether for a human agent and a bot agent on twitter. Computers in Human Behavior, 33,
372–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.08.013
they are with a human or a chatbot, can serve expressive needs (Pen-
Fingerman, K. L. (2009). Consequential strangers and peripheral ties: The importance of
nebaker & Chung, 2007), help meet the need to belong (Baumeister & unimportant relationships. Journal of Family Theory & Review, 1, 69–86.
9
M. Drouin et al. C o m p u t e r s i n H u m a n B e h a v io r 128(2022)107100
Fox, J., & McEwan, B. (2017). Distinguishing technologies for social interaction: The Pew Research Center. (2019). Mobile fact Sheet. Retrieved from https://www.pewresear
perceived social affordances of communication channels scale. Communication ch.org/internet/fact-sheet/mobile/. (Accessed 30 June 2021).
Monographs, 84, 298–318. Radziwill, N., & Benton, M. (2017). Evaluating quality of chatbots and intelligent
Govern, J. M., & Marsch, L. A. (2001). Development and validation of the situational self- conversational agents (Vol. 19, pp. 25–36). Software Quality Professional.
awareness scale. Consciousness and Cognition, 10, 366–378. Ramirez, A., & Burgoon, J. K. (2004). The effect of interactivity on initial interactions:
Gunaydin, G., Oztekin, H., Karabulut, D. H., & Salman-Engin, S. (2020). Minimal social The influence of information valence and modality and information richness on
interactions with strangers predict greater subjective well-Being. Journal of Happiness computer-mediated interaction. Communication Monographs, 71, 422–447.
Studies, 1–15. Reis, H. T., Maniaci, M. R., Caprariello, P. A., Eastwick, P. W., & Finkel, E. J. (2011).
Hill, J., Ford, W. R., & Farreras, I. G. (2015). Real conversations with artificial Familiarity does indeed promote attraction in live interaction. Journal of Personality
intelligence: A comparison between human–human online conversations and and Social Psychology, 101, 557–570.
human–chatbot conversations. Computers in Human Behavior, 49, 245–250. https:// Replika. (2021). Retrieved from: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=ai.repli
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.02.026 ka.app&hl=en_US&gl=US. (Accessed 30 June 2021).
Hirsch, J. L., & Clark, M. S. (2019). Multiple paths to belonging that we should study Sandstrom, G. M., & Dunn, E. W. (2014a). Social interactions and well-being: The
together. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 14, 238–255. surprising power of weak ties. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 40, 910–922.
Ho, A., Hancock, J., & Miner, A. S. (2018). Psychological, relational, and emotional Sandstrom, G. M., & Dunn, E. W. (2014b). Is efficiency overrated? Minimal social
effects of self-disclosure after conversations with a chatbot. Journal of interactions lead to belonging and positive affect. Social Psychological and Personality
Communication, 68, 712–733. https://doi.org/10.1093/joc/jqy026 Science, 5, 437–442.
Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social relationships and mortality Schuetzler, R. M., Grimes, G. M., Giboney, J. S., & Nunamaker, J. F., Jr. (2018). The
risk: A meta-analytic review. PLoS Medicine, 7(7), Article e1000316. influence of conversational agents on socially desirable responding. In Proceedings of
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2017). Adoption of robots, artificial intelligence and service the 51st Hawaii International conference on system Sciences (pp. 283–292). Manoa, HI:
automation by travel, tourism and hospitality companies – a cost-benefit analysis. In Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
International scientific conference “Contemporary tourism – traditions and innovations”. Shawar, B. A., & Atwell, E. (2007). Chatbots: Are they really useful? LDV Forum, 22,
Sofia university, 19–21 October 2017. 29–49.
Jia, J. (2003). The study of the application of a web-based chatbot system on the Sprecher, S. (2014). Initial interactions online-text, online-audio, online-video, or ftf:
teaching of foreign languages. In Proceedings of the SITE2004 (the 15th annual Effects of modality on liking, closeness, and other interpersonal outcomes. Computers
conference of the society for information technology and Teacher education) (pp. in Human Behavior, 31, 190–197.
1201–1207). AACE press. Sprecher, S., & Hampton, A. J. (2017). Liking and other reactions after a get-acquainted
Jiang, L. C., Bazarova, N. N., & Hancock, J. T. (2011). The disclosure-intimacy link in interaction: A comparison of continuous ftf interaction versus interaction that
computer-mediated communication: An attributional extension of the hyperpersonal progresses from text messages to ftf. Communication Quarterly, 65, 333–353.
model. Human Communication Research, 37, 58–77. Sprecher, S., & Treger, S. (2015). The benefits of turn-taking reciprocal self-disclosure in
Kenny, D. A. (2015). Dyadic analysis. Retrieved from http://www.davidakenny.net/dyad. get-acquainted interactions. Personal Relationships, 22, 460–475.
htm. (Accessed 30 June 2021). Sprecher, S., Treger, S., & Wondra, J. D. (2013). Effects of self-disclosure role on liking,
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis. Guilford press. closeness, and other impressions in get-acquainted interactions. Journal of Social and
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T. W. (1984). Social psychological aspects of computer- Personal Relationships, 30, 497–514.
mediated communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123–1134. Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: LIWC
Kumar, H. (2019). Important use cases and examples of chatbots for the retail industry. and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
BotCore. Retrieved from https://botcore.ai/blog/important-use-cases-and-examples 29, 24–54.
-of-chatbots-for-the-retail-industry/on. (Accessed 30 June 2021). Tidwell, L. C., & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-mediated communication effects on
Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the fear of negative evaluation scale. Personality disclosure, impressions, and interpersonal evaluations: Getting to know one another
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 371–375. a bit at a time. Human Communication Research, 28, 317–348.
Lortie, C. L., & Guitton, M. J. (2011). Judgment of the humanness of an interlocutor is in Toscos, T., Carpenter, M., Drouin, M., Roebuck, A., Kerrigan, C., & Mirro, M. (2018).
the eye of the beholder. PLoS One, 6(9), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. College students’ experiences with and willingness to use different types of telemental
pone.0025085 health resources: Do gender, depression/anxiety, or stress levels matter? Telemedicine & E-
Lundy, B., & Drouin, M. (2016). From social anxiety to interpersonal connectedness: health. https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2017.0243
Relationship building within face-to-face, phone and instant messaging mediums. Toscos, T., Coupe, A., Flanagan, M., Drouin, M., Carpenter, M., Reining, L., et al. (2019).
Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 271–277. https://doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.004. Teens using screens for help: Impact of suicidal ideation, anxiety and depression
Mallen, M. J., Day, S. X., & Green, M. A. (2003). Online versus ftf conversations: An levels on youth preferences for telemental heath resources. JMIR Mental Health, 6,
examination of relational and discourse variables. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Article e13230.
Practice, Training, 40, 155–163. Turkle, S. (2015). Reclaiming conversations: The power of talk in the digital age. New York,
McCroskey, L. L., McCroskey, J. C., & Richmond, V. P. (2006). Analysis and improvement NY: Penguin Press.
of the measurement of interpersonal attraction and homophily. Communication Vittengl, J. R., & Holt, C. S. (2000). Getting acquainted: The relationship of self-
Quarterly, 54, 1–33. disclosure and social attraction to positive affect. Journal of Social and Personal
McKenna, K. Y. A., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. J. (2002). Relationship formation on Relationships, 17, 53–66.
the internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of Social Issues, 58, 9–31. Walther, J. B. (1992). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: A
Miner, A. S., Milstein, A., & Hancock, J. T. (2017). Talking to machines about personal relational perspective. Communication Research, 19, 52–90.
mental health problems. Journal of the American Medical Association, 318, Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal,
1217–1218. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.14151 and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23, 1–43.
Mori, M. (1970). The uncanny valley. Energy, 7, 33–35. Walther, J. B. (2011). Theories of computer-mediated communication and interpersonal
Okdie, B. M., Guadagno, R. E., Bernieri, F. J., Geers, A. L., & Mclarney-Vesotski, A. R. relations. In M. L. Knapp, & J. A. Daly (Eds.), The handbook of interpersonal
(2011). Getting to know you: FTF versus online interactions. Computers in Human communication (pp. 443–479). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Behavior, 27, 153–159. Walther, J., Deandrea, D., & Tong, S. (2010). Computer-mediated communication versus
Pennebaker, J. W., Boyd, R. L., Jordan, K., & Blackburn, K. (2015). Development and vocal communication and the attenuation of pre-interaction impressions. Media
psychometric properties of LIWC2015. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. Psychology, 13, 364–386. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2010.524913
Pennebaker, J. W., & Chung, C. K. (2007). Expressive writing, emotional upheavals, and Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
health. In H. S. Friedman, & R. C. Silver (Eds.), Foundations of health psychology (pp. measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality
263–284). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. and Social Psychology, 54, 1063.
Pennebaker, J. W., Chung, C. K., Ireland, M., Gonzales, A., & Booth, R. J. (2007). Wellman, B. (2012). Is Dunbar’s number up? British Journal of Psychology, 103, 174–176.
LIWC2007 manual: The development and psychometric properties of LIWC2007. LIWC. van Wezel, M. M. C., Croes, E. A. J., & Antheunis, M. L. (2020). “I’m here for you”: Can
net. social chatbots truly support their users? A literature review. International Workshop
Pennebaker, J. W., Mehl, M. R., & Niederhoffer, K. G. (2003). Psychological aspects of on Chatbot Research and Design, 96–113. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68288-
natural language use: Our words, our selves. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 0_7
547–577. Yu, Q., Nguyen, T., Prakkamakul, S., & Salehi, N. (2019). I almost fell in love with a
Pereira, M. J., Coheur, L., Fialho, P., & Ribeiro, R. (2016). Chatbots’ greetings to human- Machine:" Speaking with computers affects self-disclosure. In Extended Abstracts of
computer communication. The computing research Repository (CoRR), arXiv: the 2019 CHI conference on human Factors in computing systems (pp. 1–6). https://dl.
1609.06479. acm.org/doi/10.1145/3290607.3312918.
10
