Mood Estimation as a Social Profile Predictor in an Autonomous,
Multi-Session, Emotional Support Robot for Children
Edwinn Gamborino, Hsiu-Ping Yueh, Weijane Lin, Su-Ling Yeh and Li-Chen Fu, Member, IEEE
Abstract— In this work, we created an end-to-end general public to have a deeper, more intimate understanding
autonomous robotic platform to give emotional support to when communicating with their human counterparts. For this
children in long-term, multi-session interactions. Using a mood purpose, the robot must be able to get information not only
estimation algorithm based on visual cues of the user’s behaviors from the explicit communication channels (e.g. words and
through their facial expressions and body posture, a multi-
gestures), but also from the implicit, mostly non-verbal
dimensional model predicts a qualitative measure of the
behaviors (e.g. motivations and drives) of their human
subject’s affective state. Using a novel Interactive Reinforcement
counterparts. Previous research [2] has indicated that
Learning algorithm, the robot is able to learn over several
autonomous cognitive and social profiling of the user are key
sessions the social profile of the user, adjusting its behavior to
match their preferences. Although the robot is completely to deploying social robots in environments outside of the
autonomous, a third party can optionally provide feedback to laboratory (e.g. in hospitals, schools or at home). In order to
the robot through an additional UI to accelerate its learning of perform this cognitive and social profiling, robots must
the user’s preferences. To validate the proposed methodology, interpret the behavior of their users through implicit cues in
we evaluated the impact of the robot on elementary school aged their facial expression and body gestures to infer mental
children in a long-term, multi-session interaction setting. Our
states, personalities and emotions and, using this information,
findings show that using this methodology, the robot is able to
use a decision making process to determine how to best
learn the social profile of the users over a number of sessions,
interact with a specific user.
either with or without external feedback as well as maintain the
One possible approach to achieve this preference learning
user in a positive mood, as shown by the consistently positive
rewards received by the robot using our proposed learning is through Machine Learning techniques. However, one of the
algorithm. main difficulties of applying such techniques on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI) problems is the sheer amount of data
I. INTRODUCTION
required for the machine to learn anything meaningful. This
Socially Assistive Robotics is an emerging is particularly harsh in HRI research for three reasons: (1) the
interdisciplinary field which is currently of interest to several problems addressed tend to be very application specific, (2)
researchers in psychology, sociology, computer science and due to the variety of hardware and software configurations,
robotics. One of the main reasons being the rapid change in there is yet no consensus as to what functions a social robot
the demographic structure, mostly in developed countries [1]; should or should not have and (3) due to the specificness
it is prospected that there will not be enough people to care problem, the datasets available online are scarce.
for the weaker social groups (e.g. the elderly and children), Furthermore, due to the social nature of the field, it is very
both in and out of healthcare facilities in the short term. labor intensive to design and execute experiments to validate
While advances in human-computer interaction and the hypothesis with a statistically significant number of
collaborative robots have produced several methods for subjects. To address these issues, we proposed [3] an
human and technology to interact with each other somewhat implementation using an Interactive Reinforcement Learning
successfully (e.g. through touch screens and natural language algorithm by which a third party (e.g. a caregiver or relative
understanding), Socially Assistive Robots are expected by the of the user) can provide additional input to the robot through
a user interface (Fig. 1), thereby dramatically increasing the
*This research was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan (MOST 107-2634-F-002-018), National Taiwan ability of the robot to learn the user profile in a relatively short
University, Center for Artificial Intelligence & Advanced Robotics, and Joint time while at the same time maintaining a coherent and fluent
Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare.
social interaction.
E. Gamborino is with the Center for Artificial Intelligence and Advanced
Robotics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (phone: +886 958
376 105; e-mail: gamborino@ntu.edu.tw).
H.-P. Yueh is with the Department of Psychology and the Department of
Bio-Industry Communication and Development, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (e-mail: yueh@ntu.edu.tw)
W. Lin is with the Department of Library and Information Science,
National Taiwan University (e-mail: vjlin@ntu.edu.tw)
S.-L. Yeh is with the Department of Psychology, the Graduate Institute of
Brain and Mind Sciences and the Center for Artificial Intelligence and
Advanced Robotics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (e-mail:
suling@g.ntu.edu.tw)
L.-C. Fu is with the Center for Artificial Intelligence and Advanced
Robotics, the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Department of Figure 1. System Overview: The robot has a database of pre-programmed
Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan social interactions and learns from the user’s affective state and the trainer’s
University, Taipei, Taiwan (e-mail: lichen@ntu.edu.tw). feedback through an IRL algorithm.
As mentioned before, this work is an extension of [3], making platform between different ludic activities –
where the authors used a Wizard-of-Oz implementation to collaborative sorting, creative dance and quiz – in order to
show the effectiveness of the reinforcement learning engage young children over extended periods of time (over
algorithm and the ability of the system to interact with real the course of a few weeks). While the robot could perform
children. In addition to our previous findings, the main each of the ludic activities autonomously, due to limitations
contributions of the present work are: in the State-of-the-Art in key technologies, the robot was
1. To develop a fully autonomous system that is able to unable to determine when to pause/change activities (e.g. if
interact with the user without the need for a remote the child looks bored or when there is an external
operator. interruption). Therefore, the authors used a Wizard-of-Oz
2. The improvement of the emotion recognition algorithm interface to monitor and control the transition between
and the addition of body posture as a secondary channel activities. Their results show that by giving the child a choice
for learning feedback. of what activity they preferred to play with the robot, the kids
3. The validation of the proposed autonomous often chose the activity they enjoyed the most, thereby
implementation through a long-term interaction increasing their willingness to interact with it for longer
experiment with 15 children. periods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, The team of Dr. Mataric has also published a number of
we highlight some of the related works in the field of papers [8-10] in relation to Socially Assistive Robots for the
emotional support robots. Section III describes a system general public and, more specifically, with children in the
overview and the methodology followed through the design school environment. Of the greatest relevance to the present
of the proposed system. Section IV discusses the experiment work is [9], where the authors introduce their design process
design as well as briefly describe the interaction flow and in creating a robot that is suitable to interact with a specific
participant demographics. Section V includes a thorough demographic (i.e. children). The authors highlight that in HRI
analysis of the data obtained from the experiment as well as implementations there must be a balance between
some discussion and, finally, Section VI closes the document technological prowess and domain portability. Furthermore,
with a few concluding remarks. the authors mention that, as of yet, there are no established
baseline measurements for HRI performance, with most
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
authors reporting academic performance (e.g. correct
Pet therapy is a well-documented [4, 5] social therapy for responses in a quiz for a school setting) or self-reported
people presenting symptoms of depression and isolation. In features (e.g. rapport and engagement) as metrics of the
2007, Shibata and Wada first introduced Paro – the robotic platform performance. In this work, we developed a system
seal – in order to investigate whether a robotic pet could have for the robot to automatically assess the affective state of the
similar effects to its real counterpart on the residents of an user through interaction, with the ability to learn over time in
elder nursing home in Tsukuba City, Japan. Their purpose a multi-session setting, being one of the first examples of a
was to overcome the difficulties associated with keeping self-assessed, learning social robot.
animals in delicate environments such as hospitals and Dr. Brezeal et al. also have a breadth of research [11-13]
nursing homes. In the results of their six-month longitudinal on human robot interaction aimed at children. We briefly
study [6], using tools such as social network analysis and highlight one of their works as background for this paper.
urine sampling, they reported that the patients who actively First, Huggable [11] was a robotic companion used to
(and voluntarily) engaged with Paro showed an increase in mitigate anxiety, stress and pain in pediatric patients by
sociability both with other guests of the nursing home as well engaging them in playful interactions. The authors presented
as caregivers. This is one of the first documented examples of a Wizard-of-Oz interface for a child life specialist to interact
using robots for social and emotional support. The main indirectly with pediatric patients. In a preliminary study, the
lesson to learn from Paro is that Socially Assistive Robots do authors aimed to determine the superiority of a robotic partner
not necessarily require to possess advanced cognitive for emotional support over other types of interventions,
understanding of the user to be effective in improving the namely a regular plush teddy bear or a virtual avatar of
quality of life of their users. Huggable, with positive results.
The ALIZ-E Project (Adaptive Strategies for Sustainable More recently, in [2] Gunes et al. reported their efforts at
Long-Term Social Interaction) was a collaboration between developing HRI systems with automatic emotion and
several European universities and research institutions with personality prediction algorithms. They reported on their
the aim of developing a comprehensive cognitive system for experiences and lessons learned through several
robots to offer a consistent experience during long-term implementations and public HRI demonstrations. In the
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) scenarios. In particular, the paper, they detail their implementation of autonomous
project focuses on the group comprised of 8-11 years old emotion and personality predictors as cues of a user’s social
children with diabetes for their target study. Several papers profile. While they note that their predictors are fully
focused on solving different areas of the long-term child- developed and describe the interaction flow and reaction of
robot interaction (cHRI) problem: speech, non-verbal bodily the subjects to the robot, the robotic side of their
expression, small talk, gaze, touch and proximity, among implementation is done through a Wizard-of-Oz interface.
others. A relevant antecedent of the present work is presented Compared to their contribution, in this work we developed a
in [7], where the authors developed a high-level decision fully autonomous system using facial expression as a cue of
the subject’s internal affective state. Nonetheless, there are
valuable lessons to learn from this publication. For example,
more often than not, people would be more interested in the
shape and motion of the robot than what it is actually saying,
therefore they would not carefully listen to the instructions
given by it and have to rely on the experimenter to
successfully complete the interactions.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
A. System Overview
Figure 2. System Architecture
In this section we briefly describe the system architecture
otherwise it will be low, resulting in a binary value for each
(Fig. 2) and how each part interacts with each other. In the
time instant. The state of time interval [𝑡 ,𝑡 ], then will be the
following subsections we will further detail each module. We 0 𝑛
most frequent in the post-classifier pool.
used a set of RGB cameras to capture the subject’s facial
Similarly, body posture has been shown [17] to be a good
expression and body posture in interaction with the robot.
predictor of engagement. In particular, head orientation and
This information is used to estimate their internal affective
the leaning angle of the upper body are important indicators
state on-the fly as a reaction to the robot’s social actions (e.g.
of engagement. To achieve automatic, on-the-fly engagement
dance, joke). Over time, the robot learns which of its social
prediction we leverage the open source software OpenPose
actions are more likely to cheer up the user when they are in
[18]. Using an approach similar to the temporal averaging of
a given affective state. The robot associates a user profile with
emotions, we can obtain an average of engagement over a
their facial features for future sessions. Furthermore, although
certain time interval.
the robot can act autonomously, using the principle of
We then created a mapping of which states represent a
Interactive Reinforcement Learning, a third party can provide
good, neutral or bad mood using the following heuristic rules:
additional feedback to it. This can be particularly useful when
Those time instants where positive emotions (i.e. joy and
interacting with children, where visual feedback may not
surprise) are high will be considered as good mood, time
always be reliable due to excessive motion from the subject.
instants with only neutral emotion as high will be neutral
B. Mood Estimation mood, all others will be considered as bad mood. In terms of
Although there exists more than one proposal to model engagement, if the person is detected as engaged at each time
human emotions, in this work we adopt one of the most interval, the robot will receive an additional small reward,
common interpretations of Paul Ekman’s six basic emotions otherwise the reward value remains unchanged.
(e.g. joy, fear, sadness, anger, disgust and surprise). We used
C. Action Database and Interaction Manager
an in-home developed algorithm [14], which utilizes a
In the context of this work, we define the actions of the
temporal-contrastive appearance network to determine the
robot as social behaviors that enable it to engage and interact
saliency of each feature compared to a neutral facial
with the child, with the possibility of having a positive impact
expression. The results reported in our 2018 paper on open
on their mood. Examples of these actions that can be found in
source databases achieved an average accuracy of 84.2%,
the recent literature [7, 19] include verbal (e.g. conversation,
outperforming the State-of-the-Art.
story-telling, quizzes and jokes) non-verbal (e.g. dance,
Mood is defined [15] as a long lasting affective state,
imitation game) and complex items, such as playing games
usually measured qualitatively (e.g. good or bad mood). On
through a secondary device (tablet or computer). We propose
the other hand, the Discrete Emotion Theory [16] poses that
a set of behaviors that, based on concepts from previous cHRI
there exists a set of core emotions. These emotions manifest
research (e.g. care-receiving robots [20]) as well as concepts
themselves through different channels (e.g. facial
from pediatric psychology (puppet therapy [21]), are likely to
expressions, body gestures, physiological signals) in specific,
cheer up a child through ludic interactions and conversation.
discernible and unique ways. Furthermore, core emotions are
Based on the previous survey, we defined six types of
semantically unique, whereas complex emotions are thought
selectable interactions in this iteration of the system: joke,
to be composed of different core emotions. Then, in
riddle, chit-chat, tale, dance and video. Inside each category,
mathematical terms, the set of core emotions may be
there were on average ten different interactions for the robot
described as a linear basis that spans a vector space containing
to choose from. The robot would not repeat the same single
the set of complex emotions. In other words, complex
interaction twice with a given user. Each interaction included
emotions are linear combinations of core emotions.
a predefined set of sentences for the robot to speak out.
Based on this abstraction, we hypothesize that a good state
Furthermore, in contrast to our previous Wizard-of-Oz
classifier for the mood of a person can be achieved by
implementation, in order to make the system fully
determining whether each one of the core emotions is either
autonomous, we created a behavior executor, which has basic
low or high during a specific time interval. To achieve this,
Natural Language Processing capabilities. For example, the
for each frame 𝑡 ∈[𝑡 ,𝑡 ], the classifier calculates a
𝑖 0 𝑛 robot could issue a different reply depending on whether the
dimension-wise mean of the pool of vectors stored up until
user’s response was positive or negative (e.g. would you like
that point. Then, if the value in time 𝑡 is greater than the
𝑖 to hear a funny joke?), a predefined expected answer (e.g. the
current average, the emotion will be considered as high,
B oE d y Pstim oa stu re
tio n
M o o d P re d
U s e
E mR
e c o
ic tio n
r
o tio n
g n itio n
In te ra c tio n
M a n a g e rIn te ra c tiv e
R e in fo rc e m e n t
L e a rn in gIn
te ra c tiv e M o d e lR
e in fo rc e m e n t
Le a rn in g M o d e l
T r a in e r
U se r
P ro file
S o c ia l
A c tio n
D a ta b a se
IV. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
Results of our previous work showed that there was a
statistically significant decrease in the negative affect of the
children after playing with the robot for the first time.
However, one could argue that the novelty effect [25] had a
major role in the mood improvement on that pilot study.
Furthermore, given the early prototype stage of the system,
the control of the robot was achieved through a Wizard-of-Oz
implementation. Therefore, we designed a follow-up
experiment focused on the validation of a completely
Figure 3. Screenshot of the UI for the trainer/experimenter. The personal data autonomous action selector and interaction manager for
of the user as well as the current mood estimate can be observed. The bars to
the right represent the likelihood that the robot will perform that action next.
human-robot interaction and the long term effectiveness of
the robot intervention for emotional support of children.
answer to a riddle) and even save keywords from the user’s
The experiment took place in the Computer and
utterance (e.g. name and gender), and use them in subsequent
Information Networking Center, National Taiwan University.
interactions.
In total, 19 participants were recruited for this experiment. All
D. Interactive Reinforcement Learning and User Profiling participants were elementary school aged children (avg.=
10.7, σ= 1.1, 31% female). However, the data of five
Briefly, what distinguishes Interactive Reinforcement
participants had to be excluded because they did not complete
Learning (IRL) from classic RL is the use of a trainer that
the full four sessions.
modifies either the reward from the environment, known as
The participants enrolled voluntarily in the experiment as
reward shaping [22], the action of the agent, known as policy
a part of a robotics holiday course, the parents or guardians of
shaping [23] or both (hybrid approaches). In this work we
each student signed a consent form to participate in the
propose the use of a hybrid algorithm to maximize the
experiment. The duration of this course was of five
learning rate. Our model is built following the SARSA
consecutive days. During each of the first four class days,
methodology, where the only noteworthy change in the
each of the students was taken out of the classroom to a
following equation is the change/addition of the reward term:
separate environment to perform the experiment individually.
𝑄(𝑠 ,𝑎 )←𝛼[𝑟𝑟 +𝑟𝑝 +𝛾𝑄(𝑠 ,𝑎 )−𝑄(𝑠 ,𝑎 )]
𝑡 𝑡 𝑡+1 𝑡+1 𝑡+1 𝑡+1 𝑡 𝑡 In order to avoid cross-contamination in terms of the
The policy reward 𝑟𝑝 is designed to encourage the agent
𝑡+1 expectations regarding the experiment, each participant was
to transition from bad mood states to the good mood states
asked not to discuss the content of the experiment with their
and stay in good mood by providing a negative reward for a
classmates until after the experiment was finished.
transition to a bad mood state a and a positive reward for a
Two experimenters were present in each session with
transition to a good mood state. The trainer reward 𝑟𝑟 , on
𝑡+1 different roles: One would brief the participant on how to
the other hand, relies on the trainer’s feedback (Fig. 3). By
interact with the robot and perform tests to obtain a baseline
pressing a button, the trainer will override the next action of
of different psychologic al parameters (Section V), while the
the robot, which will in turn modify the value of 𝑟𝑟 for the
𝑡+1 other would act as the trainer of the robot, observing the
next learning iteration. These changes are represented in real
participant’s reaction to the robot’s actions and providing
time on the bar graph.
feedback through the UI (Fig. 3). Both researchers were
By using the IRL algorithm, the robot stores a set of values
trained on how to recognize affective states from facial
for each state-action pair available, where the states are
expressions following the guidelines outlined in the BROMP
associated with the qualitative measurement of the user’s
protocol [26]. Each interactive session lasted for
mood (good, neutral or bad) and engagement, whereas the
approximately 10 minutes. The robot deployed to perform the
actions correspond to the social actions of the robot. In the
experiment with the child participants is RoBoHoN, a small
literature these values are commonly known as q-values. The
humanoid robot smartphone. Although it does not possess
action selection is performed using the ε-greedy algorithm,
top-of-the-line sensing abilities, its speech capabilities and the
which, for the current state, will usually pick the action with
ability to produce body gestures through the motion of its
the highest q-value. However, to encourage exploration it
head and arms make it an ideal candidate for human-robot
may randomly pick other sub-optimal actions.
interaction research.
At the beginning of the first interaction, the robot is
programmed to ask basic profile details from the user (e.g.
name, age) and associates these data with the facial profile of
the user. At the end of each interaction, the robot will save the
preferences (q-values and overall reward) of the user for each
interaction to persistent memory to be used in subsequent
interactions. From the second interaction onward, the robot
will confirm the profile of the user through dialog. This
behavior was design in alignment with the findings of Fischer
[24], where the authors point out that the ability of an entity
Figure 4. Samples of the emotion and mood estimation algorithms during the
to recognize users is paramount to creating social bonds.
interactive sessions with the robot.
In addition to the robot we utilized two cameras to capture
the facial expression and body posture of the participants on
real time (Fig. 4). This configuration enabled the system to
perform analysis and control of the robot on-the-fly with good
performance.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Performance Metrics
To gauge the effectiveness of the system in interaction with
the children we focused on the autonomous nature of the
platform, relying on the rewards received by the learning
algorithm through continuous interaction. As explored in
Section III, there are two metrics collected by the system
automatically during interaction: q-values (2-dimensional
vectors) and overall rewards (scalars). Higher q-values
indicate a positive reward was received for a given mood-
social action combination; therefore, it follows that the Figure 6. Comparison of the total reward by policy. The x-axis represents the
actions with the highest values are considered by the robot as day of interaction whereas the y-axis represents the reward earned by the
appropriate when the user is in a specific affective state. The robot from the mood estimation algorithm. The dotted lines represent the
reward of each individual user, the bold line represents an average of all users
reward, on the other hand, is stored as a scalar after each
with the same policy. The top graph shows the data of the group of users with
interaction and only the overall value after one whole the learning robot, whereas the bottom graph shows the same data for the
interactive session is stored in persistent memory. The overall group that interacted with a robot with random action policy.
reward value is related with the perceived enjoyment of the
values. Qualitatively speaking, we can observe that in the first
interaction by the user, as defined by the robot itself through
two blocks negative values are rather scarce whereas in the
mood and engagement estimation or by the trainer through the
latter two red areas dominate the blocks. A straightforward
rewards given.
interpretation of this is that when the robot used the IRL
B. Results and Discussion policy it tended to receive more positive feedback, either from
the user or the trainer, than when using a random policy.
In order to determine whether the Interactive
Furthermore, we can observe that certain users had an
Reinforcement Learning policy had any significant effect on
unusually high or low affinity with the robot, as certain rows
the user’s reaction to the robot, the participant population was
in either block have a higher concentration of green or red
divided into two groups: a control group with which the robot
blocks, respectively. Unfortunately, due to the small sample
would perform the interactions with the IRL policy as
size we were yet unable to identify a pattern between the
described in Section III, whereas with the other group the
user’s profile and their action preference.
robot would perform the same type of interaction but without
In terms of the overall reward, Fig. 6 shows the day-by day
learning the user’s preference, that is, picking actions
reward obtained by the robot for all users. The dotted lines
randomly. In order to avoid bias from the trainer when
represent each individual participant’s data whereas the bold
assigning rewards to the robot, the system was programmed
line represents the average of all data points for each group,
to randomly assign an IRL or random policy when meeting
divided by the policy the robot used. Again, due to the small
each new participant, while keeping the number of
sample size of our test group, quantitative validation is rather
participants in each group balanced.
difficult, so instead we provide a qualitative analysis of the
Due to the relatively small size of the dataset, in order to
graph. We can observe there is a clear difference between the
make a more significant analysis, the q-values obtained by the
tendency of each group. While in the IRL policy group the
robot from each interaction were sorted into bad and good
overall reward tends to increase, in the random group there is
mood (neutral mood was grouped together with good mood).
a higher variance and the overall reward is negative for almost
Fig. 5 shows a h eat map representation of the q-values for
all participants at the end of the fourth day. These findings
each policy and affective state for each user in each group.
further validate the effectiveness of the proposed IRL
For each sub-figure, the x-axis represents one of the social
algorithm for extended periods of time.
actions of the robot whereas the y-axis is one of the users in
that group. Darker green values represent more positive
values whereas darker red values represent more negative
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we outlined an end-to-end autonomous
socially assistive robot for the emotional support of children.
The system used an Interactive Reinforcement Learning-
based methodology to learn the social profile of the users
through social interactions. Under this paradigm, the robot
could learn either by observing the user’s reaction to its own
social actions or with the assistance of a trainer, who could
Figure 5: Heat map representations of the q-values for each kind of policy.
3
2
1
3
0
2
-1
1
0
-1
0
0
1
1
D
D
2
A Y S
2
A Y S
3
3
4
4
optionally provide additional feedback through a separate [10] E. S. Short, E. C. Deng, D. J. Feil-Seifer and M. J. Matarić,
interface. "Understanding Agency in Interactions Between Children with Autism
and Socially Assistive Robots". In Transactions on Human-Robot
In our experiment, we had a group of elementary school
Interaction, 6(3):21-47, 2017.
children come and play with the robot. The objective of the
[11] S. Jeong, “Developing a Social Robotic Companion for Stress and
experiment was to validate the ability of the robot to achieve Anxiety Mitigation in Pediatric Hospitals”, Master Thesis, Department
long term engagement with its users, as well as to determine of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), 2014.
whether the automatic mood estimation algorithm could
[12] G. Gordon, C. Breazeal and S. Engel, “Can Children Catch Curiosity
provide some insight into the user’s social profile. To achieve
from a Social Robot?”. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE
this, we separated the participant pool into two groups, to International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 91-98),
compare the performance of the robot with the learning policy ACM. 2015.
against a robot performing actions randomly. Results showed [13] K. Westlund, S. Jeong, H. W. Park, S. Ronfard, A. Adhikari, P. L.
Harris, D. DeSteno and C. Breazeal, “Flat versus expressive
that there was a remarkable difference between the two
storytelling: young children’s learning and retention of a social robot’s
groups, both in terms of preference for individual actions as
narrative”. In Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11. 2017.
well as overall for interacting with the robot. Furthermore, a [14] Z. J. Li, Y. H Liu, A. S. Liu, Y. H. Yang, T. H. Yeh and L. C. Fu,
cross-correlation analysis of the robot’s behaviors with the “Temporal-Contrastive Appearance Network for Facial Expression
profile of the user defined by questionnaires revealed that Recognition”. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man
and Cybernetics (SMC), 2018.
certain behaviors of the robot may exacerbate the negative
[15] R. Ketal, “Affect, Mood, Emotion and Feeling: Semantic
feelings a person may have towards robots.
Considerations,” in The American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 132,
While these results are promising in terms of the Issue 11, pp. 1215-1217, 1975.
effectiveness of the IRL algorithm to sustain long-term [16] P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen, “Constants across Cultures in the Face
and Emotion” in Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 17,
interactions with children for longer, it is yet unclear whether
no. 2, pp. 124-129, 1971.
this algorithm could clearly define a user’s social profile
[17] G. Doherty-Sneddon, V. Bruce, L. Bonner, S. Longbotham and C.
through sufficient interactions. Furthermore, due to the Doyle, Development of Gaze Aversion as Disengagement from Visual
relatively small subject pool, it is difficult to draw statistically Information”, Advance Online Publication, 2011.
significant conclusions from these results alone. In the future, [18] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo, T. Simon, S. E. Wei and Y. Sheikh, “OpenPose:
Realtime Multiperson 2D Pose Estimation using Part Affinity Fields”,
we will expand our participant pool in order to provide a
arXiv:1812.08008, 2018.
quantitative analysis to further support the propose
[19] D. Ullrich, S. Diefenbach and A. Butz, “Murphy Miserable Robot – A
methodology. Companion to Support Children’s Well-being in Emotionally Difficult
Situations” in CHI’16 Extended Abstracts, 2016.
REFERENCES [20] F. Tanaka, K. Isshiki, F. Takahashi, M. Uekusa, R. Sei and K. Hayashi,
“Pepper Learns Together with Children: Development of an
[1] K. C. Fleming J. M. Evans and D. S. Chutka, “Caregiver and Clinicial Educational Application”, in Proceeding of the IEEE-RAS
Shortages in an Aging Nation” in Mayo Clinic Proceedings, Vol. 78, 8, International Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2015.
pp. 1026-1040, 2003. [21] P. Hatava, G. L. Olsson and M. Lagerkranser “Preoperative
[2] H. Gunes, O. Celiktutan and E. Sariyanidi, “Live human-robot Psychological Preparation for Children Undergoing ENT Operations:
interactive public demonstrations with automatic emotion and A Comparison of Two Methods” in Journal of Paediatric Anaesthesia
personality prediction.”. In Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374: 20180026, 2019. 10(5):477-86, 2005.
[3] E. Gamborino and L. C. Fu, “Interactive Reinforcement Learning based [22] A. L. Thomaz and C. Brezeal, “Reinforcement Learning with Human
Assistive Robot for the Emotional Support of Children”. In 18th Teachers: Evidence of Feedback and Guidance with Implications for
International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems Learning Performance,” in 21st National Conference in Artificial
(ICCAS’18), 2018. Intelligence, Vol. 1 pp. 1000-1005, 2006.
[4] M. M. Baum, N. Bergstrom, N. F. Langston, and L. Thoma, [23] W. B. Knox and P. Stone, “Reinforcement Learning from Human
“Physiological Effects of Human/Companion Animal Bonding” in Reward: Discounting in Episodic Tasks,” in IEEE Intl. Symposium in
Journal of Nursing Research, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 126–129, 1984. Robot-Human Interactive Communication, RO-MAN, 2012.
[5] Gammonley, J. and J. Yates, “Pet Projects Animal Assisted Therapy in [24] K. Fischer, “Interpersonal Variation in Understanding Robots as Social
Nursing Homes,” in Journal of Gerontological Nursing, vol. 17, no. 1, Actors” in 2011 6th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
pp. 12–15, 1991. Robot Interaction (HRI), 2011.
[6] K. Wada and T. Shibata, “Living with Seal Robots — Its [25] K.L. Koay, D.S. Syrdal, M.L. Walters and K. Dautenhahn, “Living with
Sociopsychological and Physiological Influences on the Elderly at a Robots: Investigating the Habituation Effect in Participants Preferences
Care House” in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, Vol. 23, No. 5, 2007. During a Longitudinal Human-Robot Interaction Study” in The 16th
[7] A. Coninx, P. Baxter, E. Oleari, S. Bellini, B. Bierman, O. Blanson IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive
Henkemans, L. Canamero, P. Cosi, V. Enescu, R. Ros-Espinoza, A. Communication (RO-MAN’07), 2007.
Hiolle, R. Humbert, B. Kiefer, I. Kurjff-Korbayova, R. Looije, M. [26] J. Ocumpaugh, R.S. Baker and M.T. Rodrigo, “Baker-Rodrigo-
Mosconi, M. Neerincx, G. Paci, G. Patsis, C. Pozzi, F. Sacchitelli, H. Ocumpaugh Monitoring Protocol(BROMP) 2.0 Technical and Training
Sahli, A. Sanna, G. Sommavilla, F. Tesser, Y. Demiris and T. Manual”, 2015.
Belpaeme, “Towards Long-Term Social Child-Robot Interaction:
Using Multi-Activity Switching to Engage Young Users” in Journal of
Human-Robot Interaction, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 32-67, 2016.
[8] D. J. Feil-Seifer and M. J. Matarić, "Using Computational Models Over
Distance-Based Features to Facilitate Robot Interaction with Children".
In Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 1(1):55-77, 2012.
[9] C. Clabaugh, G. Ragusa, F. Sha and M. Matarić, “Designing a Socially
Assistive Robot for Personalized Number Concepts Learning in
Preschool Children”. In 5th International Conference on Development
and Learning and on Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob), 2015.
