Original Research
A Scenario-Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Mobile App
to Reduce Dysfunctional Beliefs in Individuals with Depression:
A Randomized Controlled Trial
Ji-Won Hur, PhD,1 Boram Kim, BA,2 Dasom Park, BA,2
and Sung-Won Choi, PhD2
1Department of Psychology, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
2Department of Psychology, Duksung Women’s University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Abstract
Introduction:
While
self-administered
mobile
app-based
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has shown efficiency and
effectiveness over the past decade, attempts to address auto-
matic and negative beliefs have been lacking. The purpose of this
study was to introduce and verify a mobile app that directly
intervenes in dysfunctional thoughts. This app-based treatment
includes recognizing automatic and negative thoughts of the
protagonist of scenarios, writing advice directly to the main
character, and sharing advice provided by other participants.
Materials and Methods: Thirty-four participants diagnosed
with Other Specified Depressive Disorder were recruited and ran-
domly allocated to a CBT-based mobile-app program, the Todac
Todac (TT group), or a daily mood chart app program (control
group). Participants were asked to use the software for 3 weeks.
Assessments for autonomic thoughts and clinical symptoms were
administered at baseline and at a follow-up evaluation.
Results: After completing the 3-week program, Dysfunctional
Attitude Scale (DAS) scores in TT group were lower than they
were in the control group. In clinical measures, both TT group
and control group showed reduced Beck Depression Inventory-
II (BDI-II) scores and situation-dependent trait version of
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-X2) at follow-up. How-
ever, TT group showed significantly reduced STAI-X2 scores
compared to control group. For all participants, changes in
DAS scores were correlated with BDI-II and STAI-X2 scores.
Conclusions: Our preliminary findings provide promising
evidence that scenario-based CBT mobile apps can be used to
deliver feasible and efficacious cognitive therapy. Long-term
research is needed to determine the impact and effectiveness
of this new treatment format.
Keywords: m-health, telepsychiatry, e-health, telehealth, mobile
app, cognitive behavioral therapy, depression, intervention
Introduction
J
ust a decade ago, the idea of developing a mobile app
for intervention in mental illness sounded naive to
mental health professionals. Now, it is estimated that
more than 30,000 mental health apps are available in
the Apple iTunes and Android app stores.1 Given the acces-
sibility and familiarity of smartphone usage,2 both the public
and private sectors have shown great interest in developing
and distributing mobile apps for people with mental illness.
Effectiveness of this new generation of public mental health
interventions has also been demonstrated by meta-analyses of
web-based mental health services.3–7
The vast majority of this burgeoning industry pertains to
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which is well known as the
most effective intervention for depression.8 CBT aims to modify
an individual’s automatic and dysfunctional beliefs, which
contribute to depressive episodes. Cognitive restructuring, one
of the most representative CBT techniques, helps individu-
als to recognize and challenge their own logical fallacies, such
as black-and-white thinking, catastrophizing, magnification/
minimization, mind reading, overgeneralization, and ‘‘should’’
statements.9 In this process, therapists usually provide clients
with various scenarios, including the cases of the clients, and
the clients are asked to explore cognitive distortions that ap-
pear in the scenarios.10,11 During CBT sessions, therapists typ-
ically provide various scenarios, including clients’ cases, to the
clients, who are then asked to explore cognitive distortions
evident in the given scenarios. Correcting such cognitive dis-
tortions can help people who are at vulnerable mental state to
learn more effective cognitive skills, which in turn can help
them return to their daily lives.
Computerized CBT programs borrowing from the existing
CBT techniques are expected to help alleviate and contribute
to reducing both mood symptoms and improper cognitive
schemas; however, evidence for the therapeutic effects of the
mobile-based CBT program is scarce on the dysfunctional
DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2017.0214
ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 24
NO. 10  OCTOBER 2018
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 1
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

beliefs. Several explanations are available. First, treatment
courses usually span only 3–4 weeks and may not be enough
time to fundamentally restructure schemas. Therefore, mobile-
based CBT interventions should take the format tailored to
successfully alleviate core cognitive symptoms, namely, the
dysfunctional depressive thoughts.12 Second, given the classi-
fication of types of e-commerce, such as e-health services, the
majority of available mental health apps take the form of
business-to-consumer (B2C, consumers interact with online
services) rather than of business-to-business (B2B, institutions
sell products to other businesses) or consumer-to-consumer
(C2C, interactions between consumers).13 In particular, applica-
tion contents are exceptionally dependent on self-help guide
based on psychoeducational materials and instructions.14 How-
ever, some of the more recently developed apps have adopted an
anonymous peer-to-peer (C2C) platform, which overcomes the
drawbacks of the one-way passive treatment program, receiving
high praise from users.15 In such context, both ‘‘choosing and
focusing’’ on direct cognitive intervention and the paradigm shift
to C2C services should be considered to increase program com-
pliance and intervention efficiency. Such considerations may
lead to cognitive change in mental health app users.
The present study aimed to introduce and verify a novel
scenario-based CBT mobile app, mind-growth program To-
dac Todac (TT; in Korean, tap tap). The app was developed
with focus on targeting dysfunctional beliefs in individuals
at high risk of psychiatric illness or with psychiatric disor-
ders. This novel app includes three steps as follows: (1) Step
I: identifying cognitive distortions using a scenario-based
quiz; (2) Step II: ‘‘Decatastrophizing’’ questions aimed to
correct unrealistic concerns; and (3) Step III: ‘‘Distancing’’
questions using open-ended questions, which encourage the
users to gain distance from the dysfunctional thought by
giving advice to others in a situation similar to the scenario.
After each step, users can assess others’ responses and ad-
vice. The design of TT app, thus, utilizes the advantages of
both B2C and C2C that facilitate cognitive reconstruction
and self-growth.
Conventional face-to-face CBT shows a robust medium
effect on maladaptive beliefs of depressed individuals.16 Si-
milarly, this smartphone app delivery of scenario-based CBT
was assumed to have a significant effect on automated and
dysfunctional thoughts. The goal of this randomized con-
trolled trial (RCT) was twofold: First, to examine the hy-
pothesis that this app-based CBT program will reduce clinical
symptoms compared to a mood diary group. Second, to assess
whether this scenario-based platform results in modifying
the users’ dysfunctional beliefs through reappraisal and re-
constructing.
Materials and Methods
TRIAL DESIGN
This study is a RCT with two groups: a scenario-based CBT
mobile app group (TT group) and an app-based mood charting
group (control group). Randomization, based on a computer-
ized random number generator, occurred immediately after
obtaining informed consent, but before screening clinical
symptoms. Following randomization, participants were asked
to spend 10–15 min a day for 3 weeks on the TT or mood chart
app. Push alarms within the app were used to prevent the ab-
sence of app usage for two or more consecutive days. Partici-
pants were compensated for their participation (valued at USD
30). Furthermore, after completing participation, those as-
signed to the control group were informed that they could use
the TT app without any restriction.
PARTICIPANTS
Figure 1 shows the flow of participants through the trial.
Participants were initially recruited through web-based
advertisements, posters, and outpatient psychiatric clinics.
For study inclusion, participants had to meet following
criteria: the DSM-5 diagnosis for Other Specified Depressive
Disorder,17 fluent in Korean, 12 or more years of formal
education, and familiar with Internet and smartphone app
use familiarity. Exclusion criteria were as follows: high risk
of suicide attempt, diagnosis of psychosis or major de-
pressive disorder based on the Structured Clinical Interview
for the DSM-IV, Non-Patient Edition,18 current psychiatric
drug use during at least 4-week period before participating
in the program, and/or family history of psychiatric disor-
der. Of 91 eligible volunteers, 29 did not meet inclusion
criteria, and 14 refused participation in these follow-up
studies. The remaining 48 participants were randomly as-
signed to two groups. Seven participants in each group did
not participate in enough training and were excluded from
the final analysis. Thus, final participants who enrolled
in the study were 34 patients who met the DSM-5 criteria
for Other Specified Depressive Disorder (30 females; aged 18
to 35 years, mean = 23.71, standard deviation [SD] = 3.26)
with significant symptoms of depression (indicated by a
Beck Depression Inventory-II [BDI-II] score of 10 or higher;
mean = 24.12, SD = 7.96, min = 10, max = 44).19
INTERVENTIONS
The intervention protocol for the mind growth program TT
app was developed based on the conventional CBT manual.9
One trial consists of one scenario and a related three-step quiz
(Fig. 2). Participants were asked to perform three trials per day.
HUR ET AL.
2 TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH
OCTOBER 2018
ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

Step I: identifying cognitive distortions. After reading a short
story describing vague or frustrating situation (e.g., a story of
an employee who joined a new company but is sensitive to the
evaluation of others; a story of a young man who failed to get a
job and is worried about ruining everything
after that), users are asked to find the protag-
onist’s automatic and systematic negative
beliefs in each vignette (‘‘What is the dys-
functional belief of the main character in the
story?’’). The multiple-choice question de-
scribes typical cognitive distortions common
in psychiatric patients, such as black-and-
white thinking, catastrophizing, magnifica-
tion/minimization, mind reading, overgener-
alization, ‘‘should’’ and ‘‘must’’ statements,
and tunnel vision. Immediately after each re-
sponse, a bar graph of the response rate of
others is displayed, allowing the participant to
see the answers most people chose (i.e., the
correct answers).
Step
II:
the
‘‘Decatastrophizing’’
ques-
tions. Individuals with mental illnesses tend
to predict either an unrealistic worst-case
scenario or hold an unrealistically optimistic
view. In either case, the question of ‘‘guessing
what is really going to happen’’ is very helpful
for these patients with an impaired grasp of
reality and tunnel vision. In this step, users are
asked to choose among three alternatives the
most realistic outcomes for each scenario:
most unrealistic pessimistic, most realistic, and
most unrealistic optimistic ones (‘‘What would be the most re-
alistic outcome that could happen in this situation?’’). This step
provides the participant opportunity to confront and correct
the level of anxiety that causes his or her maladjustment.
Fig. 1. Flow of participants through the trial.
Fig. 2. Screenshot of the Todac Todac app, including scenario-based three-step quiz.
SCENARIO-BASED CBT APP ON DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEFS
ª M A R Y A N N L I E B E R T , I N C .  VOL. 24
NO. 10  OCTOBER 2018
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 3
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

Immediately after each response, the most realistic expectation
is displayed, allowing the participant to correct their unrealistic
concerns or wishes.
Step III: the ‘‘Distancing’’ questions. Users are asked to imagine
what to advise a close friend or family member in a similar
situation. This training may encourage users to distance them-
selves from distorted thoughts (‘‘If your friends and family
members were in same situation, and you were a counselor,
what would you tell them?’’). At this stage, individuals will
experience growing as counselors for themselves. After com-
pleting each step, individuals can post and share their advice on
the timeline, as well as read advice from others.
Control group. In comparison, participants in the mood chart
control group were asked to complete a daily mood diary, re-
cording their mood state (e.g., depressed, manic) and sleep
quality/quantity. Completing the mood chart takes 10–15 min.
OUTCOME MEASURES
Every participant completed all assessments listed below
both at baseline and 3 weeks after the start of the program. The
main outcome measure was the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale
(DAS),20 which indicates the extent to which an individual
agrees or disagrees with a set of functional and dysfunctional
attitude statements. The level of negative beliefs of depressed
individuals was estimated based on the total score. Psychiatric
symptoms of depression and anxiety were assessed by the
BDI-II19 and the trait version of the State-Trait Anxiety In-
ventory (STAI-X2).21 Higher scores on each scale indicate
greater levels of clinical symptoms. The most widely used self-
esteem measure, the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES),22
was used to assess participants’ psychological resources es-
sential for mental health. To rule out the impact of changes in
environmental factors, quality of life (QoL) was also explored
for each group.23
PROCEDURE
The two-arm trials examining the effects of a scenario-based
CBT app on dysfunctional cognition used a 3-week prospective
longitudinal design. At baseline, participants completed clini-
cal screening (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, Non-
Patient edition [SCID-NP], DAS, BDI-II, STAI-X2, RSES, and
QoL) and measures of self-report questionnaires and received
information about how to use the mobile intervention
app. After 3 weeks of app use, participants were associated with
the same measures as they did at baseline. All participants
provided written informed consent. This study was conducted
in accordance with the guidelines provided by the Institutional
Review Board at Chung-Ang University.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
Mann–Whitney or chi-square tests were performed as non-
parametric tests between groups, while the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test was used as a nonparametric paired test for cognitive
and psychiatric symptom changes after the intervention and the
Spearman test for correlation analysis.
Results
DEMOGRAPHIC AND CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Before the intervention, dysfunctional attitude, clinical
symptoms, including depression, and resilience in participants
of the TT group did not show any significant difference
compared to those of the control group (Table 1; all ps > 0.05).
EFFECTS OF THE MOBILE APP INTERVENTIONS
At follow-up, the DAS mean scores improved significantly
in the TT group after using app-based intervention for 3 weeks
(Wilcoxon’s test, Z = -2.533, p = 0.011), while the control
group did not show changes in negative beliefs ( p > 0.05).
DAS scores in the TT group were lower than they were in the
control group (Z = -2.26, p = 0.024).
The Wilcoxon test for clinical symptoms showed reduced BDI-
II (TT group: Z=-3.386, p=0.001; control group’s Z=-3.011,
p=0.003)
and
situation-dependent
STAI-X2
(TT
group’s
Z=-2.913, p=0.004 vs. control group’s Z=-2.511, p=0.012)
scores for both groups after completing the 3 week course.
However, despite the improvement of anxiety evident in both
groups, a group difference was found in BDI-II score at trend level
(Z=-1.90, p=0.058, TT group < control group) and in the STAI-
X2 (Z=-2.10, p=0.035, TT group < control group) at follow-up.
In the case of self-esteem, which showed no significant
problems at baseline, there was no change after 3 weeks of
intervention for either group (all ps > 0.05). No group differ-
ence was found in QoL at follow-up ( p > 0.05; Table 1).
CORRELATION ANALYSIS
The changes in DAS scores showed moderate or greater cor-
relations with both the scores of BDI-II (Spearman’s rho= 0.38,
p = 0.027) and of STAI-X2 (Spearman’s rho = 0.73, p < 0.001).
Discussion
Mobile mental health apps with sophisticated and rigorous
design and methodology are becoming increasingly popu-
lar.24 It is clear that a variety of innovative app-based thera-
pies will meet the needs of many patients and change the
landscape of mental healthcare. In this RCT study, a scenario-
based mental health app, TT, demonstrated superior cognitive
and clinical outcomes for patients with other specified depres-
sive disorder compared to those in the control condition, who
HUR ET AL.
4 TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH
OCTOBER 2018
ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

kept a mood diary. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
verify the direct effects of a CBT mobile app on dysfunctional
beliefs and clinical symptoms in depressed patients.
Over the past decade or so, considerable research has
demonstrated the efficiency and effectiveness of app-based
treatment.25,26 However, determining the therapeutic mech-
anisms of mobile-based therapy remains a challenging task.27
Moreover, general mental health apps typically focus on (1)
exercise and mood, (2) behavioral activation, and (3) coping
strategies,24 while rarely addressing the core cognitive symptoms
of mood disorder, namely, dysfunctional beliefs. In the TT app,
users are given opportunities to look for negative cognitive
distortions evident in the main characters in frustrating sce-
narios and provide advice to those who
have experienced this situation. Through
this process, a depressed individual can
break his or her negative perspective with
repeating the exercise of stepping back and
examining the situation objectively. In the
present preliminary study, only 3 weeks of
app use led to remarkable decreases in
depression, anxiety, and negative thoughts
in individuals diagnosed with other speci-
fied depressive disorder.
Academic interest in the impact of psy-
chotherapy on dysfunctional beliefs arose
relatively recently. A recent meta-analysis
demonstrated that psychotherapy, includ-
ing CBT, has a robust and stable impact on
dysfunctional cognitions in depressed in-
dividuals.16 In the present study, similar to
the results of previous meta-analytic re-
search, the index of negative thoughts, DAS
scores, was reduced in the TT group com-
pared to control group, and the changes in
DAS scores revealed remarkable correlations
with the BDI-II scores. Thus, the scenario-
based CBT program TT using traditional CBT
proved to be an effective application for
modifying dysfunctional beliefs with a more
appropriate schemata.9
Interestingly,
DAS
changes
showed
stronger links with STAI-X2 changes than
they did with those of the BDI-II. Indeed,
it has been reported that anxiety is related
to various cognitive distortions, such as
dysfunctional attitudes and negative auto-
matic thoughts.28 Given that the specific
therapeutic mechanisms underlying the
modification of dysfunctional beliefs in
depression remain unclear,29 future studies should investigate
exactly how psychotherapy affects depression. However, the
present result builds for the case that interventions on negative
thinking augment the alleviation of anxiety, which could in-
directly improve depressive symptoms.
In contrast, it should be noted that the mood diary pro-
gram, too, demonstrated therapeutic effects on depression
and anxiety. A mood chart aims to increase awareness of
the appearance or fluctuation of mood symptoms and is
widely used in the management of mood disorders.30,31
Therefore, mood chart may help individuals to acquire meta-
awareness of internal experiences, as well as moods, to help
Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics at Baseline and at Follow-Up
TT GROUP
(n = 17)
CG (n = 17)
GROUP COMPARISON
Z OR FISHER’S
EXACT TESTa
p
Male/female
2/15
2/15
N/A
1.000
Age (years)
24.76 – 3.70
22.65 – 2.42
-1.56
0.119
QoL
96.82 – 16.73
90.00 – 18.02
-1.19
0.234
DAS
DAS at baseline
148.76 – 33.12
165.82 – 26.35
-1.52
0.130
DAS at follow-up
127.65 – 29.13
154.06 – 30.88
-2.26
0.024
Paired testb
Z = -2.53, p = 0.011
Z = -1.61, p = 0.107
BDI-II
BDI-II at baseline
22.65 – 7.94
25.59 – 7.93
-0.88
0.379
BDI-II at follow-up
10.00 – 7.09
16.00 – 10.32
-1.90
0.058
Paired testb
Z = -3.39, p = 0.001
Z = -3.01, p = 0.003
STAI-X2
STAI-X2 at baseline
57.00 – 9.27
60.82 – 7.31
-0.95
0.342
STAI-X2 at follow-up
46.00 – 10.62
53.88 – 10.28
-2.10
0.035
Paired testb
Z = -2.91, p = 0.004
Z = -2.51, p = 0.012
RSES
RSES at baseline
27.65 – 2.34
27.59 – 1.91
-0.19
0.847
RSES at follow-up
27.88 – 1.90
27.59 – 2.29
-0.75
0.452
Paired testb
Z = -0.44, p = 0.658
Z = 0.00, p = 1.00
aNonparametric Z-values from nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Fisher’s exact test for
continuous and categorical variables, respectively.
bWilcoxon test for paired samples (follow-up, baseline)
BDI-II, Beck Depression Inventory-II; CG, control group; DAS, Dysfunctional Attitude Scale; N/A, not
applicable; QoL, quality of life; RSES, Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; STAI-X2, trait version of the State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory; TT, Todac Todac.
SCENARIO-BASED CBT APP ON DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEFS
ª M A R Y A N N L I E B E R T , I N C .  VOL. 24
NO. 10  OCTOBER 2018
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 5
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

reduce depression onset.32 In this line, the recovery of
clinical symptoms in the control group is a plausible result.
Research on the utility of mobile-based mood charts is also
under way.30
The generalizability of our observations may be limited by
the study’s small sample size and gender bias. Further study
should recruit a large sample, as well as consider the even
distribution of gender, to provide results representative of
the effectiveness in male users. The current findings are also
limited by the absence of information on the physiological
changes accompanying the recovery of clinical symptoms.
The effects of mental health apps focusing on dysfunctional
beliefs should be further substantiated in a greater number
of patients, assessing both physiological and psychologi-
cal variables. We are planning a follow-up study in light of
the above limitations. Despite the limitations, our findings
suggest several directions to be considered for mobile app
design. The World Health Organization suggests that un-
treated mental disorders account for 13% of the total global
burden of disease.33 Moreover, human resources for mental
healthcare are not sufficient in low- and middle-income
countries. Along this line, newly developed apps should take
a ‘‘choice and focus’’ strategy, consider both B2C and C2C
formats, and provide specific and tailored ways to intervene
in the pathogenesis of various symptoms of mental ill-
ness. Efforts to clarify the goals and targets can enhance the
effectiveness of app-based therapies. App-based psycho-
therapy should also grow within the framework of evidence-
based therapy. In other words, through research validation,
the dynamics and limitations of the effects of app-based
therapies should be investigated.
In the present study, we demonstrate that the scenario-based
CBT mobile app functions as an effective platform that con-
tributes to the correction of cognitive distortions, as well as the
alleviation of depression and anxiety. Although preliminary,
the direct intervention to automatic and dysfunctional beliefs
delivered a number of potential benefits that warrant further
investigation. Through this novel platform, we hope to assist
individuals in their paths as mental healthcare practitioners
who care for themselves.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant of the Korea Health
Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry
Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of
Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (Grant No: HM15C1245).
Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
R E F E R E N C E S
1.
Westervelt A. Mental-health apps make inroads with consumer and therapists.
2015. The Wall Street Journal. September 27, 2015. Available at: http://
www.wsj.com/articles/mental-health-apps-make-inroads-with-consumers-
and-therapists-1443407477.
2.
Torous J, Powell AC. Current research and trends in the use of smartphone
applications for mood disorders. Internet Interv 2015;2:169–173.
3.
Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, Clarke J, Birch M-R, Christensen H.
Smartphones for smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic
review. J Med Internet Res 2013;15:e247.
4.
Andersson G, Cuijpers P, Carlbring P, Riper H, Hedman E. Guided Internet-
based vs. face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy for psychiatric and
somatic disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. World Psychiatry
2014;13:288–295.
5.
Barak A, Hen L, Boniel-Nissim M, Shapira Na. A comprehensive review and a
meta-analysis of the effectiveness of internet-based psychotherapeutic
interventions. J Technol Hum Serv 2008;26:109–160.
6.
Cuijpers P, Donker T, van Straten A, Li J, Andersson G. Is guided self-help as
effective as face-to-face psychotherapy for depression and anxiety disorders?
A systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative outcome studies.
Psychol Med 2010;40:1943–1957.
7.
Andrews G, Cuijpers P, Craske MG, McEvoy P, Titov N. Computer therapy for
the anxiety and depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical
health care: A meta-analysis. PLoS One 2010;5:e13196.
8.
Cuijpers P, Berking M, Andersson G, Quigley L, Kleiboer A, Dobson KS. A
meta-analysis of cognitive-behavioural therapy for adult depression, alone
and in comparison with other treatments. Can J Psychiatry 2013;58:376–
385.
9.
Beck JS. Cognitive behavior therapy: basics and beyond, 2nd ed. New York: The
Guilford Press, 2011.
10. Brosan L, Westbrook D. The complete CBT guide for depression and low mood:
A comprehensive self-help guide for people with depression and low mood
that also offers invaluable advice for families and other supporters. Hachette,
United Kingdom: Robinson Press, 2015.
11. Doherr L, Reynolds S, Wetherly J, Evans EH. Young children’s ability to engage
in cognitive therapy tasks: Associations with age and educational experience.
Behav Cogn Psychother 2005;33:201–215.
12. Wright JH, Wright AS, Albano AM, Basco MR, Goldsmith LJ, Raffield T, MW O.
Computer-assisted cognitive therapy for depression: Maintaining efficacy
while reducing therapist time. Am J Psychiatry 2005;162:1158–1164.
13. Eysenbach G. What is e-health? J Med Internet Res 2001;3:e20.
14. Hedman E, Ljo´ tsson B, Lindefors N. Cognitive behavior therapy via the Internet:
A systematic review of applications, clinical efficacy and cost–effectiveness.
Exp Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 2012;12:745–764.
15. Morris RR, Schueller SM, Picard RW. Efficacy of a web-based, crowdsourced
peer-to-peer cognitive reappraisal platform for depression: Randomized
controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2015;17:e72.
16. Cristea IA, Huibers MJH, David D, Hollon SD, Andersson G, Cuijpers P. The
effects of cognitive behavior therapy for adult depression on dysfunctional
thinking: A meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2015;42:62–71.
17. APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 5th ed.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013.
18. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JBW. Structured clinical interview for
DSM-IV axis I disorders, non-patient edition (SCID-NP). New York: State
Psychiatric Institute/Biometrics Research Department, 1995.
19. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK, Psychological C. Beck depression inventory-II.
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation, 1996.
20. Weissman AN, Beck AT. Development and validation of the dysfunctional
attitude scale: A preliminary investigation. Paper presented at: Association for
the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, Chicago, IL, 1978.
HUR ET AL.
6 TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH
OCTOBER 2018
ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

21. Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene RE, Vagg P, Jacobs GA. STAI manual for
the state-trait anxiety inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press, 1970.
22. Rosenberg M. Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1965; Vol. 11.
23. Gill DL, Chang Y-K, Murphy KM, Speed KM, Hammond CC, Rodriguez EA, Lyu M,
Shang Y-T. Quality of life assessment for physical activity and health
promotion. Appl Res Qual Life 2011;6:181–200.
24. Bakker D, Kazantzis N, Rickwood D, Rickard N. Mental health smartphone apps:
Review and evidence-based recommendations for future developments. JMIR
Ment Health 2016;3:e7.
25. Josephine K, Josefine L, Philipp D, David E, Harald B. Internet- and mobile-
based depression interventions for people with diagnosed depression: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord 2017;223:28–40.
26. Luxton DD, June JD, Kinn JT. Technology-based suicide prevention: Current
applications and future directions. Telemed J E Health 2011;17:50–54.
27. Kok G, Bockting C, Burger H, Smit F, Riper H. Mobile cognitive therapy:
Adherence and acceptability of an online intervention in remitted recurrently
depressed patients. Internet Interv 2014;1:65–73.
28. Wong SS. The relations of cognitive triad, dysfunctional attitudes, automatic
thoughts, and irrational beliefs with test anxiety. Curr Psychol 2008;27:
177–191.
29. Lorenzo-Luaces L, German RE, DeRubeis RJ. It’s complicated: The relation
between cognitive change procedures, cognitive change, and symptom
change in cognitive therapy for depression. Clin Psychol Rev 2015;
41:3–15.
30. Depp CA, Kim DH, Vergel de Dios L, Wang V, Ceglowski J. A pilot study of mood
ratings captured by mobile phone versus paper-and-pencil mood charts in
bipolar disorder. J Dual Diagn 2012;8:326–332.
31. Gerhards SAH, Abma TA, Arntz A, de Graaf LE, Evers SMAA, Huibers MJH,
Widdershoven GAM. Improving adherence and effectiveness of computerised
cognitive behavioural therapy without support for depression: A qualitative
study on patient experiences. J Affect Disord 2011;129:117–125.
32. Teasdale JD, Moore RG, Hayhurst H, Pope M, Williams S, Segal ZV.
Metacognitive awareness and prevention of relapse in depression: Empirical
evidence. J Consult Clin Psychol 2002;70:275–287.
33. WHO. Global burden of mental disorders and the need for a comprehensive,
coordinated response from health and social sectors at the country level:
Report by the secretariat. Geneva, Switzerland, 2011.
Address correspondence to:
Sung-Won Choi, PhD
Department of Psychology
Duksung Women’s University
33, Samyang-ro 144-gil
Dobong-gu
Seoul 01369
Republic of Korea
E-mail: karatt92@duksung.ac.kr
Received: August 24, 2017
Revised: October 18, 2017
Accepted: October 19, 2017
Online Publication Date: January 11, 2018
SCENARIO-BASED CBT APP ON DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEFS
ª M A R Y A N N L I E B E R T , I N C .  VOL. 24
NO. 10  OCTOBER 2018
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 7
Downloaded by University of Rochester package NERL from online.liebertpub.com at 01/13/18. For personal use only. 

