behavioral 
sciences
Article
Development and Pilot Testing of an Internet-Based
Self-Help Intervention for Depression for
Indian Users
Seema Mehrotra 1,*, Paulomi Sudhir 1, Girish Rao 2, Jagadisha Thirthalli 3 and TK Srikanth 4
1
Department of Clinical Psychology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore,
Karnataka 560029, India; paulomi@nimhans.ac.in
2
Department of Epidemiology, Center for Public health, NIMHANS, Bangalore 560029, India;
girishnrao@gmail.com
3
Department of Psychiatry, NIMHANS, Bangalore 560029, India; jagatth@yahoo.com
4
E-health Research Center, IIIT, Bangalore 560100, India; tk.srikanth@iiitb.ac.in
*
Correspondence: drmehrotra_seema@yahoo.com
Received: 8 January 2018; Accepted: 16 March 2018; Published: 22 March 2018


Abstract: There is a dearth of published research on uptake and utility of mental health apps in India,
despite a rising global trend in the application of technology in the ﬁeld of mental health. We describe
the development and pilot testing of a self-help intervention for depression, PUSH-D (Practice
and Use Self-Help for Depression) for urban Indians. This guided self-help app, with essential
and optional zone sections, was developed to provide a comprehensive coverage of therapeutic
strategies drawn from cognitive behavior therapy, interpersonal therapy, supportive psychotherapy,
and positive psychology. Pilot testing was carried out using a single group pre-, post- and follow-up
design in 78 eligible participants. Participants were typically young adults with major depression
or dysthymia and signiﬁcant impairment in functioning. Almost two-thirds of the participants had
never sought professional mental health help. Signiﬁcant reductions in depression and improvement
in the functioning and well-being were notedon standardized measures in participants completing
all 10 essential zone sections. These gains were maintained at follow-up. The results were similar
for partial completers, who completed ﬁveout of the 10 essential sections. PUSH-D is one of the ﬁrst
indigenously developed self-help apps for depression and it shows promise in reducing the treatment
gap for depression in India.
Keywords: internet-based self-help; depression; treatment gap; depression app; guided self-help;
depression in India
1. Introduction
The potential for the use of internet-based platforms in the mental health ﬁeld has attracted
signiﬁcant attention of scientists and other stakeholders in the last few years [1–3]. This is evident
from the number of articles being published on this topic as well as the number of applications (apps)
available on platforms such as Apple and Google Play stores [4]. Using the key word ‘mental health’
in combination with the word ‘internet-based’ as search terms on PubMed resulted in 251 articles for
the last ﬁve-year period(2013–2017).
A growing number of research studies on internet-based interventions in the ﬁeld of mental health
need to be understood in the background of observations that the majority of individuals across the
globe who need mental health interventions do not receive them. World Health Organization (WHO,
2007) has recommended development of an optimal mix of different kinds of services for addressing
treatment gap in mental health. This includes empowerment of communities, through provision
Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36; doi:10.3390/bs8040036
www.mdpi.com/journal/behavsci

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
2 of 24
of low-intensity self-help interventions as a ﬁrst line in themanagement of common mental health
problems [5,6]. Realization of the magnitude of treatment gap and the potential use of technology on
one hand, coupled with increasing internet access on the other hand have propelled voluminous
research on self-help interventions for psychiatric conditions that can be delivered through the
internet [7]. Internet-based self-help interventions can play an important role in addressing unmet
mental health needs in low-resource settings with limited availability of mental health professionals
and poor access to mental health services. Internet-based interventions offer several advantages
such as ease of access, low costs, ﬂexibility, privacy and convenience of use etc. [1]. Internet-based
self-help interventions have several potential points of implementation: during the waiting period
for meeting a mental health professional, as stepped-care for low severity problems, as preventive
measure for individuals at risk, as relapse prevention for those with residual symptoms or as a blended
approach when integrated with face-to-face interventions [1]. The present study focuses on examining
an internet-based self-help intervention, primarily as a stepped-care approach.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Current Status at a Glance
Numerous studies have been published on internet-based interventions for a wide variety of
common mental health conditions and substance use disorders [3]. Cognitive behavior therapies(CBT)
, especially for depression, have been the most popular forms of therapy approaches for which
internet-based formats have been tested, although there are a handful of studies on other forms
of internet-based therapies too [1,8,9]. This may be due to a variety of factors such as availability
of empirical evidence-base for CBT as well as its structured nature, ease of transformation into
internet-based delivery formats and potential for client-learning with minimal external assistance.
CBT-based internet interventions have typically yielded moderate effect sizes [10]. Internet-based
interventions that are completely unguided, as well as those involving some level of human assistance
have both been examined for their utility. Most studies suggest superiority of interventions that involve
some human contact (therapist or a non-professional) in terms of adherence and performance [11].
Unguided self-care apps tend to be associated with low adherence rates. Typically, unguided apps
also have limited scope for contextualization depending on the needs of a user. Other limitations of
completely unguided apps include dependence on a user’s motivation to complete the intervention
and reliance on a user’s self-awareness about when it is required to stepup to a higher-intensity
intervention. There is a wide array of unguided apps that have come up in the commercial marketplace
and there is insufﬁcient information built into the description of apps to help a potential user decide
whether a given app might best suit his/her needs [12].
Reviews and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of internet-based interventions
for depression and anxiety disorders have, in general indicated promising results in term of their
efﬁcacy in reducing severity of symptoms [13–18].
Despite mounting evidence on efﬁcacy of
internet-basedinterventions for common mental health problems, several concerns have been noted by
researchers working in this ﬁeld. Some of these include low uptake of internet-based interventions
by individuals who are provided access to the same and high drop-out rates seen in intervention
trials. Limited use of active placebo controls in research studies and insufﬁcient evidence about long
term gains of internet-based interventions etc. are a few other issues that have been raised [16,19,20].
Mushrooming of un-tested mental health apps, some of which are designed with little involvement
of mental health professionals and promoted in the unregulated marketplace has also raised ethical
questions [13,21,22].
2.2. Rationale for the Study
Although there have been large-scale empirical studies on internet-based interventions for
common mental health problems across the globe, most of these are from Western nations and only

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
3 of 24
some of these well-researched apps are freely available to a potential user [23–25]. Relatively very
little is known about how internet-based methods of delivery of psychological interventions may
be received and used in non-Western cultures by individuals for whom they are designed [26–28].
A broad scan of literature indicated that although several papers have been published in the last few
years on the scope of digital mental health in India, there is a signiﬁcant dearth of empirical research
on internet-based interventions for mental health in the Indian context [29–32].
The ﬁndings of a recently completed National Mental Health survey spanning 12 Indian states has
revealed high prevalence of common mental health problems and importantly, the extent of treatment
gaps for these problems. As per this survey, one in every 20 persons is estimated to be suffering
from major depression. What is more disturbing is the observation that about 85% of those who
need professional intervention for depression are not able to access treatment [33]. In this context, an
increasing penetration of the internet in India [34] provides an opportunity to examine the potential
utility of internet-based interventions for depression in urban Indians.
A review of free depression apps available on Android platforms for Indian users highlighted that
most of these apps focus on psycho-education or mood monitoring, and only a few apps incorporate
managing suicidal thoughts as a component [25]. This review also indicated that there is limited
information built in these apps on their scope and limitations or for educating the users about when
to reach out for a higher intensity intervention as well as how to overcome mental barriers related
to seeking professional help. The last point becomes especially relevant in a country like India
where stigma and negative attitudes towards help seeking make it difﬁcult for individuals to seek
professional face-to-face interventions for mental health [35,36]. Self-care apps cannot merely help
individuals learn skills to handle their minor mental health issues, but can also include content aimed
at strengthening positive attitudes towards seeking professional help whenever it is needed. There is
a need for development and testing of internet-based interventions that are culturally appropriate,
and address common concerns in clients as seen in clinical practice, while taking in account limited
professional resources and low levels of mental health literacy [36,37]. On the whole, the review of
research highlighted the need for an internet-based self-help program for depression that covers a wide
range of therapeutic components commonly utilized in clinical practice in urban India, and addresses
some of the lacunae in free depression apps through including components on psycho-education,
managing suicidal thoughts as well as guidance about when to step-up and reach out for professional
support. It was in this backdrop that an internet-based self-help program for depression was developed
and pilot tested in India. The present paper is aimed at describing the development of the program, as
well as the result of the pilot testing of the program. Pilot testing was primarily aimed at documenting
patterns of use, perceived gains as reported by the users and short-term outcomes on depressive
symptoms, functioning and wellbeing.
3. Method
Program development and salient features:Practice and Use Self-help for Depression (PUSH-D)
was developed to serve as an internet-based self-care program to help individuals deal with symptoms
of depression. The name of the program (hereafter referred to as PUSH-D) was decided following
brainstorming within the research team to serve as an easy-to-remember acronym. It aimed at
conveying its essence: a self-help program to deal with depression with an emphasis on the role
of practice.
3.1. Content Considerations
The development of PUSH-D was based on review of publications on internet-based interventions
in common mental health conditions, review of depression apps freely available in commercial market
place as well as multiple rounds of discussions within the research team. The content development
process was guided by the clinical experience of the ﬁrst two authors who are engaged in providing
psychological interventions for adults with varying severity of depression in a tertiary care teaching

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
4 of 24
hospital as well as in a community based well-being center in a metropolitan city of South India.
The components were drawn primarily from theoretical frameworks that have been well researched
and are commonly applied in clinical practice with urban Indian clients. These included ingredients of
cognitive behavior therapy, supportive therapy, interpersonal therapy as well as positive psychology.
Thus the coverage attempted to bring the research and practice perspectives together. The other
authors provided expertise in public health, psychiatry and use of technology as required during
various phases of the project. The following points were taken into consideration in the development
of PUSH-D.
At the outset, it was decided that PUSH-D should comprehensively address a wide range of
components that are commonly included in face-to-face individual therapies for Indian urban clients
with depression. Based on clinical experience in the local culture(apart from empirical literature
review), the researchers identiﬁed the following components in the initial round of discussion:
psycho-education about depression, behavioral activation, learning to identify and correct cognitive
errors, worry management, reducing self-criticality and enhancing self-compassion, enhancing
self-soothing skills and enhancing an overall sense of mastery. A few additional components were also
decided upon, based on the rationale described below.
As prior research indicates high dropouts in internet-based interventions, it was planned to
include a component focused on helping users with strategies to keep up their motivation to
complete PUSH-D (e.g., scheduling and prioritizing self-care, anticipating gains through practice,
self-reinforcement for progress etc.).
Our clinical experience as well as research suggests that
individuals in a collectivistic culture like India experience barriers to seek help for distress from
informal sources due to a wish to avoid placing unnecessary demands on signiﬁcant others/burden
them and the need to maintain harmony [38]. Hence it was decided to include a component focusing
on mobilizing support from informal sources for managing distress and generating positive emotions.
Self-care interventions are low-intensity interventions and their users need to recognize when
self-help may be insufﬁcient and seeking face-to-face interventions is required.
The review of
depression apps indicated that several of these do not provide sufﬁcient information to the users
regarding the limitations of self-help approach. This information is important for users of self-help
apps in a context where stigma and lack of awareness play a major role in non-utilization of services.
Hence the last section in the essential zone of PUSH-D aimed to help users become aware as to when
professional help seeking might be an appropriate decision. The section also extensively covered
various psychological barriers to seeking professional help and ways of overcoming hesitations and
ambivalences related to seeking face-to-face interventions in times of need. The above-mentioned
components formed the various sections of PUSH-D (Table 1) and were grouped together under the
label of Essential Zone.
PUSH-D also contained additional sections put together under the label of optional zone.
These sections could be accessed by a user at any point of time depending on need or preference.
The optional zone was developed to address additional issues that clients with depression may present
with (viz. maintaining sleep hygiene, dealing with interpersonal relationships issues, dealing with grief,
and learning relaxation through visualization). A section on dealing with suicidal thoughts was also
included, though PUSH-D was not targeted at individuals experiencing signiﬁcant suicidality and the
evaluation process identiﬁed and directed individuals with high suicidal risk to appropriate services.
This was kept as an optional section thatwas freely accessible to clients at any point. A provision was
made in the program to deliverautomatic prompts to clients to go to this section, when their current
mood rating indicated high distress along with death-wishes or suicidal thoughts. These mood ratings
on a pleasant to unpleasant continuum were captured through the presentation of a single seven-point
smiley-based item on each log-in. In addition, the optional zone included sections that provided inputs
on maintenance of wellbeing so as to help clients in not just reduction of depressive symptoms but
also in enhancing an overall sense of well being over time. The optional zone also contained references
and links relevant to the content for users interested in further reading.

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
5 of 24
Table 1. Content of PUSH-D.
Essential Zone
Section Number
Section Name
Brief Description
1
Understand depression
Checking one’s beliefs about depression, busting myths
and recognizing depressive symptoms
2
Enhance self-care
motivation
Anticipating motivational blocks to complete the
program & empowering self with strategies to keep up
the motivation
3
Activate
Learning about utility of behavioral activation,
systematically planning and monitoring one’s
engagements
4
Deal with depressive
thoughts
Learning to recognize thinking-errors common in
depression and substituting unhelpful thoughts with
more helpful ones
5
Managing excessive
worries
Learning to handle excessive worries, learning the
concept of wise mind
6
Learn self-compassion
Recognizing the problems with self-criticality, the utility
of self-compassion and working on ways to cultivate a
self-compassionate stance
7
Strengthen self-soothing
skills
Identifying the use of healthy self-soothing practices for
use in order to deal with intense negative emotions
8
Regain a sense of mastery
Managing the sense of feeling overwhelmed by multiple
problems and regaining a sense of mastery
9
Harness the power of
support
Identifying and overcoming mental barriers to seeking
support for managing depression
10
Step-up
Learning to recognize when self-help alone is insufﬁcient
and managing psychological barriers to reaching out for
professional help for depression
A few other points were taken into consideration in the process of development of PUSH-D.
All self-care/help strategies introduced were those thatcould be potentially learned by a user without
face-to-face interaction with a therapist. These strategies were preceded by a clearly articulated
rationale for the same. It was considered important to help users understand why and how certain
strategies might help. This rationale was based on available research as well as clinical experience of
the authors.
It was ensured that across sections, exercises for practice/assignments for application in daily life
were introduced after providing demonstrations/illustrations. Diverse examples from family, social
relationships, work and academic domains were used across sections, so as to keep the content relevant
to individuals from different backgrounds. An attempt was also made to incorporate examples based
on commonly seen themes in clinical practice in the Indian culture (e.g., self-criticality related to one’s
role as a parent of an adolescent, responsibilities associated with living together with parents/in-laws)
and to avoid examples or wordings that may have low relevance for many Indians (e.g., dating).
3.2. Structure and Design Considerations
The salient structural features of PUSH-D as mentioned above included the division of the entire
content into essential and optional zones. The users were expected to complete the essential zone
section in a predetermined sequence. The sequencing of sections was designed to include the most
basic content such as psycho-education and motivation enhancement ﬁrst, followed by behavioral
activation, and then dealing with depressive thoughts. These were considered the basic components to
be addressed and hence appeared at the beginning. Subsequent sections were organized so as to build

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
6 of 24
links from one section to another, to the extent feasible. Sequential access to the essential zone sections
was planned with the aim of minimizing random browsing and helping users progress through the
content in a systematic fashion. Optional zone sections could be accessed by a user at any point of
time depending on need or preference.
The program was made available through a webbrowser as well as through a mobile app on
the Google Play store so as to provide clients with easy access to the application, as well as allow
access in settings with greater privacy. The browser and mobile version were synchronized so that the
client could work on a section on one device and seamlessly continue with subsequent activities on a
different device.
Since the data recorded by the clients in the app were of a sensitive nature, the communication and
storage/access of data had to be secure. HTTPS was used for secure communication to the web services.
Access to the program was through a user-ID/password-based login. The client’s personal identiﬁable
information (PII) was maintained separate from the clients’ program data, and all access/updates of
such program data was through anonymized identiﬁers.
3.3. Functional Features of PUSH-D
Some of the salient functional features of PUSH-D included the following:
■
Provision to schedule one’s next session: The users were prompted to plan their next session by
ﬁlling in the expected date and time while logging out. This resulted in two automatic mobile
message prompts on the scheduled date.
■
Reﬂections: Space was provided to jot down the summary of what was learnt in each section at
the end of the respective sections.
■
Flagging of sections (“likely to be highly personally relevant for you”): Sections were identiﬁed
as highly personally relevant for a given user based on pattern of responses to a checklist before
the start of Section 1. The items on this checklist corresponded to various section-themes (e.g., for
someone endorsing the item on very low level of activity, the behavioral activation section
was marked as highly relevant). The sections identiﬁed as likely to be very relevant for a user
appeared at the end of the checklist and these were also labeled as such when the user reached
the beginning of those sections.
■
Facilitating review: Provision to access one’s responses on various items and a brief section
summary through one’s online workbook pages.
■
Guided navigation through the sections in the essential zone, such that sections could be accessed
only in sequential order as mentioned earlier. However, a user could go back to and review an
earlier completed section at any time.
■
Monitoring by the professional: There was a provision for the professional who carried out
the initial evaluation to view a given client’s workbook and the session summaries entered by
the user.
■
Facilitating continued application: Provision to create new versions of various templates to
practice or to manage different exercises (e.g., weekly monitoring of one’s activities)
■
Self-monitoring: Provision to examine the time spent per log in and the number of log-ins
for self-monitoring
■
Feedback and reinforcement: Verbal and visual feedback on progress in terms of number of
sections and number of exercises completed.
3.4. PUSH-D Pilot Trial Method
3.4.1. Design and Sample Selection
The overall PUSH-D trial was meant to examine the socio-demographic and clinical proﬁle of
seekers of PUSH-D, pattern of use and short-term outcomes. The present paper is focused on describing

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
7 of 24
patterns of use, short-term outcomes and gains as perceived by the participants. Pattern of use herein
broadly refers to the proportion of participants who logged in to the app once or more after being
provided access to the app, number of sessions completed, average number of log-ins and duration of
log-in time. Short-term outcomes primarily refer to changes in depression and level of functioning as
the participants progressed from ﬁrst log-in to completion of ten sections and two months thereafter.
A single group pre-, post- and follow-up design was used, keeping in view of a lack of availability
of empirical data on receptivity of such an internet-based self-help program for depression in urban
India, as well as the cost and time constraints related to this study.
This being one of the ﬁrst studies on a mental health app in India, the sample selection criteria
were kept minimal. Eligibility criteria for inclusion in the trial were: age18 years and above; educated
at least up to high school (ten years of formal education); ability to read and write and understand
English; familiarity with basic use of computers and internet; depression severity score of 13 or more
on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI II) [39]. Exclusion criteria were: (a) Those suffering from
psychotic disorders/mental retardation/dementia or any other major neurological or psychiatric
condition that interfered with the ability to follow instructions and complete the self-help intervention,
as determined during the screening; (b) those reporting signiﬁcant suicidal ideations on any of the
twoindices: frequent suicidal thoughts or low sense of control over suicidal thoughts as assessed
through items in the basic data sheet and/or moderate to high suicidality score on MINI International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) for current suicidality [40].
Those who were clinically adjudged to require face-to-face individual or family or marital therapy
for major ongoing stressors (e.g., family discord/complicated grief etc.) were encouraged to seek
such interventions at the institute where the study was carried out (or elsewhere as preferred by the
individual), instead on being enrolled in PUSH-D trial. This was considered an ethical approach to
adopt in view of the researchers’ awareness of the limitations of PUSH-D content to address major
life stressors/interpersonal issues in a contextualized fashion. This was decided by the research staff
in consultation with the investigators after completion of the initial assessment. The corresponding
numbers are mentioned in Figure 1.
The pilot trial was conducted after obtaining approval by the ethics committee of the researchers’
institute. The details regarding announcement of PUSH-D trial and recruitment process as well as basic
and clinical proﬁle of those seeking participation in PUSH-D program trial have been described
elsewhere in detail [41]. Participation in the pilot testing was solicited through various means.
Poster, ﬂyers and write-ups were developed to make the potential participants in the community
aware about PUSH-D program and its main features (self-help, internet-based intervention targeting
depressive symptoms and utilizing techniques used in psychological interventions for depression
in face-to-face sessions). A few core symptoms of depression were presented in the posters, to help
people gauge if the distress they were experiencing could indicate possibility of depression. In
addition, all the announcements indicated that participation in PUSH-D research trial involved initial
screening/evaluation to determine the suitability of PUSH-D program for the given individual and in
case it was not found suitable, referral-related guidance would be provided. Announcements were
made on multiple ofﬂine and online platforms that included posters on notice boards of various local
institutions, emails, an announcement on the institute’s website, as well as another website aimed at
youth mental health promotion run by the corresponding author, and dissemination of ﬂyers during
two health-related exhibitions in the metropolitan city where the researchers are located. Individuals
who came across the announcement on PUSH-D and approached the resource team via phone or email
were initially provided detailed information about PUSH-D evaluation process, it being a research
trial as well as the nature of the PUSH-D program itself.
About two-thirds of the seekers of PUSH-D on whom initial screening and assessments were
carried out were treatment naïve and had never sought professional consultation. Reasons for not
seeking professional help ranged from lack of awareness about the nature of the problem as well as
services, timeconstraints and stigma [32,41].

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
8 of 24
Figure 1. Flow Chart of pilot trial. Note: S1-S10 refer to the 10 sections in the essential zone of PUSH-D
& the ﬁgures below section numbers refer to number of users who used the respective sections
3.4.2. Assessments
The basic data sheet developed for the present study incorporated sociodemographic details as
well as additional details such as major life events in recent past, ongoing stressors, availability
of support, self-report of suicidal thoughts if any in the last few weeks, self-perception of the
capacity to control suicidal thoughts, past consultation with a mental health professional if any, etc.
MINI-International Neuropsychiatric Interview Version 6.0 (MINI) was used to establish psychiatric
diagnoses, if any, during the initial evaluation [40]. A Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
Personality Disorders (SCID-5 PD) [42], an updated version of the former Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II) was used for arriving at personality disorder
diagnosis, if any. This was also used only during the initial evaluation.

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
9 of 24
Primary Outcome measures: (a) Depression: current severity of depressive symptoms was
assessed using Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) [39,43].
PHQ-9 is shorter in length and hence it was introduced to quickly capture changes at midpoint
without increasing respondent burden. (b) Functioning: Self-reported functional impairment was
assessed using the Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS) [44]. Higher scores indicate poorer
adjustment. In addition a simple clinician-rated simple measure namely, Global Assessment of
Functioning (GAF) [45] was also used as an index of functioning. The scores range from 0 (inadequate
information) to 100 (superior functioning).
Secondary outcome measures: Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale [46] and the WHO-FIVE Well-Being
Index [47] were used as additional outcomes measures. Higher scores on these measures reﬂect higher
levels of self-esteem and well-being, respectively.
3.4.3. Procedure
Those interested in participating in the initial evaluation/screening process were contacted and
evaluation was carried out either in a face-to-face session, Skype session or over telephone, with the
consent of the participant.
Face-to-face and Skype sessions were conducted for 45 and 14 participants respectively, while
telephonic assessments were carried out for 43 participants. The baseline evaluation was carried out in
the ﬁrst session after obtaining written informed consent. This consent was obtained in the face-to-face
sessions, or it was obtained by requesting the participants to send a signed and scanned document
over email for those who were interviewed over Skype or telephone.
The baseline evaluation involved listening to the narration of psychological difﬁculties as
described by the interviewees, ﬁlling of the basic data sheet, and administration of MINI and SCID-PD,
followed by administration of the self-report questionnaires. A brief feedback was provided to the
participants regarding the suitability of PUSH-D for their problems or the need for other forms of
mental health interventions. User names and passwords were issued if PUSH-D was considered a
suitable mode of intervention, while for others, referral-related guidance was provided.
The participants who were registered for PUSH-D were recommended to complete the self-help
intervention program within a period of six to eight weeks. It was estimated that a participant would
be required to spend on an average of about two hours in a week with the program material (in chunks
of 20 to 40 min) over six weeks to complete the entire program. In addition, they were prompted to
carry out simple activities and exercises for mood management on a regular basis as is the case in a
typical face-to-face intervention for depression. These were built-in exercises across various sections.
The users were expected to carry them out/apply the learning between log-ins. A few examples include
weekly monitoring of engagement in pleasurable and meaningful activities, monitoring self-critical
thoughts and substituting them with self-compassionate thoughts, applying and recording the use of
self-soothing techniques when in distress.
Literature suggests that compliance and motivation management are difﬁcult issues in stand-alone
self-help programs. The content of the internet-based program was supplemented with periodic
telephone assistance, once every 8–12 days as the available research suggests that human contact in
some form or the other helps improve adherence and outcomes—these calls were made by research
staff members who were trained clinical psychologists. The telephonic assistance was meant to serve
as minimal contact/basic assistance, clarify doubts if any, resolve technical issues in navigating, and
motivate users to work on the content. The calls were typically brief (lasting for about 15 min) and
the timings were ﬁxed as per users’ convenience. These also helped in monitoring severity of distress
and addressing any need for referrals to appropriate, face-to-face professional services, if and when
needed. Such a provision for referral was made in the research protocol as per the ethical practice.
The plan was to exclude data of such participants who might be referred for face-to-face intervention
at any point during the trial. However, no participant required such a referral after registration into
the PUSH-D program. Periodic mobile prompts with suggestions to maintain efforts at self-care, and

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
10 of 24
short quotes relevant to managing negative emotions and cultivating positive emotions were sent at a
frequency of about once in 10–15 days.
Assessments were carried out at four time-points (Table 2). Baseline assessment was carried out
at the point of recruitment and soon after screening (T1); midpoint assessment was carried out after
completion of 5 out of 10 sections (T2). Post-assessment was carried out after completion of all 10
essential zone sections (T3). Follow-up assessment was carried out twomonths after completion of
post-assessment (T4). While the baseline session was conducted face-to-face or via Skype/telephone,
the remaining assessments entailed a combination of email and telephone, as per the convenience of
the participants.
Table 2. Measures used during the pilot trial of PUSH-D.
Measures
Baseline (T1)
Midpoint (T1)
after Completion
of 5/10 Sections of
PUSH-D
Post (T3) after
Completion of
10/10 Sections of
PUSH-D
Follow-up (T4) 2
Months after
Post-Assessment
Depression BDI-II
✓ 
- - -
✓ 
✓ 
Depression PHQ-9
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Self-esteem (Rosenberg
Self-Esteem Scale)
✓ 
- - -
✓ 
✓ 
Well-being Index
WHO-5
✓ 
- - -
✓ 
✓ 
Functional Impairment
(Work & Social
Adjustment scale)
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Global Assessment of
Functioning
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
3.4.4. Analyses
SPSS Version 16.0 was utilized for data analyses. The data entry was checked for errors. Paired
sample t-tests were used for comparison between two points of time. Repeated measures ANOVA
was used for within group comparisons involving more than twomeans. Mauchly’s test was used to
examine any signiﬁcant violation of sphericity assumption. In any instance of violation, degrees of
freedom were corrected using the Greenhouse and Geisser estimate [48] to examine signiﬁcance of
Fratio. In cases of a signiﬁcant F ratio, signiﬁcant results on post hoc comparisons were made and
signiﬁcant differences between any two timepoints are reported after a Sidak adjustment for multiple
comparisons. Changes in proportions were examined using the McNemar test. Effect sizes were
calculated in various analyses terms of correlation coefﬁcients as recommended by Field, 2005 [49].
4. Results
4.1. PUSH-D Trial Sample Characteristics
Following baseline evaluation, 78 participants were registered for PUSH-D while 24 were not
registered. Nine out of these 24 participants were not registered due to moderate to high levels of current
suicidality. One or more of the following other reasons resulted in exclusion 5 participants each from
registration to PUSH-D: lack of comfort with English language, lack of regular access to internet, absence
of depressive symptoms and presence of other psychiatric disorders or major family or interpersonal
concerns that were adjudged to require face-to-face individual or family therapy (Figure 1).
The basic sociodemographic details of the participants are described in Table 3. An average
participant was about 32 years old and both the genders were fairly represented in the sample.
Majority of them had a bachelor’s degree and were employed. While about one-third (34.65%) were

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
11 of 24
currently experiencing a major depressive episode, about 65% were experiencing chronic low grade
depression qualifying for dysthymia. A comorbid personality disorder (Cluster C) was evident in
6% of the participants. As per the information obtained through the basic data sheet, 18 out of 78
(23%) reported experiencing suicidal thoughts. However 12 of them reported being able to easily
manage/control them while 6 reported some difﬁculty in managing the same.
Table 3. PUSH-D trial sample characteristics-I (n = 78).
Variables
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
40
51.3
Female
38
48.7
AGE Mean (SD) 32.28 (12.98)
17–25
24
25.6
26–35
32
41.03
36–50
17
21.80
Above 50
5
6.41
Region
Bangalore
55
70.5
Outside Bangalore but within Karnataka
3
3.8
Other states in India
20
25.6
Education
Under Graduation
11
14.1
Graduation
36
46.2
Post-Graduation
31
39.7
Religion
Hindu
67
85.9
Muslim
8
10.3
Christian
2
2.6
Others
1
1.3
Marital Status
Single
46
59.0
Married
30
38.5
Separated
2
2.6
Work Status
Job seekers/currently unemployed
18
23.1
Employed
38
48.7
Student
17
21.8
Retired
5
6.4
Living Arrangement
Hostel/Paying Guest
25
32.1
With Family
53
67.9
Individual Income in INR (Per Month)
Up to 20,000
4
5.1
20,001–30,000
5
6.4
30,001 and above
42
53.8
Do not Wish to Answer
27
34.6
Major life events in the preceding sixmonths were reported in 46.2% of cases. About 65% reported
having never sought mental health consultation any time. On the other hand, 28 (35.9%) reported
having consulted a mental health professional for current issues and it was a consultation with a
psychiatrist for a majority of them. Out of these 28, 18 were receiving some form of intervention
(15 being on stable dose of an antidepressant, one was undergoing counseling and 2 were receiving
counseling and antidepressant).

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
12 of 24
4.2. Usage of PUSH-D in Registered Participants
Out of 78 participants who were registered and given PUSH–D log in details, 14 participants (18%)
did not use the program or did not complete the ﬁrst section and were termed nonusers. Thirty out
of 64 users (47%) were categorized as partial completers as they completed 5/10 essential sections
and provided Time-2 (T-2) repeat assessment data. Twenty out of 64 (31%) participants completed
all the ten essential zone sections and provided Time-2 and Time-3 data (T-2 & T-3). Sixteen out of
20 completers additionally provided follow-up assessment data (T1 to T4). Owing to different number
of participants available at various points of time, analyses have been carried out separately for partial
as well as full completers. These details have been depicted in Figure 1.
The midpoint assessment (T-2) coincided typically with the end of ﬁrst month after baseline
assessment. While, the time interval between post-assessment (T-3) and follow-up assessment (T-4)
was ﬁxed for all the participants (2 months), post-assessment was carried out after completion of ten
sessions. Except in case of 3 participants, post-assessment was carried out between 6th and 8th weekfor
all the others. Three participants needed 12 weeks’ time for completion of ten sessions and providing
on post-assessment data. The average interindividual variability in capture of post=assessment data in
a majority of instances was of 10 days and was attributable to logistic constraints that came in way
for some users to complete ten sections and provide post-assessment data. An average completer
logged in 17 times and spent about 30 min on an average per log-in (standard deviation: 14 min).
The remaining participants spent about 24 min per log-in on an average (standard deviation: 16 min).
4.3. Examination of Outcomes in PUSH-D Users
Mean changes on outcomes at post-assessments: Twenty registered participants completed all
the ten essential zone sections and post-assessments. Depression scores decreased signiﬁcantly from
baseline to post-assessment on BDI-II, and also from baseline to midpoint on PHQ-9; while the
well-being scores increased in this period. On the other hand there was no signiﬁcant change evident
in self-esteem from baseline to post-assessment. There was a consistent decline on impairment and
improvement in global functioning seen from baseline to post-assessment in this subsample (Table 4).
Table 4. Changes from baseline (T1) to post-assessment (T3) in completers (n = 20).
Variables
Mean (SD)
Effect Size (r)
T1
T 2
T3
F/t Value
Post hoc
Differences
Depression (BDI)
26.16(8.89)
-
10.53 (10.47)
7.22 ***
-
0.86
PHQ-9
10.83 (5.67)
7.06 (5.53)
5.22 (4.80)
10.83 **
2 < 1, 3 < 1
0.54 (1–2)
0.42 (2–3)
Self-Esteem
25.82 (4.81)
-
28.06 (5.18)
1.84
0.40
Well-being
10.67 (6.18)
-
15.06 (5.93)
3.08 ***
-
0.59
Impairment
21.10 (8.41)
15.74 (10.74)
12.37(8.99)
12.59 **
3 < 1
0.51 (1–2)
0.47 (2–3)
Global
Functioning (GAF)
71.84 (6.91)
73.68 (6.63)
79.84 (5.42)
75.50 **
2 > 1, 3 > 1, 3
> 2
0.54 (1–2)
0.91 (2–3)
** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
Percentage changes on depression and impairment and shifts in severity in individual participants
at post-assessment: Change scores from baseline to post-assessments were also calculated and these
were and transformed into change percentages relative to the respective baseline scores. Large mean
percentage changes in Beck Depression Inventory scores were noted (Mean: 61.79) followed by those
on PHQ-9 (46.25) and impairment (30.98), although variability in individual level gains was evident
from large standard deviations.

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
13 of 24
Using the standard cut offs used for BDI-II, an attempt was made to explore the pattern of
shifts in severity of depression in those who completed post-assessment. There was a marked shift
in terms of drop in proportion of the sample that was in moderate and severe depression category
(from 35% and 40% to 10% each respectively). While 75% of the participants showed a shift to a lower
severity category, none showed worsening/shift-to-higher category. The overall shift in severity across
categories on BDI-II was signiﬁcant (McnemarBowker test, p < 0.01).
As far as changes in severity of impairment from baseline to post-assessment are concerned,
a majority of participants moved from moderately severe impairment to higher levels of functioning.
While sixty percent had moderately severe impairment at baseline, twenty percent could be so classiﬁed
at post-assessment. The overall pattern of shift was signiﬁcant (McNemar–Bowker test, p < 0.05), with
73% of the participants showing a shift to lower impairment category and none showing a worsening.
Thirty participants who completed 5 out of ten essential zone sections were categorized as
partial completers. Comparison of scores of the partial completers subsample revealed signiﬁcant
improvements from baseline to T-2 on depression (PHQ-9). Signiﬁcant decline on impairment was
also seen from baseline to T-2 in partial completers (Table 5).
Table 5. Changes in partial completers on select variables (n = 30).
Variables
Mean (SD)
T1
T2
t Value
Effect Size (r)
Depression (PHQ-9)
9.86 (5.79)
7.14 (5.64)
2.84 **
0.47
Impairment (WSAS)
20.00 (8.63)
14.66 (9.78)
3.44 **
0.54
** p < 0.01.
Assessments at midpoint also provided an opportunity to track shift in severity of depression and
impairment. There was a drop in the proportion of individuals falling in moderately severe category
(PHQ-9) at T2 as compared to baseline (40% at baseline vs. 13.3% at post-assessment). There was a
corresponding increase in the number of participants in mild category from 20% to 50%.
Similarly, gains in functioning were seen in partial completers in terms of drop in proportion of
participants who were classified as having moderately severe impairment at T2 on WSAS (46.7% vs. 26.7%).
Stability of gains over a period of 2 months following completion of the program could be
ascertained in 16 out of 20 completers who could be contacted for the same. Signiﬁcant gains were
made and maintained on depression as measured by BDI-II and PHQ-9, Work and social functioning
(decline in impairment) as well as ratings on global assessment of functioning. On BDI-II as well as
PHQ-9 measures, depression scores declined signiﬁcantly from baseline to post-assessment and then
further decline was evident at follow-up. PHQ-9 was also assessed at midpoint providing a picture of
changes during the program. It was observed that depression scores tended to decline from baseline
through midpoint to post- and follow-up assessment resulting in post and follow-up assessment scores
being signiﬁcantly lower than the baseline. Scores on self-esteem and well-being measures improved
from baseline to post-assessment. Further, there was a signiﬁcant improvement in self-esteem and
well-being seen at follow-up (Table 6).
Subjective reports of impairment decreased signiﬁcantly from baseline to post-assessment and
this gain was stable at follow-up; the follow-up scores being signiﬁcantly improved compared to
baseline as well as midpoint. As far as clinician ratings of functioning is concerned, there was a similar
upward trend seen in functioning, with signiﬁcant improvement from baseline to post and midpoint
to post-assessment, with gains being maintained at follow-up (Table 6).

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
14 of 24
Table 6. Changes from baseline and stability of gains in follow-up sample (n = 16).
Variables
Mean (Standard Error)
F
Signiﬁcant Differences
on Post hoc Analyses
Effect
Size (r)
Time-1
Time-2
Time-3
Time-4
BDI-Depression
25.44 (2.34)
-
9.94 (2.32)
6.25 (1.84)
56.51 ***
3 < 1, 4 < 1,4 < 3
0.90 (1–2)
0.59 (2–3)
PHQ Depression
10.46 (1.56)
6.93 (1.30)
5.27 (1.22)
3.20 (1.20)
14.33 ***
4 < 1, 3 < 1, 4 < 3
0.61 (1–2)
0.37 (2–3)
0.65 (3–4)
Self-esteem
25.71 (1.06)
-
27.64 (1.31)
30.14 (1.42)
9.65 ***
4 > 1, 4 > 3
0.43 (1–2)
0.67 (2–3)
Well-being
14.80 (1.48)
18.67 (1.41)
20.87 (1.50)
8.68 **
(corrected)
4 > 1, 4 > 3
0.56 (1–2)
0.60 (2–3)
Impairment
(WASA)
20.69 (2.24)
15.50 (2.31)
12.69 (2.13)
11.25 (2.34)
11.96 ***
3 < 1, 4 < 1
0.54 (1–2)
0.41 (2–3)
0.27 (3–4)
GAF
70.50 (2.03)
72.00 (2.26)
79.20 (1.82)
81.00 (2.21)
40.86 ***
(corrected)
3 > 1, 4 > 1, 3 > 2 4 > 2
0.54 (1–2)
0.93 (2–3)
0.46 (3–4)
** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
4.4. Supplementary Analyses
Participants who completed 5 sections (i.e., 50% of the program content) and provided repeat
assessment data (partial completers, n = 30) were compared to those who did not use or discontinued
use before completing 5 sections and providing repeat assessment data (n = 48, 61.5%). These 2
groups were not signiﬁcantly different from each other on gender (p = 0.48), marital status (p = 0.41),
educational level (p = 0.46), work status (p = 0.66) presence of major depression (p = 0.32) or dysthymia
(p = 0.27). Similarly these two groups did not signiﬁcantly differ from each other on baseline scores
on self-esteem, well-being, work and social adjustment, PHQ-9 or BDI –II depression and global
assessment of functioning ratings (with all p-values being > 0.05). Durations of dysthymia and major
depression were not signiﬁcantly different (p = 0.11 p = 0.10). On the whole, no baseline variables
assessed in the study differentiated between users who completed 5 sessions vs. those who did
not. Further supplementary analyses with the subgroup of those who never initiated PUSH-D (after
having been provided log in credentials) also revealed similar patterns; with no difference on baseline
variables seen, between these participants and the partial completers.
The PUSH-D pilot trial was meant to understand the proﬁle of seekers of such a program in urban
India apart from assessing short-term outcomes of its usage. Also, internet-based self-help programs
have the potential to be used as supplement to treatment as usual. Hence, no exclusion criteria were
used regarding ongoing mental health interventions. As mentioned earlier, 18 of the 78 registered
participants reported receiving some form of intervention at the time of baseline assessment. In the
sample of completers and partial completers on whom main analyses have been carried out, only
8 participants were undergoing intervention (on stable dosage of antidepressants). Re-running the
analysis after exclusion of these 8 participants returned similar results as mentioned above. Signiﬁcant
improvements from baseline to post-assessments were noted on both the measures of depression (BDI:
p < 0.01, r = 0.82; PHQ-9: p < 0.05; r = 0.68) and on functioning (WSAS: p < 0.05; r = 0.79; GAF: p < 0.05,
r = 0.93) with large effect sizes.
4.5. Reports of Perceived Utility and Feedback from Users
There was a provision at the end of each section for a user to write down a summary of what
was learnt in that particular section. This could be revisited/viewed by the user in his/her workbook
section. Although all users did not have entries for all the sections; 285 entries were available for content
analysis. Most of the content across sections could be classiﬁed into four broad categories, namely
information, self-awareness, self-motivation, picking a strategy for use/application. Mere repetition of
some of the factual content of a section was coded as information gained. Self-awareness was coded for

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
15 of 24
summaries thatexpressed the participants became aware about certain aspects of themselves (e.g., “I
realized that I often tend to engage in all-or-none thinking”/“I think that I have been too critical of
myself”). Self-motivation was coded wherever the summary content indicated a motivating message
that the user wrote for themselves (e.g., “I must keep going, come on, let me just do this”). Picking a
strategy was used for putting together those summarieswhich indicated an intention/plan that the
user wanted to apply a speciﬁc strategy learnt in the section (e.g., “I will make a list of things that are
under my control and focus on that ﬁrst”). It was noted that the largest number of summaries reﬂected
the user picking a speciﬁc strategy/plan and reﬂecting on the same for their use. The second largest
category was self-motivating statements/inspirational statements for self, followed by others (Table 7).
Table 7. Emergent themes in session summaries provided by participants. (Number of summaries = 285).
Sections
(1–10)
Emergent Themes in Summaries
Brief Mention
of Information
Gained
Self-Awareness
Self-Motivation
Picking a
Strategy for Use
Others
Total
S1
30
14
4
-
Feeling that one is
not alone-4 General
comments: 5
57
S2
1
15
15
General comments:
14
45
S3
2
5
30
General comments:
2
39
S4
8
1
17
26
S5
1
5
1
18
25
S6
3
4
11
18
S7
2
17
Self acceptance-2
21
S8
1
18
19
S9
3
7
8
18
S10
2
7
1
General comments:
7
17
Total
Frequency
(Percentage)
31 (10.88%)
38 (13.33%)
47 (16.49%)
135 (47.37%)
34 (12.0%)
285
At the beginning of each section, the user was provided with a prompt item to reﬂect on what
they had applied/tried to apply based on learning of the previous section. This was a multiple-choice
item. Analysis of 279 responses across users and sections on this item revealed that about 50% of
responses reﬂected an intention to use what was learnt; while about 43% of responses indicated that
before moving on to the next section, the participants had already used something or the other learnt
in the previous section and had found that to be beneﬁcial to varying extent (Table 8).
Table 8.
Reﬂection at the beginning of a new section on utilization of what was learnt in the
previous section.
User Reﬂections (n = 279)
Did not Use
Tried Using
Will Try to Use
Used and Found
Somewhat Useful
Used and Found
Quite Useful
Frequency
%
Frequency
%
Frequency
%
Frequency
%
Frequency
%
4
1.4
17
6.09
138
49.46
48
17.20
72
25.81
While hope about new learning and witnessing beneﬁts were seen as the most helpful factors,
practice exercises, clarity and comprehensive coverage as well as videos were reported to be the most
liked aspects of PUSH–D by the completers. Weekly calls were seen to serve the purpose of feeling less
alone and having help available when needed (Table 9).

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
16 of 24
Table 9. Helpful factors and suggestions as perceived by the completers.
Helpful
Factors/Suggestions
Theme
Description
Frequency
Percentage
Helpful factors for
completing the program
(n = 20)
Professional support
Support by the PUSH-D team
4
20
Curiosity to uncover and learn
Sequential structure of the
program
2
10
Witnessing the beneﬁt
Feeling better by using the
program
5
25
Hope about new learning to
reduce distress
Hoping to feel better by using
PUSH-D and learning new
strategies to feel better
7
35
Credibility
PUSH-D developed by a
premier mental health institute
2
10
Most liked aspects of the
program (n = 35)
Posters
Informative posters within
various sections
3
8.57
Self-help
PUSH-D as a source of learning
to help oneself
2
5.71
Videos
Videos used in various sections
5
14.29
Demonstrations
Demo-exercises before practice
exercises
3
8.57
Structure
Sequential structure of program
and step-by step content within
sections
3
8.57
Practice Exercises
Ready-to-use forms for applying
what is learned
10
28.57
Reminders
Reminders before start of the
next section—about applying
what was learnt and feedback to
monitor progress
3
8.57
Clarity of content and
comprehensive coverage of
different themes across
sections
New content in every section,
clear content
6
17.4
Suggestions for change
(n = 11)
Add humor
Increase content with humor
2
18.18
Add more images
More posters
1
9.09
Add music
Light music in the background
1
9.09
Reduce textual content and
increase activities
More practice points
5
45.45
Provision for Feedback from
user to admin
Feedback from user to admin
after every activities
1
9.09
Improve ease of continuity
Ease of refreshing/going back to
previous stage for those logging
after a gap
1
9.09
Weekly Calls: Utility
(n = 19)
Reminder
To continue PUSH-D
5
26.32
Motivation/support
Someone available to
help/support and care for me
8
42.11
Guidance
Provide clarity/guidance when
required
6
31.58
Any technical
issues/challenges (n = 6)
Navigation
Difﬁculties in moving forward
(initial trial users)
4
-
Video
Videos not playing
2
-
Emotion management and strengthening a sense of mastery were reported as the most frequent
perceived gains by the follow-up participants (Table 10).

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
17 of 24
Table 10. Self-perceived gains (n = 25) from learning based on PUSH-D content (Follow-up assessment).
Broad Theme
Description
Frequency *
Percentage
Emotion management
Managing worries, Controlling
anger, Identifying and dealing
with negative thoughts
6
24
Improved social connection
Decreasing social withdrawal
3
12
Improved self awareness
Better aware of one’s strengths
and weaknesses
3
12
Enhanced sense of self acceptance and
compassion towards self and others
Reduced self-criticality, increased
tolerance
3
12
Enhanced sense of mastery
Improved focus on controllable
factors in life, feeling conﬁdent
about dealing with issues
5
20
Goal directedness
Being focused and persistent
about one’s goals
3
12
Optimism
Looking forward to future
2
8
* More than one category of gains was reported by the follow-up participants.
Table 11 provides a few excerpts of the encouraging feedback received from the completers of
PUSH-D program (n = 20).
Table 11. Excerpts of general feedback by users (verbatim).

Availability of PUSH-D itself made me feel that there is something to help me. This thought was
itself motivating.

The use of activities/exercises and other contents from PUSH-D were very interesting and it has made a
huge impact on me.

PUSH-D is very helpful for working people like me who can’t take out time to go to a mental
health professional.

The module was very engaging and insightful.

It was very convenient to use. It will be useful to people who are not able to share their problems
with others.

The division of the material into knowledge point, toolbox, practice point, commitment etc. aids in
clarity and the concepts just seep in.

It helped me to understand that I have ways to ﬁght my depression without medications.

It is very diverse and dynamic. It has colorful charts, posters, videos, diagrams and scales. That breaks
the monotony and encourages engagement.

It gives a record of how ‘I am doing’. How much time I have spent on the website, how many exercises I
have completed, how far I have to go.
5. Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, PUSH-D is one of the ﬁrst indigenous internet-based self-care
intervention programs in the ﬁeld of mental health developed by mental health professionals in an
academic setting with assistance from a technology partner.
The strengths of the PUSH-D program include a comprehensive coverage of content targeting
depressive symptoms and providing opportunities to clients to empower themselves with self-care
strategies to deal with depression through use of informative text, videos, exercises, posters and
monitoring tools. The content development took into account an exhaustive review of free apps on
depression available to Indian users in addition to the existing scientiﬁc literature. It was ensured that
the scope and limitation of self-care were emphasized adequately and a section to educate users about
when to seek professional help and how to break mental barriers to seeking such help was included

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
18 of 24
as part of the essential zone. Mobile prompts and basic telephonic assistance were added to enhance
chances of completion of PUSH-D, in view of available literature indicating poor rates of completion
of unassisted internet-based mental health programs.
A typical PUSH-D trial participant was a working young adult of either gender, with at least
three years of college education. Most participants were suffering from major depression or dysthymia
and only a small proportion had comorbid psychiatric condition (mostly anxiety disorder or cluster C
personality disorder). Most participants had moderate to severe depression and signiﬁcant impairment
in functioning at baseline. Almost two-thirds of the participants had never sought mental health
consultation at any point in the past.
Slightly less than one-ﬁfth of the registered participants were nonusers. A somewhat larger
proportion of registered participants (50%) completed 40% of the sections though they did not
complete 50% of the essential zone or provide repeat assessment (Time-2) data. No baseline variables
differentiated between those who did not complete ﬁve sections vs. partial completers. The former
group was also difﬁcult to connect to and engage with through weekly telephonic calls. This pattern
somewhat mirrors observations in other studies, indicating that a signiﬁcant proportion of individuals
do not complete internet-based mental health self-help programs. The proportion of nonusers in the
present study was lower (17.9%) than that reported earlier. Out of the 420 participants in a study
involving two active app based interventions, 58% did not download the apps, despite having gone
through eligibility screens, giving consent and completing baseline evaluation. Moreover, adherences
to both the apps declined over time [26]. Decrease in user engagement over time has been reported in
several studies [16].
The available literature reviewed earlier indicates that user-uptake and retention are major
challenges related to self-care programs. There is a need for further studies to enhance understanding
of modiﬁable factors related to non-use of self-help intervention like PUSH-D, despite initial inclination,
expressed interest and investment of time to undergo the evaluation process. Provision of feedback
on progress/summary of progress built into depression apps may have some utility [16] and this
feature was incorporated in PUSH-D. It has been observed that engagement with the app may
be a very important variable, but it is often likely to be less than optimum due to a variety of
reasons such as life-roles and responsibilities in addition to technical issues such as wi-ﬁaccess
etc. [13]. Clients with low treatment motivation may beneﬁt from approaches aimed at motivational
enhancement [23]. An initial section of PUSH-D incorporated inputs to sustain motivation to complete
PUSH-D program. In previous studies, adherence to internet-based interventions is reported in terms
of indicators such as number of log-ins, duration of exposure to intervention, number of modules or
exercises completed, and number of postings etc. [50]. A review indicated that about 50–70% of the
internet-based intervention modules for depression are completed by participants of research trials [51].
Reviews also indicate that studies need to report as to how much of the internet-basedself-care tool
is completed by participants who do not complete the entire tool that is offered [52]. In the present
study, 47% of the users completed 50% of the sections (partial completers) and showed signiﬁcant
improvements on primary outcome measures. About 39% of the users completed 90% of the sections
(Figure 1). These data suggest adherence rates to be somewhat similar to other studies in about
half of the users. Most completers showed sustained engagement in the program as evinced by
consistent progress from one section to another, amount of time invested per log-in, number of log-ins
and ease of connecting through the weekly telephonic calls. Based on average number of log-ins
and average duration per log in, as mentioned earlier, it is estimated that an average completer
spent 8.5 h going over the entire program content. Qualitative data presented earlier also suggested
fair engagement with the strategies suggested in various sessions. It was difﬁcult to reach out to
participants who did not complete 10 sections after Time-2, though attempts were made to connect
over phone/mail. Information available from some of these participants suggested the role of factors
such as major life event, work demands, vacation, and physical ill health or lowered felt need resulting
in dis-continuation/non-completion.

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
19 of 24
The examination of outcomes highlights the potential utility of PUSH-D in individuals with
depression. The completers’ data suggests signiﬁcant and consistent decline in depressive symptoms
during the PUSH-D program and maintenance of gains at 2-month follow-up. Mean percentage
changes at post-assessment as compared to baseline severity were calculated. This analysis indicated
large average gains on BDI-II (62%). In a previous study, a reduction of 17.5% on BDI-II, was reported
to be minimal clinically important difference (MCID) while the corresponding estimate for individuals
with longer duration depression (who were non-responders to antidepressants) was noted to be
higher at 32% [53]. The shifts in severity of depression were examined as another approach to
establish the clinical meaningfulness of statistically signiﬁcant changes in the present study. Majority
of the participants with baseline levels of moderate to severe depression moved up to minimal/mild
depression by post-assessment. Similarly, functional impairment reduced signiﬁcantly in completers
as per self-report as well as clinical ratings. Moreover a majority of the participants moved from
moderately severe impairment to higher levels of functioning at post-assessment.
The partial completers’ sample provided another opportunity to examine changes in depression
and impairment in functioning after completion of 50% of PUSH-D program. This analysis too
showed a signiﬁcant decline in depression, improvement in functioning as well as a drop in proportion
of partial completers falling in severe/moderately severe categories (depression and impairment)
at Time-2 as compared to baseline. The analysis with this sample suggests that completion of all
the essential zone sections are perhaps not required for signiﬁcant positive changes in depressive
symptoms and improvements in functioning to manifest. This seems understandable as the ﬁrst
ﬁve sections of PUSH-D contained a few major ingredients of the self-care intervention program
namely, psycho-education, improving self-care motivation, behavioral activation and dealing with
depressive cognitions apart from managing worries. Along somewhat similar lines, results of a clinical
trial mentioned earlier [26] showed that 45–46% of the users manifested at least 50% reduction in
depression severity by 4 weeks. This trial also highlighted that most did not use the apps as instructed
and this was the case despite differences between apps in terms of content and user experience.
This ﬁnding is similar to the present study observations on user engagement.
Secondary outcomes were assessed in terms of self-esteem and well-being. On both these
measures, there was steady improvement in scores with the overall difference between time-points
being signiﬁcant at post-assessment on well-being. Signiﬁcant changes in these two variables were
evident from post-assessment to follow-up period. The overall pattern suggests that changes on
well-being and self-esteem are likely to manifest after signiﬁcant decrease in depressive symptoms and
improvement in functioning. This ﬁnding raises the hypothesis that apps for depression may impact
on indices of well-being, beyond reduction of depressed mood and improvement in functioning.
Examination of effect sizes provided an estimate of magnitude of effects. Moderate effect sizes in
terms of reductions in depressive symptoms have been noted in CBT based online interventions, but a
meta-analysis indicated low impact on functioning [10,54]. In the present study sample, large effect
sizes were noted in all analyses involving changes in BDI-II scores at various time points and medium
to large effect sizes were noted on PHQ-9. Similarly moderate to large effect sizes were noted on most
analyses of changes in level of impairment in functioning as well as on secondary outcomes.
Summaries entered by the users at the end of various sections and user feedback at post/follow-up
assessments provided crude pointers to factors that might have contributed to gains observed.
These include ﬁnding and picking up a useful strategy, enhanced self-awareness and improved
motivation to engage in self-care. The analysis of brief responses to an item at the start of various
sections indicated that about 50% of responses reﬂected an intention to use what was learnt; while
about 43% indicated that, the participants had already used something or the other learnt in the
previous section and had found that to be beneﬁcial to varying extents. The feedback received at
follow-up revealed that enhanced emotion regulation efﬁcacy and enhanced overall sense of mastery
emerged as most frequently experienced gains, in addition to better self-awareness and a sense of
acceptance, improved social connectedness and goal striving. These are likely to have played a role

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
20 of 24
in enhanced self-esteem and wellbeing as documented at follow-up. Moderate to high effect sizes
observed for almost all the outcome variables in the present sample may have been contributed by
several factors such as (a) a large proportion having signiﬁcant distress to begin with; (b) having
had no prior exposure to counseling/therapy; (c) comprehensiveness of content-coverage and (d)
availability of basic telephonic support.
Limitations and Future Directions
The study has several limitations such as small sample sizes at various time-points, lack of
a control group to tease out the effects of passage of time and a short follow-up. Variability in
post-assessment time-points (between 6–8 weeks for most users) is another limitation of the study.
Replication of ﬁndings in randomized controlled trials and longer term follow-up can help in more
ﬁrmly establishing the efﬁcacy of the PUSH-D program Comparison with a control group (e.g., a group
undergoing pharmacotherapy for depression) may be helpful in assessing the robustness of the
ﬁndings. Low rates of program completion raise concerns that need to be addressed. Simpliﬁcation in
the design of one or two initial sections of the app that involve multiple exercises as well as allowing
users to self-select and access sections that are most personally relevant are some of the modiﬁcations
that are being currently considered. The utility of such design changes for user-retention would require
further study. In view of other studies that describe similar challenges in user-retention, it may be
helpful to examine the role of self-regulation deﬁcits in non-completion of internet-based self-help
programs [55].
In a country like India with multiple languages as well as the likely confound between knowledge
of English and educational levels, PUSH-D‘s utility is most likely limited to individuals in the middle
and upper socioeconomic strata, with some years of college education, internet access and comfort
with English.
Relatively higher levels of anonymity and privacy, ﬂexibility of usage, ease of access, low delivery
costs and standardized content have been cited as some of the advantages of internet-based mental
health interventions [1]. PUSH-D was indigenously designed to address issues such as (a) lack of
freely available internet-based interactive self-care tool for urban Indians dealing with depression;
(b) inadequate coverage of therapeutic components in existing apps to suit a variety of client needs;
and (c) lack of emphasis on enhancing self-care motivation, managing suicidal thoughts, maintaining
well-being and educating about when to step-up. Research from the Indian subcontinent indicates
a very high treatment gap for depression with a very small proportion of individuals needing
professional intervention receiving the same [33]. Notwithstanding the limitations of the present
study, programs such as PUSH-D can improve self-awareness and empower users with self-care
skills and bypass time and cost constraints related to seeking face-to-face psychological interventions
for depression. Most of the PUSH-D participants had never availed professional services in the
past and several had moderate-to-severe levels of depressive symptoms. Completion of PUSH-D,
including partial completion (50% of PUSH-D sections) was associated with statistically and clinically
signiﬁcant gains of moderate to large effect size on depression and functioning. These gains were
stable over a two-month follow-up. Additional data from the participants in terms of intention
as well as application of what was learned to varying extent, average time spent on the program
and self-reported gains are encouraging. Even when applicable or utilized by only a segment of
the population, it still has a potential to reducing overall treatment gap for depression in acountry
with a scarcity of trained professionals, as well as low rates of people seeking professional help
due to factors such as stigma [32,41,56]. The PUSH-D trial examined its potential use as a ﬁrst line
of management for depression and dysthymia in line with a stepped-care approach. Its utility for
individuals with signiﬁcant co-morbid psychiatric disorders (e.g., cluster B personality disorders,
substance use disorders and OCD etc.) can be examined. Its additive value as a supplementary
program in routine psychiatric outpatient settings as well as for bolstering and maintaining gains in

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
21 of 24
those undergoing face-to-face psychological interventions individual therapy are also useful issues for
exploration in further studies.
6. Conclusions
The limitations notwithstanding, the overall ﬁndings suggest that internet-based self-help
program PUSH-D has potential appeal and utility for urban Indians, especially those suffering from
mild-to-moderate severity of depression, who have not sought professional consultation for their
mental health concerns. Further research on PUSH-D, the use of multipronged strategies to ensure
uptake (e.g., simpliﬁcation of design to reduce attrition, availability in the national language, i.e., Hindi,
and enhanced public awareness) along with large-scale dissemination can provide an important avenue
to reduce the treatment gap for depression in India.
Author Contributions: All the authors were involved in the conceptualization and execution of the study.
The ﬁrst two authors developed the PUSH-D content. The third and fourth author provided assistance in sample
recruitment as well as inputs regarding screening process and assessments. The ﬁfth author provided the expert
assistance in the technological aspects of developing web browser based and mobile based versions of the app.
The ﬁrst author wrote up the initial draft of the paper and all the authors provided inputs for ﬁnalizing the draft.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge funding for this research by the Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR), New Delhi, India.
References
1.
Schröder, J.; Berger, T.; Westermann, S.; Klein, J.P.; Moritz, S. Internet interventions for depression: New
developments. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 2016, 18, 203–212. [PubMed]
2.
Price, M.; Yuen, E.K.; Goetter, E.M.; Herbert, J.D.; Forman, E.M.; Acierno, R.; Ruggiero, K.J. mHealth: A
mechanism to deliver more accessible, more effective mental health care. Clin. Psychol. Psychother. 2014, 21,
427–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Kumar, V.; Sattar, Y.; Bseiso, A.; Khan, S.; Rutkofsky, I.H. The effectiveness of Internet-based cognitive
behavioral therapy in treatment of psychiatric disorders. Cureus 2017, 9, e1626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Shen, N.; Levitan, M.J.; Johnson, A.; Bender, J.L.; Hamilton-Page, M.; Jadad, A.A.; Wiljer, D. Finding a
depression app: A review and content analysis of the depression app marketplace. JMIR mHealthuHealth
2015, 3, e16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
World Health Organization (WHO). The Optimal Mix of Services;
WHO: Geneva,
Switzerland,
2007; Available online: http://www.who.int/mental_health/policy/services/2_Optimal%20Mix%20of%
20Services_Infosheet (accessed on 18 March 2018).
6.
National Institute for Health and CareExcellence (NICE). Depression in adults: Recognition and Management.
2009.
Available online: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg90/chapter/1-Guidance#stepped-care
(accessed on 18 March 2018).
7.
Newman, M.; Szkodny, L.; Llera, S.; Przeworski, A. A review of technology-assisted self-help and
minimal contact therapies for anxiety and depression: Is human contact necessary for therapeutic efﬁcacy?
Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2011, 31, 89–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Johansson, R.; Ekbladh, S.; Hebert, A.; Lindström, M.; Möller, S.; Petitt, E.; Poysti, S.; Larsson, M.H.;
Rousseau, A.; Carlbring, P.; et al. Psychodynamic guided self help for adult depression through the internet:
A randomised controlled trial. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e38021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Donker, T.; Bennett, K.; Bennett, A.; Mackinnon, A.; Straten, A.V.; Cuijpers, P.; Christensen, H.; Grifﬁths, K.M.
Internet-delivered interpersonal psychotherapy versus internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy for
adults with depressive symptoms: Randomized controlled noninferiority trial. J. Med. Internet Res. 2013,
15, e82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Giosan, C.; Cobeanu, O.; Mogoase, C.; Szentagotai, A.; Muresan, V.; Boian, R. Reducing depressive
symptomatology with a smartphone app: Study protocol for a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Trials
2017, 18, 215. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
22 of 24
11.
Andersson, G.; Carlbring, P.; Berger, T.; Almlöv, J.; Cuijpers, P. What makes internet therapy work?
Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2009, 38, 55–60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Mehrotra, S.; Kumar, S.; Sudhir, P.; Rao, G.N.; Thirthalli, J.; Gandotra, A. Unguided mental health self-help
apps: Reﬂections on challenges through a clinician’s lens. Indian J. Psychol. Med. 2017, 39, 707–711. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
13.
Rathbone, A.L.; Clarry, L.; Prescott, J. Assessing the efﬁcacy of mobile health apps using the basic principles
of cognitive behavioral therapy: Systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2017, 19, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Scholten, M.R.; Kelders, S.M.; van Gemert-Pijnen, J.E. Self-guided web-based interventions: Scoping review
on user needs and the potential of embodied conversational agents to address them. J. Med. Internet Res.
2017, 19, e383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Andersson, G.; Cuijpers, P. Internet-based and other computerized psychological treatments for adult
depression: A meta-analysis. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2009, 38, 196–205. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Firth, J.; Torous, J.; Nicholas, J.; Carney, R.; Pratap, A.; Rosenbaum, S.; Rosenbaum, S.; Sarris, J. The efﬁcacy
of smartphone-based mental health interventions for depressive symptoms: A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. World Psychiatry 2017, 16, 287–298. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Karyotaki, E.; Riper, H.; Twisk, J.; Hoogendoorn, A.; Kleiboer, A.; Mira, A.; Mackinnon, A.; Meyer, B.;
Botella, C.; Littlewood, E.; et al. Efﬁcacy of self-guided internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy in the
treatment of depressive symptoms: A meta-analysis of individual participant data. JAMA Psychiatry 2017,
74, 351–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Josephine, K.; Joseﬁne, L.; Philipp, D.; David, E.; Harald, B. Internet- and mobile-based depression
interventions for people with diagnosed depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Affect. Disord.
2017, 223, 28–40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Batterham, P.J.; Calear, A.L. Preferences for internet-based mental health interventions in an adult online
sample: Findings from an online community survey. JMIR Mental Health 2017, 4, e26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Andersson, G.; Titov, N. Advantages and limitations of internet-based interventions for common mental
disorders. World Psychiatry 2014, 13, 4–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Giota, K.G.;
Kleftaras, G. Mental health apps:
Innovations,
risks and ethical considerations.
E-HealthTelecommun Syst. Netw. 2014, 3, 19–23. [CrossRef]
22.
Bakker, D.; Kazantzis, N.; Rickwood, D.; Rickard, N. Mental health smartphone apps: Review and
evidence-based recommendations for future developments. JMIR Ment. Health 2016, 3, e7. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
23.
Dahne, J.; Lejuez, C.; Kustanowitz, J.; Felton, J.W.; Diaz, V.A.; Player, M.S.; Carpenter, M.J. Moodivate:
A self-help behavioral activation mobile app for utilization in primary care—Development and clinical
considerations. Int. J. Psychiatry Med. 2017, 52, 160–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Donker, T.; Petrie, K.; Proudfoot, J.; Clarke, J.; Birch, M.-R.; Christensen, H. Smartphones for smarter delivery
of mental health programs: A systematic review. J Med. Internet Res. 2013, 15, e247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Kumar, S.; Mehrotra, S. Free mobile apps on depression for Indian users: A brief overview and critique.
Asian J. Psychiatry 2017, 28, 124–130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Arean, P.A.; Hallgren, K.A.; Jordan, J.T.; Gazzaley, A.; Atkins, D.C.; Heagerty, P.J.; Anguera, J.A. The use and
eefectiveness of mobile apps for depression: Results from a fully remote clinical trial. J. Med. Internet Res.
2016, 18, e330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Patel, U.; Sobowale, K.; Fan, J.; Liu, N.; Kuwabara, S.; Lei, Z.; Sherer, R.; van Voorhees, V. Cultural
considerations for the adaptation of an internet-based intervention for depression prevention in Mainland
China. Int. J. Adolesc. Med. Health 2016, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Lui, J.H.L.; Marcus, D.K.; Barry, C.T. Evidence-based apps? A review of mental health mobile applications in
a psychotherapy context. Prof. Psychol. Res. Pract. 2017, 48, 199–210. [CrossRef]
29.
Aggarwal, N.K. Applying mobile technologies to mental health service delivery in South Asia.
Asian J. Psychiatry 2012, 5, 225–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Yellowlees, P.; Chan, S. Mobile mental health care—An opportunity for India. Indian J. Med. Res. 2015, 142,
359–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
23 of 24
31.
Kanuri, N.; Newman, M.G.; Ruzek, J.I.; Kuhn, E.; Manjula, M.; Jones, M.; Taylor, C.B. The feasibility,
acceptability, and efﬁcacy of delivering internet-based self-help and guided self-help interventions for
generalized anxiety disorder to Indian University students: Design of a randomized controlled trial.
JMIR Res. Protoc. 2015, 4, e136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Mehrotra, S.; Kumar, S.; Gandotra, A.; Sudhir, P.M.; Thirthalli, J.; Rao, G.N. Why urban Indians are interested
in an internet-based self-care app for depression? A brief pilot survey. Int. J. Community Med. Public Health
2017, 4, 2197–2201. [CrossRef]
33.
Gururaj, G.; Varghese, M.; Benegal, V.; Rao, G.N.; Pathak, K.; Singh, L.K.; Mehta, R.Y.; Ram, D.;
Shibukumar, T.M.; Kokane, A. National Mental Health Survey of India, 2015–16; National Institute of Mental
Health and Neuro Sciences: Bengaluru, India, 2016.
34.
Assocham India. India’s Internet Population Likely to Touch 600 Million by 2020: Study. 2016. Available
online: http://www.assocham.org/newsdetail.php?id=6070 (accessed on 2 July 2017).
35.
Shidhaye, R.; Kermode, M. Stigma and discrimination as a barrier to mental health service utilization in
India. Int. Health 2013, 5, 6–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Gaiha, S.M.; Sunil, G.A.; Kumar, R.; Menon, S. Enhancing mental health literacy in India to reduce stigma:
The fountainhead to improve help-seeking behaviour. J. Pub. Mental Health. 2014, 13, 146–158. [CrossRef]
37.
Andrade, L.H.; Alonso, J.; Mneimneh, Z.; Wells, J.E.; Al-Hamzawi, A.; Borges, G.; Kessler, R.C. Barriers
to mental health treatment: Results from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. Psychol. Med. 2014, 44,
1303–1317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Taylor, S.E.; Sherman, D.K.; Kim, H.S.; Jarcho, J.; Takagi, K.; Dunagan, M.S. Culture and social support: Who
seeks it and why? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 2004, 87, 354–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Beck, A.T.; Steer, R.A.; Brown, G.K. Beck Depression Inventory: Manual, 2nd ed.; The Psychological Corporation:
San Antonio, TX, USA, 1996.
40.
Sheehan, D.V.; Lecrubier, Y.; Sheehan, K.H.; Amorim, P.; Janavs, J.; Weiller, E.; Hergueta, T.; Baker, R.;
Dunbar, G.C. The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): The development and validation
of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. J. Clin. Psychiatry 1998, 59, 22–33.
[PubMed]
41.
Mehrotra, S.; Sudhir, PM.; Kumar, S.K.C.; Thirthalli, J.; Rao, G.N.; Srikanth, T.K.; Gandotra, A. Proﬁle of
seekers of an internet-based self-help program for depression in India: Observations and implications. Int. J.
Community Med. Public Health 2017, 4, 3202–3211. [CrossRef]
42.
First, M.B.; Williams, J.B.W.; Benjamin, L.S.; Spitzer, R.L. User’s Guide for the Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-5 Personality Disorders (SCID-5-PD); APA Publishing: Arlington, VA, USA, 2016; pp. 1–52.
43.
Kroenke, K.; Spitzer, R.L.; Williams, J.B. The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. J. Gen.
Intern. Med. 2001, 16, 606–613. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Mundt, J.C.; Marks, I.M.; Shear, M.K.; Greis, J.H. The work and social adjustment scale: A simple measure of
impairment in functioning. Br. J. Psychiatry 2002, 180, 461–464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed.; Text Revision;
APA: Washington, DC, USA, 2000.
46.
Rosenberg, M. Society and the Adolescent Self-Image; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1965.
47.
Bech, P. Male depression: Stress and aggression as pathways to major depression. In Depression: Social and
Economic Time-Bomb; Dawson, A., Tylee, A., Eds.; BMJ Books: London, UK, 2001; pp. 63–66.
48.
Greenhouse, S.W.; Geisser, S. On methods in the analysis of proﬁle data. Psychometrika 1959, 24, 95–112.
[CrossRef]
49.
Field, A. Discovering Statistics Using SPSS, 2nd ed.; Sage: London, UK, 2005.
50.
Donkin, L.; Christensen, H.; Naismith, S.L.; Neal, B.; Hickie, I.B.; Glozier, N. A systematic review of the
impact of adherence on the effectiveness of e-therapies. J. Med. Internet Res. 2011, 13, 81–92. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
51.
Christensen, H.; Grifﬁths, K.M.; Farrer, L. Adherence in internet interventions for anxiety and depression:
Systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2009, 11, e13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Simco, R.; McCusker, J.; Sewitch, M. Adherence to self-care interventions for depression or anxiety:
A systematic review. Health Educ. J. 2014, 73, 714. [CrossRef]

Behav. Sci. 2018, 8, 36
24 of 24
53.
Button, K.S.; Kounali, D.; Thomas, L.; Wiles, N.J.; Peters, T.J.; Welton, N.J.; Ades, A.E.; Lewis, G. Minimal
clinically important difference on the Beck Depression Inventory–II according to the patient’s perspective.
Psychol. Med. 2015, 45, 3269–3279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
So, M.; Yamaguchi, S.; Hashimoto, S.; Sado, M.; Furukawa, T.A.; McCrone, P. Is computerised CBT really
helpful for adult depression?-A meta-analytic re-evaluation of CCBT for adult depression in terms of clinical
implementation and methodological validity. BMC Psychiatry 2013, 13, 113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Fuhr, K.; Schröder, J.; Berger, T.; Moritz, S.; Meyer, B.; Lutz, W.; Hohagen, F.; Hautzinger, M.; Klein, J.P. The
association between adherence and outcome in an Internet intervention for depression. J. Affect. Disord. 2018,
229, 443–449. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Karyotaki, E.; Riper, H.; Cuijpers, P. Internet-based self-help interventions for depression in routine
care—Reply. JAMA Psychiatry 2017, 74, 853. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

