Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

[www.elsevier.com/locate/intcom](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/intcom)

# ‘It’s just like you talk to a friend’ relational agents for older adults

### Timothy W. Bickmore[a,]*, Lisa Caruso[b], Kerri Clough-Gorr[b], Tim Heeren[c]

aDepartment of Medicine, Medical Information Systems Unit, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA
bDepartment of Geriatrics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
cDepartment of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA

Available online 30 September 2005

Abstract

Relational agents—computational artifacts designed to build and maintain long-term social–
emotional relationships with users—may provide an effective interface modality for older adults.
This is especially true when the agents use simulated face-to-face conversation as the primary
communication medium, and for applications in which repeated interactions over long time periods
are required, such as in health behavior change. In this article, we discuss the design of a relational
agent for older adults that plays the role of an exercise advisor, and report on the results of a
longitudinal study involving 21 adults aged 62–84, half of whom interacted with the agent daily for 2
months in their homes and half who served as a standard-of-care control. Results indicate the agent
was accepted and liked, and was significantly more efficacious at increasing physical activity (daily
steps walked) than the control.
q 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Relational agents; Social interfaces; Human–computer interaction

 - Corresponding author. Present address: College of Computer and Information Science, 202 West Village H, C
Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115-5000, USA. Tel.: C 1 617 638 8170;
fax: 1 617 373-5477.
E-mail addresses: bickmore@ccs.neu.edu (T.W. Bickmore), lisa.caruso@bmc.org (L. Caruso), kmclough@
bu.edu (K. Clough-Gorr), tch@bu.edu (T. Heeren).

0953-5438/$ - see front matter q 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2005.09.002


-----

712 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

1. Introduction

Between 2010 and 2030 the number of older adults in the United States is projected to
more than double, with the overall fastest growing segment being those age 85 and older
(DHHS, 1991). This shift in US demographics towards an older society has motivated a
growing body of research in human–computer interaction for older adults over the last
decade. While some studies have found that older adults embrace new technology, others
have concluded that many older adults have significant problems using standard computer
interfaces. The burden of physical and cognitive impairments in this age group may
explain some of the difficulties older adults have using computers. Computer anxiety may
also be one of many factors that have led to a low adoption rate of computers by older
adults. As a group, adults age 55 and over own fewer computers than any other adult age
group. Only 25.8% of senior households have a computer compared to 46.0–54.9% for
adults aged 25–54. Access to the Internet lags as well: 14.6% of all senior households have
Internet access compared to 30.1–35.0% for adults aged 25–54 (NTIA, 1999).
Embodied conversational agents (ECAs)—animated computer characters that simulate
face-to-face conversation with users (Cassell et al., 2000)—may constitute an especially
effective form of human–computer interface for older adults. One skill that many older
adults retain, even with significant cognitive impairment, is the ability to engage in faceto-face conversation. This primal form of interaction is learned in infancy and early
childhood and comprises tacit, crystallized knowledge in older adulthood. The ability to
engage others is thus available even when individuals have difficulty learning new
interfaces that require more adaptive, ‘fluid’ intelligence (Horn, 1982). Face-to-face dialog
is multi-modal. It incorporates a wide range of non-verbal and paraverbal behavior to carry
semantic content redundantly with speech, enabling individuals with impairments in some
channels (e.g. hearing) to compensate by attending to redundant information in other
channels (e.g. hand gesture). Face-to-face dialog also has well-established repair
mechanisms that enable listeners to request repetition or clarification by a speaker (e.g.
communicated by the absence of grounding behavior such as a headnod; Clark and Krych,
2004). Finally, this form of interaction has mechanisms for constraining the interactants’
focus of attention (Grosz and Sidner, 1986). This focus is important for older adults who
have difficulty in dividing their attention or dealing with distractions common in current
windows-based interfaces (Hartley, 1992).
In addition to task-oriented conversations that ECAs can hold with users, we feel that
incorporating social, emotional and relational aspects of face-to-face interaction into a
computer agent is also crucial for agents designed to interact with older adults, especially
over long periods of time. A significant amount of research over the last three decades has
demonstrated the importance of social support on health and well-being in the elderly
(Berkman and Syme, 1979; Berkman and Glass, 2000). In addition, studies across many
disciplines of human helping have demonstrated the significant positive effects of a highquality relationship between the helper and the helped on therapeutic outcomes (Horvath
and Symonds, 1991). Assuming these effects hold for human–computer relationships, an
ideal interface agent for older adults in helping tasks should use relationship-building and
maintenance behaviors in addition to being a competent conversationalist, which
comprises a kind of interface we refer to as a ‘relational agent’.


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 713

Such interfaces move beyond the paradigm of computer as tool, to make systems that
are delightful and engaging so that users want to use them over and over again, and that
they will trust and really care about, as well as feel cared for by them (Cassell and
Bickmore, 2003; Bickmore and Picard, 2004). Although many studies of social and
embodied agents have shown these effects in brief interactions (Dehn and Mulken, 2000),
an important question raised by this research is whether these results are durable or not;
that is, they may simply be the result of a novelty effect that quickly wears off.
In our work, we have developed a relational agent that plays the role of an exercise
advisor, designed to be used by older adults in their homes on a daily basis over an
extended period of time. One reason we selected this application domain is that the daily
protocol—driven by the current government recommendations for daily physical
activity—provides ample contact time to establish a social relationship with users over
the duration of the study. In addition, older adults are in particular in need of physical
activity interventions: only 12% of adults over 75 get the minimum level of physical
activity currently recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and
65% report no leisure time physical activity (DHHS, 2000).
In this article, we begin by defining and describing relational agents, arguing that they
are uniquely suited to long-term helping applications for older adults, and then present a
review of related work. We then discuss the design details of our relational agent
application, including both general principles of designing social interface agents for longterm use and issues specific to our application. We then describe our evaluation study and
quantitative results, followed by an extended discussion of the ramifications of the study,
supported by qualitative results from semi-structured interviews with study participants.
We conclude with a discussion of promising future directions of research in this area. In an
earlier conference paper we presented a synopsis of the acceptance and usability results
from this study (Bickmore, 2005); in the current article we present all results from the
study, in addition to a detailed design rationale and discussion of implications and future
work.

2. Relational agents

Relational agents are computational artifacts designed to build and maintain long-term
social–emotional relationships with users (Bickmore, 2003). These can be purely software
humanoid animated agents—as developed in this work—but they can also be nonhumanoid or embodied in various physical forms including robots, wearables and handheld computers. Central to the notion of relationship is that it is a persistent construct,
spanning multiple interactions; thus, relational agents are explicitly designed to remember
past history and manage future expectations in their interactions with users. Finally,
relationships are fundamentally social and emotional, and detailed knowledge of human
social psychology must be incorporated into these agents if they are to effectively build
relationships with users in the most natural manner possible.
This work uses a relational agent that is a specialized kind of ECA. In addition to the
reasons cited in Section 1, an ECA was selected because language is the primary modality
used to build human relationships (Duck, 1995), face-to-face conversation is the primary


-----

714 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

site of human language use, and many of the relational strategies that humans use within
conversation are non-verbal (Andersen and Guerrero, 1998).
Although some forms of relationship can be constructed without language (e.g.
‘relationships’ with pets) language is crucial for the development and management of
human relationships (Duck, 1994). Given this, our agent uses natural language and
synchronized non-verbal conversational behavior to communicate with users. User input,
however, is more problematic. While we would like to use unconstrained speech input, we
find the state of the art in speech recognition (especially for older adults) and natural
language understanding (especially for unconstrained social dialog) does not support this.
Consequently, we offer users on-screen, multiple-choice inputs, dynamically updated
during each turn of the conversation. While this can be very constraining for some users,
properly constructed agent dialog and user response choices can still maintain the feel of
social interaction, and was shown in the MIT FitTrack study (Section 3.4) to be sufficient
for establishing social bonds between a relational agent and user over time. In addition,
this form of user input, which relies on recognition rather than recall and synthesis, may be
easier to use for many older adults who suffer from language production impairments
(Ulatowski et al., 1985).

3. Related work

3.1. Dialog systems for health communication with older adults

A number of dialog systems have been developed for older adults, particularly in the
area of health communication.
The TLC-ACT system was an automated telephone system that used recorded speech
output and touch-tone input to promote exercise adoption (Jarvis et al., 1997). Weekly
calls were made over a 3-month period to 41 older adults (average age 66), while a ‘usual
medical care’ control group received printed information on the benefits of walking.
Subjects in the intervention group who walked 15 min or less at baseline significantly
increased the number of minutes walked at the end of the intervention compared to
controls. In addition, subjects were very satisfied with the system, giving it a score of 8.6
(range: 1Z‘very dissatisfied’ and 10Z‘very satisfied’), and 74% of the intervention group
rated their satisfaction as 10 of 10.
A number of automated reminder systems have been developed for older adults with
mild to moderate cognitive impairment. Perhaps, the most sophisticated system developed
in this area is Autominder, which incorporates sensing, planning and scheduling
capabilities to adapt to the activities of the older adult user (Pollack et al., 2003).
Autominder also communicates to its users in natural language, and uses a custom text
generation algorithm to generate reminders that are as effective and non-repetitive as
possible. However, it does not engage users in an interactive dialog or have any social
aspects to its planned communication.


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 715

3.2. Embodied conversational agents for older adults

ECAs have rarely been used as interfaces for older adults. Besides the animated pill
used in the Medication Advisor, the only ECA system in this area that we are aware of is
the GrandChair system (Fig. 1) (Smith, 2000). In this system, the agent had the appearance
of a 6-year-old child, and was designed to elicit narratives from older adult users. The
system used user posture and speech intonation to provide continuation prompts at
appropriate intervals (‘tell me more’). In a study involving 15 grandmothers (aged 55–65)
the agent was found to elicit significantly more and longer stories than a text-prompt
control condition. Fourteen of the 15 users enjoyed the experience, and all users
automatically adopted a child-directed speaking style appropriate for a 6-year-old child.

3.3. Emotional care-taking robots for older adults

Several recent efforts in academia and industry have focused on creating robotic pets
for older adults in order to achieve the same beneficial effects found in animal-assisted
therapy, namely to decrease stress, anxiety and loneliness and improve mood (e.g. Banks
and Banks, 2002). The ‘mental commit’ robots take the form of cute stuffed animals such
as a cat or a harp seal pup, and are designed to foster an attachment with users. One study
compared the effects of these robots on older adults in a nursing home with the effects of
an identical robot that had a much simpler behavioral repertoire, however, no significant
differences were found (Wada et al., 2003). Although the robot was used in group sessions
by the same individuals 4 days per week for 3 weeks, and has long-term memory and a
reinforcement learning mechanism, it is not possible for it to model a relationship with any

Fig. 1. GrandChair, an early conversational system for older adults.


-----

716 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

particular user given that it does not have the ability to discriminate between users.
Another study compared the use of a Sony AIBO robotic dog with a stuffed toy dog and a
‘clothed’ AIBO by a group of older adults with severe dementia. This study found that
patients actually interacted more with the stuffed toy than either of the AIBOs, but the
differences were not significant (Tamura et al., 2004).
There is also an emerging commercial market for robotic dolls targeted at the older
adult market, particularly in Japan. Bandai launched the Primopuel doll in 1999, which is
designed to resemble a 5-year-old boy who continually asks to be hugged and entertained.
Dream Supply released the Snuggling Ifbot in 2004, intended to be a speech-based
conversational partner for the elderly. Tomy recently announced the release of the Yumel
doll, which also converses with older adults using speech, and assists users in maintaining
healthy behaviors such as good sleep hygiene (AFP, 2005). None of these systems have
been formally evaluated.

3.4. MIT FitTrack

The FitTrack system was developed to investigate the ability of relational agents to
establish and maintain long-term, social–emotional relationships with users, and to
determine if these relationships could be used to increase the efficacy of health
communication and health behavior change programs delivered by the agent (Bickmore et
al., to appear; Bickmore and Picard, to appear). The system was designed using a client–
server architecture, with the client application running on users’ home computers. The
client bundled an ECA, web browser, input screens, and speech synthesizer (see Fig. 2),
while the server maintained the relational database, web server (for forms, educational
content, and self-monitoring graphs) and dialog engine.
In FitTrack, interaction dialogs are scripted using a custom scripting language that
compiles into Augmented Transition Networks (ATNs; Woods, 1986) so that common
sub-dialogs could be factored out and re-used across interactions. Each state in the
network generally specifies: (1) an output utterance for the agent that can be tailored at
runtime using template-filling (agent non-verbal behavior is automatically generated at
system compile time using BEAT; Cassell et al., 2001); (2) a set of allowable user
utterances that will be presented to the user as a multiple choice selection menu; and (3)
next state specification and actions to perform for each user utterance.
An evaluation of the physical activity advisor agent was conducted in a longitudinal,
between-subjects design study, involving 101 MIT students and staff interacting with the
agent daily for 30 days. The user–agent relationship was evaluated using the Working
Alliance Inventory, which is a standardized measure used in psychotherapy to evaluate the
quality of therapist–client working relationships (Horvath and Greenberg, 1989).
The study had three treatments: RELATIONAL, NON-RELATIONAL, and a baseline
CONTROL condition. In each study arm, subjects received standard behavioral
interventions, including goal setting and self-monitoring via progress charts showing
their activity levels over time. All subjects were also provided with daily web pages of
educational content on the topic of walking for exercise. All subjects in RELATIONAL
and NON-RELATIONAL conditions had a daily ‘conversation’ with the virtual exercise
advisor named Laura about their progress, any obstacles they had to exercising, and


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 717

Fig. 2. MIT FitTrack client interface, used in an earlier study.

the educational content. In the RELATIONAL group, the agent also used relational
strategies in an attempt to build a working alliance relationship with subjects, whereas in
the NON-RELATIONAL condition the relational functionality had been removed.
Subjects in the RELATIONAL condition had significantly higher Working Alliance
scores (on the bond subscale of the measure) compared with subjects in the NON!
RELATIONAL condition, both at 1 week into the intervention (t(58)Z1.75, p 0.05) and
!
at the end of the 30-day intervention (t(57)Z2.26, p 0.05). Subjects in the
RELATIONAL and NON-RELATIONAL groups combined increased their number of
days per week over the 30 min per day of moderate-or-greater physical activity goal
(during the intervention period) significantly more than subjects in the CONTROL
!
condition, t(86)Z1.98, p 0.05. However, there were no significant differences between
the RELATIONAL and NON-RELATIONAL groups with respect to gains in physical
activity.

4. Design of a relational agent for older adults

In this section, we first describe some general design principles for relational agents,
and then discuss the specific system we implemented for older adult users.


-----

718 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

4.1. Principles of relational agent design

Relational agents that will be used for extended periods of time require special design
considerations compared to systems that are either only used for brief interactions or do
not engage the user in social interaction. An overriding goal in designing these systems is
to make them continually engaging to use so that people want to keep using them over and
over again.

4.1.1. Model of user–agent relationship
If the user–agent relationship is expected to change over the projected period of use,
then a key element of the system is a model of this relationship, methods for updating it,
and its use in planning dialog and other interaction behaviors. There are many kinds of
relational models (see Bickmore and Picard, to appear for a summary), but perhaps the
simplest is one that varies along a fixed trajectory based on number of interactions or total
contact time with the user. For example, an agent might be designed so that initial
interactions with it by a particular user will be relationally distant and professional, but
gradually become more personal and social over time, as reflected by increasing turns of
social dialog and increasing frequency of other kinds of relational behavior. This is the
relational model used in the FitTrack system (for a more sophisticated example, see
Cassell and Bickmore, 2003).

4.1.2. Use of relational behavior
There is a wide range of relational behavior an agent can use in attempts to manipulate
or maintain its relationship with a user, and, conversely, that the agent could recognize in
the user’s behavior to infer their relational stance. These include social dialog, empathy,
meta-relational communication (talk about the relationship), humor, and self-disclosure;
see Bickmore and Picard, to appear for an extended discussion). Empathy, in particular, is
frequently mentioned in the helping literature as the most important factor in establishing a
working alliance (Gelso and Hayes, 1998). Empathy may also be especially important in
systems developed for older adults, since older adults are much more prone to relating
painful information about their lives in social dialog than younger adults (Coupland et al.,
1991).

4.1.3. Persistent memory
A crucial element in a relational agent system is a memory of past interactions with a
user. While this is theoretically not a necessary element of the relational model
(relationships can be characterized categorically or via specific expectations about the
future; Bickmore, 2003), it is necessary for the proper use of many relational behaviors,
such as talking about the past and future together (Planalp and Benson, 1992; Planalp,
1993) and continuity behaviors (talk about the time spent apart; Gilbertson et al., 1998).
Several subjects in the MIT FitTrack study reported that they first noticed that there was
something special about the agent when it remembered something about them from a past
interaction.
Persistent memory should ultimately be represented as an episodic store recording all
details of all (or key) past interactions with the user. At a minimum, however, it can be


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 719

designed to record specific facts that can be referenced in future conversations. Examples
in the physical activity domain include remembering the name of a user’s walking buddy
or favorite walking location, as well as purely social (off-task) facts, such as the user’s
favorite television program and whether they had any big plans for the upcoming weekend
or not. FitTrack uses a slightly more sophisticated version of persistent memory, in which
it records facts indexed to specific conversations, so that the agent can tell, for example,
whether the user has not been feeling well for the last four interactions.

4.1.4. Variability in agent behavior
People continuously vary their language in subtle ways in response to changes in
context, mood, interaction history, and, of course, relationship with their listener. Imagine
how strange it would be if every time you ran into an acquaintance they used exactly the
same language in their conversation with you. Not only would this seem unnatural, but it
would also send the message that their past history with you is unimportant. Thus, in order
to establish a social bond with the user and to maintain their engagement over long periods
of time, some variability in a relational agent’s verbal and non-verbal behavior is
important. In the MIT FitTrack study, many subjects felt that the agent was repetitive after
the first week or two. This was not just an annoyance; several subjects said that it had a
significant negative impact on their engagement with the system and on their motivation to
exercise.
Determining appropriate types and amounts of behavior variability to maintain
engagement remains an important area of research. There are several approaches to
providing variability, however, that are used in FitTrack and are relatively straightforward
to implement. First, at each state in the dialog, multiple agent utterances are specified and
randomly selected from at runtime, providing some variability in the agent’s verbal and
non-verbal behavior for every possible utterance it might make. Second, the use of items
from persistent memory to both condition logical branches in the dialog and to fill in
utterance template slots provides variability over time. Overall dialog structure is also
varied, as described in Section 4.1.5.

4.1.5. Dialog structure
Some variability in overall dialog structure is important as well. However, if the ATNscripting approach to dialog is used, this can be an imposing task, especially if each
interaction is scripted as a separate dialog and every dialog has a significant amount of
branching. This was the approach taken in the MIT FitTrack system, and it clearly is not
scalable. In the system for older adults, we use a fixed top-level dialog structure, but with
‘hooks’ at each location at which dialog variants can be inserted (e.g. for social dialog).
This is coupled with a database of dialog fragments that are indexed by interaction so that,
rather than having to write entire top-level scripts for each interaction, only the elements
that are different from the standard task-oriented interaction need to be authored.
The dialog structure used in the system for older adults is shown in Fig. 3. Social dialog
fragments can be inserted between any of the steps in the above structure, based on the
number of interactions the agent has had with the user. In addition, many of these
fragments are written so that they could be re-used, such as talking to users about the
weather, their weekend plans, or whether they were enjoying their exercise or not.


-----

720 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

1. Greeting
2. Ask about user’s physical & emotional state (“how are you?”)
3. Talk about events that have occurred in user’s life since previous contact.
4. Ask about user’s pedometer readings (includes showing self-monitoring
graph of steps walked vs. agent-suggested goals over time)
5. Review user’s exercise progress with respect to long-term goals and shortterm commitments (includes positive reinforcement and problem solving)
6. Negotiate next walking commitment (includes tips and affirmations)
7. Ask about when user will contact the agent again
8. Farewell
9. Introduce educational content page for the day

Fig. 3. Top-level dialog structure for new FitTrack system.

4.2. FitTrack for older adults

FitTrack was adapted for a population of older adult users (aged 65 and over) with little
or no previous computer experience. The system was designed to be easy to use, with a
very consistent and intuitive user interface. To achieve these objectives desktop computers
were chosen, but instead of using a keyboard and mouse, large (17[00]) color touch screen
monitors were used. The ECA display area was enlarged to fill most of the screen in order
to accommodate visual impairments, and the scrolling list of user input options at the
bottom of the screen was replaced with a list of large buttons with enlarged text along the
right edge of the screen (see Fig. 4). The self-monitoring graph and educational content
was displayed by temporarily replacing the ECA, in order to maintain large font sizes
throughout (Fig. 5, left and center, respectively). Subjects were required to enter a daily

Fig. 4. Interface for new FitTrack system, showing conversational agent.


-----

Fig. 5. Additional interface displays for new FitTrack system: (left) self-monitoring chart; (middle) educational page; (right) pedometer entry.


-----

722 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

pedometer reading. For this, a numeric keypad entry screen was used so that it appeared in
the same area as all other user inputs (Fig. 5, right).
The FitTrack architecture was redesigned to run stand-alone on one computer to
eliminate the need for Internet access, with a local database maintaining the persistent
memory and logs of all user interface actions for evaluation and troubleshooting.
Participants were provided with a dedicated-use PC and table for use during the study
period. The system was configured so that participants simply pushed the PC power button
to automatically run the relational agent interface, conduct the 5–10 min daily interaction,
and automatically shut down the system once completed. In order to prevent loss of data
due to system crashes or theft, a concern given the implementation neighborhoods, the
system was designed to walk the user through a weekly floppy-disk backup procedure.
Most of the dialog content from the original MIT FitTrack system was re-authored for
an older adult population. The conversational scripts used by the agent were designed to be
used daily over a 2-month period of time, following the structure outlined in Section 4.1.5.
The daily conversation involved having participants enter the number of steps they had
walked on the previous day, showing them a self-monitoring graph of their progress,
providing positive feedback when warranted, discussing obstacles to exercise, and
negotiating a walking goal for the following day which was ‘shaped’ to gradually allow
them to work from their baseline level up to their 2-month goal. Since there was very wide
variability expected in the amount of walking our participants would be performing given

1. A: Hello, Bertha. Great to see you.
2. U: Hi Laura.
3. A: How are you feeling today?
4. U: I'm not feeling so great.
5. A: I am sorry to hear that.
6. A: Tell me more about how you are feeling.
7. U: I'm tired.
8. A: How tired are you feeling?
9. U: I'm pretty beat.
10. A: Good grief, I hope you’re not getting sick. Can you get some rest soon?
11. U: I think so.
12. A: That is great. I hope you come back feeling refreshed.
13. U: Me too!
14. A: So, are you from the East Coast originally?
### …
24. A: So, is there anything I can do to help make this a more productive working
relationship?
25. U: Nope, everything is OK.
26. A: That's wonderful.
27. U: Yeah.
28. A: So, let us talk about your pedometer readings.
### …
40. A: Looks like mission accomplished on the exercise.
41. A: We're doing some great work together.
### …

Fig. 6. Partial transcript of sample conversation between subject and agent (A, Agent; U, User).


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 723

the heterogeneity of physical function among older adults, we set different 2 months goals
for participants based on their first week’s baseline data. The goal was: 5000 steps/day if
their baseline was below 5000 steps/day; 10,000 steps/day if their baseline was 5000–
10,000 steps/day, otherwise it was set to maintain their baseline level. In addition, the
agent used the relational behaviors used in the MIT FitTrack system, including social
dialogue, empathy exchanges, meta-relational communication, and non-verbal immediacy
behavior, adapted for the new subject population. For example, social dialog about MIT
and Cambridge was replaced with dialog about television shows and Boston
neighborhoods. Fig. 6 shows part of a transcript from one of 211 interactions conducted
with subjects during the study.
The 60 pages of educational content were assembled from publicly available web pages
on exercise topics, particularly walking for older adults, from the American Council on
Exercise (ACE, 2005), the National Institutes of Health, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.

4.3. Pre-test study

Prior to the intervention study, the interface was pre-tested with five participants in the
Geriatric Ambulatory Practice (GAP) clinic at Boston Medical Center, the primary safety
net hospital in the Boston area. All participants found the system easy to use with the
exception of the floppy-disk backup procedure. Two participants accidentally re-booted
the PC while attempting to eject the disk.
Four of the five reacted positively to the agent and indicated that they would be
interested in having the agent in their homes to talk to them daily about exercise. We also
gave participants 11 designs for ECA characters developed by an animator for the project,
intended to more closely match the subject population in age, race and body build.

Fig. 7. Top-rated animated conversational agent choices by geriatric patients.


-----

724 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

Subjects were asked to pick the character they would feel most comfortable working with.
Fig. 7 shows the top-rated choices.
Based on these results we eliminated the floppy-disk backup procedure from the
protocol (no loss of data actually occurred during the intervention study). Unfortunately,
given budget and scheduling constraints, the ‘Laura’ character used in the MIT study was
re-used rather than using the selected character, although we plan to use these characters in
future studies. This turned out to not be a problem, since there were no complaints about
Laura’s appearance from intervention study participants. In fact, the Laura character had
been intentionally designed to be racially ambiguous, and one subject in the study
commented that they liked the fact that Laura was a ‘person of color’.

5. Evaluation of FitTrack for older adults

To evaluate the acceptance and efficacy of the exercise advisor agent by older adults we
conducted a randomized trial comparing participants who interacted with the agent daily
in their homes for 2 months (RELATIONAL) with a standard of care control group
(CONTROL). The CONTROL group used a physical activity intervention that had already
been designed and planned for use in the GAP clinic, and involved giving subjects
pedometers and printed materials on the benefits of walking for exercise.
The primary hypotheses evaluated in the study were:

H1. Subjects in the RELATIONAL group would enjoy using the relational agent on a
regular basis.
H2. Subjects in the RELATIONAL group would perform more physical activity than
subjects in the CONTROL group.

We were also interested in whether the use of a relational agent by older adults would
lead to increases in well-being and, more specifically, decreases in loneliness. This was
motivated by the general association found between social support and well-being in the
elderly, and since the use of animal-assisted therapy has been shown to reduce loneliness
in older adults (Banks and Banks, 2002).
H3. Subjects in the RELATIONAL group would have significant increases in well-being
and decreases in loneliness compared to subjects in the CONTROL group.

The study took place in Boston neighborhoods between July and December, 2003, and
was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Boston Medical Center.

5.1. Procedure

Subjects were referred by GAP physicians and nurses if they met the study eligibility
requirements—(1) no significant cognitive impairments, (2) English speaking ability, and (3)
ability to begin a new exercise program—and if they expressed an interest in participating in
the study. Following GAP referral, subjects were contacted by telephone to complete
screening and to schedule an initial meeting with an experimenter in their home. During this


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 725

meeting, consent was obtained, demographic, literacy, health, well-being and loneliness
questionnaires were completed, and pedometer use was demonstrated. Subjects were
instructed to keep track of their daily steps on a paper log sheet. Subjects in the
RELATIONAL group then had the computer installed in their home, after which they
participated in a brief training session in which they conducted an initial interaction with the
agent under the direction of the experimenter. They were asked to use the system daily, but
informed that they could miss a day or two during the 2-month study period. Subjects in the
CONTROL group were left with the printed materials on exercise from the GAP.
At the end of 2 months, an experimenter conducted a follow-up meeting with subjects at
which well-being and loneliness questionnaires were completed again and the paper log
sheets of steps walked were collected bythe experimenter. For subjects inthe RELATIONAL
group, a questionnaire evaluating various aspects of the intervention was also completed as
well as a 15–30 minute, tape recorded, semi-structured interview with the experimenter, after
which the experimenter dismantled and removed the computer system.

5.2. Subjects

Twenty-one participants were recruited into the study based on referrals from the GAP
clinic: 10 in the RELATIONAL group and 11 in the CONTROL group (see Table 1).
Participants ranged in age from 63 to 85 (mean 74.0), were 86% female, and 76% African

Table 1
Subject demographics

CONTROL RELAT’L ALL

Number of subjects 11 10 21
Withdrawals from 2 2 4
study

Age 74.2 73.8 74.0
Gender Male 27% 0% 14%
Female 63% 100% 86%
Lives alone 27% 30% 29%
Body mass index 30.4 27.9 29.2
(BMI)[a]

Overall health Physical (PCS-12) 41.6 45.8 43.4
(SF-12)[b] Mental (MCS-12) 56.6 50.7 54.1
Ethnicity African American 64% 90% 76%
Caucasian 27% 10% 19%
Other 9% 0% 5%
Computer Never used 27% 50% 38%
experience Used a few times 27% 30% 29%
Use regularly 45% 10% 29%
Expert user 0% 10% 5%
Literacy score[c] 65.4 61.6 63.6

a BMI of 25–29.9 is ‘overweight’, 30 or more is ‘obese’ (NHLBI, 1998).
b SF-12 means for US citizens: age 65–74, PCS-12Z46.36, MCS-12Z55.31, for age 75 or greater, PCS-12Z
38.68, MCS-12Z53.53 (Ware et al., 1996).
c Literacy score below 75 is ‘low literacy’ (Lobach et al., 2003).


-----

726 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

American. Seventeen (77%) were overweight or obese (based on body mass index from
reported height and weight), and 19 (86%) were scored as having low reading literacy
(Lobach et al., 2003). Eight (38%) reported never having used a computer before and
another six (29%) reported having used one ‘a few times’.
There were no significant differences between the groups with respect to age, body
mass index or overall health. Overall health scores from the SF-12 were near the national
averages based on age (Ware et al., 1996). Participants were compensated for their time.

5.3. Measures

Interaction History was recorded in log files on the subjects’ computers that kept track
of all actions RELATIONAL participants took with their system.
Steps Walked was measured by a pedometer. Participants were instructed to write their
steps down each day on a log sheet, and subjects in the RELATIONAL group were also
prompted to enter these into the computer during conversations with the agent.
Satisfaction with, Repetitiveness, Friendliness, Informativeness, Interestingness, Liking
of, and Trust in the agent (for subjects in the RELATIONAL group) were measured by
single items on seven-point semantic differential scales at the end of the intervention, as
were Ease of Use of the system, Desire to Continue using the system, and Relationship to
the agent.
Well-being was measured using the Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985)
and the UCLA Loneliness scale (Russell et al., 1980), administered to all subjects at the
start and end of the intervention.
Overall health was measured using the 12 Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12),
with subscales for physical health (PCS-12) and mental health (MCS-12) (Ware et al.,
1996).
In addition, semi-structured interviews were held with each participant during the
follow-up meeting at the end of the intervention.

5.4. Results

5.4.1. Usage
Two participants in the RELATIONAL group and two in the CONTROL group
withdrew from the study before the end of the 2-month intervention, all reportedly due to
health problems with themselves or a family member. In addition, one participant was
found to have not turned the system on once following the intake meeting, even though she
claimed to have used it. Following an intent-to-treat protocol, data from all subjects are
included in the quantitative results.
For subjects in the RELATIONAL group, actual use during the 60-day intervention
ranged from 0 to 54 interactions, with 90% of subjects averaging at least one contact per
week, 40% averaging at least two contacts per week and 30% averaging at least three
contacts per week. A typical usage pattern was daily during the first week, tapering off to
once or twice a week by the end of the study period. When asked if they looked forward to
the interactions with the agent, subjects gave a range of responses, with most (75% of
those who commented) responding positively:


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 727

Yes, I . yes. Because those two nights I forgot—I think, maybe I had been out late
or whatever—but I was really surprised, I was like ‘Oh I forgot Laura.’ Then I’d turn
the light on and talk to her. But it was something I looked forward to, I’d say it was
my little night cap.

I enjoyed coming in and turning it on, and talking with her.

I can’t say that I looked forward to it. If I did I would have called in every day.

RELATIONAL participants also indicated that they would like to continue using the
system, giving this an average rating of 6.4 (range: 1Z‘not at all’ to 7Z‘very much’).

5.4.2. Usability
All subjects found the system easy to use, with an average rating of 1.9 on a 1 (‘easy’) to
7 (‘difficult’) scale. Except for some problems entering pedometer steps (described below)
and a few other minor problems, none of the subjects reported having any significant
difficulty using the system.
A number of participants did have problems using the touch screen keypad to enter their
pedometer steps. Compared to their written records they made errors in data entry 49% of the
time,often bydroppingorduplicating a digit,causing anorder-of-magnitudeerror.This wasa
major problem if it occurred during the first week when the system was collecting baseline
data, as it caused the agent to set an unrealistically high goal for two participants. Two
participants also reported problems with touch screen alignment that made selection difficult.
Participants felt that the simulated conversation worked reasonably well. When asked if
they felt that they and the agent understood each other, participants rated this at 5.4 (with
1Z‘not at all’ and 7Z‘very much’). Only one instance of a problem talking to Laura was
reported: the participant thought the agent asked her “are you tired?” when she was really
asking “are you retired?” causing the agent to ask her a series of inappropriate follow-up
questions. Several participants mentioned that they could not express themselves
completely using the constrained, multiple-choice interaction:

When she ask me questions . I can’t ask her back the way I want.

I felt that she was programmed to answer. She was programmed to listen to the
questions that you put on the screen. She would ask a question and I would have a
choice, one, two, three, four. But I could never explain. Or she could never follow
up, or follow through with another question.

When asked, participants universally said they would have preferred speaking to Laura,
rather than using a touch screen. However, they preferred the touch screen over typing,
even though it meant having a much more restrictive conversation:

The only difference is that even if you wanted to say more it was, you know, you
could just touch, you couldn’t type, to say something. That was the difference. But, I
believe that I would have handled this better. I’m rarely typing in my words.
Because I’m not too familiar with computers.

Several participants mentioned that they enjoyed the social dialog with Laura and
would have liked the opportunity to chat more with her:


-----

728 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

She says ‘Good Morning Camille’ [laughs]. Yeah, it’s nice. I liked that. You know a
lot of more people would like that because they’re lonely.

I told you I like to talk, so that was, you know, good chit-chat’n. I found it very good,
you know, chit-chat’n with her.

I wanted to have more conversation with her.

Participants also mentioned that they would have liked to talk more about their health
problems with Laura, especially as they related to their ability to do more walking:

There was a couple of times when I wasn’t feeling good I didn’t go walking, you
know. And I felt that. So, I would have loved to say to her, ‘well Laura I think . ’
and she say to me ‘I hope you feel better.’ I think that came up. I said ‘I’m getting the
flu,’ and I wanted to say to her ‘I wasn’t feeling well’ so I won’t go walking.

I don’t think she understood about my condition. No, not me. But, probably someone
else. Because she kept saying you have to do 10,000 steps . no way could I do that.

5.4.3. Physical activity
Comparisons between the RELATIONAL and CONTROL groups on daily recorded
pedometer steps were based on generalized estimating equations (GEE) regression models
for longitudinal data. GEE regression accounts for the repeated-measures nature of the
data by modeling the correlation between repeated observations from the same subject,
and adjusting both parameter estimates and standard errors for this correlation. GEE
regression has several advantages over traditional repeated-measures ANOVA, in that it

Fig. 8. Study results: subjects who used relational agent walked more.


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 729

allows unequally spaced observations over time and allows inclusion of subjects who are
missing data from some follow-up points. This approach also allows the flexibility of
regression modeling in describing trends over time and controlling for other covariates.
We modeled a linear increase in steps over the study period, and allowed a differential
increase in steps in the RELATIONAL vs. CONTROL group by including an interaction
term between time and study group in the model. The estimated slope (increase per week
in mean steps walked) for the CONTROL group was 83.9, while the slope for the
RELATIONAL group was estimated at 411.1 (see Fig. 8). The difference in slopes was
significant (pZ0.004). There was no significant increase in steps over the study period in
the CONTROL group (pZ0.295 for the test of 0 slope), while the increase in steps over
time in the RELATIONAL group was significant (pZ0.001).

5.4.4. Well-being and loneliness
There were no significant changes in the Satisfaction With Life Scale scores for either
the RELATIONAL (paired t(9)Z0.34, pZ0.75) or CONTROL (paired t(7)Z0.80, pZ
0.45) groups during the intervention, nor were there significant differences between the
two groups on this measure either before (t(18)Z0.557, pZ0.58) or after the intervention
(t(17)Z0.316, pZ0.76).
The CONTROL group did see a significant decrease in loneliness over the intervention
!
period (paired t(7)Z2.74, p 0.05), but this was not reflected in the RELATIONAL group
(paired t(9)Z0.50, pZ0.63). There were no significant differences between the two
groups on this measure either before (t(18)Z0.658, pZ0.52) or after the intervention
(t(17)Z1.635, pZ0.12).

5.4.5. Ratings and perceptions of relational agent
Reviews of the relational agent were mostly positive, as shown in Table 2:

She’s nice. She’s really good. Really good. She asks you the right questions. She
tells if you if you’re not doing up to par, you know, and all that. And if you’re doing
good, she’ll tell you. If you’re not she’ll tell you. And it’s honest. And it works. It
really does. I like it. I like talking to her.

She was nice and friendly, and honest, with the stuff she say.

She’s nice. She’s really good. Really good.

Table 2
Ratings of relational agent

Measure Min (1) Max (7) Mean

Satisfaction with Not at all Very 5.4
Liking of Not at all Very much 6.3
Trust in Not at all Very much 6.4
Relationship with Stranger Close friend 6.8
Friendly Not at all Very 6.7
Informative Not at all Very 6.5
Repetitive Not at all Very 4.8
Interesting Boring Interesting 6.4


-----

730 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

I enjoyed her, I enjoyed Laura, and I’m quite sure somebody else would.

Eight of the 10 subjects in RELATIONAL anthropomorphized the agent to some
degree, putting Laura in a category somewhere between a computer and a person:

You’d be talking to her and sometimes you forget and think she’s a real person.

I would ask her of course and then I’d say ‘oh this is not a person’ [laughs]. THIS IS
NOT A PERSON [laughing]. You know after you talk to her for so long you get to
thinking of Laura as a person.

Well, just turning on the computer every night, and realizing that this is not a human
being, though I am carrying on an intelligent conversation with this, with Laura.
And, like I said after maybe the third or fourth night, that thought wasn’t even in my
mind anymore. I was not talking to a computer. I realized it was not a human being
but it was not a computer.

A telephone is a machine. But, I would not say that Laura is a machine.

I don’t feel that it gets the true feeling, the true experience of a person. Like a real
live person. . It was an animation. You know those questions [on the follow-up
questionnaire] were inappropriate.

Two subjects compared talking to Laura to talking to a character on TV, or having
people on TV tell them what to do:

It was like talking to the TV. I talk to the TV, too. [laughs]

There were many comments about the agent–subject relationship and relational
dynamics. The general relational trajectory seemed to be that the relationship and
interaction seemed strange at first, became more familiar over time, with liking and
trusting of and even caring for the agent common by the end of the 2 months. Several
participants said they also felt that Laura liked and cared about them:

Um, she took getting used to. But, um, by maybe the third or the fourth night she
appeared to be familiar, you know.

By the way that she sound, she sound like she like me.

I remember one weekend I went to Wareham. You know, I began to feel bad about
Laura, stuck in that box.

It was funny when it stopped. [strangeness felt after the last interaction]

Rather than serve to further isolate older adult subjects, two subjects mentioned that
Laura actually provided a form of social network support for them. One said that talking to
Laura became a regular activity that she did with her granddaughter watching, while
another mentioned that her friends would often remind her to talk to Laura:

I brought my friends up here a couple of times to listen to her. My girlfriend she came
upstairs with me and I show it. She say ‘what’s that?’ and I say ‘let me show you.’ So I
talk to her. So every time she talk to me she say ‘Did you talk to Laura last night?.’


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 731

6. Discussion

Overall, the study was successful in demonstrating the acceptance and usability of a
relational agent by older adults—even though most of the subjects in the RELATIONAL
group had little or no computer experience—and in demonstrating the efficacy of this
agent in motivating them to walk more. We conclude that our first two hypotheses
regarding enjoyment of the system and health behavior change efficacy were confirmed.
Satisfaction with the overall intervention was very high, with most participants
acknowledging that it was for their benefit:

I appreciated having that kind of a reminder, because I don’t have anybody who will
tell me what to do, to remind me, you know, to get up, get out and get some fresh air.

It was the best thing that happened to me, to have something that pushed me out and
get me walking.

Participants in our study had very few problems using the PC based system or talking to
the agent:

That is so easy. That is so good. Regular computers I don’t do. But, that was so easy,
even a baby could do that.

The only notable exception was the part of the interaction that was non-conversational:
pedometer step entry.
Both survey results and interview responses indicated that most participants in the
RELATIONAL group felt that they had established some kind of social bond with the
system over the duration of the intervention and that this bond, at a minimum, served as a
motivator for them to continue interacting with the agent.
Our third hypothesis, regarding the impact of the relational agent on well-being and
loneliness, was not confirmed. This may be due to the short intervention interval, the small
number of subjects, and especially the even smaller number of subjects who lived alone:
most subjects either lived with their spouse or in a multi-generational household. The
significant decrease in loneliness in the CONTROL group is a little harder to explain, but
may be due to the small (but not significant) increase in physical activity experienced in
this group and the accompanying increase in social contact that is common with walking
for exercise. Why this effect was not seen in the RELATIONAL group is an open question.

7. Future work

There are a number of important and interesting directions for future research on
relational agents for older adults. First is that more sophisticated models of dialogue
planning should be developed, so that users can engage in richer conversations and can
more freely express themselves. Doing this while maintaining the ease of use of the
multiple-choice selection input modality will be a very challenging undertaking.
Replacing the touch screen with automated speech recognition would have been
welcomed by all participants in this study, but commercial systems would need to be


-----

732 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

thoroughly evaluated to ensure that they could provide high enough reliability given the
variability and differences in voice quality in older adults compared to the voice models
they were developed for.
Many participants indicated that interactions with Laura became somewhat repetitive
over the course of the 2 months, and the solution to this problem remains an interesting
area of research. In addition to the techniques described in Section 4.1.4, other possible
solutions include: providing a wider range of dialog scripts; more variability in agent
utterances for any given dialog state; and the incorporation of external data that is
dynamically updated (e.g. weather reports). One subject suggested that just having Laura
change her clothing occasionally would have helped break the monotony. Ultimately,
what is needed is the use of dialog planning and text generation techniques to dynamically
synthesize the agent’s behavior and dialog so that it can be subtly varied every interaction,
for example, based on simulated agent mood or the user’s affective state.
The general relationship between user–agent social bond, system usage and behavioral
outcomes needs to be more thoroughly explored. Certainly social bond and engagement
influences usage and there is some dose–response association between usage and
outcomes, but the details need to be teased out in a much larger study.
Future systems like FitTrack that rely on sensor readings (such as pedometer step
counts) should be designed to automate the transfer of data from the sensing devices to the
computer to eliminate user data entry errors.
There are also some issues involved with just installing computers in the homes of older
adults, especially those with minimal computer expertise. First, many older adults live in
very small homes filled with possessions accumulated over a lifetime. Just finding an
appropriate space for a desktop computer system can be very challenging. Two subjects
had to put the computer on part of their dining room table. Second, multi-generational
households with small children can be problematic when installing fragile electronic
equipment such as a home computer. One woman dealt with this by including her
granddaughter in all of her conversations with Laura. Finally, one participant was
concerned that the computer, which was installed as a stand-alone system, was somehow
collecting information about her and broadcasting it back to the hospital.

8. Conclusion

In this article, we have examined the use of a new kind of computer interface—
relational agents—for older adult users, specifically in the context of a health education
and behavior change application. Based on this experience, we believe that the caring,
social, anthropomorphic interface enabled the system to be readily accepted, usable with
minimal training, and efficacious in achieving a desired behavioral outcome with this user
population.
Relational agents may prove to be an especially effective modality for delivering health
communication to older adults with low functional health, reading, or computer literacy,
problems that are especially acute in underserved populations. In a 1995 study of 2659
predominately indigent and minority patients at two urban public hospitals it was found
that 86% of the English speaking elderly had inadequate or marginal functional health


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 733

literacy, defined as the ability to read and follow basic medical instructions (Williams et
al., 1995). A relational agent that uses the universally understood and non-threatening
format of face-to-face conversation, relying minimally on text comprehension and using
multi-modal cues to maximize comprehension, may be an ideal platform to provide an
effective automated health educator with unbounded patience and empathy for these
patients.
Relational agent systems such as the one presented here may also be effective in nursing
home settings for engaging residents in social conversation and motivating them to engage
in social activities, in addition to motivating them to obtain physical activity. Studies have
shown that these residents typically spend over half of their time alone doing nothing,
leading to loneliness, low self-esteem, depression and, consequently, an overall low
quality of life. In addition, because residents spend such a large portion of their day sitting
or laying down, they are at great risk for muscle atrophy and skin breakdown (Ice, 2002).
While social and relational interaction is certainly not appropriate for all kinds of
computer interfaces, we feel that health communication with older adults is one area in
which these interface features are not only efficacious but are sincerely appreciated by
users.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a grant from the Evans Foundation at the Boston
University School of Medicine. Thanks to Ann McDonough, RN, for her help in recruiting
subjects from the GAP clinic. Thanks also to Jennifer Smith, Rosalind Picard, Ramesh
Farzanfar, Jeffrey Mignault, and Robert Friedman for their many helpful comments on this
article.

References

[ACE 2005. American Council on Exercise. Retrieved from the World Wide Web onApril 9, http://www.](http://www.acefitness.org)
[acefitness.org.](http://www.acefitness.org)
[AFP 2005. As Japan goes grey, toymakers design dolls for the elderly. AFP Online, 2005, available at http://](http://www.antara.co.id/en/seenws/?id=1109)
[www.antara.co.id/en/seenws/?idZ1109, accessed 18 Aug.](http://www.antara.co.id/en/seenws/?id=1109)
Andersen, P., Guerrero, L., 1998. The bright side of relational communication: interpersonal warmth as a social
emotion. In: Andersen, P., Guerrero, L. (Eds.), Handbook of Communication and Emotion. Academic Press,
New York, pp. 303–329.
Banks, M., Banks, W., 2002. The effects of animal-assisted therapy on loneliness in an elderly population in longterm care facilities. Journal Gerontology Medicine Sciences 57A, M428–M432.
Berkman, L., Syme, S., 1979. Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: a nine year followup study of
alameda county residents. American Journal of Epidemiology 109, 186–204.
Berkman, L., Glass, T., 2000. Social integration, social networks, social support, and health. In: Berkman, L.,
Kawachi, I. (Eds.), Social Epidemiology. Oxford Press, New York.
Bickmore, T., 2003. Relational agents: effecting change through human-computer relationships, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology PhD Dissertation, Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Bickmore, T., 2005. Acceptance and Usability of a Relational Agent Interface by Urban Older Adults.
Proceedings of CHI’05, Portland, OR.


-----

734 T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735

Bickmore, T., Gruber, A., Picard, R. (to appear). Establishing the Computer-Patient Working Alliance in
Automated Health Behavior Change Interventions. Patient Education and Counseling.
Bickmore, T., Picard, R., 2004. Towards Caring Machines. Proceedings of CHI’04, Vienna.
Bickmore, T., Picard, R., (to appear). Establishing and Maintaining Long-Term Human-Computer Relationships,
ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction.
Cassell, J., Bickmore, T., 2003. Negotiated Collusion: Modeling Social Language and its Relationship Effects in
Intellient Agents. User Modeling and Adaptive Interfaces 13, 89–132.
Cassell, J., Sullivan, J., Prevost, S., Churchill, E. (Eds.), 2000. Embodied Conversational Agents. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Cassell, J., Vilhja´lmsson, H., Bickmore, T., 2001. BEAT: The Behavior Expression Animation Toolkit.
Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ’01, Los Angeles, CA.
Clark, H., Krych, M., 2004. Speaking while monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of Memory and
Language 50, 62–81.
Coupland, N., Coupland, J., Giles, H., 1991. Language, society, and the elderly. Blackwell, Oxford.
Dehn, D., Mulken, S.v., 2000. The impact of animated interface agents: a review of empirical research.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 52, 1–22.
DHHS, 1991.Anon., 1991. Aging America. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.
DHHS, 2000. Healthy People 2010. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, US Dept of Health and
Human Services, Washington, DC.
Diener, E., Emmons, R., Larsen, J., Griffin, S., 1985. The Satisfaction with Life Scale. Journal Personality
Assessment 49, 71–75.
Duck, S., 1994. Meaningful Relationships. SAGE Publications, London.
Duck, S., 1995. Talking relationships into being. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 12, 535–540.
Gelso, C., Hayes, J., 1998. The psychotherapy relationship: theory, research and practice. Wiley, New York.
Gilbertson, J., Dindia, K., Allen, M., 1998. Relational Continuity Constructional Units and the Maintenance of
Relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 15, 774–790.
Grosz, B., Sidner, C., 1986. Attention, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Computational Linguistics 12,
175–204.
Hartley, A., 1992. Attention. In: Craik, F., Salthouse, T. (Eds.), The Handbook of Aging and Cognition. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Horn, J., 1982. The theory of fluid and crystallized intelligence in relation to concepts of cognitive psychology
and aging in adulthood. In: Craik, F., Trehub, S. (Eds.), Aging and Cognitive Processes. Plenum Press, New
York.
Horvath, A., Greenberg, L., 1989. Development and validation of the working alliance inventory. Journal of
Counseling Psychology 36, 223–233.
Horvath, A., Symonds, D., 1991. Relation between working alliance and outcome in psychotherapy a metaanalysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology 38, 139–149.
Ice, G., 2002. Daily life in a nursing home: has it changed in 25 years? Journal of Aging Studies 16, 345–359.
Jarvis, K., Friedman, R., Heeren, T., Cullinane, P., 1997. Older women and physical activity: using the telephone
to walk. Womens Health Issues 7, 24–29.
Lobach, D., Hasselblad, V., Wildemuth, B., 2003. Evaluation of a Tool to Categorize Patients by Reading
Literacy and Computer Skill to Facilitate the Computer-Administered Patient Interview. Proceedings of
AMIA, Washington, DC.
NHLBI, 1998. Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation and treatment of overweight and obesity in
adults. Bethesda, MD: Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.
NTIA, 1999. Falling through the Net: defining the digital divide. A report on thetelecommunications and
information technology gap in America. Washington, DC: National Telecommunication and Information
Administration.
Planalp, S., 1993. Friends’ and acquaintances’ conversations II: coded differences. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships 10, 339–354.
Planalp, S., Benson, A., 1992. Friends’ and acquaintances’ conversations I: perceived differences. Journal of
Social and Personal Relationships 9, 483–506.


-----

T.W. Bickmore et al. / Interacting with Computers 17 (2005) 711–735 735

Pollack, M., Brown, L., Colbry, D., McCarthy, C.E., Orosz, C., Peintner, B., Ramakrishnan, S., Tsamardinos, I.,
2003. Autominder: an intelligent cognitive orthotic system for people with memory impairment. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 44, 273–282.
Russell, D., Peplau, L., Curtrona, C., 1980. The revised UCLA lonelines scale: concurrent and discriminant
validity evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, 472–480.
Smith, J., 2000. GrandChair: conversational collection of grandparent’s stories. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology PhD Dissertation, Cambridge, MA.
Tamura, T., Yonemitsu, S., Itoh, A., Oikawa, D., Kawakami, A., Higashi, Y., Fujimooto, T., Nakajima, K., 2004.
Is an entertainment robot useful in the care of elderly people with severe dementia? The Journals of
Gerontology 59A, 83–85.
Ulatowski, H., Cannito, M., Hayashi, M., Fleming, S., 1985. Language abilities in the elderly. In: Ulatowski, H.
(Ed.), The Aging Brain: Communication in the Elderly. College-Hill Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 125–139.
Wada, K., Shibata, T., Saito, T., Tanie, K., 2003. Effects of Robot Assisted Activity to Elderly People who Stay at
a Health Service Facility for the Aged, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ Intl Conference of Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Las Vegas, NV.
Ware, J., Kosinski, M., Keller, S., 1996. A 12-item short form health survey: construction of scales and
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care 34, 220–233.
Williams, M., Parker, R., Baker, D., Parikh, N., Pitkin, K., Coates, W., Nurss, J., 1995. Inadequate functional
health literacy among patients at two public hospitals. JAMA 274, 1677–1720.
Woods, W., 1986. Transition network grammars for natural language analysis. In: Grosz, B.J., Jones, K.S.,
Webber, B.L. (Eds.), Readings in Natural Language Processing. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc, Los
Altos, CA, pp. 71–88.


-----

