http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

## RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access

# A randomized controlled trial of a senior centre group programme for increasing social support and preventing depression in elderly people living at home in Norway

#### Hege Bøen[*], Odd Steffen Dalgard, Rune Johansen and Erik Nord

Abstract

Background: Late-life depression is a common condition and a challenging public health problem. A lack of social
support is strongly associated with psychological distress. Senior centres seem to be suitable arenas for
community-based health promotion interventions, although few studies have addressed this subject. The objectives
were to examine the effect of a preventive senior centre group programme consisting of weekly meetings, on
social support, depression and quality of life.
Methods: A questionnaire was sent to a random sample of 4,000 persons over 65 in Oslo, and a total of 2,387
completed questionnaires were obtained. These subjects served as a basis for recruitment of participants for a trial,
with scores on HSCL-10 being used as a main inclusion criterion. A total of 138 persons were randomized into an
intervention group (N = 77) and control group (N = 61). Final analyses included 92 persons. Social support (OSS-3),
depression (BDI), life satisfaction and health were measured in interviews at baseline and after 12 months (at the
end of the intervention programme). Perceptions of benefits from the intervention were also measured. Mean
scores, SD, SE and CI were used to describe the changes in outcomes. Effect sizes were calculated based on the
original scales and as Cohen’s d. Paired sample tests and ANOVA were used to test group differences.
Results: There was an increase in social support in both groups, but greatest in the intervention group. The level of
depression increased for both groups, but more so in the control than the intervention group. There was a
decrease in life satisfaction, although the decrease was largest among controls. There were almost no differences in
reported health between groups. However, effect sizes were small and differences were not statistically significant.
In contrast, most of the participants said the intervention meant much to them and led to increased use of the
centre.
Conclusions: In all probability, the intervention failed to meet optimistic targets, but possibly met quite modest
ones. Since intention-to-treat analysis was not possible, we do not know the effect on the intervention group as a
whole. A further evaluation of these programmes is necessary to expand the group programme. For the depressed,
more specialized programmes to cope with depression may be a more appropriate intervention.

Trial Registration: DRKS00003120 on DRKS

Keywords: Elderly people, Social support, Depression, Prevention, Senior centre

[* Correspondence: hege.boen@fhi.no](mailto:hege.boen@fhi.no)
Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Division of Mental Health, P.O. Box
4404 Nydalen, NO-0403, Oslo, Norway

© 2012 Bøen et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
[Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

Background
Late-life depression and depressive symptoms are common conditions and a challenging public health problem. Studies from the Netherlands from 1999–2006
suggested a prevalence of 16% [1]. A Norwegian study
reported that the prevalence of depression increased
with age, and was highest among the eldest. Of those
80 years and older, depression was reported by 20% [2].
Depression among older people is often related to physical symptoms resulting from chronic diseases or other
impairments [3], as the combination of chronic diseases
and depressive conditions cause dramatic reductions in
the quality of life [4,5].
A lack of social support is strongly associated with psychological distress in elderly people, and is an important
psychosocial risk factor for depressive disorders later in
life [6]. Hence, interventions targeting loneliness and social isolation seem to be a good strategy for prevention,
which is also pointed out by Luanaigh and Lawlor in
their review article on loneliness and the health of older
people [7]. A systematic review conducted to examine
the effects of health-promoting interventions identified
nine of 10 effective interventions to alleviate social isolation and loneliness among older people. Most were
group interventions with an educational or support input
for specific groups of older people, and it appeared that
programmes that enabled participants to be involved in
planning, developing and delivering activities were most
likely to be the most effective [8]. A randomized controlled trial showed a decrease in the feeling of loneliness
among frail elders who had been exposed to a physically
oriented rehabilitation programme [9].
The senior centre is the only welfare service in Norwegian elder care serving both fit and less functional pensioners over 65 years. Senior centres have the goal of
maintaining physical and psychological activity, functional health, protection, in addition to the promotion of
self-sufficiency and the prevention of psychosocial problems of loneliness and isolation in the elderly. They are
organized as small local units for activity and social contact, have a small staff of 2–4 persons and are run in
large part by volunteers; they can be characterized as a
welfare service and a private responsibility, though not a
statutory care service such as home help, home nursing
and a residential care facility.
Senior centres seem to be suitable arenas for
community-based health promotion interventions that
target social isolation and loneliness. However, few studies have addressed this subject. Three studies located at
senior centres with physical activity as the main outcome
also report a preventive effect on psychological distress.
One randomized controlled intervention study located at
a senior centre with 201 frail older adults demonstrated
significantly higher levels of physical activity and senior


centre participation, as well as a significant reduction in
the use of psychoactive medications in the intervention
group [10]. Another randomized trial with 100 older
adults in a senior centre showed that after six months
the intervention group had significantly better scores on
the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form (SF-36) health
survey subscales, and fewer depressive symptoms than
controls measured with the self-report depression scale
CES-D [11]. A pre- test, post-test evaluation of a oneyear prevention programme with the participation of 300
men and women aged 65 and older and 14 senior centres
participating, concluded with a decrease in depression
symptoms, better self-evaluated health and increased
physical activity among the participants [12].
The purpose of the present study was to test the
effects of a senior centre group programme on preventing depression, increasing social support and self-rated
health and satisfaction with life. We hypothesized that
the programme could cause lower score on a depression
scale, and higher scores on life satisfaction, self-rated
health and social support scales in the participants of
the programme than in controls.

The intervention
The intervention was initiated by the National Association for Public Health, which owns 32 senior centres in
Norway, and sponsored by the Extra Foundation for
Health and Rehabilitation. Its aims were to reach out to
elderly people with symptoms of loneliness and some
symptoms of psychological distress and also to increase
the use of senior centres in a selection of elderly people
in two districts of Oslo, Norway. By having these people
participate in common senior centre activities, there was
hope of increasing their feelings of social support, alleviating and preventing depression and increasing their satisfaction with life.
Independent of the location of the senior centres,
there are number of studies which show that mental
stimuli, social network and social engagement, nutrition
intervention and physical activity have a positive effect
on the mental health of the elderly [13–19]. The intervention programme, however, was based on practical
experiences from senior centre leaders, as well as the
goals of the senior centre and some Norwegian studies
concerning the above mentioned themes (only in the
Norwegian language) [20–23]. It was designed to produce practical knowledge how the senior centres could
expand their activities.
The intervention was started in late January 2007, and
was conducted in three senior centres in two municipal
districts, with one in eastern Oslo and one in western
Oslo. Elderly people who were eligible for participation
(see Figures 1 and 2 in the Method section) were offered
a programme consisting of a weekly group meeting of a


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

### Total sample = 4,000

**Residents of nursing homes = 111**

### Invitees for participation = 3,889

**Not** **interested = 1,502**

### Candidates for recruitment of the trial = 2,387

**Did not meet criteria for**
**participation = 1,972**

### Eligible sample = 201+214=415

Figure 1 The process going from the gross sample to the
eligible sample.

three-hour duration that was carried out 35 to 38 times
over the course of a year. Each group had a fixed membership and 7 – 10 participants. Addressing psychosocial
problems such as depressive symptoms, loneliness and
the isolation of elders within the senior centres context
was chosen in this study because the senior centre leaders had a practical experience from local communities
that many older persons were lonely and would benefit
from a specially designed programme such as this. They
also had a notion that many could not visit the centres
due to a lack of transportation.
The intervention programme included transportation
to and from the senior centre if needed and a warm
meal at a low cost. A physical training programme
developed by physiotherapists especially for older persons was included. It was easy to practice with a chair
without changing clothes, footwear, etc. A self-help
group discussed topics that the participants agreed upon
themselves such as safety in the home and outdoors,
how to avoid falling, social relations and aging, humour
and laughter. These elements of the programme were
well-known as key elements in daily activities at the centres. They were put together on the basis that if the participants who were slightly depressed when recruited
would attend these groups, the content must be common and not too lengthy and that it was easy for them


to meet. The group leaders were volunteers who had
completed a training course for group leaders, and they
were supervised by the project leader, who was a registered nurse and an experienced senior centre leader. A
description of the introduction to the group methods
and practical advice was created by the National Association of Public Health, both for the themes for the group
discussion and for the physical training (only in the Norwegian language). The researchers had no part in planning or organizing this intervention.
The intervention was mostly implemented according
to the project plan. Because the number of participants
was reduced and the days available for the group
programme had to fit the time schedules of the participants, the five groups were supplemented by other persons not taking part in the research project. In a
logbook at each senior centre, the group leaders documented the names and dates of those present and absent
from among the research participants.
The intervention was planned for 80 people, with this
being the maximum number allowed by the resources
available to the project and the three centres in
question.

Preliminary evaluation of the intervention
Prior to the outcome evaluation reported in this paper,
the intervention was evaluated by the project leader with
respect to the participant’s satisfaction. The participants
were asked questions about health and well-being, and
were tested for simple physical skills three weeks after
the beginning of the programme and after 11 months.
Both men and women reported being in a normal good
mood after three weeks, though before the intervention
they reported symptoms of distress and a lack of initiative. Some possible explanations for this are that the
intervention had already fulfilled some of its intentions
or that the participants reported what they thought the
project leader expected. Among the women, 40% had
made new friends, while the men reported no differences
in friendships. Female participants also experienced that
the number of visits from friends in their homes
increased, and that the participants were active in the
group setting and met on time. The project leader for
the participants reported less loneliness, a better mood
and better physical health [24].

Main evaluation of the intervention
The present evaluation was conducted by researchers
who had no part in planning or organizing the intervention. The evaluation was designed as a randomized controlled trial which aimed at comparing an intervention
group of 80 people with an equally large control group.
The organizers of the intervention cooperated with the
evaluators in recruiting participants so that a sound,


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

**Enrolment**

Allocated to control (n=61)

Lost to follow-up (n=6)
3 dead, 3 withdrew

Analysed (n= 55)

Figure 2 The process of going from the eligible sample to analysis.

randomized controlled trial could be conducted. The
study intervention did not require any large additional
expenditure of resources, and was easily fitted into the
ongoing senior centre programme.
We were not able to detect any controlled studies of
the effect of the senior centres’ programmes on persons’ mental health, well-being and social support as
main outcomes. It was hypothesized that the intervention was particularly suitable for the elderly with only
slight depression, which affected the inclusion criteria,
see below.
The limitation of the intervention to 80 people inevitably set a limit to the statistical power that would be
possible to achieve in an evaluation. It was therefore
acknowledged that an assessment of the effectiveness
could lead to results with fairly wide margins of uncertainty, which would have to be read as indicative rather
than conclusive. As shown below, some fairly clear conclusions can nonetheless be drawn.

Methods
Participants and recruitment
The study was approved by the Data Inspectorate and
the National Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics, (Southeast Region) in 2006.

|Randomiz|ed (n=138)|
|---|---|


The process of going from the gross random sample
to the sample assessed for eligibility and randomization
is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
As a first step towards selecting people for the trial, a
random sample of 4,000 persons over the age of 65 years
living at home - with 2,000 from each of the two municipal districts - was drawn from the Norwegian Population
Register. Of these, 111 persons were residents of nursing
homes and were excluded from the material.
Letters were sent to the remaining 3,889 persons in
October 2006. The letter contained information about
the senior centres and an extensive questionnaire for
self-administration and postal return, and asked about
gender, age, education, income, ethnicity, marital status,
use of the senior centre, reason for non-use, functional
impairments (physical and mental), social support and
quality of life. One reminder was sent to those who did
not respond. The completed questionnaires were
scanned and quality controlled. A total of 2,387 out of
the 3,889 persons (61%) were obtained as candidates for
recruitment to the trial. The further details of those who
did not answer are described in Bøen et al. [25].
For recruitment to the trial, an initial inclusion criterion (see below) was ‘having psychological distress
according to Hopkins Symptom Checklist-10 (HSCL-10)
in the range of 1.39 to 1.99’, which corresponds to ‘light


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

depression’. Two other criteria were that the subjects
should not have been regular users of the senior centre
already, and that they wanted to be part of the current
study. Of the 2,387 persons who responded satisfactorily
to the questionnaire, 201 met these three initial eligibility criteria. The 201 were contacted by phone in order to
make practical arrangements for face-to-face interviews
in their homes. The purpose of the interviews was to
make further observations regarding their eligibility and
motivation for participation in the trial, and to obtain
written informed consent. Specially trained social work
students and retired social workers, researchers and project leaders conducted the interviews.
During this part of the recruitment process, a number
of potential candidates dropped because of a lack of
interest. The reasons given for this disinterest were bad
health and a heavy burden of care. This was essentially
as expected, although the number of dropouts was larger
than anticipated and implied that the number of participants in the trial would be lower than planned. To avert
a loss of statistical power beyond what had to initially be
accepted for practical reasons, we carried out a second
recruitment from the 2387 completed questionnaires, in
which we expanded the inclusion criterion based on the
HSCL-10 scale to the range from 1.20-3.90. This meant
that we included candidates who were not depressed at
all, although we also included candidates who were more
depressed than in the first recruitment. Those who had
answered less than seven out of 10 questions on HSCL10 were excluded. An additional 214 persons were found
eligible in this second round, yielding a total of 415 eligible persons. Persons in the second round were contacted and interviewed in their homes in the same way
as the first 201 persons.
Figure 2 illustrate the process of going from the eligibility sample (415) to the randomized sample (138) and
is explained in the following. The flow diagram (Figure 2)
used is according to updated guidelines for reporting
parallel group randomized trials [26,27].
In total, 277 of the 415 eligible persons dropped out,
leaving 138 subjects for randomization in the trial, which
was performed by stratifying many in the sample by geographical area and gender. Seventy-seven (55%) were
allocated to the intervention group and 61 (45%) to the
control group. A larger lot was drawn to the intervention group than to the control group because of an
expected loss of participants.
The first group (those recruited on the basis of the initial HSCL criterion) started the intervention in January
2007, four weeks after baseline interviews with the outcome measures described below. Follow-up interviews
took place in November/December of the same year.
The additional second group started the intervention
in April 2007, four weeks after baseline interviews, with


the follow-up interviews conducted in April/March
2008.
The control group was free to continue daily activities
as they chose, and they were offered the same group activities as the intervention group after one year. They
were not subjects of further follow-up studies after the
intervention had ended.

Data
One outcome parameter was social support, as measured by scores on the Oslo-3 Social support scale
(OSS-3). The OSS-3 is based on three questions, with
scores on each item and a sum score.

Oslo 1: How many people are you so close to that you
can count on them if you have great personal
problems? (none (1), 1–2 (2), 3–5 (3), 5+ (4))
Oslo 2: How much interest and concern do people
show in what you do? (a lot (5), some (4), uncertain
(3), little (2), none (1))
Oslo 3: How easy is it to get practical help from
neighbours if you should need it? (very easy (5), easy
(4), possible (3), difficult (2), very difficult (1))

In the present paper the sum score, ranging from 3
(worst) to 14 (best), is used. The OSS-3 has been used
in several studies, thereby confirming its feasibility
and predictive validity with respect to psychological distress [28,29].
Another outcome parameter was depression, as measured on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). The BDI
is a 21-item, self-report scale, ranging from 0 (normal)
to 3 (most severe), with a total maximum depression
score of 63. This questionnaire is widely used among
older adults, though not specifically developed for the
geriatric population [30–33].
A third outcome parameter was life satisfaction, as
measured by scores on a question about quality of life,
ranging from 1–5, with 1 meaning very dissatisfied and
5 very satisfied.
A fourth outcome parameter was self-reported health,
as measured by scores on a question of health, ranging
from 1–4, with 1 meaning bad health and 4 very
good health.
All of these measurements were conducted in an identical manner in face-to-face interviews, first at baseline
and then at 12 months follow-up when the intervention
had come to an end. After 12 months, the intervention
group was also asked how much the weekly group
programme meant to them, ranging from very much
(4) to little (1). They were also asked if they had made
any new friends or met the participants in a private setting (yes/no).


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

Specific hypotheses to be tested
The expectation of those who initiated and organized
the intervention was that it would increase the participants’ feelings of social support, alleviate and prevent depression and increase their satisfaction with life, though
the exact strength of this expectation was not specified.
We considered that the effects needed to be above a certain size to be clinically significant and thus of interest
for policymaking. With respect to the Beck Depression
Inventory, Bright et al. (1999) suggested that a change of
at least 6 points is clinically significant, even though this
judgement is somewhat arbitrarily related to the size of
standard deviations commonly observed in BDI data.
Nord and Dalgard conducted a cost-value analysis of a
programme for coping with depression based on an
observed effect of 3.3 points on the BDI [34]. This corresponded for instance to ‘somewhat less sadness, somewhat greater interest in others, somewhat greater
enjoyment of activities and somewhat less problems with
sleep’, which was clearly a significant difference. Consequently, we therefore lowered the requirement even further, and tested the hypothesis that the intervention
yielded a mean effect of at least a 2 point improvement
on the BDI. The implication was that if the effect was
less than that, which we refer to as a ‘modest target’, the
intervention may be difficult to justify. Since there was
inevitably an element of subjectivity in such a choice of
‘satisfactory effect size’, we additionally applied a wider
test criterion of 3 points on the BDI, which we refer to
as an ‘optimistic target’.
We chose similar target levels of effect on the other
three outcome measures. Here, we used the target level
on the BDI as a reference and proportionally adjusted
for differences in the length of the scales by looking at
the standard deviations of scores on the four different
scales as observed in the present study. As we shall see,
the standard deviations were on the order of 6 for BDI,
2 for social support, 0.8 for life satisfaction and 0.6 for
health. The target level of 2 points for BDI is 1/3 of the
standard deviation. Applying the same fraction to the
standard deviations of the other outcome measures, we
achieved modest target levels of 0.67 points for social
support, 0.27 points for life satisfaction and 0.2 points
for health. The corresponding optimistic targets were
1.0, 0.4 and 0.3, respectively.

Statistical methods and analyses
Baseline characteristics for the intervention and control
groups were given as the percentage of distributions or
mean values. Changes on the four outcome measures in
the intervention and control groups were reported in
terms of mean scores at intervention and at follow-up,
including standard deviations (SD) at each of these,
mean differences from intervention to follow-up, the


standard deviations of these differences, the standard
errors (SE) of the mean differences calculated as SE ¼
SD=pffiffiffiffiN and the 95% confidence intervals of the mean
differences calculated as mean differences + / - 2 SE.
Effect sizes were first calculated in absolute terms as
the difference between the mean change in the intervention group and the mean change in the control group on
each of the four outcome measures, and second as a
standardized effect size, which is the effect size divided
by the mathematical mean of the standard deviations of
the changes in the two groups (the Cohen’s d).
The standard error of an effect size in absolute terms
on a particular outcome measure is calculated as the
square root of the sum of the squared standard errors of
the mean changes within the two groups.
We examined whether the estimated effect sizes in the
study met the targets levels specified above by looking at
the confidence intervals of the observed effects.
The Pearson’s correlation coefficient was used to describe the associations between the number of times participating in the group meetings and the outcome
scores.
To be sure that the observed results were neither due to
selection nor group differences, various raking techniques
were used that are explained in the Discussion section.
To test differences at the group level, paired sample
tests and a ‘one-way between groups’ ANOVA were
used.

Results
Of those allocated for intervention, 36 persons changed
their minds about participating. They all cited too much
stress or illness in their lives to carry through with the
programme and completely withdrew from the study. Of
those constituting the dropouts, one person died and
some had great memory problems, which meant that
they were not available for further interviews. In
addition, four persons were lost to follow-up because of
bad health and removal, which meant that a total of 40
persons dropped out (Figure 2).
Seven persons came to the group sessions 14 times or
less and discontinued their participation, although group
did not differ significantly from the others with respect
to baseline characteristics.
Of those allocated for intervention, 37 (48%) took part in
the follow-up, with the corresponding number of controls
at 55 (90%). The total number of participants who completed the study was 92, which was much lower than what
was initially hoped for (which was 80 for each group).
Ideally, analyses of interventions should be conducted
on the basis of intention-to-treat. However, no data collection could be carried out with the 40 participants
who were lost after the allocation and during follow up,


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

Table 1 Characteristics of the sample

Intervention Control

Gender Women 59.5 54.7

Men 40.5 45.3

Age group 65-69 5.4 15.1

70–79 35.1 35.8

80+ 59.5 49.1

Income*1 <150’ 16.2 22.0

150’-200’ 27.0 28.0

200’-300’ 32.4 30.0

300+ 24.3 20.0

Education Primary, 9 yrs 35.1 37.7

Secondary,12 yrs 27.0 18.9

College/University > 13 yrs 37.8 43.4

Marital status Married/cohabiting 40.5 49.1

Single 59.5 50.9

District of town Ullern 56.8 64.2

�stensjø 43.2 35.8

Life satisfaction* 2 Mean 3.65 (0.82) 3.84 (0.71)

Health* 3 Mean 2.44 (0.65) 2.55 (0.60)

Social support* 4 Mean 9.32 (2.01) 9.21 (2.00)

BDI*5 Mean 10.14 (6.63) 8.70 (4.85)

*1 Norwegian crowns.
*2 High value, most satisfied.
*3 High value, good health.
*4 High value, much support.
*5 High value, most depressed.
For categorical variables: Percentage; For continuous variables: Mean, Standard
Deviations in brackets, total n = 92.

due to their health status and withdrawal from the study.
Their reasons for withdrawal were not questioned, and it
would have been unethical to pressure them. The seven
persons who did come to the group sessions 14 times or
less (discontinued participation) were all followed up
and interviewed at 12 months, and were included in the
main analysis.


Characteristics of the study sample in the intervention
and control groups at baseline are shown in Table 1:
The intervention and control groups were fairly similar when compared at baseline for demographic characteristics, life satisfaction, health and social support, and
the average age in the intervention group was slightly
higher than among the controls. With respect to depression, the level of BDI indicated that the intervention group was slightly more depressed than the
controls.
The scores on the outcome variables at baseline and
the 12-month follow-up, as well as the difference scores
for the intervention group and the control group, are
shown in Table 2.
For both groups, there was a decrease in life satisfaction, although the decrease was largest among controls.
There were almost no differences in health between the
groups. There was an increase in social support in both
groups, but was greatest in the intervention group. For
both groups the level of depression increased, but more
so in the control than in the intervention group. Even
so, the effect sizes were very small and all differences
were far from being statistically significant. A null hypothesis – i.e. a hypothesis that the intervention in reality
was without effect on the parameters in question – can
by no means be rejected.
To look for a possible ‘dose-response’ effect, the outcome measures were correlated with the number of
times participated in the group meetings. Both with respect to BDI, social support and health, improvements
increased in step with the increasing number of times
that the persons participated in the group meetings,
whereas this was not the case for life satisfaction. Correlations were on the order of .1 - .2 (not shown in table),
and none of them were significant.
Tables 3 and 4 show the development of BDI scores
among those who were younger than 80 years and those
who were 80 years and older.


Table 2 Descriptive mean score, Standard deviations on the scales of life satisfaction, health, social support and Beck
Depression Inventory at baseline and after 12 months, n total = 92 *

Instruments and scoring range Baseline After 12 months Differences Baseline- Effect
12 months size

Groups n Mean score S.D. n Mean score S.D. n Mean change S.D. Cohen’s d

Life satisfaction Intervention 37 3.65 0.82 37 3.59 0.76 37 -0.06 0.78 0.22

1-5 Control 55 3.84 0.71 54 3.61 0.79 54 -0.22 0.74

Health Intervention 36 2.44 0.65 37 2.24 0.72 36 -0.20 0.74 0.07

1-4 Control 55 2.55 0.60 55 2.40 0.63 55 -0.15 0.52

Social support Intervention 37 9.32 2.02 37 9.97 2.05 37 0.65 1.46 0.12

3-14 Control 53 9.21 2.00 54 9.69 2.09 52 0.48 1.72

BDI Intervention 36 10.14 6.63 37 10.70 5.95 36 0.56 5.45 0.03

Control 53 8.70 4.85 55 9.44 4.19 53 0.74 4.72

- n differs, both in intervention group and in control group because not all the participants answered all the questions at both baseline and after 12 months.


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

Table 3 Development of Beck Depression Inventory score in intervention and control groups in 12 months for
participants younger and older than 80 years (n = 92)

Age Younger than 80 years 80 years or above

Time T1 T2 T1 T2

intervention control intervention control intervention control intervention control

Number of participants 14 27 15 29 22 26 22 26

BDI 9.5 9.44 8.47 8.62 10.55 7.92 12.33 10.35


There was no significant difference between the intervention and control groups in any of the two age groups.
A comparison with memory impairments revealed no
significant differences between the intervention group
and the control group, either for participants younger or
older than 80 at time t2. There was no significant difference with respect to memory impairment at t2 between
the two age groups (not shown in table). The figures
were too small to test for use of medication against depression among the participants.
Table 5 shows the effect estimates compared to the
previously chosen clinically significant target levels.
For social support, health and life satisfaction, the ‘optimistic’ target levels were higher than the upper limit of
the 95% confidence intervals for the effect estimates,
while for BDI, the optimistic target level was in the
upper tail. Hence, the data strongly suggest the rejection
of a hypothesis that the intervention yielded large
effects. In contrast, the ‘moderate’ target levels were inside the effect size confidence intervals on all four parameters, meaning that the possibility of moderate effects
(as defined above) cannot be rejected.
The participants in the research intervention group were
also asked after 12 months to evaluate how much this
intervention had meant to them. Of the 37 participants, 19
answered that it meant very much or much, 13 persons
answered some and five persons said that it meant little.
The ANOVA ‘one-way between groups’ analysis carried
out with social support as the dependent variable suggested
that those who valued the meetings as most meaningful
also experienced the most improvement in social support,
which was nearly significant (p< 0.08). Half the intervention group had made new friends, and 25 persons now

Table 4 Absolute and relative changes in Beck
Depression Inventory score in intervention and control
groups in 12 months for participants younger and older
than 80 years (n = 92)

Age Younger than 80 years 80 years or above

intervention control intervention control

Changes in BDI - 1.03 - 0.82 + 1.68 + 2.43
(absolute)

Changes in BDI - 10.8% - 8.7% + 19.9% + 30.7%
(relative)


availed themselves of more of the activities at the senior
centre (not shown in the table).

Discussion
The strength of this study is that it has a randomized,
controlled design and uses well-established and validated
outcome measures for social support and depression. Its
main weaknesses are the high percentage of dropouts,
which may have led to a selection bias by making it difficult to do a completely fair comparison between the
groups (cf. the note above about the intention-to-treat
analysis).
One possible explanation for the loss of participants in
the intervention group after the randomization could be
that when it came closer to the start of the programme,
the participants started to have second thoughts and the
obligation to weekly meetings for a year seemed too much
to fulfil. As a result, the easiest way out was to withdraw at
an early stage. The controls accepted three home visits
during the year and a coming programme the next year,
which did not imply that much personal commitment. To
cushion this effect, we could have followed up the participants more closely by, e.g. phone calls.
The low number of participants, which leaves the
study with a low statistical power, is also a problem.
Both of these problems were difficult to avoid given the
limited resources available in the intervention project,
which calls for great care when interpreting the findings.
There were some differences between the intervention and control groups, both with respect to size and
various socio-economic variables, and at baseline and
the end of the intervention, thereby suggesting that the
observed results might have been due to the selection
mechanisms on one or more variable(s). However, including the variables under consideration as predictors
in regression analyses, did not significantly affect the
results, which suggest that the observed results in the
present paper were neither due to selection nor group
differences.
This was also confirmed by using various raking
techniques [35,36]. More specifically, we first assumed
that both the intervention and control group were
identically distributed with respect to the different variables from Table 1: gender, age, income, education,
marital status and geography at baseline, although this


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

Table 5 Effect estimates of life satisfaction, health, social support and Beck Depression Inventory compared to
reasonable, clinically significant target levels

Effect estimate absolute SE 95% CI Target level

Mean Modest Optimistic

Life satisfaction 0.17 0.16 −0.15, +0.49 0.27 0.40

Health −0.05 0.14 −0.33, +0.23 0.20 0.30

Social support 0.17 0.32 −0.47, +0.81 0.67 1.00

BDI 0.18 1.12 −2.06, +2.42 2.00 3.00


did not significantly affect the BDI level. Moreover,
since the dropout rate from baseline to the end of the
intervention was different in the two groups, we also
checked whether this could affect the change in BDI
from baseline to the end of the intervention by applying similar techniques. However, this did not significantly affect the BDI levels.
The effect of dropouts is difficult to judge. There are
arguments for assuming that the dropouts would have
benefited less than those who stayed, so that the inclusion of the dropouts would have made the differences
between the intervention group and the control group
smaller. But the opposite is also conceivable. Dropouts
reported higher levels of stress and illness, so perhaps
socializing at senior centres would have been of particular help to these people.
Disregarding the possible biases related to the high
dropout rate, we may draw some conclusions from the
data. Since all 95% confidence intervals of effect estimates clearly overlap with zero, it is impossible to reject the null hypothesis (that the intervention did not
have any effect). That does not in itself mean that the
intervention cannot have been effective, as there may
have been positive effects that just do not show up in
a statistically significant way due to the small sample
size. We therefore focused on the possibility of there
being more than just small and perhaps clinically insignificant effects, i.e. the possibility of effects that one
would reasonably consider to be of clinical and policymaking interest. From this perspective, we suggested
specific target values for effect sizes which the intervention should have been able to meet. According to
our data, the intervention in all probability failed to
meet optimistic targets, but possibly met quite modest
ones. The latter possibility is supported by the positive
reporting from participants with respect to satisfaction
with the intervention. There was also a tendency
towards a ‘dose–response’ effect, although this was not
significant.
The very modest effect observed on BDI was somewhat
surprising. An important concern is whether BDI is an
inappropriate instrument in this context, in which the
majority were over 80 years old. This inventory was
chosen because it is widely used among older adults, with


a well-documented high reliability, internal consistency
and validity. The BDI also demonstrates a good discrimination between patients with varying degrees of depression,
and accurately reflects changes in the intensity of depression over time [30–33]. Still, it may be difficult to separate
depression and cognitive impairments, even in a diagnostic
evaluation [37]. Since the majority of participants were over
the age of 80 years, and knowing that the incidence of cognitive decline increases sharply in this age group, stratification in age groups over and less than 80 years was
conducted. There were no significant differences in BDI
scores between the intervention and control groups in either of the two age groups. Furthermore, no significant differences were found in memory impairment.
There was a relatively large but non-significant decrease in BDI score among persons aged less than
80 years, and a significant increase in BDI score among
persons over 80 years. It could well be that participants
from 65 to 79 experienced a process of awareness and
optimism as a result of being surveyed. In contrast, the
oldest group might have experienced no awareness and
optimism due to their age and future expectations from
the staring point to the end of the intervention.
Another possible explanation for the modest effect on
BDI could be that the level of depression in the sample
was too low (a mean BDI score at baseline of approximately 10) for a substantial effect to be expected from
the intervention, though this explanation is not supported by a subgroup analysis of the data. When we split
the material into those with a BDI score equal to or less
than 10 and those with a BDI score higher than 10 (not
reported in the tables), we observe that the positive effect is almost statistically significantly smaller in the high
BDI group than in the low BDI group.
An alternative explanation is therefore that an intervention of this type does not so much serve to improve
the condition of those who already have considerable depression, but rather to avert development of more severe
depression in those who have only mild symptoms.
With regard to the fact that the intervention programme
at most had a modest effect upon depression, the frequency of meetings and the level of competence of the
group leaders must be taken into consideration in the
evaluation of this programme. The leaders were volunteers


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

and had no health professional or social work background
that qualified them to address mental health problems, and
most of them had no prior experience with conducting
group programmes. If this programme is meant to address
users’ special mental challenges, more experienced and
professional group leaders are needed. The substance of
the programme must then be developed towards a treatment course, such as a Coping With Depression Course
(CWD) for the elderly. An effectiveness trial proved the
CWD course to be effective for older people with subclinical depression, as well as for those with a current major
depression [38].

Conclusions
According to our data, the intervention in all probability
failed to meet optimistic targets, but a ‘modest effect’
cannot be rejected. The latter possibility of a modest effect is supported by the positive reporting with respect
to satisfaction with the intervention and a tendency toward a dose–response effect from participants who
stayed in the group until the study period ended. Since
the intention-to-treat analysis was not possible, we do
not know the effect of the programme on the intervention group as a whole. A further evaluation of these programmes is necessary to expand the group programme.
For the depressed, more specialized programmes to cope
with depression may be a more appropriate intervention.

Competing interests
None of the authors had any economic interest in the project.

Author’s contributions
HB and OSD were responsible for the design. EN contributed to determining
sample size. HB was responsible for the data collection. RJ performed the
randomization. HB, OSD and RJ conducted the data analysis. HB and OSD
were responsible for drafting the manuscript. RJ commented on the
possibility of a selection bias. EN made extensive amendments and revisions
for important substantial content. OSD supervised the study. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Ina Takle Renskaug from the National Health Association
for her extensive work with the concept and data collection, in addition to
being the project leader of the intervention. Our warm thanks also to Grethe
Kjær Hasselblad, Division of Mental Health, National Institute of Public Health,
who provided administrative, technical and material support. We are also
grateful to the participants for their cooperation, including all of those who
helped with home visits and performed data collection, as well as the senior
centres that facilitated the project.
The study was funded by grant no. 2006-2-0134 from the Extra Foundation
for Health and Rehabilitation.

Received: 2 May 2011 Accepted: 23 April 2012
Published: 20 May 2012

References
1. Smit F, Ederveen A, Cuijpers P, Deeg D, Beekman A: Opportunities for
cost-effective prevention of late-life depression: an epidemiological
approach. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006, 63:290–296.
2. Stordal E, Bjartveit KM, Dahl NH, Kruger O, Mykletun A, Dahl AA: Depression
in relation to age and gender in the general population: the


Nord-Trondelag Health Study (HUNT). Acta Psychiatr Scand 2001,
104:210–216.
3. Stordal E, Bjelland I, Dahl AA: Mykletun A: Anxiety and depression in
individuals with somatic health problems. The Nord-Trondelag Health
Study (HUNT). Scand J Prim Health Care 2003, 21:136–141.
4. Wittchen HU, Jacobi F: Size and burden of mental disorders in Europeùa
critical review and appraisal of 27 studies. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol
2005, 15:357–376.
5. Üstün TB, Ayuso-Mateos JL, Chatterji S, Mathers C, Murray CJL: Global
burden of depressive disorders in the year 2000. Br J Psychiatry 2004,
184:386.
6. Bruce ML: Psychosocial risk factors for depressive disorders in late life.
Biol Psychiatry 2002, 52:175–184.
7. Luanaigh CË, Lawlor BA: Loneliness and the health of older people. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 2008, 23:1213–1221.
8. Cattan M, White M, Bond J, Learmouth A: Preventing social isolation and
loneliness among older people: a systematic review of health promotion
interventions. Ageing and society 2005, 25:41–67.
9. Ollonqvist K, Palkeinen H, Aaltonen T, Pohjolainen T, Puukka P, Hinkka K,
et al: Alleviating loneliness among frail older people Findings from a
randomised controlled trial. The International Journal of Mental Health
Promotion 2008, 10:26–34.
10. Leveille SG, Wagner EH, Davis C, Grothaus L, Wallace J, LoGerfo M, et al:
Preventing disability and managing chronic illness in frail older adults: A
randomized trial of a community-based partnership with primary care.
J Am Geriatr Soc 1998, 46:1191.
11. Wallace JI, Buchner DM, Grothaus L, Leveille S, Tyll L, LaCroix AZ, et al:
Implementation and effectiveness of a community-based health
promotion program for older adults. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A
1998, 53:M301.
12. Phelan EA, Williams B, Leveille S, Snyder S, Wagner EH, LoGerfo JP:
Outcomes of a community-based dissemination of the Health
Enhancement Program. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002, 50:1519–1524.
13. Barnett PA, Gotlib IH: Psychosocial Functioning and Depression Distinguishing Among Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequences.
Psychol Bull 1988, 104:97–126.
14. Beekman ATF, Penninx B, Deeg DJH, Ormel J, Braam AW, Van Tilburg W:
Depression and physical health in later life: results from the Longitudinal
Aging Study Amsterdam (LASA). J Affect Disord 1997,
46:219–231.
15. Fratiglioni L, Winblad B, von Strauss E: Prevention of Alzheimer's disease
and dementia, Major findings from the Kungsholmen Project. Physiol
Behav 2007, 92:98–104.
16. Golden J, Conroy RM, Bruce I, Denihan A, Greene E, Kirby M, et al:
Loneliness, social support networks, mood and well-being in
community-dwelling elderly. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2009,
24:694–700.
17. Kawachi I, Berkman LF: Social ties and mental health. J Urban Health 2001,
78:458–467.
18. Mowe M, Bohmer T, Kindt E: Reduced nutritional status in an elderly
population (> 70 y) is probable before disease and possibly contributes
to the development of disease [published erratum appears in Am J Clin
Nutr 1994 Aug; 60 (2): 298]. Am J Clin Nutr 1994,
59:317.
19. Vink D, Aartsen MJ, Schoevers RA: Risk factors for anxiety and depression
in the elderly: A review. J Affect Disord 2008, 106:29–44.
20. Pettersen AM, Laake K: Hvem bruker eldresenteret? hva er viktig for å ta
senteret i bruk? Oslo. In Nasjonalforeningens forskergruppe i geriatri
Universitetsseksjonen. Ullevål sykehus: Geriatrisk avdeling; 2000.
21. Pettersen AM, Laake K: Hukommelsesvansker, angst og depresjon hos
hjemmeboende eldre. In Oslo: Nasjonalt kompetansesenter for aldersdemens
Nasjonalforeningens forskergruppe i geriatri. 2003.
22. Sommerfeldt E, Bevefelt E: Eldresentre i utvikling. Oslo: Norsk Gerontologisk
Institutt; 1993.
23. Thorsen K: Levekår, ressurser og bruk av eldresenter. Oslo: Norsk Gerontologisk
Institutt; 1983.
24. Renskaug IT: Rehablitering i eldre senter. Rehabilitation in a senior centre.
2008. 2005/3/0266 edition: Nasjonalforenigen for folkehelsen.
25. Boen H, Dalgard OS, Johansen R, Nord E: Socio-demographic, psychosocial
and health characteristics of Norwegian senior centre users: A
cross-sectional study. Scand J Public Health 2010.


-----

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 2318/12/20

26. Schulz K, Altman D, Moher D: CONSORT 2010 Statement: updated
guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. BMC Med 2010,
8:18.
27. Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, Montori V, Gotzsche PC, Devereaux PJ,
et al: CONSORT 2010 Explanation and Elaboration: updated guidelines
for reporting parallel group randomised trials. Br Med J 2010, 340:c869.
28. European Union Public Health Information System. Dalgard OS: Social
support: occurence; 2009.
29. Korkeila J, Lehtinen V, Bijl R, Dalgard OS, Kovess V, Morgan A, et al:
Establishing a set of mental health indicators for Europe. Scand J Public
Health 2003, 31:451–459.
30. Burns A, Lawlor B, Craig S: Assessment scales in old age psychiatry. Aust N
Z J Psychiatry 2000, 34:888–889.
31. Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelson ML, Mock JE, Erbaugh JK: An inventory for
measuring depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1961, 4:561.
32. Beck RA, Aaron T: Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression
Inventory: Twenty-five years of evaluation. Clin Psychol Rev 1988, 8:77–100.
33. Richter P, Werner J, Heerlein A, Kraus A, Sauer H: On the validity of the
Beck Depression Inventory. Psychopathology 2000, 31:160–168.
34. Nord E, Dalgard OS: Economic evaluation of a course in coping with
depression. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 2006, 126:586–588.
35. Battaglia MP, Izrael D, Hoaglin DC, Frankel MR: Tips and tricks for raking
survey data (aka sample balancing). Abt Associates 2004 :4740–4744.
36. Johansen R, Rognerud M, Sundet JM, Aarø LE: Observed Trends in Mental
Health - a Strategy to Adjust for Nonresponse Bias and Demographic
Changes in Survey Data. 2010. submitted paper.
37. Blazer DG: Depression in late life: review and commentary. Focus 2009,
7:118.
38. Haringsma R, Engels GI, Cuijpers P, Spinhoven P: Effectiveness of the
Coping With Depression (CWD) course for older adults provided by the
community-based mental health care system in the Netherlands:
a randomized controlled field trial. Int Psychogeriatr 2005, 18:307–325.


**Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central**
**and take full advantage of:**

**• Convenient online submission**

**• Thorough peer review**

**• No space constraints or color figure charges**

**• Immediate publication on acceptance**

**• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar**

**• Research which is freely available for redistribution**

Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit


-----

