Article 
An Efﬁcient System for Eye Movement Desensitization 
and Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy: A Pilot Study 
Nicolae Goga 1, Costin-Anton Boiangiu 2 
Marius-Valentin Drăgoi 1, Ramona Popovici 1,3, Ionatan Octavian Gancea 2, Mihail Cristian Pîrlog 4 
Ramona Cristina Popa 1 and Anton Hadăr 5 







Faculty of Engineering in Foreign Languages, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Splaiul Independentei 313, 
060032 Bucharest, Romania; n.goga@rug.nl (N.G.); andrei.vasilateanu@upb.ro (A.V.); 
marius.valentin.dragoi@gmail.com (M.-V.D.); ramona.popovici@drd.unibuc.ro (R.P.); 
popa.ramona91@yahoo.com (R.C.P.) 
Faculty of Automatics and Computer Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Splaiul Independentei 313, 
060032 Bucharest, Romania; costin.boiangiu@cs.pub.ro (C.-A.B.); ganceatoni@gmail.com (I.O.G.) 
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Bucharest, 90 Panduri Street, 
050657 Bucharest, Romania 


200349 Craiova, Romania; mihai.pirlog@gmail.com 
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Robotics, University Politehnica of Bucharest, 
Splaiul Independentei 313, 060032 Bucharest, Romania; anton.hadar@upb.ro 

Abstract: In this paper, we describe an actuator-based EMDR (eye movement desensitization and 
reprocessing) virtual assistant system that can be used for the treatment of participants with traumatic 
memories. EMDR is a psychological therapy designed to treat emotional distress caused by a 
traumatic event from the past, most frequently in post-traumatic stress disorder treatment. We 
implemented a system based on video, tactile, and audio actuators which includes an artiﬁcial 
intelligence chatbot, making the system capable of acting autonomously. We tested the system on a 
sample of 31 participants. Our results showed the efﬁciency of the EMDR virtual assistant system 
in reducing anxiety, distress, and negative cognitions and emotions associated with the traumatic 
memory. There are no such systems reported in the existing literature. Through the present research, 
we ﬁll this gap by describing a system that can be used by patients with traumatic memories. 


Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is an eight-phase psycholog- 
ical therapy designed to treat emotional distress caused by traumatic events from the past, 
most frequently in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD is a serious disorder that 
can be developed by people after exposure to severe stressors that generate a series of symp- 
toms such as avoidance of reminders of the event, hyperarousal, or vivid ﬂashbacks [1]. 
During the therapy, the clinician uses diverse bilateral stimuli such as a light that changes 
positions, the alternation of sounds between speakers, or the vibration of devices held by 
the patient in their hands, in order to help the client process a distressing experience. 
Although studies have shown that EMDR is an efﬁcient method of intervention for 
different mental conditions, there are still controversies regarding the working mechanism. 
The studies so far on EMDR efﬁciency and the role of eye movement have captured variable 
results [2], which makes the emergence of more rigorous research an imperative [3]. In this 
context, the tools for self-administration of EMDR therapy can facilitate the understanding 
of the role of eye movement in EMDR therapy. 


























(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1) 
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) 






A study from 2012 [4] found that intervention through EMDR helped the participants 
in coping with a psychotic disorder and PTSD. Also, another study showed that EMDR had 
better results in treating speciﬁc symptoms than other types of therapies [5]. A more recent 
meta-analysis showed that EMDR treatment is efﬁcient in reducing PTSD symptoms [6] 
and other mental health problems such as anxiety and depression [7,8]. Therefore, EMDR 
therapy has proven to be effective in treating trauma and PTSD. Moreover, EMDR may 
be effective for any psychological disorder that can be linked with trauma or adverse life 
events [9]. 
In the light of this information, an actuator-based virtual assistant trained to perform 
EMDR therapy could be a useful tool for psychologists in the process of treating their 
patients. It can also become a tool used by the general population for the treatment of 
minor psychological disorders linked with trauma. The artiﬁcial intelligence engine chatbot 
developed for the presented system was based on the eight essential phases of EMDR 
described by Francine Shapiro [10]: 
1. The ﬁrst phase involves the investigation of the client’s past in order to design the 
treatment plan. This includes the evaluation of all clinical aspects (symptoms, unhealthy 
behaviors, and characteristics) and the selection made by the therapist of the issues that 
need to be addressed (events that affect the emotional life, dysfunction triggers, and new 
positive behaviors/attitudes). 
2. In the preparation phase, the therapist explains the basic theory of EMDR and the 
intervention procedures with the aim of setting the expectation of the outcome, which also 
includes the presentation of the possible disturbances that could appear. The client is also 
empowered with some affect regulation strategies. 
3. The evaluation phase consists of the application of two evaluation instruments, the 
Subjective Units of Distress (SUD) and Validity of Cognition (VOC) scales, for assessing the 
negative cognition and the emotional response of the client to the investigated event. 
4. The desensitization phase concerns the client’s emotional response, the evoked 
insights, and appropriate associations. In this phase, the client is bilaterally stimulated 
until the SUD level signiﬁcantly decreases. 
5. The installation phase aims at cognitive integration and restructuration. One 
essential aspect of this phase is the installation and strengthening of a more functional, 
positive cognition. 
6. The sixth phase involves an analysis of the persisting body sensations which implies 
a mental body scan in order to identify any residual disturbance. Thus, the client will be 
able to process any unprocessed information. 
7. The seventh phase includes discussions and prepares the client for the closure of 
the session. Its purpose is to bring the client to a state of equilibrium between the sessions. 
8. The last phase is the re-evaluation of the progress at the beginning of each session. 
Interaction with the user includes both audio and writing communication. Thus, the 
present research describes an EMDR virtual assistant system based on video, tactile, and 
audio actuators which includes an artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot that can be used in the 
autonomous treatment of traumatic memories. 
With this background, the aim of our paper is to deliver an EMDR tool fully capable 
of assisting a user in performing efﬁcient therapy and doing so without the intervention 
of a trained clinician. We developed a pilot study for testing our system, in which 31 
participants were included. We found that our EMDR virtual system is efﬁcient and can be 
used for the reduction of symptoms associated with PTSD and anxiety. 

Since EMDR therapy has proven to be efﬁcient in the treatment of PTSD, recommended 
by the World Health Organization in 2013, it has also begun to be used in the treatment of 
resistant disorders, such as PTSD with comorbid psychosis [11], in which case it obtained a 
reduction of paranoid thoughts and allowed patients to reach remission in the psychotic 
disorder in a shorter period of time. For the treatment of borderline personality disor- 


der [12], there had to be several adaptations made from the standard procedure. The same 
was done for people suffering from a narcissistic personality disorder [13] or comorbid 
bipolar I and II disorders [14]. 
EMDR therapy has been associated with technology since its earliest description. 
There was always an interest in the development of new devices to assist with the bilateral 
stimuli involved in the therapy process, whether these were devices designed to help in 
the visual phase of treatment, such as headsets and glasses, or devices designed to assist 
in the tactile therapy. Lately, with the advance in technology and the major development 
of mobile devices, there is interest in developing mobile applications that can provide the 
required treatment with as little involvement from a trained psychotherapist as possible. 
The literature on this topic is, however, scarce. We present below a brief summary of the 
existing studies and their major results. 
In [15], Alulema Flores et al. present a prototype that can be used in EMDR therapy. It 
is a modular design containing three modules, each providing visual, auditory, and tactile 
sequences, integrated with an Android interface that controls the speed of the sequences, 
the type of sound, and the intensity of vibration of the tactile module. The software is 
intended for the use of the psychotherapist, who can either use a predeﬁned routine or 
create a personalized program for the patient by controlling all three modules. The structure 
of the project consists of an Android device that controls the sound module and the IOIO for 
Android DEV-10748 motherboard [16] that controls both the visual and the tactile module. 
For each person, the application requires selecting a therapy type: the visual therapy lights 
the red LEDs on the glasses in different sequences, the touch therapy sends pulses to each 
hand at a time, and the sound therapy option plays from 10 different sounds in the left 
or right ear. Each type of therapy has an automatic and manual mode of functioning. In 
the manual mode, the psychotherapist can choose the frequency of the sequence (from 
0 to 6 s) and also the side (left or right) that the sequence is displayed. In its conclusion, the 
paper [15] stated that the usage of the described system helped to reduce the processing 
time of patient cases and the duration of a therapy session, which decreased to 20–30 min 
per session. Also, when the system was used, it was observed that the level of physical 
exhaustion was reduced by 90 percent and mental exhaustion by 75 percent. However, no 
artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot was included in this system that could allow it to function 
fully autonomously—the intervention of the psychotherapist was still needed. 
The system described by Jeffery D. Eastman in [17] is designed to help people that are 
suffering from trauma. It is based on the display of a series of light sequences that allows 
the user to self-direct an EMDR session. The implementation of the proposed method of 
treatment is based on the exchange of data between the patient’s computer, where the 
user completes a survey form after each therapy session, and the server application that 
responds with another adapted sequence of lights or in some cases even with an audio 
sequence. The self-directed session starts with the user logging in to the client application, 
which requests authentication and an initial light sequence from the server. The server 
returns a response based on the user’s history and personal data. Each treatment sequence 
is followed by a survey form containing a 1 to 10 scale evaluation of the discomfort level, 
which is taken into consideration for the next self-directed light session, and the light 
patterns are changed accordingly. As compared to the previous system, there are no 
tactile-based actuators in this system that can make the EMDR more efﬁcient. 
The invention presented in [18] by Gazit et al. refers to a system and a series of methods 
designed for remote EMDR therapy. The described system includes a therapist platform, 
a client platform, and an EMDR server which includes multiple processors, memory, a 
storage solution, and an operating system. The therapist platform presents a dashboard 
that allows the user to add client information such as personal data, preferences for bilateral 
stimulation, and notes regarding past therapy sessions, and controls different bilateral 
stimulation parameters. These parameters may refer to color, opacity, size, or background 
color in the case of video therapy; volume, sound effects, or the type of music for audio 
therapy; and for the tactile part, vibration intensity. For a better interpretation of the 


sessions’s the results of the session, the therapist’s computer has the function of displaying 
the level of correspondence between the client’s eye movement and the movement of the 
visual element on the screen. In this respect, an image processing algorithm running on the 
client’s platform can be used to correlate the movement of the visual bilateral stimulation 
and the client’s eye movement. Moreover, based on this implementation, the server may be 
conﬁgured to automatically modify the bilateral stimulation depending on the patient’s 
level of correspondence; for example, if the correspondence is better than 95%, the speed 
of the light display may be increased, while if it is less than 90%, the speed may decrease. 
This system does not include an intelligent chatbot. 
In [19], Burgio et al. present a system and a method that can be used in EMDR therapy. 
The system is based on a headset, e.g., a pair of glasses, with dark lenses to block out the 
external light, a receiver that receives signals from an external device, a microprocessor, 
and data storage. EMDR therapy also implies auditory stimulation that can be provided 
by a device integrated with the headset and tactile stimulation which can be produced by 
a clothing article having incorporated a series of vibrating units over the torso. Also, in 
some embodiments, the stimulator may have a transceiver that can coordinate with the 
headset. Before every treatment, a diagnosis is performed by measuring the reactivity of 
each patient using a transducer assembly, with the role of determining the appropriate 
treatment schedule. An example of a treatment procedure may observe the following 
ﬂow: ﬁrst, the patient’s neuromuscular strength is measured with the transducer, then a 
speciﬁc treatment schedule is applied which may involve tactile stimulation, applying a 
gentle massage over the neural lymphatic points; visual stimulation, provided through 
the headset by changing the eye’s focus direction by displaying different light patterns; or 
auditory stimulation. During the treatment, the neuromuscular strength is remeasured. 
Then, depending on the weak signals that were determined, the patient may follow either a 
physical treatment, a mental treatment, or a chemical one. Next, the vibrating units and the 
headset are activated by the stimulator through an infrared signal and the treatment plan 
is applied. The process of the neuromuscular strength check is repeated, and an adapted 
treatment is followed again. This form of treatment that involves an automatic system is 
slightly different than the standard EMDR, but has proven to be cost-effective, enabling 
therapists to treat multiple patients at once. Also, the system can treat physical injuries, 
life accumulation stress disorder (LASD), and improve the patient’s overall mental and 
physical state. 
As compared to all these studies, the system we propose has several improvements, 
such as the presence of an intelligent chatbot that can accompany the user during the EMDR 
intervention, which is developed in relation to the standardized procedures. Moreover, 
the presence of audio, video, and tactile-based actuators makes the EMDR system more 
efﬁcient [20,21]. Table 1 describes these differences in relation to similar systems. 
From a theoretical and practical point of view, this paper responds to some gaps 
reported in previous literature, having an important contribution [3]. Firstly, the proposed 
system is accompanied by an intelligent chatbot based on the protocol developed by 
F. Shapiro. In contrast, the other systems are based on a partial protocol or do not follow it 
at all and can only be used in the presence of a therapist. Other systems work remotely 
via an EMDR platform but still with the help of a person. As far as we know, there is no 
system similar to the one presented in this paper reported in the literature. 






Aleluma Flores 
et al. [15] 
Uses visual, tactile, and 
auditory therapy. 
Can be customized. 
Jeffrey D. 
Eastman [17] 
Visual stimulation can be 
dynamically adjusted based on 
feedback from the user. 

Selection of the intensity 
of stimuli. 
Implements only the 
desensitization phase in the 
EMDR protocol. 
Used only by 
psychotherapists/clinicians. 
The presence of a trained clinician 
is mandatory, cannot be used 
independently. 
Only visual and auditory stimuli. 
Audio is mostly used for playing 
relaxation sounds, very little 
information is given about 
bilateral audio stimulation. 
Only patent, not validated. 
No intelligent chatbot. 
The system is designed to 
intermediate the relation between 
client and clinician and can be 
used remotely but requires the 
intervention of a therapist for 
setting the parameters. 
Differences between Our System 
and Related Work 
Presence of intelligent chatbot 
which implements the preparation, 
evaluation, and ending phases in 
the EMDR protocol. 
The system has the potential to be 
autonomous, the presence of a 
trained clinician not being 
mandatory. 
Presence of intelligent chatbot 
which implements the preparation, 
evaluation, and ending phases in 
the EMDR protocol. 
Audio, video, and tactile-based 
actuators that make the EMDR 
system more efﬁcient. 
The proposed system has the 
potential to be autonomous. 

Opaque glasses that block light 
from reaching the eyes and thus 
prevent simultaneous exposure to 
other visual stimuli. 
Uses chemical stimulation. 
The system is dependent on the 
presence of the therapist 
Different from the standardized 
EMDR procedure 
Only patent, not validated. 
The proposed system includes an 
intelligent chatbot offering 
autonomy. 
Designed in relation to 
standardized EMDR procedures. 
Secondly, because there is a constant need to test the potential effectiveness of self- 
administered EMDR therapy [3], this study aimed to address this need in testing the 
feasibility and efﬁciency of a virtual assistant for EMDR in reducing negative symptoms 
associated with traumatic memories. 
3. Materials and Methods 
3.1. Materials 

• 
• 
• 

Video stimulus using a rendered ball on a graphical display; 
Audio stimulus simulating a moving sound source; 
Tactile stimulation using vibration motors placed on the user using bracelets—stimuli 
are synchronized to maximize the effectiveness; 
A chatbot for communicating with the user according to the EMDR protocol, allowing 
the system to function autonomously, i.e., in the absence of a therapist. 
In Figure 1 we have a view of the general architecture of the system. We have chosen 
a component-based, highly modular approach so the system can be deployed in different 
conﬁgurations. The proposed system is composed of the following modules: video, audio, 
tactile, and chatbot, which can work independently or together, depending on the user 
preferences and deployment options. 


The chatbot module is the central command module of the system, which coordinates 
and synchronizes all other modules, and allows users to interact with the system by text 
and audio (through the audio module). The chatbot is the kernel of the system because 
all processing decisions are made inside of it. Regarding user interaction, the module is 
programmed to describe each step of the treatment and asks a series of questions, according 
to the EMDR protocol, to evaluate the negative cognition and the emotional response of 
the user to a traumatic event. In the Figure A1 (see Appendix A), we present the interface 
of the EMDR system with the users and an example scenario. This chat window pairs the 
discussion between the artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot and users. 
From the implementation point of view, we have developed the chatbot kernel in 
Python using different natural language processing algorithms, such as preprocessing, 
lemmatization and vectorization, and intelligent pattern matching based on cosine simi- 
larity. Chatbot intents are organized based on the stage of the protocol, with the purpose 
of giving contextual feedback to the user but also guiding her/him from stage to stage. 
The textual input from the user is preprocessed by removing stop words and lemmati- 
zation. Lemmatization is the process of ﬁnding out the dictionary form, or lemma, of a 
word, depending on the context. The WordNet lemmatizer was used for this task. Since 
most machine learning algorithms work on numeric input, the preprocessed text is then 
vectorized, by using a term frequency inverse document frequency vectorizer from Python. 
The vectorized form is compared using an intelligent pattern match based on cosine 
similarity with the available patterns for a given intent. The highest match maps to a 
response outputted to the user. 

The video module is used in the desensitization phase to simulate the therapist’s hand 
movement by creating an output window that displays a red ball moving horizontally from 
one side of the screen to the other. The following parameters can be modiﬁed: window 
width and height and ball speed. Figure 2 presents the parameters of the motion, and 
Figure A2 (see Appendix A) displays the movement of the ball during the EMDR session. 






























 
 
 




The audio module has two responsibilities: ﬁrstly, to render audio for the chatbot 
interaction, the procedure descriptions, and the questions, and secondly, for the bilateral 
audio stimulation in the desensitization phase. This module can be deactivated for users 
with hearing impairments. 
For the user interaction, the module can use pre-recorded audio clips by therapists but 
can also use a text-to-speech function to transform text input to audio output. This allows 
developers to easily add more interaction scenarios and provides more personalized and 
dynamic behavior, with text generated at runtime by the chatbot. 


The tactile module is used in the desensitization phase to provide bilateral tactile 
stimulation, using vibration motors attached to the wrists of the patient, to complete the 
EMDR treatment experience, enhance the video and audio stimulations, and make the 
system usable by users with hearing and visual impairments. 
The overall ﬂow of the entire system is presented in Figure 3 and is based on the 
EMDR protocol described in the Introduction section. The protocol is adapted so that the 
questions and evaluations typically carried out by the therapist are now implemented by 
the chatbot module (integrated with the audio module), while the desensitization phase is 
implemented in the audio, video, and tactile modules. We used a UML activity diagram to 
represent the actions conducted by each module in response to the patient input. 






















 
 
 




All modules were implemented in Python, with the chatbot module acting as a 
coordinator and also being the entry point of the application. Different libraries were 
used for the speciﬁc modules, such as PySimpleGui, time, sys, os for video module, gTTS 
text-to-audio library, playsound library for the audio module, NLTK, sklearn, and WordNet 
for the chatbot kernel. 

In Figure 4, the tactile module implements tactile stimulation by using two vibration 
motors pressed to the user’s wrists using bracelets. The motor used is the same as the 
one in [22], a small, lightweight ﬂat vibration motor controlled by a Raspberry Pi board 
(or similar). 

The system can be entirely deployed on a Raspberry Pi (or similar) board, with an 
attached video and audio output, and the vibration motors attached to the RPI general- 
purpose I/O pins. If the selected conﬁguration does not include the tactile module, then 
the system can also be deployed on a desktop/laptop computer. It is preferable to use 
headphones instead of speakers for bilateral audio stimulation. Figure 5 shows how 
somebody may use the EMDR system. 
 









 
 
 


 

Figure 5. The participant is prepared for intervention. On the left side of the ﬁgure, we see how the 
user is ﬁxing the actuators, while on the right side of the ﬁgure we see how the user is participating 
in an EMDR session. 
In the current pilot study, we tested the feasibility of an actuator-based EMDR virtual 
assistant system in replacing a trained clinician in the EMDR procedure and making the 
system capable of acting autonomously. Thus, we wanted to see if there were improvements 
regarding the cognitive and emotional response in relation to traumatic memories after the 
participants used the virtual assistant. 
 
 

A total of 31 participants were included in the pilot study, 14 males and 17 females, 
with ages between 19 and 33 (Mage = 26.2, SD = 4.21). Given the nature of the study and 
given the fact that this pilot study is an initial step in exploring an innovative application, 
we followed the recommendation of Leon et al. [23] in recruiting and selecting participants, 
who emphasize that a pilot sample size is based on the pragmatics of recruitment and 
the necessity for examining the feasibility of the application. Participants were volunteers 
that responded to an online announcement and agreed to participate in a single session of 
intervention for reducing stress and anxiety associated with a potentially traumatic event 
from the past. In order to assess whether the participants were eligible in accordance with 
Shapiro’s recommendations, they were interviewed by two psychologists [10]. For inclusion 
in the study, participants needed to be 18–40 years of age, and to have at least medium scores 
on the Impact of Events Scale-Revised (IES-R) and the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). 
Participants were excluded from the study if they scored very high on both measures, if 
they were suicidal, taking psychotropic medication, or had a diagnosed psychological 
condition. After the initial assessment, four participants were excluded (Table 2). All 
participants were informed about the study and signed a consent statement. The study was 
approved by the Committee of Ethics and Academic and Scientiﬁc Deontology, University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova. 





























 
 


 
 

The system can be entirely deployed on a Raspberry Pi (or similar) board, with an 
 
 



attached video and audio output, and the vibration motors attached to the RPI general- 
purpose I/O pins. If the selected configuration does not include the tactile module, then 
the system can also be deployed on a desktop/laptop computer. It is preferable to use 
headphones instead of speakers for bilateral audio stimulation. Figure 5 shows how 
somebody may use the EMDR system. 






















 
 

 
 











Male 
Female 
High school diploma 
College degree 
Master’s degree 
Doctorate (Ph.D) 

No treatment in the last 6 months 
Under treatment in the last 6 months 
Months since the 
traumatic event 
Less than 6 months 
Between 6 and 12 months 
Between 12 and 24 months 
Between 24 and 36 months 
More than 36 months 

(18–40 years of age; at least medium 
scores on IES-R and STAI) 

(Scored very high on both measures; 
suicidal; taking psychotropic medication; 
diagnosed psychological condition) 

45.2 
54.8 
12.9 
32.3 
28.4 
6.5 
74.2 
25.8 
3.2 
41.9 
19.4 
22.6 
12.9 


14 
17 
4 
10 
15 
2 
23 
8 
1 
13 
6 
7 
4 



The designed intervention consisted of four phases of bilateral stimulation (visual, 
auditive, and actuator-based). The ﬁrst three phases were designed with the aim of reducing 
the intensity of emotions and beliefs associated with the traumatic event. The fourth 
phase was introduced to install a positive belief about that event. In addition to visual 
stimulation, audio and tactile stimulation were used simultaneously, as auditory, and tactile 
stimuli have been shown to enhance the effect and increase the effectiveness of EMDR 
intervention [20,21]. 
The procedure was applied as follows. The participants were informed about the 
EMDR therapy and instructed on how to use the application. Participants were invited to 
think about a traumatic event from the past that caused them discomfort, where they failed 
to overcome it. After accessing the traumatic memory, the IES-R and STAI instruments 
were applied in the pre-test condition. After the discussion with a specialist, and after 
the completion of the instruments on the pre-test assessment phase, the participants self- 
administered the intervention through the application. After the initial assessment, we 
eliminated four participants because their scores on the IES-R and STAI were very high, 
and they needed specialized professional treatment. In Table 3 we can see the description 
of the applied protocol in detail. 

















Participants were informed about EMDR therapy and how bilateral 
sensory stimulation helps process traumatic memories. It was mentioned 
that they could withdraw at any time if they were not comfortable with 
the procedure. At the same time, the participants went through an 
adjustment session with bilateral stimulations. 
The application requested demographic information (gender and age) 
and the agreement for participation. 
Through intelligent chatbot guiding, the participant was led to access 
overwhelming emotions that sometimes interfere with their usual activity 
and primary events recorded in memory associated with overwhelming 
emotions. The participant was also guided to visualize that event 
mentally as a movie scene. Once the oldest memory associated with those 
emotions was identiﬁed, the participant was asked to describe it brieﬂy. 
The participant was intelligently guided to identify the bodily sensations 
associated with that event (tension, tremor, cold, heat, pressure, or 
sounds). The information obtained was noted and recorded by the 
application. 
Identiﬁcation of negative beliefs (about oneself, others, the world, or life 
in general) caused by the traumatic event. 
Assessment of the intensity of negative cognitions/beliefs and emotions 
associated with that event (VOC and SUD scale) 
Application of bilateral stimulation (audio, video, and sensory) in several 
sessions of four minutes each and assessment of the intensity of 
cognitions and emotions after each session of bilateral stimulation done 
through the guidance of the chatbot. 
Identifying and installing positive cognition through a new session of 
bilateral stimulation. 
The intelligent chatbot reminds the participant that they can beneﬁt from 
psychological support. 
The participant can share their impressions related to the experience of 
using the application. 
3.4. Instruments 
3.4.1. Primary Outcome Measures 
Impact of Event Scale-Revised (IES-R). The IES-R is a 22-item self-report questionnaire 
used to assess subjective distress caused by a recent traumatic event or a speciﬁc one. The 
IES-R items are rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“extremely”) 
and related to symptoms associated with PTSD. The IES-R scale can have a total raw 
score ranging from 0 to 88 and a raw score for three subscales: Intrusion, Avoidance, 
and Hyperarousal subscales. For our study, we calculated the total score in order to 
assess the severity of the symptoms [24,25]. The scale has good psychometric properties 
being validated for the Romanian population and is one of the most used instruments for 
assessing traumatic events [26–28]. In this study, Cronbach’s alpha varied from 0.87 in the 
pre-intervention phase to 0.72 for the post-intervention condition. 
The State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) is a 40-item self-reported instrument used 
to measure trait and state anxiety and was designed by Spielberger et al. [29]. The scale 
consists of two separate subscales each of 20 items that measure the state factor and the trait 
one. In our study, we used the ﬁrst subscale which measures the state factor because this 
scale can be used to measure the level of anxiety regarding a situation, event, or traumatic 
memory from the past. All items are rated on a 4-point scale ranging from “Almost Never” 
to “Almost Always”, with higher scores indicating higher levels of anxiety. The scale was 


validated for the Romanian population [30]. In our study, Cronbach’s alpha was 0.88 in the 
pre-intervention condition, and 0.71 for the post-intervention condition. 






 
 
 





Subjective Units of Disturbance (SUD) scale is a single-item measure and self-reporting 
scale used for measuring the level of subjective distress and intensity of the traumatic 
memory with answers ranging from 0 to 10, where 0 refers to a lack of disturbances and 10 
to the worst possible. 
The Validity of Cognition (VOC) scale is a single-item measure and self-report scale 
and shows the level of belief in a positive or a negative cognition on a scale ranging from 
1 to 7, where a score of 1 means a lack of belief in a particular cognition, and a score of 
7 means a full belief in it. 
4. Results 
4.1. Primary Outcome Measures 
The results provided in Tables 4 and 5 show that there was a signiﬁcant difference in 
scores for the pre-test condition (M = 39.8, SD = 14.07) and post-test (M = 13.7, SD = 5.7) 
measured with the IES-R scale: t (30) = 10.5, p < 0.001, and a large effect size (d = 1.89). 


IES-R Pre-, IES-R Post- 
STAI Pre-, STAI Post- 
10.521 
11.759 

30 
30 




<0.001 
<0.001 
1.890 
2.112 
1.292 
1.469 
2.476 
2.744 


IES-R Pre- 
IES-R Post- 
STAI Pre- 
STAI Post- 

31 
31 
31 
31 

39.806 
13.742 
56.774 
33.839 

14.077 
5.785 
8.330 
4.620 

2.528 
1.039 
1.496 
0.830 
Also, there was a signiﬁcant difference in scores for the pre-test condition (M = 56.7, 
SD = 8.3) and post-test (M = 33.8, SD = 4.6) regarding anxiety scores: t (30) = 11.7, p < 0.001, 
and a large effect size (d = 2.11) of intervention in reducing anxiety associated with the 
traumatic event. In other words, the intervention through the virtual assistant system for 
EMDR had a signiﬁcant effect and contributed to reducing the distress associated with the 
traumatic event, and reduced the anxiety associated with it. 

We used the VOC and SUD scales in order to assess whether there were improvements 
in the EMDR procedure on the negative cognitions and emotions associated with the 
traumatic event. The results indicate a signiﬁcant increase in VOC scores: t (30) = 14.4, 
p < 0.001, which reﬂects a positive increase of positive cognition regarding the traumatic 
event (Table 6). Also, we notice that there was a signiﬁcant pre- to post-intervention 
reduction in scores for SUD: t (30) = 75.9, p < 0.001 (Table 5). Table 7 also shows that 
the higher scores decreased signiﬁcantly at the end of the intervention. These results 
indicate that the self-administered protocol has good potential and is efﬁcient for reducing 
the negative cognitions and emotions associated with the traumatic memory even in the 
absence of the human factor. 



VOC Pre-, VOC Post - 
SUD Pre-, SUD Post - 

14.471 
75.904 

30 
30 


31 
31 
31 
31 

2.968 
6.097 
9.161 
0.774 

0.657 
0.887 
0.735 
0.717 
VOC Pre- 
VOC Post- 
SUD Pre- 
SUD Post- 


<0.001 
<0.001 

0.118 
0.156 
0.132 
0.129 
The goal of this study was to develop an EMDR virtual assistant capable of guiding a 
user in performing an efﬁcient therapy with minimal intervention from a trained clinician. 
Given the fact that the study is a pilot one, the process was supervised by trained clinicians 
who did not intervene in the process but were prepared to do so if needed. 
The results suggest the efﬁciency of self-administered EMDR through the developed 
system pre- and post-intervention. Our study showed a statistically signiﬁcant reduction 
of symptoms associated with PTSD and anxiety. Also, the self-administration of treatment 
using bilateral actuator, visual, and tactile stimulation appears to produce a signiﬁcant 
decrease in symptoms associated with traumatic memories. The intervention contributes 
both to the reduction of negative affections associated with traumatic events and helps in 
changing these cognitions with more functional ones. 
Compared to other systems that offer the possibility of EMDR interventions, such as 
the one proposed by Aleluma Flores et al. [15], our virtual system is more autonomous, 
being developed following the EMDR protocol, and the presence of a clinician is not 
mandatory. In addition, the main difference from other systems [17–19] lies in the usefulness 
of the intelligent chatbot together with the multi-actuator implementation that can have an 
impact on the efﬁciency of the intervention. 
Our results are in line with interventions that used traditional EMDR [8,31]. Even if 
the intervention involved only one session, our ﬁndings are similar to those of previous 
research, which showed that even after a single session of EMDR, symptoms decreased 
signiﬁcantly, effects of the intervention being constant after follow-up [32–37]. Moreover, 
this decrease in terms of symptoms was also found in other research where participants 
were treated remotely and the intervention was self-administered [3,38]. 
In explaining our results, as noted by Kutz et al. [37], we must take into consideration 
two main variables: the former exposure of participants to trauma and the presence of 
some risk factors that can inﬂuence the effect of the intervention [35]. In this respect, 
those who are exposed to a single traumatic event and who have experienced moderate 
symptoms associated with PTSD or anxiety are more prone to have a rapid response in 
terms of recovery, compared to those who have a history of risk factors or pre-existing 
vulnerabilities such as multiple exposures to signiﬁcant trauma [37]. 
Also, it is important to note that in relation to the virtual assisted treatment, the 
participants were curious about how the intervention would proceed, while some were 
interested in the possibility of working through their traumatic memories without exposing 
themselves to another person. Therefore, our system could be very useful in the context 
generated by COVID-19, given that most of the activities are developed in the online 
environment, and the incidence of depression, anxiety, insomnia, and PTSD has increased 
substantially [39]. Because of the impact that COVID-19 has on individuals and in the 
context of increasing demands for remote intervention [40], the possibility of using such a 
system complements the lack of human resources and at the same time makes psychological 
intervention possible where, because of the restriction measures, face-to-face interaction 


with a specialist is not possible. Moreover, our system is suitable for cases confronting mild 
psychological distress, which do not require the presence of a specialist. Thus, existing 
human resources can concentrate on those cases that require special attention. 
Based on the results from this study, we can state that having a system which offers 
an autonomous EMDR intervention is a clear possibility. The advantages include reduced 
costs and increased accessibility. However, it raises several questions about whether the 
technology can replace the human presence entirely. We are aware of the fact that there are 
some risks associated with this intervention, such as increased short-term distress for some 
participants. Still, studies have shown that such risks are minor and are based on anecdotal 
evidence [3]. We have improved our system by taking into account the recommendation 
for designing safe, affordable, and easy-to-use interventions for self-help that have the 
potential to be used by many people [41]. However, we consider that any intervention, 
whether autonomous or not, must be carried out in the ﬁrst phase under the supervision of 
a trained clinician and in compliance with the established protocol until large-scale testing. 
Participants did not report any problems in their interactions with the system. The 
usability of the system was considered good and whenever needed, explanations were 
given to the participants on how to use the system. Overall, the experience of the users in 
this respect—usability—was ranked as good. 
However, the results of our present research must be interpreted in the context of the 
pilot study that we have carried out, which is based on a limited number of participants 
and consequently has limitations in terms of generalizability. Even so, this is a ﬁrst step in 
addressing the need that has been reported in previous studies regarding the development 
of self-administered EMDR therapy that is developed in accordance with established 
protocols and underscores the need for more extensive research. We consider it as another 
step in studying the effectiveness of remotely administered interventions and a starting 
point for developing some clinical trials using the proposed system. 

In this paper, we described an EMDR virtual system based on video, tactile, and 
audio actuators used to treat anxiety, distress, and negative emotions associated with 
traumatic memories. Based on the results obtained, an autonomous EMDR intervention is 
a clear possibility. 
Our study evidences the efﬁcacy of an EMDR intervention for those who cannot 
have access to immediate psychological support, thus enabling their autonomy. Moreover, 
the established protocol was tested and positively conﬁrmed in providing the necessary 
guidance for an efﬁcient administration. As a result, it could be considered as a tool of 
self-support for people experiencing mild symptoms of PTSD. 
Moreover, one of the key ﬁndings of this study refers to the efﬁciency of such a system 
that offers the possibility of self-administration of an EMDR intervention, thus contributing 
to a limited body of research in this ﬁeld [3]. Even if there are some developments and 
applications for EMDR therapy, the majority of the systems are not autonomous and require 
the permanent intervention of a clinician or are used only as a tool in treatment [38,42]. 
Compared to other systems, the unique advantages of the present system are as follows: 
• 
The presence of an AI-driven chatbot, following the eight essential phases of EMDR [10], 
which can be further enhanced with new dialogue options and evaluation strategies; 
The ability to customize the interaction based on the patient’s characteristics. For 
example, using different stimulation methods (visual, audio, tactile) makes the EMDR 
procedure accessible for people with disabilities (severe visual impairment or even 
blindness, hearing loss); 
The possibility of applying EMDR treatments in a fully unsupervised manner, using 
the aforementioned chatbot, i.e., the assistance of a trained clinician is not required; 


Future work will include adding web-based functionality to the system to make it 
possible to be used by the public. Adding intelligent dialog robots, such as Siri, can 
realize autonomous communication and at the same time can accompany the user in 

accommodating the intervention. Moreover, the use of an automated system has the 
potential to enable future studies comparing EMDR with alternative treatments using sham 
stimulation, which could be valuable in helping to elucidate the efﬁcacy of the bilateral 
stimulation component of EMDR at a more general level. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P., M.-V.D., R.P., I.O.G., M.C.P., 
R.C.P. and A.H.; methodology, N.G., A.V., A.-F.P. and R.P.; software, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., M.-V.D., I.O.G. 
and R.C.P.; validation, N.G., A.-F.P. and R.P.; formal analysis, N.G., A.-F.P., and R.P.; investigation 
A.-F.P., M.-V.D., R.P. and I.O.G.; writing—original draft preparation, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P., 
M.-V.D., I.O.G., R.P., M.C.P. and A.H.; writing—review and editing, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P. and 
R.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Oana S, tefănescu for her great support and 
assistance with this paper. 



































 
 
 
 
 


Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the 
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Ethics Committee of The University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy of Craiova (149/07.12.2020). 

Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available upon request from the 
corresponding author. 




 




Shapiro, F. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing: Basic Principles, Protocols and Procedures, 2nd ed.; Guilford: 
New York, NY, USA, 2001; ISBN 978-1572306721. 
Sikes, C.; Sikes, V. EMDR: Why the controversy? Traumatology 2003, 9, 169–182. [CrossRef] 


2. 
3. Waterman, L.Z.; Cooper, M. Self-administered EMDR therapy: Potential solution for expanding the availability of psychotherapy 




8. 
9. 
10. 
for PTSD or unregulated recipe for disaster? BJPsych Open 2020, 6, e115. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Berg, D.P.V.D.; van der Gaag, M. Treating trauma in psychosis with EMDR: A pilot study. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 2012, 43, 
664–671. [CrossRef] 
Ironson, G.; Freund, B.; Strauss, J.; Williams, J. Comparison of two treatments for traumatic stress: A community-based study of 
EMDR and prolonged exposure. J. Clin. Psychol. 2001, 58, 113–128. [CrossRef] 
Cuijpers, P.; Van Veen, S.C.; Sijbrandij, M.; Yoder, W.; Cristea, I.A. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing for mental 
health problems: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2020, 49, 165–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Horst, F.; Den Oudsten, B.; Zijlstra, W.; de Jongh, A.; Lobbestael, J.; De Vries, J. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy vs. Eye Movement 
Desensitization and Reprocessing for Treating Panic Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Front. Psychol. 2017, 8, 1409. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Gauhar, Y.W.M. The Efﬁcacy of EMDR in the Treatment of Depression. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2016, 10, 59–69. [CrossRef] 
Logie, R. EMDR-more than just a therapy for PTSD? Psychologist 2014, 27, 512–517. 
Shapiro, F. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy, Third Edition: Basic Principles, Protocols, and Procedures; 
The Guilford Press: New York, NY, USA, 2018; ISBN 9781462532766. 















11. De Bont, P.A.J.M.; Berg, D.V.D.; Van Der Vleugel, B.M.; De Roos, C.; De Jongh, A.; van der Gaag, M.; Van Minnen, A.M. Prolonged 
exposure and EMDR for PTSDv. a PTSD waiting-list condition: Effects on symptoms of psychosis, depression and social 
functioning in patients with chronic psychotic disorders. Psychol. Med. 2016, 46, 2411–2421. [CrossRef] 


13. Mosquera, D.; Knipe, J. Understanding and Treating Narcissism with EMDR Therapy. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2015, 9, 46–63. [CrossRef] 
14. Novo, P.; Landin-Romero, R.; Radua, J.; Vicens, V.; Fernandez, I.; Garcia, F.; Pomarol-Clotet, E.; McKenna, P.J.; Shapiro, F.; 
Amann, B.L. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy in subsyndromal bipolar patients with a history of 
traumatic events: A randomized, controlled pilot-study. Psychiatry Res. 2014, 219, 122–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Flores, D.O.A.; Pineda-Lopez, F.; Aucatoma, E.L.G.; Cordova, F.E.I. Automated system on android platform for use in the 
implementation psychotherapeutic technical EMDR. In Proceedings of the 2014 XIX Symposium on Image, Signal Processing and 
Artiﬁcial Vision, Armenia, Colombia, 17–19 September 2014; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef] 



17. Eastman, J.D. Systems and Methods for Self Directed Stress Assistance. U.S. Patent 201201513119A1, 14 June 2012. 
18. Gazit, N.; Gazit, L.; Bar, T. Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy. U.S. Patent 20200086077A1, 19 March 2020. 
19. Burgio, P.A.; Spurrill, A.T.; Burgio, D.J. Method and Apparatus for Providing Automatic Eye Focused Therapy. U.S. Patent 



21. Rousseau, P.-F.; Boukezzi, S.; Garcia, R.; Chaminade, T.; Khalfa, S. Cracking the EMDR code: Recruitment of sensory, memory and 
emotional networks during bilateral alternating auditory stimulation. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 2020, 54, 818–831. [CrossRef] 
22. Vibration Motor 1027. Available online: www.vibrationmotors.com/product-catalogue/coin-vibration-motors/coin-vibration- 
























 
 


 
 
 
 


25. Weiss, D.S. The Impact of Event Scale: Revised. In Cross-Cultural Assessment of Psychological Trauma and PTSD; Wilson, J.P., 
Tang, C.S., Eds.; Springer International and Cultural Psychology Series; Springer Science & Business Media: Boston, MA, USA, 
2007; pp. 219–238. 






Med. 2013, 86, 144–149. 
Spielberger, C.D.; Gorsuch, R.L.; Lushene, R.; Vagg, P.R.; Jacobs, G.A. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory; Consulting 
Psychologists Press: Palo Alto, CA, USA, 1983. 


31. Balbo, M.; Cavallo, F.; Fernandez, I. Integrating EMDR in psychotherapy. J. Psychother. Integr. 2019, 29, 23–31. [CrossRef] 
32. 
Shapiro, F. Efﬁcacy of the eye movement desensitization procedure in the treatment of traumatic memories. J. Trauma. Stress 1989, 
2, 199–223. [CrossRef] 


34. Rogers, S.; Silver, S.M.; Goss, J.; Obenchain, J.; Willis, A.; Whitney, R.L. A Single Session, Group Study of Exposure and 
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing in Treating Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among Vietnam War Veterans: 
Preliminary Data. J. Anxiety Disord. 1999, 13, 119–130. [CrossRef] 


(EMDR). Int. J. Stress Manag. 2000, 7, 87–101. [CrossRef] 
Servan-Schreiber, D. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Is psychiatry missing the point? Psychiatr. Times 2000, 17, 
36–40. 


38. Tarquinio, C.; Brennstuhl, M.-J.; Rydberg, J.A.; Bassan, F.; Peter, L.; Tarquinio, C.L.; Auxéméry, Y.; Rotonda, C.; Tarquinio, P. 
EMDR in Telemental Health Counseling for Healthcare Workers Caring for COVID-19 Patients: A Pilot Study. Issues Ment. Health 
Nurs. 2021, 42, 3–14. [CrossRef] 
39. Pappa, S.; Ntella, V.; Giannakas, T.; Giannakoulis, V.G.; Papoutsi, E.; Katsaounou, P. Prevalence of depression, anxiety, and 
insomnia among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 2020, 88, 901–907. [CrossRef] 
40. McGrowder, D.A.; Miller, F.G.; Vaz, K.; Cross, M.A.; Anderson-Jackson, L.; Bryan, S.; Latore, L.; Thompson, R.; Lowe, D.; 
McFarlane, S.R.; et al. The Utilization and Beneﬁts of Telehealth Services by Health Care Professionals Managing Breast Cancer 
Patients during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Health 2021, 9, 1401. [CrossRef] 
41. Maxﬁeld, L. Low-Intensity Interventions and EMDR Therapy. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2021, 15, 86–98. [CrossRef] 
42. Marotta-Walters, S.A.; Jain, K.; Dinardo, J.; Kaur, P.; Kaligounder, S. A Review of Mobile Applications for Facilitating EMDR 

