

Efficacy of digital CBT for insomnia to reduce depression across 
demographic groups: a randomized trial 
Philip Cheng1, Annemarie I. Luik2, Cynthia Fellman-Couture1, Edward Peterson1, Christine 
L.M. Joseph1, Gabriel Tallent1, Kieulinh Michelle Tran1, Brian K. Ahmedani1, Timothy 
Roehrs1, Thomas Roth1, Christopher L. Drake1 
1Sleep Disorders and Research Center, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA 


Background.—Insomnia and depression are highly comorbid and mutually exacerbate clinical 
trajectories and outcomes. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) effectively reduces 
both insomnia and depression severity, and can be delivered digitally. This could sub-stantially 
increase the accessibility to CBT-I, which could reduce the health disparities related to insomnia; 
however, the efficacy of digital CBT-I (dCBT-I) across a range of demographic groups has not yet 
been adequately examined. This randomized placebo-controlled trial examined the efficacy of 
dCBT-I in reducing both insomnia and depression across a wide range of demographic groups. 
Methods.—Of 1358 individuals with insomnia randomized, a final sample of 358 were retained 
in the dCBT-I condition and 300 in the online sleep education condition. Severity of insomnia and 
depression was examined as a dependent variable. Race, socioeconomic status (SES; household 
income and education), gender, and age were also tested as independent moderators of treatment 
effects. 
Results.—The dCBT-I condition yielded greater reductions in both insomnia and depression 
severity than sleep education, with significantly higher rates of remission following treatment. 
Demographic variables (i.e. income, race, sex, age, education) were not significant moderators of 
the treatment effects, suggesting that dCBT-I is comparably efficacious across a wide range of 
demographic groups. Furthermore, while differences in attrition were found based on SES, 
attrition did not differ between white and black participants. 
Conclusions.—Results provide evidence that the wide dissemination of dCBT-I may effectively 
target both insomnia and comorbid depression across a wide spectrum of the population. 


Author for correspondence: Philip Cheng, pcheng1@hfhs.org. 
Clinical Trial Registry: clinicaltrials.gov; Clinical Trial Identifier: 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Psychol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 March 02. 



Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) has received significant attention as an 
effective non-pharmacological treatment for insomnia. In fact, the accumulation of 
substantial supporting evidence for the effectiveness of CBT-I (Brasure et al. 2016) has led 
to its recent recommendation as first-line treatment for chronic insomnia by the American 
College of Physicians (Qaseem et al. 2016). In addition to its effectiveness for insomnia, 
CBT-I also reduces concurrent depression without ostensibly targeting non-sleep depression 
symptoms (Manber et al. 2008, 2011; Taylor and Pruiksma, 2014). In fact, one study found 
that CBT-I alone resulted in a 37% decrease in depression severity (Manber et al. 2011). 
This has particular significance given the concordance between insomnia and depression, 
and their bi-directional relation (Lustberg and Reynolds III, 2000). Indeed, insomnia is a 
reliable precursor of depression (Mahowald, 2007; Li et al. 2010; McCall et al. 2010; 
Baglioni et al. 2011; Pigeon et al. 2012) and increases the risk for depression by nearly 
threefold compared to healthy sleepers (Zammit et al. 1999; National Institutes of Health, 
2005; Baglioni et al. 2011; Hajak et al. 2011; Kessler et al. 2011). Given the pervasive health 
impacts of both insomnia and depression, the opportunity to address both via CBT-I is 
advantageous and cost-effective. 
Despite its promise, CBT-I is not without limitations. These primarily include a scarcity of 
certified practitioners, geographic distance to providers, personal limitations on travel and 
costs, and the requirement of 6–8 weeks of direct patient contact. These factors can 
contribute to reduced usage and may remain as barriers even after treatment initiation 
(Vincent and Hameed, 2003; Espie et al. 2007). Above all, the limited availability of 
credentialed behavioral sleep medicine (BSM) clinicians is the most salient barrier: nearly 
20% of US adults experience insomnia (Roth et al. 2006), yet there are well under 1000 
board-certified BSM providers (Fields et al. 2013). The limited availability of certified 
clinicians is further compounded by disparities in access to health care (including CBT-I), 
which are particularly burdensome to those with lower socioeconomic status (SES) and 
racial minority groups. Furthermore, treatment dropout rates can be significantly higher in 
these vulnerable populations due to limited transport, insurance-coverage difficulties, child- 
care responsibilities, work schedule conflicts, and lack of knowledge about available 
treatments (Cooper and Conklin, 2015). Racial minorities also historically report significant 
distrust in the medical and health care systems, which may be associated with reduced 
health-seeking behaviors (Corbie-Smith et al. 2002; Armstrong et al. 2007; Kennedy et al. 
2007). 
To address some of these barriers of access to CBT-I, web and mobile technologies have 
been utilized to develop Internet-based or digital CBT-I (dCBT-I). dCBT-I confers the 
advantages of reduced cost, therapist time, and empowers end users with technology to 
manage their own care and health. Furthermore, there may be less stigma associated with a 
user-driven digital health intervention compared with traditional therapy, which may also 
increase the accessibility of insomnia treatment. Though dCBT-I is still nascent, support for 
its efficacy has been accumulating from randomized controlled trials comparing it with an 
attention control or face-to-face CBT-I (Ström et al. 2004; Ritterband et al. 2009, 2017; 
Espie et al. 2012; Zachariae et al. 2016). Other studies have also demonstrated the efficacy 




of dCBT-I programs in reducing depression, with effects sustained at both 6 and 18 months 
follow-up (Christensen et al. 2016; Batterham et al. 2017). This evidence suggests the 
potential for the wide dissemination of an accessible and low-cost intervention for both 
insomnia and depression. 
Ultimately, the success of dCBT-I is predicated on its effectiveness for a wide range of 
individuals; however, the efficacy of dCBT-I on insomnia and depression in populations with 
health disparities (minority and low income) has not yet been adequately examined. As such, 
the objective of this study was to test the efficacy of dCBT-I in reducing insomnia and 
depression across diverse demographic groups, including race, SES (income and education), 
gender, and age. Additional analyses also examined demographic differences in attrition. 
Recruitment for this study sampled from six hospitals, 38 medical centers, and subscribers 
of a major health insurance company in southeastern Michigan. Recruitment occurred 
between May and November of 2016, and utilized Internet-based methods, including health 
system-wide email newsletters, existing research databases (e.g. Qualtrics and prior research 
participants who have consented to future research recruitment), and clinic databases (e.g. 
health system chart review). Interested participants completed a screening survey via an 
online questionnaire platform (Qualtrics, Provo, UT) that assessed for study eligibility (see 
Fig. 1). Eligible participants had to meet the criteria for insomnia determined via Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) diagnostic criteria, including the endorsement of sleep difficulty (i.e. 
difficulties falling asleep, staying asleep, or waking too early) for at least three nights a week 
lasting at least 3 months, accompanied by moderate distress and/or functional impairment 
consequential to the sleep difficulties. Exclusion criteria (assessed via the screening 
questionnaire) included lack of insomnia, reported diagnosis of sleep disorders other than 
insomnia (e.g. obstructive sleep apnea, restless legs, narcolepsy), and reported diagnosis of 
bipolar disorder or seizure disorder. Individuals who screened positive for signs of severe 
depression (i.e. self-reported daily or near daily depressed mood and anhedonia) were also 
excluded from study participation because a separate aim (not included in this manuscript) 
of this study examined the longer term prevention of depression incidence or relapse. As 
evidence for prevention or relapse requires longer term follow-up, additional analyses for 
this separate aim are planned after completion of follow-up visits. 

This study utilized a placebo-controlled design with simple randomization into two parallel 
arms (dCBT-I and online sleep education). Randomization was computerized and conducted 
centrally through Qualtrics immediately after participants met eligibility criteria. A total of 
1385 individuals with insomnia were enrolled in the study and randomized into either the 
dCBT-I or online sleep education conditions. The research staff was blinded to treatment 
allocation. Participants were randomized at a 2:1 ratio for the dCBT-I condition due to a 
higher anticipated attrition rate for the active compared with the sleep education condition, 
as has been previously demonstrated in Internet-based interventions (Christensen et al. 



2009). The final sample in the analyses included 358 for the dCBT-I condition and 300 for 
the online sleep education condition (age range 18–92). Attrition was operationalized as 
those who did not engage with treatment (i.e. no-show) and those who discontinued after 
treatment onset (see Fig. 1 for enrollment flow chart). All procedures were approved by the 
Henry Ford Health System Institutional Review Board. Informed consent was also given by 
all participants immediately following study eligibility, before any study procedures were 
executed. 

Assessments of insomnia and depression were used as the primary outcomes and were 
obtained via the same questionnaire platform as the screening survey. Assessments were 
conducted at pre- and post-treatment, with the latter occurring approximately 1 week 
following the final dCBT-I session. Insomnia severity was measured using the Insomnia 
Severity Index (ISI) (Morin et al. 2011; Thorndike et al. 2011), with higher scores indicating 
increased insomnia severity (range 0–28). Remission at post-treatment operationalized as an 
ISI score of ⩽7, which corresponds to the threshold for non-clinically significant insomnia. 
Depression severity was measured using the Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology (QIDS), with higher scores indicating increased depression severity (range 
0–27). To examine the changes in non-sleep symptoms of depression, analyses only utilized 
non-sleep items from the QIDS (items 1–4 were dropped), unless otherwise specified. Both 
the ISI and QIDS have established validity and have been utilized in sleep- and depression- 
related clinical trials (Savard et al. 2005; Brown et al. 2008; Bernstein et al. 2010; Yeung et 
al. 2012; American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Collins et al. 2014) and clinical settings. 

Individuals randomized to the dCBT-I condition completed the Sleepio program via the 
Internet (www.sleepio.com, Big Health Ltd.). Sleepio is among several currently available 
dCBT-I programs, and was selected for this study because it is evidence-based, standardized, 
fully automated, and has been analyzed in multiple randomized controlled trials (Espie et al. 
2012, 2016; Freeman et al. 2017). Participants received access for 12 weeks during which 
they could take the six core sessions of dCBT-I; each session was unlocked on a weekly 
basis and participants were advised to take a session once a week. The intervention covered 
behavioral components (e.g. sleep restriction, stimulus control) and cognitive components 
(e.g. cognitive restructuring, paradoxical intention), as well as relaxation strategies (e.g. 
progressive muscle relaxation and autogenic training) and sleep hygiene. Sessions are 
directed by an animated ‘virtual therapist’ who guides the sessions, conducts progress 
reviews with the participant, discusses diary data submitted during the week, and assesses 
progress achieved against previously set goals. In addition, the participant will have access 
to additional components such as a library with background information, a forum with other 
users of the program, their case file, and weekly live expert sessions. 

Individuals randomized to the online sleep education condition received six weekly e-mails 
containing information on the following topics: the basics of endogenous sleep regulation; 



the impact on sleep of health problems; the effects of sleep disruptive substances, such as 
caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol; and tips on creating a sleep-conducive bedroom environment. 

Treatment response was also examined by demographics, which included annual household 
income, race, sex, age, and education. Annual household income was operationalized as an 
ordinal variable with four levels: poverty, low, middle, and high. Poverty was 
operationalized as an annual household income less than 15k, which is consistent with the 
poverty threshold for a two-person household in 2016 (US Census Bureau, 2016). The 
thresholds for low, middle, and high income were <35k, <75k, and ⩾75k, respectively. Race 
was categorized as white, black, or other (i.e. Asian, American Indian/Alaska Native, 
multiracial, and unknown). Education was also operationalized as an ordinal variable with 
four levels: high school or less, some college, college, and graduate school. These categories 
correspond to the International Standard Classification of Education (UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics, 2012) levels 3 or below, 4 and 5, 6, and 7 or higher. 

A per-protocol analysis was conducted to examine the efficacy of dCBT-I in reducing 
insomnia and depression. Two mixed-effects linear regression models were implemented 
with ISI and QIDS scores as the outcome variables. A random intercept was included in both 
models to account for individual variation in pre-treatment levels of insomnia and 
depression. Fixed effects included time (pre- and post-treatment), condition (dCBT-I, sleep 
education), and the interaction of time × condition. 
To test for differences in the treatment based on demographic variables (SES, race, sex, age, 
education), each of the two mix-effects models was further tested with demographic 
variables entered into the model. Demographic variables were first tested as a moderator 
with a three-way demographic × time × condition interaction variable. In cases where the 
demographic variable was not a significant moderator, they were subsequently added as a 
covariate to the original model with time, condition, and time × condition as fixed effects. 
Power analyses indicated that the final sample size achieved 80% power to detect a small 
effect size (0.16) for a three-way interaction. 

The per-protocol analyses included a final sample of 358 individuals who completed the 
dCBT-I condition, and 300 who received online sleep education. See Table 1 for sample 
characteristics between conditions. 

Insomnia—Results from the linear mixed model revealed a significant time × condition 
interaction, t(656) = −13.6, p < 0.001, indicating that change in ISI at post-treatment differed 
significantly between the dCBT-I and sleep education conditions. Specifically, the average 
decrease in ISI in the dCBT-I condition (−10.0 points ± 5.7 S.D.) was twofold greater than the 
decrease in the sleep education condition (−4.4 ± 4.6) (see Fig. 2A). 



In addition to change in ISI, follow-up analyses also examined response and remission rates 
at post-treatment (response: reduction in ISI ⩾8; remission: post-treatment ISI ⩽7) using a 
χ2 test. Results indicated that more individuals in the dCBT-I condition exhibited a 
clinically significant treatment response (65.1%) compared with those in the sleep education 
condition (22.3%), χ2(1) = 16.9, p < 0.0001. Results also indicated that the remission rate at 
post-treatment was significantly higher in the dCBT-I condition, χ2(1) = 111.5, p < 0.0001. 
Specifically, the remission rate was almost four times higher in the dCBT-I condition 
[53.9%, 95% CI (48.7–59.1)] than in the sleep education condition [14.0%, 95% CI (10.4– 
17.6)] (see Fig. 2B). 
Post-hoc analyses also examined if dCBT-I resulted in differential changes in difficulties 
with sleep onset, sleep maintenance, or early morning awakening. Results indicated 
comparable improvements between sleep onset difficulties (−1.25 pts), sleep maintenance 
difficulties (−1.31 pts), and early morning awakenings (−1.26 pts). 
Depression—Models with depression symptoms as the outcome variable showed similar 
results compared with insomnia symptoms. A time × condition interaction, t(656) = −13.6, p 
< 0.001, indicated that change in QIDS at post-treatment differed significantly between the 
dCBT-I and sleep education conditions. Specifically, the average decrease in QIDS in the 
dCBT-I condition (−4.1 ± 4.7 s.d.) was 2.5 times greater than that of the sleep education 
condition (−1.6 points ± 3.7) (see Fig. 3 for change in QIDS). Overall, the effect size 
(Hedge’s g; thresholds for small, medium, and large effects are 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8, 
respectively) for improvements in depression (with sleep items) was 0.64 (medium effect 
size), which is higher than the average effect size documented for a range of antidepressants 
(Hedge’s g = 0.37) (Turner et al. 2008). 
Exploratory analyses also examined changes by item on the QIDS, which revealed greater 
reductions in the dCBT-I condition in all non-sleep items except for sadness, suicidality, and 
restlessness – these items included weight, energy, decision-making, general interest, self- 
perception, sluggishness, and appetite. The greatest group difference was found with 
reduced energy, with dCBT-I showing an additional half point decrease compared with sleep 
education. This was followed by improved self-perception and decision-making, with dCBT- 
I showing an additional 0.39 and 0.38 point improvement, respectively (see Fig. 4 for change 
in QIDS items). 
Post-hoc analyses also indicated that differences in treatment response by condition also 
increased linearly by baseline depression severity (sans sleep items), condition × initial 
severity (lower, middle, and upper tertiles), t(652) = −3.94, p < 0.0001. Those in the upper 
tertile of depression severity showed the greatest improvements in non-sleep symptoms of 
depression from dCBT-I (−8.0 ± 4.7 S.D.) relative to the sleep education condition (−3.7 ± 4.4 
S.D.), compared with the middle (dCBT-I: −3.8 ± 3.7 S.D., sleep education: −1.65 ± 3.1 S.D.) 
and lower tertiles (dCBT-I: −1.0 ± 2.7 S.D., sleep education: 0.41 ± 2.4 S.D.). Finally, post-hoc 
analyses also indicated that the reduction in non-sleep depression symptoms was 
significantly associated with the reduction in insomnia symptoms across both groups, 
though the effect was stronger in the dCBT-I condition (r = 0.50, p < 0.001) compared with 
the sleep education condition (r = 0.36, p < 0.001). 




SES: household income—Household income did not significantly moderate the efficacy 
of dCBT-I in reducing either insomnia or depression, and the estimated effects of household 
income were small (ISI: B = 0.78 ± 0.94 S.E.; QIDS: B = 0.78 ± 0.77 S.E.). The time × 
condition interactions for both ISI and QIDS remained significant with household income as 
a covariate. Additionally, household income was a significant covariate for both insomnia 
and depression, indicating higher severity with lower income. Specifically, ISI scores 
increased by an average of 1.59 ± 0.35 points with each decrease in income bracket, whereas 
QIDS scores increased by an average of 2.29 ± 0.32 points with each decrease in income 
bracket. 
SES: education—Education also did not significantly moderate the efficacy of dCBT-I in 
reducing either insomnia or depression (see Fig. 5). The estimated effects of education were 
moderate for ISI (B = 1.67 ± 0.94 S.E.) and small for QIDS (B = 0.83 ± 0.78 S.E.). The time × 
condition interactions for both ISI and QIDS remained significant with education as a 
covariate. Education was a significant covariate for both insomnia and depression, indicating 
higher severity with lower education. Specifically, ISI scores increased by an average of 0.90 
± 0.36 points with each decrease in education bracket, whereas QIDS scores increased 1.03 
± 0.34 points with each decrease in education bracket. 
Race—Race also did not significantly moderate the efficacy of dCBT-I in reducing either 
insomnia or depression, and the estimated effects of race were small for both ISI (black v. 
white: B = 0.71 ± 1.00 S.E.; other v. white: B = 0.78 ± 1.57 S.E.) and QIDS (black v. white: B 
= −0.67 ± 0.83 S.E.); other v. white: B = 0.13 ± 1.30 S.E.). The time × condition interactions 
for both ISI and QIDS remained significant with education as a covariate. Race was a 
significant covariate for insomnia but not for depression. Specifically, black individuals 
reported an overall average of 1.15 ± 0.38 points higher on the ISI compared with white 
individuals. 
Sex—Sex also did not significantly moderate the efficacy of dCBT-I in reducing either 
insomnia or depression, and the estimated effects of sex were small for both ISI (male v. 
females: B = 0.64 ± 0.99 S.E.) and QIDS (male v. females: B = −0.28 ± 0.82 S.E.). The time × 
condition interactions for both ISI and QIDS remained significant with sex as a covariate. 
Sex was not a significant covariate for insomnia or depression. 
Age—Age also did not significantly moderate the efficacy of dCBT-I in reducing either 
insomnia or depression, and the estimated effects of age were small for both ISI (B = 0.40 ± 
0.25 S.E.) and QIDS (B = 0.05 ± 0.21 S.E.). The time × condition interactions for both ISI and 
QIDS remained significant with age as a covariate. Age was not a significant covariate for 
insomnia but was significant for depression, though the effect was small. Each decade 
increase in age was associated with a 0.64 ± 0.09 point decrease in QIDS scores, t(655) = 
−7.08, p < 0.0001. 




Given the notable attrition rates of Internet-delivered interventions (Melville et al. 2010), 
additional analyses were also conducted to examine if treatment uptake of dCBT-I differed 
by demographic variables. Results indicated significant differences by household income, 
education, race, and age (see Table 2). Interestingly, logistic regression indicated that 
dropout rates did not differ between white and black participants; however, people of color 
who were not black (i.e. Asian, American Indian/Alaska Native, multiracial, and unknown) 
showed a 66% increase in odds of dropout compared with white participants, OR = 1.66, 
95% CI (1.03–2.77). Individuals with less than a college education also demonstrated higher 
odds of dropout relative to college graduates; those with some college showed over two- 
thirds increase in odds of dropout, OR = 1.73, 95% CI (1.20–2.50), whereas those who 
graduated high school show more than a threefold increase in odds of dropout, OR = 3.26, 
95% CI (2.13–5.04). Relative to the middle class, those at low or poverty levels of income 
also showed greater odds of dropout; those with low household income showed twice the 
odds of dropout, OR = 2.00, 95% CI (1.41–2.85), and those at the poverty level showed 
greater than twice the odds of dropout, OR = 2.20, 95% CI (1.46–3.33). Age was also a 
significant predictor of dropout, with each decade increase above the average age (44.47) 
associated with approximately a 20% decrease in odds of dropout, OR = 0.82, 95% CI 
(0.76–0.89). 

Findings from this study provide further evidence that dCBT-I reduces both insomnia and 
depression symptoms. As an Internet-based intervention, dCBT-I is less costly and more 
accessible than face-to-face interventions, particularly given the limited number of specialty 
providers trained in CBT-I. Given the potential benefits of dCBT-I, it is important that both 
efficacy and effectiveness are demonstrated across a range of demographic groups. This 
study was the first and largest to examine the efficacy of dCBT-I across different 
demographic groups, including those with significant health disparities. Results revealed no 
significant differences in the improvement of insomnia and depression between demographic 
groups despite having adequate statistical power to detect a small effect size. Furthermore, 
the estimates for the moderating effect of demographic groups were small (less than one 
point on the ISI and QIDS), suggesting limited clinical significance even if effects were to 
be detectable with a larger sample. Together, there is no strong evidence for reduced efficacy 
of dCBT-I for both insomnia and depression in the underserved populations studied here. 
These results also support the potential for dCBT-I to serve as a first-line intervention for 
those with both insomnia and depression. The web-based delivery makes this approach 
highly scalable and sustainable, especially given the significant clinical impact. Because 
dCBT-I can be implemented with minimal to no involvement of a clinician, it can be easily 
integrated into a primary care setting where both insomnia and depression are typically first 
detected. Furthermore, integration at the primary care setting may also be ideal in reducing 
health disparities in access to mental health care. Future studies should focus on the 
prevention of incident depression in longitudinal follow-up designs to determine the 
potential impact on reducing the incidence and relapse of major depressive disorder. 



dCBT-I can also be combined with CBT-I in a stepped-care framework by use of a fully 
automatized system with the potential for wide dissemination (Christensen et al. 2016). 
Stepped-care approaches also capitalize on the strengths of both face-to-face and Internet- 
delivered CBT-I treatment modalities while minimizing their disadvantages and 
inefficiencies. As opposed to a system where everyone with insomnia receives treatment by 
a specialist, a stepped-care approach begins with a least restrictive intervention, and only 
graduates limited- or non-responders to treatment with a specialist. This reserves specialist 
treatment for more complex cases, thus allowing specialists to practice at the top of their 
licenses. 
We propose that this stepped-care model would be most impactful if integrated into the 
primary care system, as early identification and treatment of both insomnia and depression 
typically occur in primary care. The current integrated care processes can be leveraged to 
immediately implement treatment when sleep problems are initially identified in the primary 
care setting. This stepped-care approach to insomnia treatment has yet to be tested in large- 
scale and clinically-based effectiveness trials (i.e. real-world), but has the potential to 
significantly impact insomnia therapeutics and transform the limited approach currently in 
place. In particular, the large-scale clinical studies will need a particular focus on 
effectiveness (including treatment uptake and adherence) in underserved minority and low- 
income populations to establish real-world generalizability and wide dissemination. Such 
trials are also needed to determine if a reduction of insomnia and depression symptoms leads 
to long-term mitigation of depression incidence (i.e. secondary prevention). 

One critical consideration for the implementation of dCBT-I is the utilization and uptake by 
individuals. This is a critical gap in the literature as very few studies have examined 
demographic differences in attrition for insomnia interventions, and this is the first study that 
has done so for dCBT-I. As such, we were unable to assess how attrition rates by 
demographics for dCBT-I compare to face-to-face CBT-I or other digital insomnia 
interventions. However, the overall attrition rate for the dCBT-I group found in this study 
was within the expected range in comparison with other randomized controlled trials of 
Internet-delivered psychotherapy interventions (50–83%) (Yeung et al. 2015; Batterham et 
al. 2017; Watson et al. 2017). Notably, the rate of dropout was much lower for those who 
engaged in CBT-I (i.e. completed at least one session) compared with those who did not 
engage in treatment (i.e. no-shows). 
While we found no differences in the treatment effects of dCBT-I between demographic 
groups, results did show demographic differences in the dropout rates consistent with other 
intervention studies (Wierzbicki and Pekarik, 1993; Melville et al. 2010; Watson et al. 
2017). In particular, low SES (i.e. education and income) was associated with greater risk for 
dropout from dCBT-I. This is consistent with prior evidence from a meta-analysis indicating 
that lower SES was the strongest predictor of psychotherapy dropout among demographic 
variables (Wierzbicki and Pekarik, 1993). Importantly, results from the current study suggest 
that increased accessibility alone does not sufficiently mitigate treatment barriers for many 
individuals with limited education and financial resources. Further evidence must be 



collected to elucidate additional barriers to engagement and persistence for dCBT-I 
associated with low SES. 
The finding of high attrition among those with low SES also represents an opportunity to 
examine if and how dCBT-I may be refined to enhance the appropriateness and feasibility 
across a diverse range of people. This evaluation is among the critical steps required prior to 
the wide dissemination of dCBT-I. The flexibility afforded via the digital platform means 
that both content and implementation of dCBT-I can be readily tailored to address the needs 
of a low SES population. Additionally, gains in retention could be further enhanced with a 
stepped-care model. For example, even a modest improvement of 5–10% in attrition could 
extend accessibility of dCBT-I to one-third of those in the lowest SES bracket. The 
remaining individuals can be triaged to enhanced interventions that are socially integrative 
and multipronged. For instance, a recent study successfully achieved a fourfold reduction in 
attrition in low-income racial minority participants via a strategic framework that targeted 
cultural and linguistic competency, relationship building, leveraging existing social 
networks, contingency management, and other relevant domains (Flores et al. 2017). 
Because these approaches are generally more resource intensive, they are well matched for a 
stepped-care model that enables redistribution of existing resources. As such, future research 
should test the feasibility of stepped-care models for insomnia, particularly in those with 
limited education and financial resources. 
Importantly, attrition rates from this study did not differ between black and white 
participants despite historically established differences in treatment engagement and 
adherence in traditional forms of psychotherapy (Yamamoto et al. 1967; Sue et al. 1974). In 
fact, an early study found that attrition within 6 weeks of treatment (a match to the length of 
dCBT-I in this study) was twice as high for black compared with white patients (Rosenthal 
and Frank, 1958). More recent studies have continued to show similarly higher attrition rates 
in black compared with white individuals (Murphy et al. 2013; Johnson et al. 2014). As 
such, it is notable that attrition rates for dCBT-I were comparable between white and black 
participants in this study. Interestingly, results did indicate that those in the ‘other’ category 
appeared to be at higher risk for dropout. The interpretation of this result is less clear 
because this category is significantly smaller in sample size (<25 in each condition) and 
comprises multiple racial identities (including multiracial identities). Future research with 
greater representation of non-black people of color is necessary to further understand this 
relationship. 
While gender was not associated with differences in dropout, our final sample was 
predominantly female. Exploratory analyses revealed comparable gender distribution 
throughout the enrollment process, suggesting that the gender differences may be associated 
with initial interest in participating in intervention research for insomnia. There is evidence 
that females are more likely to engage in health-seeking behaviors in both a traditional 
clinical setting (Möller-Leimkühler, 2002) and on the Internet (Ybarra and Suman, 2006). 
The gender differences in help-seeking behaviors are also further compounded by the higher 
prevalence of insomnia in women (Roth and Roehrs, 2003). Finally, the gender distribution 
found in this study was also comparable to that found in another recent study of dCBT-I 
(Christensen et al. 2016). 



Results from this study also found that older age was associated with reduced attrition from 
dCBT-I, which is consistent with the previous studies that have examined intervention 
dropout (DeMaris, 1989; Lange et al. 2005). The replication of this finding in the context of 
an Internet-based intervention is significant, particularly given general concerns that 
technological literacy in older adults would be a barrier to dCBT-I. While results do not 
speak specifically to the role of technological literacy, they do support the feasibility of 
dCBT-I in older populations, and also indicate comparable efficacy across the age ranges. 
This should be further examined in a larger effectiveness study in a community sample. 
While the depression severity in this sample ranged from none to very severe (max QIDS = 
23), the majority of depression scores fell in the ‘mild’ and ‘moderate’ range (QIDS score 
7–15). As such, one limitation of this study is the generalizability to those with more severe 
forms of depression. Another limitation is the use of a per-protocol analysis, which can be 
vulnerable to bias and also precludes generalizability of the described effects to all who 
would be prescribed dCBT-I. However, given that our proposed stepped-care model would 
integrate dCBT-I as a first-line intervention, those who were unable to complete dCBT-I 
would be additionally triaged for other forms of intervention. Additionally, as is the case 
with most efficacy trials, these results describe the effect of the treatment under ideal 
circumstances (e.g. minimal comorbidities, ability to complete the treatment) and should be 
interpreted as such. Finally, there were no statistical differences in demographics between 
the two experimental groups, suggesting that any bias associated with the per-protocol 
analysis was minimal. These data also point to a clear need for further implementation 
research to examine how uptake of Internet-delivered interventions may be enhanced in the 
community, particularly in those with socioeconomic disadvantages. 
Overall, results from this study lend support that dCBT-I could be an effective first-line 
intervention for insomnia and depression. The evidence suggests that there are little to no 
differences in efficacy for underserved minorities who are able to complete the intervention. 
Furthermore, the lack of differences in attrition between black and white participants 
suggests that dCBT-I may also have potential in improving the racial disparities of access to 
care for insomnia and depression. Future research should examine the effectiveness of 
dCBT-I in a community sample because this evidence was collected in the context of a 
research intervention and thus may have limited generalizability to a naturalistic help- 
seeking population. Furthermore, treatment barriers in lower SES populations need to be 
further characterized in order to inform interventions strategies that are feasible and 
appropriate. 

Findings from this study provide further evidence for the efficacy of dCBT-I in treating 
insomnia and concurrent depression in a wide range of individuals from various 
demographic groups, including race, SES (income and education), sex, and age. 
Furthermore, dCBT-I appears to have comparable uptake in both black and white 
individuals, suggesting that it could have potential in reducing racial disparities in access to 
care for insomnia and depression. Together, these evidence support the further examination 
of the utility of dCBT-I in large-scale reduction of insomnia and depression. 




Support for this study was provided from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and from the National Institute of 
Mental Health R56MH115150 awarded to CLD. Funding for PC was provided from the National Heart Lung and 
Blood Institute (K23HL138166). We would also like to thank David Adler for his continued support of our research 
program. 




distrust in the United States. American Journal of Public Health 97, 1283–1289. [PubMed: 
17538069] 

Riemann D (2011) Insomnia as a predictor of depression: a meta-analytic evaluation of longitudinal 
epidemiological studies. Journal of Affective Disorders 135, 10–19. [PubMed: 21300408] 

and Griffiths KM (2017) Trajectories of change and long-term outcomes in a randomised controlled 
trial of Internet-based insomnia treatment to prevent depression. British Journal of Psychiatry Open 
3, 228–235. [PubMed: 28959453] 

GJ (2010) Psychometric properties of the Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology in 
adolescents. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 19, 185–194. [PubMed: 
20683845] 
Brasure M, Fuchs E, MacDonald R, Nelson VA, Koffel E, Olson CM, Khawaja IS, Diem S, Carlyle M, 
Wilt TJ, Ouellette J, Butler M and Kane RL (2016) Psychological and behavioral interventions for 
managing insomnia disorder: an evidence report for a clinical practice guideline by the American 
College of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine 165, 113. [PubMed: 27136619] 

Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology-Self-report: a psychometric evaluation in patients 
with asthma and major depressive disorder. Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology 100, 433– 
438. 
Christensen H, Griffiths KM and Farrer L (2009) Adherence in Internet interventions for anxiety and 
depression: systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet Research 11, e13. [PubMed: 19403466] 
Christensen H, Batterham PJ, Gosling JA, Ritterband LM, Griffiths KM, Thorndike FP, Glozier N, 
O’Dea B, Hickie IB and Mackinnon AJ (2016) Effectiveness of an online insomnia program 
(SHUTi) for prevention of depressive episodes (the GoodNight Study): a randomised controlled 
trial. The Lancet Psychiatry 3, 333–341. [PubMed: 26827250] 

regimens based on the sequential, multiple assignment, randomized trial (SMART). Clinical Trials 
11, 426–434. [PubMed: 24902922] 

meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Clinical Psychology Review 40, 57–65. [PubMed: 
26067572] 




Espie CA, Macmahon KM, Kelly H-L, Broomfield NM, Douglas NJ, Engleman HM, McKinstry B, 
Morin CM, Walker A and Wilson P (2007) Randomized clinical effectiveness trial of nurse- 
administered small-group cognitive behavior therapy for persistent insomnia in general practice. 
Sleep 30, 574–584. [PubMed: 17552372] 



Espie CA, Kyle SD, Williams C, Ong JC, Douglas NJ, Hames P and Brown JS (2012) A randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial of online cognitive behavioral therapy for chronic insomnia disorder 
delivered via an automated media-rich web application. Sleep 35, 769–781. [PubMed: 22654196] 
Espie CA, Luik AI, Cape J, Drake CL, Siriwardena AN, Ong JC, Gordon C, Bostock S, Hames P and 
Nisbet M (2016) Digital cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia versus sleep hygiene 
education: the impact of improved sleep on functional health, quality of life and psychological 
well-being. Study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials 17, 257. [PubMed: 27216112] 
Fields BG, Schutte-Rodin S, Perlis ML and Myers M (2013) Master’s-level practitioners as cognitive 
behavioral therapy for insomnia providers: an underutilized resource. Journal of Clinical Sleep 
Medicine: JCSM 9, 1093. [PubMed: 24127157] 

approach to minimizing attrition in racial/ethnic minority, low-income populations. Contemporary 
Clinical Trials Communications 5, 168–174. [PubMed: 28378019] 
Freeman D, Sheaves B, Goodwin GM, Yu L-M, Nickless A, Harrison PJ, Emsley R, Luik AI, Foster 
RG, Wadekar V, Hinds C, Gumley A, Jones R, Lightman S, Jones S, Bentall R, Kinderman P, 
Rowse G, Brugha T, Blagrove M, Gregory AM, Fleming L, Walklet E, Glazebrook C, Davies EB, 
Hollis C, Haddock G, John B, Coulson M, Fowler D, Pugh K, Cape J, Moseley P, Brown G, 
Hughes C, Obonsawin M, Coker S, Watkins E, Schwannauer M, MacMahon K, Siriwardena AN 
and Espie CA (2017) The effects of improving sleep on mental health (OASIS): a randomised 
controlled trial with mediation analysis. The Lancet Psychiatry 4, 749–758. [PubMed: 28888927] 
Hajak G, Petukhova M, Lakoma MD, Coulouvrat C, Roth T, Sampson NA, Shahly V, Shillington AC, 
Stephenson JJ, Walsh JK and others (2011) Days-out-of-role associated with insomnia and 
comorbid conditions in the America Insomnia Survey. Biological Psychiatry 70, 1063–1073. 
[PubMed: 21962491] 

dropout from cognitive behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder. BMC Psychiatry 14, 233. 
[PubMed: 25199046] 
Kennedy BR, Mathis CC and Woods AK (2007) African Americans and their distrust of the health 
care system: healthcare for diverse populations. Journal of Cultural Diversity; Lisle 14, 56–60. 
Kessler RC, Berglund PA, Coulouvrat C, Hajak G, Roth T, Shahly V, Shillington AC, Stephenson JJ 
and Walsh JK (2011) Insomnia and the performance of US workers: results from the America 
insomnia survey. Sleep 34, 1161–1171. [PubMed: 21886353] 
Lange A, Rietdijk D, Hudcovicova M and Others (2005) Interapy: a controlled randomized trial of the 
standardized treatment of posttraumatic stress through the Internet. Year Book of Psychiatry & 
Applied Mental Health 2005, 174.and Others 
Li SX, Lam SP, Yu MW, Zhang J and Wing YK (2010) Nocturnal sleep disturbances as a predictor of 
suicide attempts among psychiatric outpatients: a clinical, epidemiologic, prospective study. The 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 71, 1440–1446. [PubMed: 21114949] 



problem by the committee on sleep medicine and research. New England Journal of Medicine 356, 
199–200. 
Manber R, Edinger JD, Gress JL, San Pedro-Salcedo MG, Kuo TF and Kalista T (2008) Cognitive 
behavioral therapy for insomnia enhances depression outcome in patients with comorbid major 
depressive disorder and insomnia. Sleep 31, 489–495. [PubMed: 18457236] 

patients with high and low depressive symptom severity: adherence and clinical outcomes. Journal 
of Clinical Sleep Medicine 7, 645–652. [PubMed: 22171204] 
McCall WV, Blocker JN, D’Agostino R, Kimball J, Boggs N, Lasater B and Rosenquist PB (2010) 
Insomnia severity is an indicator of suicidal ideation during a depression clinical trial. Sleep 
Medicine 11, 822–827. [PubMed: 20478741] 





Möller-Leimkühler AM (2002) Barriers to help-seeking by men: a review of sociocultural and clinical 
literature with particular reference to depression. Journal of Affective Disorders 71, 1–9. [PubMed: 
12167495] 

indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep 34, 601–608. [PubMed: 
21532953] 

attrition among African Americans in the STAR*D study: what causes research volunteers to stay 
or stray? Depression and Anxiety 30, 1137–1144. [PubMed: 23723044] 

statement: management of menopause-related symptoms. Annals of Internal Medicine 142, 1003. 
[PubMed: 15968015] 



insomnia disorder in adults: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians 
Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder in Adults. Annals of Internal Medicine 165, 125–133. 
[PubMed: 27136449] 
Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Gonder-Frederick LA, Magee JC, Bailey ET, Saylor DK and Morin CM 
(2009) Efficacy of an Internet-based behavioral intervention for adults with insomnia. Archives of 
General Psychiatry 66, 692–698. [PubMed: 19581560] 
Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Ingersoll KS, Lord HR, Gonder-Frederick L, Frederick C, Quigg MS, 
Cohn WF and Morin CM (2017) Effect of a web-based cognitive behavior therapy for insomnia 
intervention with 1-year follow-up: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 74, 68–75. 
[PubMed: 27902836] 





blind, placebo-controlled study in adults with primary insomnia. Sleep Medicine 7, 397–406. 
[PubMed: 16815744] 


Ström L, Pettersson R and Andersson G (2004) Internet-based treatment for insomnia: a controlled 
evaluation. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 72, 113. [PubMed: 14756620] 
Sue S, McKinney H, Allen D and Hall J (1974) Delivery of community mental health services to black 
and white clients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 42, 794. [PubMed: 4436465] 



Validation of the insomnia severity index as a web-based measure. Behavioral Sleep Medicine 9, 
216–223. [PubMed: 22003975] 

antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent efficacy. New England Journal of Medicine 358, 
252–260. [PubMed: 18199864] 


US Census Bureau (2016) Preliminary Estimate of Weighted Average Poverty Thresholds for 2016. 
Vincent NK and Hameed H (2003) Relation between adherence and outcome in the group treatment of 


Hofmeier SM, Kordy H, Moessner M, Peat CM, Runfola CD, Marcus MD and Bulik CM (2017) 
Predictors of dropout in face-to-face and Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for bulimia 



nervosa in a randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Eating Disorders 50, 569–577. 
[PubMed: 27862108] 






Yeung A, Feldman G, Pedrelli P, Hails K, Fava M, Reyes T and Mundt JC (2012) The Quick Inventory 
of Depressive Symptomatology, clinician rated and self-report: a psychometric assessment in 
Chinese Americans with major depressive disorder. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 
200, 712. [PubMed: 22850307] 
Yeung WF, Chung K-F, Ho F and Ho L-M (2015) Predictors of dropout from Internet-based self-help 
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy 73, 19–24. [PubMed: 
26226091] 

cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia – a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Sleep Medicine Reviews 30, 1–10. [PubMed: 26615572] 





Fig. 1. 
Flow chart of study recruitment and enrollment. 



Fig. 2. 
Change in ISI scores between the dCBT-I and sleep education conditions. Error bars indicate 
standard error of the mean. Experimental conditions in Panel A have been jittered for visual 
clarity and do not represent timing of treatments. 



Fig. 3. 
Change in QIDS scores between the dCBT-I and sleep education conditions. 



Fig. 4. 
Change in non-sleep items on the QIDS by experimental condition. 



Fig. 5. 
Change in insomnia and depression in the dCBT-I condition by household income brackets. 






















dCBT-I 
(N = 358) 
Sleep education 
(N = 300) 


















































No statistical differences were detected at baseline between groups. ISI, Insomnia Severity Index; QIDS, Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology. 


























































* 
p 

** 
p 

*** 
p 



