



Steven Offenbacher, DDS, James D. Beck, PhD, Heather L. Jared, BS, Sally M. Mauriello, 
EdD, Luisto C. Mendoza, DDS, David J. Couper, PhD, Dawn D. Stewart, MS, Amy P. Murtha, 
MD, David L. Cochran, DDS, Donald J. Dudley, MD, Michael S. Reddy, DMD, Nicolaas C. 
Geurs, DDS, John C. Hauth, MD, and the Maternal Oral Therapy to Reduce Obstetric Risk 
(MOTOR) Investigators 
Departments of Dental Ecology/Dental Research, Periodontology, and Biostatistics, and the Data 
and Statistical Coordinating Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; the 
Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina; the 
Departments of Periodontics and Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, San Antonio, Texas; and the Departments of Periodontology and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama. 

OBJECTIVE—To test the effects of maternal periodontal disease treatment on the incidence of 
preterm birth (delivery before 37 weeks of gestation). 
METHODS—The Maternal Oral Therapy to Reduce Obstetric Risk Study was a randomized, 
treatment-masked, controlled clinical trial of pregnant women with periodontal disease who were 
receiving standard obstetric care. Participants were assigned to either a periodontal treatment arm, 
consisting of scaling and root planing early in the second trimester, or a delayed treatment arm that 
provided periodontal care after delivery. Pregnancy and maternal periodontal status were followed 
to delivery and neonatal outcomes until discharge. The primary outcome (gestational age less than 
37 weeks) and the secondary outcome (gestational age less than 35 weeks) were analyzed using a 
χ2 test of equality of two proportions. 
RESULTS—The study randomized 1,806 patients at three performance sites and completed 
1,760 evaluable patients. At baseline, there were no differences comparing the treatment and 
control arms for any of the periodontal or obstetric measures. The rate of preterm delivery for the 
treatment group was 13.1% and 11.5% for the control group (P=.316). There were no significant 
differences when comparing women in the treatment group with those in the control group with 
regard to the adverse event rate or the major obstetric and neonatal outcomes. 

CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION—ClinicalTrials.gov, www.clinicaltrials.gov, 
NCT00097656. 


Corresponding author: Steven Offenbacher, DDS, PhD, MMSc, North Carolina Oral Health Institute, PO Box 14290, Durham, NC 
27709; Steve_Offenbacher@dentistry.unc.edu.. 
For a listing of the MOTOR data managing and programming, clinical coordinator, and managerial staff who participated in this 
study, see the Appendix online at http://links.lww.com/AOG/A123. 
Financial Disclosure 
The authors did not report any potential conflicts of interest. 
NIH Public Access 
Author Manuscript 
Obstet Gynecol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 September 1. 



Studies have suggested that maternal periodontal disease is associated with an increased risk 
for various obstetric and fetal complications including preterm delivery, very preterm 
delivery (less than 32 weeks of gestation), fetal growth restriction, and preeclampsia.1–14 A 
recent meta-analysis by Vergnes and Sixou that included 17 studies enrolling 7,151 women, 
1,056 of whom delivered preterm neonates or low birth weight neonates or both,15 found 
that a pooled estimate for the risk of delivery at a gestational age of less than 37 weeks or 
having a neonate weighing less than 2,500 g or both in patients with periodontal disease was 
2.83 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.95– 4.10, P<.001). However, the authors cautioned 
that additional high-quality studies are needed. Results from four randomized, single-center 
clinical trials suggest that periodontal treatment during pregnancy may reduce preterm 
births.16–19 However, results of a randomized, multicenter clinical trial show no difference 
between treatment and control groups for mean gestational age and for preterm birth at less 
than 37 weeks.20 
The purpose of this article is to present the results of a large, randomized trial that tested the 
effects of maternal periodontal disease treatment on the incidence of preterm birth. 
The Maternal Oral Therapy to Reduce Obstetric Risk Study was a randomized, treatment- 
masked, controlled clinical trial of pregnant women with periodontal disease who were 
receiving standard obstetric care. Periodontal disease is a chronic inflammatory response to 
the tooth-associated microbial biofilm (plaque) that induces inflammation of the adjacent 
tissues and causes local tissue destruction and loss of the tooth attachment apparatus 
(ligament and bone). Bacterial biofilms begin on the crown (supragingival) and extend onto 
root surfaces under the gumline (subgingival) with penetration into the root surfaces and can 
become mineralized as hard deposits (calculus). Nonsurgical treatment of periodontal 
disease includes the mechanical removal of supragingival and subgingival microbial 
deposits and calculus by debridement using hand or ultrasonic instruments to remove 
bacteria and calculus and to plane the root surfaces to removed diseased and bacterially 
contaminated root surfaces. The study assessed the effects of nonsurgical periodontal 
therapy on rates of preterm delivery as the primary study outcome (defined as delivery at a 
gestational age of less than 37 weeks), as compared with a group who received periodontal 
care delayed until after delivery. All obstetric and dental examinations were performed by 
trained and calibrated obstetric and dental investigators. Safety oversight was provided by an 
independent data and safety monitoring board and the institutional review boards at each 
participating center. All participants provided written informed consent. Enrollment 
occurred between December 2003 and October 2007. 
Patients were enrolled at Duke University Medical Center and the affiliated clinic at Lincoln 
Health Center, the University of Alabama at Birmingham Medical Center, and two obstetric 
sites of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (University Health 
Center-Downtown of University Health Systems and Salinas Clinic of the San Antonio 
Metropolitan Health District). Pregnant women presenting for obstetric care who were of 
legal age to consent and who were able to complete periodontal treatment before 23 6/7 
weeks of gestation were recruited and screened for periodontal and obstetric eligibility. To 
be eligible, women had to have at least 20 teeth and at least three periodontal sites with at 
least 3 mm of clinical attachment loss. Before randomization, women could receive limited 
dental care to reduce the likelihood of an acute infectious event during pregnancy. These 
limited treatments included the extraction of hopeless teeth and restoration of pulp- 
threatening caries. 



Gestational age was determined by ultrasound examination performed before 16 weeks. 
Women were excluded if they had multiple gestation; history of human immunodeficiency 
virus infection, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, autoimmune disease, or diabetes 
(gestational diabetes was acceptable); need for antibiotic prophylaxis for periodontal 
probing or periodontal treatment; or any obstetric finding that precluded enrollment in the 
study. Women with advanced caries or advanced periodontal disease requiring multiple 
immediate extractions were excluded. 
Eligible participants were assigned randomly to receive periodontal treatment either before 
23 6/7 weeks gestational age or after delivery. A permuted block randomization scheme 
with a random mixture of block sizes was used, stratifying participants by clinical center. 
Dental examiners were masked to treatment assignment of participants until after the 
postpartum examination, after the primary obstetric outcome was collected. This was 
achieved by using different staff members for examinations and therapy. Different 
examination and treatment rooms were used, and schedules were staggered as much as 
possible. Dental therapists were instructed not to divulge treatment status to study staff 
assigned to postnatal data collection. Participants and staff were instructed to not inform the 
postpartum examiner of the pregnancy outcome. The managing physicians were totally 
unaware of oral treatment assignments or treatment appointments. 
Participants received up to four sessions (mean 1.3, standard deviation ±0.4) of 
supragingival and subgingival scaling and root planing using hand and ultrasonic 
instruments to complete the baseline therapy. Local anesthesia was used as needed. Those in 
the treatment group also received full-mouth tooth polishing and oral hygiene home 
instructions. There were no follow-up periodontal treatment visits. After delivery, those in 
the delayed-treatment group received periodontal therapy at no cost. 
The principal outcome (gestational age less than 37 weeks) included induced or spontaneous 
deliveries, fetal demise, and miscarriage but not therapeutic abortions. The study initially 
was planned with the primary outcome being the proportion of births with gestational age 
less than 35 weeks. Before the start of recruitment, the data and safety monitoring board 
recommended switching the primary outcome to births with gestational age less than 37 
weeks to improve study power. This change did not involve changing the target sample size. 
Secondary outcomes included incidence of gestational age less than 35 weeks; mean birth 
weight among neonates adjusting for race, sex, and gestational age; and a composite 
measure of neonatal morbidity and mortality before discharge defined as fetal demise after 
randomization-neonatal death before discharge from hospital to home or chronic care, 
respiratory distress syndrome, proven sepsis, grade 3 or 4 intraventricular hemorrhage, or 
necrotizing enterocolitis requiring treatment. These data were collected from neonatal 
intensive care unit records as were data on congenital abnormalities. 
Before study initiation, periodontal examiners were trained and calibrated to the reference 
examiner to quantify intraexaminer and interexaminer reliability of measuring periodontal 
soft and hard tissue indices in both a dental chair and hospital bed. Annual retraining 
sessions were held. Percentage agreements for probing depth and attachment loss measures 
within 1 mm ranged from 80.5% to 100%, Kappas ranged from 0.755 to 1.000, and 
intraclass correlation coefficients ranged from 0.892 to 1.000 (average 0.970). Intraexaminer 
Kappa scores between measurements made in the dental chair and the bed were 0.983 and 
0.969 for probing depth and clinical attachment loss measures, respectively. 
Sample size determination used data from the University of Alabama pilot trial17 and 
estimated a preterm (gestational age less than 35 weeks) birth rate of 6% in the delayed 
periodontal therapy group compared with 2% in the periodontal therapy group, assuming a 



loss to follow-up rate of 3% in each group. We added the 3% loss to follow-up rate to each 
group under an intent-to-treat assumption, with the further assumption that all individuals 
lost to follow-up had a preterm birth. In this situation, a sample size of 900 per treatment 
group would provide power of 91% to detect such a difference between the two treatment 
groups. After the data and safety monitoring board recommended changing the primary 
outcome from gestational age less than 35 weeks to gestational age less than 37 weeks 
without changing the sample size, we determined the detectable treatment effect, using the 
same assumptions as above, for several preterm rates in the delayed-treatment group. For 
rates of 12%, 16%, and 20%, we would have 90% power to detect differences of 5.1, 5.7, 
and 6.2 percentage points, respectively. 
Dental examiners conducted comprehensive oral soft tissue (cancer screening) and 
periodontal examinations at baseline and delivery. After enrollment, women were followed 
up by obstetric surveillance through parturition, followed by a postdelivery dental follow-up 
and neonatal surveillance that included chart review after discharge. All reported and 
observed adverse events were documented on case-report forms describing onset, duration, 
severity, assessment of causality, and relationship to treatment intervention. Participants’ 
obstetric charts were reviewed weekly to collect adverse events and treatment provided 
(outside of routine). All neonatal discharge summary findings were collected to monitor any 
adverse neonatal morbidity such as neonatal sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis. Serious 
adverse events included preterm labor hospitalization, pre-term birth, birth with maternal or 
fetal indications, other hospitalizations, triage, stillbirth or spontaneous abortion, neonatal 
death, and congenital anomaly. 
Two interim analyses for efficacy were conducted (after 600 and 1,200 completed 
pregnancies) using O'Brien-Fleming type boundaries as the decision criteria for efficacy. All 
analyses were performed using the intention-to-treat principle unless stated otherwise. A P 
of .05 was used as a cutoff for statistical significance. P-values were not adjusted for 
multiple testing. The primary outcome (gestational age less than 37 weeks) and the 
secondary outcome (gestational age less than 35 weeks) were analyzed using a χ2 test of 
equality of two proportions. Pregnancies that did not end in a live birth (such as 
miscarriages) were regarded as part of the unfavorable outcome (gestational age less than 37 
weeks or less than 35 weeks). Differences in proportions in outcomes between the treated 
group and the control group were tested for statistical significance by χ2 or Fisher exact test. 
The primary analysis for whether birth weight among those neonates with gestational ages 
less than 37 weeks differed by treatment group used a Kruskal-Wallis test. 
Of an estimated total patient pool of 29,000, 10,005 were invited to enroll, of whom 6,748 
were potentially eligible and 1,806 were randomized (Fig. 1). Of those who were screened, 
there were 1,884 medically ineligible and 1,568 dentally ineligible. Randomizations 
occurred from February 2004 to September 2007. Approximately equal numbers of 
randomized participants in the two groups provided follow-up data for all outcomes, 
although 31.3% of those in the delayed treatment control group did not receive postpartum 
periodontal treatment for reasons shown in Figure 1. 
The treatment and control (delayed treatment) groups at baseline did not differ in maternal 
age, race, ethnicity, marital status, education, insurance or public assistance, maternal weight 
or height, or mean gestational age at randomization (19 5/7±2 1/7 weeks, Table 1). 
Similarly, the groups did not differ in parity, previous pregnancy histories, self-reported 
drug use, or smoking history; however, the treatment group reported significantly higher 
alcohol use during pregnancy. With respect to periodontal status, both groups had similar 




numbers of teeth, mean bleeding on probing scores, and extent of sites with at least 4 mm of 
probing depth. The overall randomization resulted in no significant differences in baseline 
characteristics comparing treatment with control groups, and this was also valid for each 
performance site, except that the number of nulliparous pregnancies was slightly higher 
among the group randomized to treatment at the North Carolina site (29.8% compared with 
20.9%, treatment compared with control, respectively, data not shown). 
Overall, there were no significant differences comparing women in the treatment group with 
those in the control group with regard to the major obstetric and neonatal outcomes of 
interest (Table 2). Primary outcome data (gestational age less than 37 weeks) are displayed 
in two ways: one considering missing data to be preterm delivery and the other in which the 
missing data are omitted (not intent-to-treat). There were no differences between those in the 
treatment and control groups in either of these analyses. For intent-to-treat analyses, the 
odds ratios (ORs) for gestational age less than 37 were 1.219 (95% CI 0.0893–1.664), for 
gestational age less than 35 0.998 (95% CI 0.640 –1.554), and for gestational age less than 
32 1.138 (95% CI 0.637–2.033). Similarly, there were no differences between those in the 
treatment and control groups for secondary outcomes including mean birth weight, 
distribution of low birth weight categories, Apgar scores, neonatal intensive care unit 
admissions, rate of prematurity at gestational ages less than 35 weeks and less than 32 
weeks, and incidence of preeclampsia. The ORs for intrauterine growth restriction were 
0.801 (95% CI 0.604 –1.062), for birth weights less than 2,500 1.008 (95% CI 0.716 – 
1.419), and for birth weights less than 1,500 1.148 (95% CI 0.543–2.428). 
Changes in periodontal status are given in Table 3. There was a significant worsening of 
periodontal status among patients in the delayed treatment (control) group. For example, 
there was an increase in overall mean probing depths of 0.23±0.02 mm among those in the 
control group. However, there was a significant interaction effect between all probing-depth 
measures and clinical center. In Alabama and North Carolina, both the control and treatment 
groups got worse (positive change score), with the control group having a statistically 
greater mean change in probing depth (P<.001 and P<.022, respectively). In Texas, 
periodontal status of the control group changed little during the study, and the treatment 
group improved (negative change score), resulting in a significant difference between 
groups (P<.001). The changes in percentage of sites with probing depths of 4 mm or more 
present a similar pattern of change. However, the percentage of sites with probing depths of 
5 mm or more decreased in the treatment groups at Alabama and Texas, whereas both 
groups in North Carolina increased. There was no center interaction effect for attachment 
level and bleeding on probing measurements, with both measures being significantly better 
in the treatment group as compared with the control group (P=.005 and P<.001, 
respectively). 
The data in Table 3 show that treatment effects on periodontal status varied among centers 
and that the restoration of periodontal health may not have been achieved. Therefore, we 
conducted a non–intent-to-treat analysis to investigate the proportion of women meeting 
various definitions of periodontal health. These definitions were chosen a priori to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the periodontal therapy. Table 4 presents the number and percentage of 
women meeting various definitions of periodontal health at baseline and delivery. At 
baseline, no women met the definition of having all periodontal pockets less than 4 mm; at 
delivery, four women in the control group (0.5%) and seven in the treatment group (1.0%) 
met the criterion (P=.32). For periodontal pockets less than 5 mm, more women in the 
control group met the definition at baseline than at delivery, with the treatment group 
displaying the opposite pattern (P=.02). Aproximately 12–18% of women in both groups 
had less than 10% of sites with bleeding on probing at delivery. We also defined periodontal 
health as a shallow probing depth (3 mm or less) in the relative absence of bleeding on 



probing (less than 10%). Very few women met this stringent criterion. Because a previous 
study linked incidence or progression of probing depth to increased risk of preterm birth,21 
we used the same definition of disease progression in this analysis. Among women in the 
control group, 30.5% had no progression during pregnancy compared with 40.7% in the 
treatment group. In summary, although the treatment group had less postpartum periodontal 
disease than did the control group, only a small proportion of the treatment group achieved 
what would be considered periodontal health, and we failed to arrest disease progression 
between baseline and delivery in 40.7% of the treatment group. 
There was no significant difference in the frequency of control and treatment group 
participants with serious adverse events. There were 119 (13.4%) participants reporting one 
or more serious adverse events among those randomized to treatment (total n=887) and 101 
(11.4%) among those in the control group (total n=884), P=.20 (χ2). Comparing the two 
groups (n events treatment group/n events control group), there were no significant 
differences in the observed outcomes of serious adverse events, which included preterm 
labor hospitalization (15/15), pre-term birth (36/34), birth with maternal or fetal indications 
(40/34), other hospitalizations (35/25), triage (8/3), stillbirth or spontaneous abortion (7/7), 
neonatal death (4/2), and congenital anomaly (15/12). 

Although the periodontal therapy resulted in a small but statistically significant 
improvement for many periodontal clinical signs relative to the delayed-treatment group, 
periodontal treatment did not restore most participants to periodontal health. The results 
from this study are in general agreement with previous findings of the Obstetrics and 
Periodontal Therapy study,20 which demonstrated that periodontal therapy during pregnancy 
did not alter the rates of preterm birth, low birth weight, or fetal growth restriction. So, what 
factors may explain the lack of any effect of this periodontal intervention on pregnancy 
outcomes? 
One explanation is that periodontal disease does not influence preterm birth rates; the 
accumulated evidence to date has not been sufficient to conclude that periodontal disease is 
a cause or even an effect modifier in combination with other factors for pre-term birth. A 
second explanation may be that periodontal disease does increase the risk for preterm birth, 
but treatment of this exposure does not reduce that risk. Stamilio et al, commenting on a 
meta-analysis of studies on periodontal disease and preterm birth, notes that causation and 
treatment efficacy can be interrelated or they can function independently.22 For example, 
bacterial vaginosis is considered to be one contributing cause of preterm birth, yet antibiotic 
treatment of bacterial vaginosis in controlled trials did not reduce the risk of prematurity.23 
At this point, there is not sufficient evidence to determine whether periodontal disease 
simply does not increase risk for preterm birth or whether it does increase risk but treatment 
as performed in this study was ineffective in decreasing preterm birth. This is in contrast to 
the recent meta-analysis by Polyzos etal,24 which includes data from seven trials including 
the large OPT trial. This meta-analysis concludes that periodontal therapy reduces the risk of 
preterm birth for gestational age less than 37 weeks (overall OR 0.55, 95% CI 0.35–0.86, 
P=.008, n=2,527 births). Further, the greatest benefit was seen among patients with less 
periodontal disease at baseline and no previous preterm deliveries, suggesting that 
prevention or other modalities of intervention including preconception or intraconception 
may be more efficacious rather than treatment of severe disease during pregnancy, such as in 
this study. 
A third possibility is that preterm birth and periodontal disease both share a common 
underlying condition or trait, for example, an exaggerated inflammatory response that might 



explain the clinical response to the oral infection and the inflammatory process associated 
with obstetric complications. In this type of model, periodontal disease would contribute to 
the inflammatory burden and may be an effect modifier for the relationship between other 
conditions and the outcome (eg, subclinical vaginosis and preterm birth). 
Any randomized, controlled trial assumes that the treatment provided is successful in 
reducing the level of the exposure. However, the treatment of periodontal disease is not 
always successful, and pregnancy itself poses an additional risk for periodontal disease onset 
and progression.21 Thus, a fourth possibility is that the periodontal intervention itself was 
not successful in returning the study participants to a healthy periodontal status. The data 
shown in Table 4 illustrate this point using definitions of periodontal health that have been 
published previously.25 In the Oral Conditions and Pregnancy Study,26 we identify maternal 
periodontal progression (as defined in Table 4) as the strongest periodontal indicator for 
prematurity. In the present study, 40.7% of the treatment group demonstrated progression. 
Bleeding on probing levels, which are a marker of potential systemic infectious exposure, 
and disease activity are high in both groups. These findings suggest that a single treatment 
employing only scaling and root planing was not adequate to control gingival inflammation 
between baseline and delivery. 
Finally, there are striking analogies between the findings of the larger randomized controlled 
trials to treat periodontal disease and those targeting bacterial vaginosis. Both exposures 
represent putative risk factors in many but not all studies and appear as opportunistic biofilm 
infections dominated by anaerobic gram-negative bacteria. There is ample evidence of 
periodontal pathogens such as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Campylobacter rectus 
displaying placental tropism and creating fetal exposure in utero.27 The biologic plausibility 
of the potential role of these organisms in mediated pregnancy and neonatal development 
pathologies is well established; however, trials designed to reduce or eliminate these 
infections appear to have been ineffective. Randomized controlled trials that more 
effectively control the micro-biome of the oral and reproductive tract are necessary to better 
control the role of this potentially noxious maternal–fetal burden. 
Periodontal therapy as provided in this protocol did not reduce the incidence of preterm 
delivery at less than 37, 35, or 32 weeks of gestational age, weight for gestational age, or 
neonatal morbidity. Periodontal therapy consisting of a single treatment of scaling and root 
planing and oral hygiene instruction was ineffective in resolving gingival inflammation and 
preventing disease progression in the majority of these pregnant women. 



















environmental factors influencing pregnancy outcomes. Ann Epidemiol 2000;10:475–6. [PubMed: 
11018415] 
8. Kramer MS, Séguin L, Lydon J, Goulet L. Socio-economic disparities in pregnancy outcome: why 
do the poor fare so poorly? Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2000;14:194–210. [PubMed: 10949211] 
9. Lawoyin TO. The relationship between maternal weight gain in pregnancy, hemoglobin level, 
stature, antenatal attendance and low birth weight. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 
1997;28:873–6. [PubMed: 9656418] 



inflammatory response, and brain damage in very low birth weight infants. Developmental 
Epidemiology Network Investigators. Pediatr Res 1999;46:566–75. [PubMed: 10541320] 
12. Cannon TD, Rosso IM, Bearden CE, Sanchez LE, Hadley T. A prospective cohort study of 
neurodevelopmental processes in the genesis and epigenesis of schizophrenia. Dev Psychopathol 
1999;11:467–85. [PubMed: 10532620] 







weight in women with periodontal disease. J Periodontol 2002;73:911–24. [PubMed: 12211502] 
17. Jeffcoat MK, Hauth JC, Geurs NC, Reddy MS, Cliver SP, Hodgkins PM, et al. Periodontal disease 
and preterm birth: results of a pilot intervention study. J Periodontol 2003;74:1214–8. [PubMed: 
14514236] 





periodontal disease and risk of preterm birth. N Engl J Med 2006;355:1885–94. [PubMed: 
17079762] 

pregnancy and risk for a small-for-gestational-age infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006;194:1316– 
22. [PubMed: 16647916] 

enough teeth to recommend screening and preventive treatment? Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2007;196:93–4. [PubMed: 17306643] 

The Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews 2005 , Issue 1. Art. No.: CD000262. DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000262.pub3. 
24. Polyzos NP, Polyzos IP, Mauri D, Tzioras S, Tsappi M, Cortinovis I, et al. Effect of periodontal 
disease treatment during pregnancy on preterm birth incidence: a meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2009;200:225–32. [PubMed: 19254578] 



pregnancy study: periodontal status of a cohort of pregnant women. J Periodontol 2004;75:116–26. 
[PubMed: 15025223] 



27. Madianos PN, Lieff S, Murtha AP, Boggess KA, Auten RL, Beck JD, et al. Maternal periodontitis 
and prematurity. Part II: maternal infection and fetal exposure. Ann Periodontol 2001;6:175–82. 
[PubMed: 11887461] 



Fig. 1. 
Enrollment of Maternal Oral Therapy to Reduce Obstetric Risk Study patients. Offenbacher. 
Periodontal Treatment and Pregnancy Outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 2009. 





























































































































































Self-reported data reporting of any drug, alcohol, or smoking use during pregnancy are based on self report at either baseline or postpartum 
examination interview. 


















































































































Includes fetal demise after randomization, neonatal death before discharge, respiratory distress syndrome, proven sepsis, intraventricular 
hemorrhage grades III and IV, necrotizing enterocolitis requiring treatment, and congenital abnormalities. 

















































































































