Article abstract 
To determine whether nervous system neoplasms are associated with 
primary malignancies elsewhere, we studied the frequency of multiple 
primary tumors in patients in whom at least one of the primary tumors was 
within the nervous system. The patients were Connecticut residents with 
tumors diagnosed between 1935 and 1964. Of 135 patients, 130 had two 
primary tumors, four had three primary tumors, and one had four primary 
tumors. Only with multiple primary tumors involving the brain and breast did 
the number of observed cases significantly exceed the number of expected 
cases; eight patients who had a meningioma associated with a breast 
cancer accounted for this excess. Patients with breast cancer presenting 
with signs or symptoms of an intracranial neoplasm should be carefully 
evaluated, for the intracranial lesion may be a potentially curable 
meningioma. 
Nervous system neoplasms 
and primary malignancies 
of other sites 
The unique association between meningiomas and breast cancer 
BRUCE S. SCHOENBERG, M.D., M.P.H., BARBARA W. CHRISTINE, M.D., M.P.H., and JACK P. WHISNANT, M.D. 
oes a cancer in a particular anatomic site in- 
D 
crease, decrease, or have no effect on the risk that a 
second primary cancer will develop in the same or another 
site? In this paper, we attempt to answer this question in 
relation to tumors of the nervous system, with particular 
consideration of the association between neoplasms of the 
nervous system and primary malignancies of other sites. 
A number of recently published findings prompted the 
present study. Of great interest was McAllister and 
colleagues' report of the isolation of viruslike particles 
from a brain tumor that developed after a human 
From the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, 
Rochester, Minnesota (Drs. Schoenberg and Whisnant) and the Chronic 
Disease Control Section, Connecticut State Department of Health, Hartford, 
Connecticut (Dr. Christine). 
This investigation was supported in part by a special traineeship award (5 
F11 NS 02499-03 NSRB) to Dr. Schoenberg from the National Institute of 
Neurological Diseases and Stroke, Public Health Service. 
Read in part before the twenty-sixth annual meeting of the American 
Academy of Neurology, San Francisco, April 25, 1974. 
Received for publication January 28, 1975. 
Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr. Schoenberg, Section of 
Publications, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street, S.W., Rochester, MN 55901. 
rhabdomyosarcoma cell line was implanted into fetal cats. 
The brain tumor, a sarcoma, was thought to be a 
metastasis of the rhabdomyosarcoma. However, no 
viruslike particles could be isolated from the original 
rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, and these investigators 
considered the possibility that the C-type virus particles 
obtained from the brain tumor represented. competent 
human sarcoma virions capable of inducing tumors. Of 
further interest was the recent report of several families 
with a high prevalence of breast cancer, soft-tissue 
sarcoma, leukemia, and brain tumors.2 
Investigations d ea 1 in g with mu1 t i p 1 e pri mar y 
neoplasms have included (1) individual case reports 
documenting the occurrence of multiple primary 
malignancies in a single patient; (2) reports dealing with 
large series of such patients, with estimations of the 
frequency of occurrence of multiple primary tumors; and 
(3) reports based on population surveys attempting to 
compare the incidence rate or risk of development of a 
second primary with the corresponding risk of 
development of a first primary cancer in the general 
population. The third type of investigation is especially 
relevant. If a history of one cancer decreases the chance 
NEUROLOGY 25: 705-712, August 1975 705 

Nervous system neoplasms and primaty malignancies of other sites 
that a second primary cancer will develop. it would seem 
that the first cancer provides some degree of protection 
against development of a new primary malignancy 
elsewhere, However, if the development of one cancer 
increases the risk of development of a second primary 
cancer, one might argue that the same genetic or 
environmental carcinogenic factors (including oncogenic 
\Jiruses) operating in the development of the first cancer 
were again operating in the development of the second 
cancer. Such investigations, together with studies of 
families with a high prevalence of cancer, serve to identify 
particular segments of the general population who should 
be investigated further with respect to possible 
environmental or genetic oncogenic factors. 
A number of dysgenetic syndromes may be associated 
with nervous system neoplasms, including tuberous 
sclerosis. Lindau‘s syndrome, von Recklinghausen’s 
neurofibromatosisl neurocutaneous melanosis. and 
Sturge-Weber-Dimitri disease. The tumors usually 
associated with tuberous sclerosis are astrocytomas and 
glioblastomas. In addition to the multiple peripheral, 
spinal. and cranial nerve sheath tumors that occur in von 
Recklinghausen‘s neurofibromatosis, other nervous 
system tumors found in individuals with this disease 
include meningiomas (often multiple), gl ial tumors of the 
central nervous system, and ependymomas. The 
cercbellar hemangioblastoma of Lindau’s syndrome is 
associated with similar tumors of the retina (Hippel’s 
disease), renal tumors, and congenital cysts of the 
pancreas and kidney. In neurocutaneous melanosis, 
melanotic pigmentation of various areas of the skin is 
associated with melanoma of the leptomeninges. 
Sturge-Weber-Dimitri diaease is characterized by a 
c a pi 11 a ry - v en o us ma 1 form at i o n of one cerebra I 
hemisphere and a homolateral port-wine stain in the area 
of distribution of the trigeminal nerve. All these 
conditions are believed to be attributable to hereditary 
factors, although sporadic cases have been reported.3 
Among the more common tumors of the nervous 
system, mcningiomas are known to occur in association 
with cerebral ~ I i o m a s ; ~ - ~  
multiple primary neoplasms of 
the meninges also have been reported.’ Depending on the 
series, glioblastomas ha.ve been found to have a 
multicentric origin in from 4 . 9  to 20 percenty of patients. 
Two instances of glioblastoma in association with colloid 
cysts of the third ventricle also have been r e p ~ r t e d . ~  
Multiple ganglioneuromas sometimes occur“’ and have 
been reported in patients with von Recklinghausen’s 
ne~rofibromatosis.~ 
TabIes f and 2 summarize the recent 
literature concerning the association of neoplasms of the 
nervous system with primary malignancies in other sites 
in individual patients and within families. The site of 
associated ma1 ignancies seems to have no consistent 
pattern. 
Materials and methods. T j . p t ~ ~  
of’ IIII)IOY.S stirrlicd. We 
studied all cases of multiple primary tumors diagnosed in 
Connecticut residents from 193.5 through I964 in which at 
least one of the primary sites was within the nervous 
system. The data resource was the population-based 
Connecticut Tumor Registry. The Registry routinely 
receives ( 1 )  reports on all Connecticut residents who are 
admitted to a hospital within the state with a diagnosis of 
malignant neoplasm and (2) copies of all death certificates 
for Connecticut residents on which cancer is men- 
tioned.2092’ Both benign and malignant neoplasms of 
the central nervous system are reportable. If the patient is 
known to have been admitted to a hospital outside the 
state, that institution is contacted for more specific infor- 
mation. An attempt is made to follow all patients from 
diagnosis to death, and it is estimated that less than 5 
percent of the patients are lost to follow-up.** 
The Registry offers many advantages for studies of 
multiple primary tumors. The incidence rates used to 
calculate the expected number of multiple primary 
neoplasms are obtained from the same population yielding 
the first primary malignancies. The Registry also has 
nearly complete reporting of cancer throughout the state 
and a large enough experience to allow meaningful 
comparisons between the observed and expected numbers 
of second primary tumors on an individual primary-site 
basis. 
Because of close anatomic proximity , tumors of the 
pituitary gland, craniopharyngeal duct, and pineal gland 
were included with neoplasms of the nervous system. 
Neoplasms of the eye were not included because, 
although the optic nerve and retina are derived 
embryologically from the primary cerebral vesicle. 
neoplasms of the eye are, in certain instances, somewhat 
distinct from tumors occurring elsewhere in the nervous 
system. Throughout this report, the nomenclature used to 
describe neoplasms of the central nervous system is that 
suggested by Kernohan and Sayre. 23 Furthermore, the 
term “astrocytoma” is reserved for the grade 1 and 2 
gliomas of the astrocytic series, and the term “glio- 
blastoma” designates grade 3 and 4 gliomas of the 
astrocytic series. 
Of tumors outside the nervous system, skin cancers 
were excluded from the present study because the 
Registry does not attempt to collect data on all skin cancer 
cases. Skin cancers may be treated on an outpatient basis 
and therefore may not be reported to the Registry. 
C~ilcirl~r/ioi~ 
qf]xitic~nt siit-t~iiwl. In order to compare the 
observed and expected numbers of second primary tumors 
in the Connecticut population, the overall survival data for 
patients with a first primary ma1 ignancy were converted to 
person-years of exposure (PYE), that is, PYE to the risk of 
development of a new primary cancer. The calculation is 
based on the assumption that the survival experience for 
five patients observed for 1 year is comparable to that for 
one person observed for 5 years, provided the risk of 
development of cancer remains constant over the 5-year 
period. PYE were collected for each primary-site group 
for each year of age, starting at the first diagnosis of a 
neoplasm to either the individual’s death or age at last 
follow-up. The cutoff date for follow-up was December 
31. 1964. 
If a patient with a recorded age of SO years had a brain 
tumor and survived for 4 years, 1 month, his age at 
diagnosis would average 50.5 years. Such a patient would 
706 NEUROLOGY August 1975 

Table 1. Association in individual patients of neoplasms of nervous system 
with those of other systems: Summary of literature, 1967-1971 
Table 2. Association within same family of neoplasms of nervous system 
with those of other systems: Summary of literature, 1967-1971 
NEUROLOGY August 1975 707 

Nervous system neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites 
Table 3. Example illustrating the calculation of person- 
years of exposure (PYE) following first primary 
brain tumor 
Table 4. Association of additional primary tumors 
with index tumors 
contribute 6 person-months of exposure (PME) at age 50, 
I PYE at each age from 5 1 through 53, and 7 PME at age 
54. If a second patient with a recorded age of 52 had a 
brain tumor and had survived for 2 years, 2 months at the 
date of last follow-up, he would be, on the average, 52.5 
years old at diagnosis. He would contribute 6 PME at age 
52, 1 PYE at age 53, and 8 PME at age 54. The PME can 
then be converted into PYE by dividing by 12. The total 
experience for these two patients would be 0.50 PYE at 
age 50, 1.00 PYE at age 51, 1.50 PYE at age 52, 2.00 
PYE at age 53, and 1.25 PYE at age 54. Table 3 gives 
examples of such calculations. 
The survival experience for all patients with a first 
primary neoplasm of the nervous system thus was 
collected for each age group, and the experience in each 
5-year age group was totaled, giving I8 such groupings 
(ages 0-4, . . ., 80-84, 85, and older). Age-specific, 
sex-specific, and site-specific incidence 
were 
then applied to the appropriate PYE in order to obtain the 
expected number of second primary cancers for each 
specific group. Thus, foreach age, sex, and site grouping, 
the following equation could be applied to individuals 
who already 
have 
a 
malignancy at site 
1: 
PYEi x incidencez = expected number of new primary 
malignancies at site 2, where PYEi refers to PYE in 
patients with cancer at one site who are exposed to the risk 
of development of a new primary cancer and incidence. 
refers to the probability that a new cancer will develop at a 
second site. 
The figures for expected cancer were then summed over 
all age groups to obtain the total number of expected 
cancers at each site. Using the same methods, it was 
possible to determine the expected number of primary 
nervous system neoplasms following primary 
malignancies in other sites. The coded records of reported 
cases of second primary cancers were selected and 
matched by case number with the first primary cancers to 
obtain the observed number of second primaries. 
Since the probability ofa second primary cancer is very 
small, the number of second primary cancers can be 
expected to follow a Poisson distribution. A table of 
significance factors for the ratio of a Poisson variable to its 
expectationz6 was used to test the statistical significance 
of the results. When the number of observed cases was 
zero, statistical significance was tested with the values 
given in a table of confidence limits for the expectation of 
a Poisson variable.*’ The total Connecticut population 
was available for the estimation of the incidence rate for 
the first primary cancer, whereas only those in whom a 
first primary cancer developed were subsequently 
available for the estimation of the incidence of the second 
primary cancer. The estimation of the incidence of first 
primary cancers therefore has negligible error in 
comparison with the estimation of the incidence of second 
primary cancers, since the former estimate is based on a 
much larger sample size. 
Results. A search of a group of 185,344 records produced 
a subgroup of 5,022 patients with multiple primary tumors 
diagnosed from 1935 through 1964. A further search of 
the subgroup revealed 135 patients (59 males and 76 
females) with multiple primary tumors in whom at least 
one of the primary sites was within the nervous system, as 
defined for the purposes of this study. As noted in table 4, 
130 patients each had one primary tumor in addition to the 
one within the nervous system, four patients each had two 
additional primaries, and one patient had three additional 
associated neoplasms. Calculation reveals that 130 
additional tumors were associated with 130 of the index 
tumor cases, eight additional tumors were associated with 
four of the index cases, and three additional tumors were 
associated with one of the index cases. Thus, 141 
additional primary tumors were associated with the 135 
index tumor cases within the nervous system. 
Three patients had both first and second primary tumors 
within the nervous system. One patient had an 
astrocytoma and meningioma, another had a 
meningiosarcoma and glioblastoma, and the third had a 
meningiosarcoma in association with an oligo- 
dendroglioma. All these six separate primary tumors 
of the nervous system were microscopically confirmed. In 
the entire group of tumors, both the first and sub5equent 
primary neoplasms were confirmed microscopically in 
approximately 75 percent of the 141 multiple primary 
tumor pairs (index case and associated primary tumor), 
one of the group of multiple primaries was confirmed 
708 NEUROLOGY August 1975 

Table 5. Histologic confirmation of multiple primary tumor pairs 
Table 6. Distribution by site of the 141 multiple primary 
tumors associated with the 135 index tumor cases 
within the nervous system* 
Approximately 75 percent of the index tumor cases 
involved the brain and cranial meninges. Table 6 shows 
the distribution by site of the 141 multiple primary tumors 
associated with the 135 index tumor cases. The most 
commonly involved sites outside the nervous system, in 
order, were the digestive tract, breast, female genital 
organs, and prostate. 
The distribution by histologic type of microscopically 
confirmed tumors involving the brain and cranial 
meninges in patients with multiple primaries was 
compared with the distribution of such neoplasms in all 
patients.2s In comparison with the relative frequency in 
the general population, there was a distinct increase in the 
percentage of meningiomas and a corresponding decrease 
in the percentage of the astrocytoma group of tumors 
(p < 0.01) (table 7). 
Simultaneously diagnosed neoplasms could not be 
included in comparing the observed and expected 
numbers of second primary cancers, because it was not 
possible to calculate an expected number for this group of 
tumors. Only in the case of multiple primary tumors 
involving the breast and nervous system did the number of 
observed second primary cancers significantly ex- 
ceed the number expected (18 cases observed versus 
10.25 cases expected; p < 0.05). All these 18 patients 
were females. Tables 8 and 9 provide a more detailed 
description of the characteristics of these tumors. The 
patients’ age at diagnosis of the breast cancer followed no 
consistent pattern. Of the 18 nonsimultaneously 
diagnosed tumor pairs, each tumor in 14 pairs was 
microscopically confirmed, and one of the two tumors in 
the remaining four pairs was so confirmed. Eight cases of 
a meningioma associated with a breast cancer accounted 
for the excess of observed-over-expected second primary 
cancers; only 3.37 such cases were expected (p < 0.05). 
Discussion. Before interpreting the results, it is necessary 
to examine certain possibilities for bias. For many of the 
multiple primary tumors studied, the central nervous 
system is a common metastatic site for the associated 
tumor; metastatic disease thus may be mistaken for a new 
microscopically in 15 percent, and none of the tumors 
primary cancer. One therefore cannot overemphasize the 
was so confirmed in 10 percent (table 5). 
importance of microscopic confirmation of both tumors or 
In 39 patients, the multiple primary tumors were 
at least of the central nervous system tumor, because 
diagnosed simultaneously. The average time interval 
malignancies of the central nervous system do not 
between discovery of nonsimultaneously 
diagnosed 
commonly metastasize to distant sites outside the central 
multiple primaries was 60.8 months. 
nervous system. The reverse can also hold true, however. 
NEUROLOGY August 1975 709 

Nervous system neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites 
Table 7. Distribution of histologically confirmed 
primary tumors of the brain and cranial meninges 
(Connecticut, 1935 -1964) 
The attending physician may believe that neoplastic 
disease in a second site represents metastatic spread, and 
therefore clinical investigations that would determine the 
existence of a new independent primary lesion may not 
be carried out. 
In cases 7. 8, and 9, the development of the nervous 
system tumor, which was not confirmed microscopically, 
was followed by the development of a histologically 
confirmed malignancy of the breast (table 8). However, 
the nervous system tumors had been diagnosed 2 years, I 
year, and 4 years, respectively, before diagnosis of the 
breast cancers. In case I8 (table 9). a confirmed 
carcinoma of the breast was diagnosed more than 13% 
years before diagnosis of the spinal cord tumor, which 
was not microscopically confirmed. Although in these 
four cases the tumor that was not histologically confirmed 
may have represented metastatic spread from the 
microscopically confirmed malignancy, we consider this 
only a small possibility. 
In comparing the observed and expected numbers of 
second primary cancers, one must consider that since 
persons in whom one cancer has already developed may 
be more closely followed medically than those in whom a 
malignancy has not developed, subsequent cancers are 
likely to be discovered more often and at an earlier date. A 
person with one cancer already diagnosed may be more 
health-conscious or may come from areas of the state with 
better medical facilities than members of the general 
population, so that any second cancer may be diagnosed 
earlier. 
Of particular interest is the higher percentage of 
meningiomas in patients with multiple primary tumors. 
This also holds true for the group with breast cancer and 
nervous system tumors. This finding has special clinical 
significance because meningiomas are potentially 
curable. 
In regard to the higher percentage of meningiomas 
among patients with multiple primary cancers. one might 
argue that since a patient with a meningioma has a longer 
survival period than patients with other types of brain 
tumors, other primary tumors may become manifest. 
However, in the patients in the group with multiple 
primary tumors who had nieningionias, nine of the 
meningiomas were diagnosed at the same time that the 
other primary was diagnosed, I7 were diagnosed after the 
other primary. and only nine were diagnosed before 
diagnosis of the other primary neoplasm. Thus, for the 
majority of patients, the argument of longer survival 
cannot explain the excess of meningiomas. since most of 
these tumors were diagnosed at the same time or after the 
other primary. Furthermore, in the analysis to determine 
the expected number of patients with both meningioma 
and breast cancer, the survival experience of all patients 
with hreast cancer and all patients with meningioma was 
taken into account. 
The considerably higher percentage of meningiomas 
found in the patients with multiple primary tumors might 
reflect the fact that the rate of postmortem examinations is 
higher in patients dying of cancer than in those dying of 
other causes with no known neoplasm. Meningiomas that 
may be asymptomatic during life therefore would be 
detected at autopsy. In order to test this hypothesis, the 
percentage of all meningiomas of the central nervous 
system first diagnosed at autopsy (15 percent) was 
compared with the corresponding percentage in cases of 
multiple primary tumors (56 percent). This sug- 
gests that the above hypothesis explains the higher per- 
centage of meningiomas in patients with multiple primary 
neoplasms. This was not the case in the eight patients 
with both a meningioma and a breast cancer. Six of these 
patients had symptoms suggesting an intracranial neo- 
plasm prior to death. In only two asymptomatic patients 
was the totally unsuspected meningioma first discovered 
at autopsy. The figure of25 percent (two ofeight patients) 
is not very different from the overall figure of 15 percent. 
The association of breast cancer and meningiornas 
raises some interesting etiologic possibilities, especially 
when they are considered in conjunction with other 
epidemiologic features of rneningiomas. First, 
meningiomas are the only common primary intracranial 
neoplasm with a higher incidence in females.2s Second, 
several authors have reported the rather abrupt appearance 
of meningiomas during pregnancy, and there is general 
agreement that these tumors enlarge during pregnancy.28 
Whether this is due to an acceleration in the growth of the 
tumor or an increase in the fluid content of the tumor has 
not been elucidated. The association of breast cancer and 
meningiomas demonstrated in the present study may be 
related to hormonal factors. 
Only in the case of nervous system tumors and breast 
cancer did the number of observed second primary 
neoplasms significantly exceed the expected number. 
This agrees with the findings of Lynch and associates,2 
who reported a similar association in members of the 
710 NEUROLOGY August 1975 

Table 8. Association of neoplasms of the nervous system* and breast cancer 
Nonsimultaneously diagnosed cases: First primary tumor in the nervous system 
Table 9. Association of neoplasms of the nervous system* and breast cancer 
Nonsimultaneously diagnosed cases: First primary tumor outside the nervous system 
NEUROLOGY August 1975 711 

Nervous system neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites 
same kindreds. Patients or families with this group of 
tumors should be more intensively studied in an attempt 
to identify the genetic or environmental factors re- 
sponsible for this association. With this relationship in 
mind, physicians should evaluate carefully any patient 
with breast cancer who presents with signs or symptoms 
of an intracranial neoplasm, for if a new independent 
primary tumor is discovered, there is a good chance it is a 
potentially curable meningioma. 
REFERENCES 
1. McAllister RM, Nelson-Rees WA. Johnson EY, et al: Disseminated 
rhabdomyosarcomas formed in kittens by cultured human 
rhabdomyosarcoma cells. J Natl Cancer lnst 47:603-611, 
1971 
2. Lynch HT, Krush AJ, Harlan WL: Association of breast cancer, soft 
tissue sarcoma, leukemia, and brain tumors in breast cancer families. 
(Abstr) Neurology (Minneap) 22:441, 1972 
3. Russell DS, Rubinstein LJ: Pathology of Tumours of the Nervous 
System. Ed 3. Baltimore, The Williams 8 Wilkins Company, 1971, pp 
4. Kirschbaum WR: lntrasellar meningioma and multiple cerebral 
glioblastomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 4:370-378, 
1945 
5. Feiring EH, Davidoff LM: Two tumors, meningioma and glioblastoma 
multiforme, in one patient. J Neurosurg 4:282-289. 
1947 
6. Alexander WS: Multiple primary intracranial tumours: Meningioma 
associated with a glioma; report of a case. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
7. Mufson JA, Davidoff LM: Multiple meningiomas: Report of two cases. J 
Neurosurg 1 :45-57, 
1944 
8. Moertel CG, Dockerty MB, Baggenstoss AH: Multiple primary malignant 
neoplasms: Ill. Tumors of multicentric origin. Cancer 14:238-248, 
1961 
9. Scherer HJ: The forms of growth in gliomas and their practical 
significance. Brain 63:l-35, 
1940 
10. McFarland J, Sappington SW: Ganglioneuroma in the neck of a child. 
Am J Path01 1 1  :429-448, 
1935 
31-42, 103-105, 
168, 322 
7:81-88, 
1948 
11. Fraumeni JF Jr, Miller RW: Adrenocortical neoplasms with 
hemihypertrophy, brain tumors, and other disorders. J Pediatr 
12. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr: Soft-tissue sarcomas, breast cancer, and other 
neoplasms: A familial syndrome? Ann Intern Med 71 :747-752, 
1969 
13. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr: Rhabdomyosarcoma in children: Epklemiologic 
study and identification of a familial cancer syndrome. J Natl Cancer lnst 
14. Gabbiani G. Kaye GI, Lattes R, et al: Synovial sarcoma: Electron 
microscopic study of a typical case. Cancer 28:1031-1039, 
1971 
15. Jensen RD, Miller RW: Retinoblastoma: Epidemiologic characteristics. 
N Engl J Med 285307-311, 
1971 
16. Lynch HT, Krush AJ: The cancer family syndrome and cancer control. 
Surg Gynecol Obstet 132:247-250, 
1971 
17. Lynch HT, Krush AJ: Cancer family "G" revisited: 1895-1 970. Cancer 
27:1505-1511, 1971 
18. Walker MD, Rumack BH, Rosenblum ML: Malignant central nervous 
system tumor and other neoplasms in a large family. (Abstr) Neurology 
(Minneap) 21:440-441, 
1971 
19. Bottomley RH, Trainer AL, Condit PT: Chromosome studies in a "cancer 
family." Cancer 28519-528, 
1971 
20. Greenberg RA: The Connecticut Tumor Registry. Conn Health Bull 
21. Connelly RR, Campbell PC, Eisenberg H: Central registry of cancer 
cases in Connecticut. Public Health Rep 83:386-390, 
1968 
22. Greenberg RA: The Occurrence of Primary Multiple Cancers. Essay 
presented to the faculty of the Department of Public Health, Yale 
University, in candidacy for the degree of Master of Public Health. New 
Haven, Connecticut, 1959, pp 22-23 
23. Kernohan JW, Sayre GP: Tumors of the Central Nervous System. 
Washington, DC, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1952 
24. Eisenberg H: Cancer in Connecticut: Incidence and Rates 1935-1962. 
Hartford, Connecticut, Connecticut State Department of Health, 1966 
25. Schoenberg BS: Unpublished data 
26. Bailar JC, Ederer F: Significance factors for the ratio of a Poisson 
variable to its expectation. Biometrics 20:639-643, 1964 
27. Pearson ES, Hartley HO: Biometrika Tables for Statisticians. Ed 2. 
Cambridge, cambridge University Press, 1958, VOI 1, p 203 
28. Michelsen JJ, New PFJ: Brain tumor and pregnancy. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 32:305-307, 
1969 
70~129-138, 
1967 
43:1365-1373, 
1969 
73135-42, 
1959 
712 NEUROLOGY August 1975 

DOI 10.1212/WNL.25.8.705
1975;25;705 
Neurology 
BRUCE S. SCHOENBERG, BARBARA W. CHRISTINE and JACK P. WHISNANT
between meningiomas and breast cancer
Nervous system neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites: The unique association
This information is current as of August 1, 1975
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://www.neurology.org/content/25/8/705.full.html
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Citations
 
http://www.neurology.org/content/25/8/705.full.html##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles: 
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/misc/about.xhtml#permissions
entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in its
  
Reprints
 
http://www.neurology.org/misc/addir.xhtml#reprintsus
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 1975 by the American Academy of Neurology. All rights 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since 1951, it
Neurology 

