# Evaluation of a Youth- Led Program for Preventing Bullying, Sexual Harassment, and Dating Aggression in Middle Schools


Journal of Early Adolescence
2015, Vol. 35(3) 403­–434
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0272431614535090
jea.sagepub.com


## Jennifer Connolly[1], Wendy Josephson[2],  Jessica Schnoll[1], Emily Simkins-Strong[1],  Debra Pepler[1], Alison MacPherson[1],  Jessica Weiser[3], Michelle Moran[3], and Depeng Jiang[4]

**Abstract**
Although youth-led programs (YLP) have been successful in many areas
of public health, youth leadership is rarely used in the prevention of
peer aggression. A YLP to reduce bullying, sexual harassment, and dating
aggression was compared experimentally with the board-mandated usual
practice (UP). Four middle schools in an urban Canadian school division
were randomly assigned to a YLP or to UP programs led by adults.
Knowledge, attitudes, victimization, and emotional school adjustment
(anxiety and school connectedness) were assessed in the fall (pretest) and
spring (posttest) among 509 Grades 7 and 8 students (51.4% female, _X age =_
12.37). Significant improvements were found in knowledge and attitudes in
both programs. Students receiving the YLP showed significant reductions in

1York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
2University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
3East Metro Youth Services, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
4University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

**Corresponding Author:**
Jennifer Connolly, York University, 217D York Lanes, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M3J 1P3.
Email: connolly@yorku.ca


-----

anxiety and maintained their school connectedness (all ps < .05). The results
suggest that youth-led prevention is an effective approach for tackling peer
aggression in school settings.

**Keywords**
aggression, school context, bullying, youth programs/camps, dating/dating
violence

Aggression between peers is a significant problem in schools, posing a threat
to student health and reducing positive adjustment (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
2010). In the middle school years, victimization by peers diversifies to
include sexual harassment and dating aggression alongside bullying (Holt &
Espelage, 2003; McMaster, Connolly, Pepler, & Craig, 2002; Pepler & Craig,
2000). Bullying refers to repeated physical or verbal actions that have hostile
intent and involve a power differential between the bully and victim (Olweus,
1993). A recent World Health Organization (WHO) survey of 35 countries
revealed a worldwide victimization rate of 11% among schoolchildren (Craig
& Harel, 2004), a value consistent with nationally representative North
American rates (Nansel, Overpeck, Pilla, Ruan, & Simons-Morton, 2001).
Sexual harassment refers to unwanted verbal or behavioral gestures of a sexual nature (American Association of University Women [AAUW], 2001).
This behavior emerges in the middle school years (McMaster et al., 2002),
and recent research in Canadian and American urban areas suggests that
between 59% and 90% of students in Grades 6 through 9 report being the
target of at least one act of harassment (Chiodo, Wolfe, Crooks, Hughes, &
Jaffe, 2009; Lichty & Campbell, 2012). Dating aggression refers to physical,
psychological, or sexual abuse directed toward a dating partner with the
intent of harming him or her (Capaldi, Knoble, Shortt, & Kim, 2012).
Nationally representative U.S. data indicate that victimization is reported by
30% of adolescents, including those 12 to 14 years of age (Halpern, Oslak,
Young, Martin, & Kupper, 2001).
Regardless of type, being victimized by a peer is a significant risk factor
for poor school adjustment. Victimized adolescents report numerous symptoms of emotional distress, including depression, anxiety, and low selfesteem (Card & Hodges, 2008; Espelage & Holt, 2007; Gruber & Fineran,
2007). They also report feeling fearful in school, and they do not feel valued
by their teachers (Chiodo et al., 2009; Lichty & Campbell, 2012; Nansel,
Haynie, & Simons-Morton, 2003; Shute, Owens, & Slee, 2008). There is as


-----

well an increased risk of problematic social behavior including the early use
of alcohol (Peleg-Oren, Cardenas, Comerford, & Galea, 2012). The implications for achievement can likewise be severe as students bullied throughout
middle school suffer significant declines in school performance (Juvonen,
Wang, & Espinoza, 2011). Given its frequency as well as negative personal
outcomes, researchers have focused attention on developing school-based
programs to prevent the occurrence of peer aggression and victimization. The
present study is an evaluation of a youth-led violence prevention program
that targets bullying, sexual harassment, and dating aggression during the
middle school years.

## The Developmental Context of Peer Aggression

Aggressive behaviors toward peers do not occur in isolation (Holt & Espelage,
2012; Pepler et al., 2006). Childhood bullying is a risk factor for sexual
harassment and dating aggression in early adolescence, when youth become
sensitized to sexual and romantic dimensions of relationships. Indeed, youth
who bully are also more likely to sexually harass their peers and to perpetrate
aggression toward a dating partner (Connolly, Pepler, Craig, & Taradash,
2000; McMaster et al., 2002). The middle school years are a transition point
for this developmental continuum as bullying rates peak around Grade 9
while these gendered forms are on the ascent (Espelage & Holt, 2007; Pepler
& Craig, 2003). Compounding the problem for middle school youth, bullying, sexual harassment, and dating violence often co-occur: Students who
experience one form of aggression are at increased risk for victimization by
the other types of aggression (Finkelhor, Ormrod, & Turner, 2007; Holt &
Espelage, 2005). Intervention at this point can alter the pathway for further
aggression in the high school years, so the middle school years are a critical
time for prevention programs.

## School-Based Aggression Prevention Programs

School-based aggression prevention programs have grown exponentially in
recent years (see Ferguson, Miguel, Kilburn, & Sanchez, 2007; Ttofi &
Farrington, 2011; Wilson, Lipsey, & Derzon, 2003, for meta-analytic
reviews). Program evaluations have generally found significant intervention
effects on outcomes that include increased knowledge, attitude changes such
as decreased acceptance of aggression, and improvements in interpersonal
skills that foster healthy peer relationships (Farrell, Meyer, Sullivan, & Kung,
2003; Flannery et al., 2003; Regan, 2009; Shapiro, Burgoon, Welker, &
Clough, 2002). School prevention programs most often target only one form


-----

of aggression, be it bullying, harassment, or dating aggression. Given their
co-occurrence in the middle school years, it would seem wise to target all
three forms of aggression affecting students at this age.
In addition to changing knowledge, attitudes, and behavior, advocates of
aggression prevention programs often speak about the importance of improving students’ adjustment in school (Flannery et al., 2003; Olweus & Limber,
1999). School adjustment is a broad concept with many components, including emotional, social, and academic well-being. In applying this concept to
victimization, emotional well-being and positive engagement with school
have been emphasized as alienation, anxiety, and negative school experiences are associated with high levels of peer aggression (Carney, Hazler, Oh,
Hibel, & Granger, 2010; Holt & Espelage, 2003; Nansel et al., 2003;
Salmivalli, Garandeau, & Veenstra, 2012). Nonetheless, to date, emotional
school adjustment has received less attention than other program outcomes.
In advocating for inclusion of emotional school adjustment in evaluation
studies, it has been argued that students in schools with effective aggression
prevention programs might experience less anxiety because of the reduced
risk of being a target of aggression or of witnessing episodes of aggression
(Salmivalli et al., 2012). They may also feel greater connection to their school
because teachers and administrators are providing a visible expression of
respect and concern for students’ safety and providing tangible support to
those experiencing peer aggression. The importance of focusing on emotional school adjustment when evaluating middle school prevention programs
is reinforced by the fact that students’ sense of connectedness with their
school very often declines during the middle school years, with deleterious
effects on academic achievement (Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, &
Schellinger, 2011; Shochet, Dadds, Ham, & Montague, 2006). Prevention
programs that improve emotional school adjustment alongside reductions in
peer aggression would be particularly appealing to administrators and
increase their uptake in schools (Salmivalli et al., 2012).

## Youth-Led Aggression Prevention Programs

Libby, Rosen, and Sedonaen (2005) have argued that young people often find
their peers more engaging and credible than adults in education and skills
training. Peer-led prevention programs have been successful in a number of
public health domains such as smoking or sexual assault (Maticka-Tyndale &
Barnett, 2010; Mellanby, Rees, & Tripp, 2000; Simoni, Nelson, Franks, Yard,
& Lehavot, 2011). In fact, Cheon’s (2008) systematic review identified peer
leadership as a best practice in community-based youth substance reduction
programs.


-----

Peers have a substantial influence on aggressive behavior (Farrell &
Flannery, 2006), and so program delivery by peer leaders would seem to be
an obvious format for prevention programs. To date, this has rarely occurred.
Recently, Weisz and Black (2010) argued that peer leadership should be
encouraged because it shows promise of being an effective means of preventing peer aggression. In advocating for peer-led programming, it is important
to distinguish peer leadership from other forms of peer participation. In a
recent meta-analysis of school-based prevention programs, Ttofi and
Farrington (2011) found that antibullying programs with peer mediation, peer
mentoring, or encouragement of peers in bystander involvement were not
effective in reducing victimization. These forms of peer engagement may not
be effective because they do not correspond to the peer-educator models
espoused by Libby et al. (2005) or Weisz and Black. In these models, which
we follow in the current study, youth are provided with extensive training in
the delivery of the program content and their program delivery is closely
monitored by adult program advisors.
Refining the discussion of the importance of youth leadership, Mellanby,
Newcombe, Rees, and Tripp (2001) have suggested that peer-led forms of
program delivery, when compared with adult-led programs, might be differentially successful in specific domains. They argue that adult-led programs
might be very effective at transferring factual knowledge but that peer-led
programs might be better at modifying social norms. If so, we would expect
that peer leaders might be comparable with adults in changing knowledge
and behavior in the areas of bullying, dating aggression, and sexual harassment but would be especially influential in the broader personal domains
including attitudes and emotional school adjustment.

## Research Context of School-Based Evaluations

Given the prevalence and negative outcomes associated with peer aggression,
school boards in Canada legally mandate prevention initiatives in all schools.
Such actions are to be strongly applauded as they reflect the important policy
changes that are occurring in schools as bullying, harassment, and dating
aggression become recognized as threats to public health. Reinforcing the
importance of such initiatives, a recent social policy report from the Society
for Research on Child Development advocated for this type of action, saying
that “school-driven” prevention programs should become a part of everyday
life in our schools (Jones & Bouffard, 2012).
Alongside the obvious value of such policy shifts are significant implications for applied research on prevention in schools. No longer is it possible in
most jurisdictions, ethically or practically, to compare a prevention program


-----

with a no-treatment control. Instead, the most typically available comparison
group is one that would continue with its usual practices (UPs) as determined
by the school board. In this context, the research question shifts from an
evaluation of whether the program under investigation is of benefit compared
with no program at all to a consideration of the trial program in comparison
with what is currently being offered to students in their everyday student
lives. Such a restriction is not uncommon in medical or psychiatric research
wherein the everyday intervention is often referred to as UP (see, for example, Deans, Minneci, Danner, Eichacker, & Natanson, 2010; Thompson &
Schoenfeld, 2007). Although less common in prevention research, some
recent studies have successfully used a UP comparison group (see Multisite
Violence Prevention Project, 2004). Inferences drawn from such comparisons are challenging because UP schools typically have some flexibility in
programming within their board, and so intervention is not standardized and
may include some variation in content. Nonetheless the value of such comparisons lies in the fact that they can demonstrate whether a new program has
potential benefits to students within a real-world setting.

## Current Study

The present study reports an evaluation of a school-based youth-led program
(YLP) implemented in a school board that mandated the provision of peer
violence prevention programs in all of its schools, and so the challenges
described above were pertinent to the current evaluation. The YLP was developed by a community agency, under contract to the school board. Prior to the
current study, a pilot evaluation was undertaken of the program when it was
offered in a different school. Students who were recipients of the pilot program rated it very positively, indicating that they liked the youth-led sessions
and that they learned something new about peer aggression (Josephson,
Connolly, Simkins-Strong, & Weiser, 2009). Focus groups conducted with
students and teachers in the pilot evaluation revealed consistent endorsement
of the value of peer leadership and the positive influence of the program on
school climate (Weiser et al., 2011). Reinforcing these findings, interviews
with the youth leaders indicated that they viewed their involvement in the
program very positively, citing increases in competence and confidence in
their abilities as well as making many personal changes in their daily lives
(Weiser et al., 2011).
In the current study, we evaluated the YLP by comparing it with the
school board’s UP of mandating individual schools to provide antiviolence
programming. Varying somewhat in format from one school to another, the
UP shared the common feature of being led by teachers or other adults. Our


-----

evaluation was consistent with the framework provided by Kirkpatrick and
Hawk (2006) in which four evaluation factors are outlined: reaction, learning, behavior, and results. Our pilot evaluation assessed the reactions of
multiple stakeholders to the program and showed that they were very positive (Josephson et al., 2009; Weiser et al., 2011). Our current evaluation
focused on: students’ learning about bullying, harassment, and dating
aggression; behavior and attitude change; and the results of the program on
emotional school adjustment. We expected the YLP to be as effective as the
UP at transferring knowledge and reducing victimization. We expected the
YLP to be more effective than the UP at improving students’ attitudes and
their emotional school adjustment, manifested by reduced anxiety levels and
a stronger sense of school connection.

## Method

 School Selection

In consultation with the director of the school board’s Safe Schools initiative,
two high schools were randomly selected from a pool of 12 high schools that
were determined to be similar to each other in size (enrollment between 900
and 1,200 students), student needs, and ethno-cultural diversity. Each of the
two high schools was associated with two “feeder” middle schools located in
close geographic proximity and from which came the majority of their students. The two high schools, with their two middle schools, were randomly
assigned to either the YLP or the board-mandated UP. Prior to treatment
assignment, the school principals had agreed to accept either condition for
their school.
The YLP and UP schools had two common programs. First, the participating school board mandated that all schools participate in an initiative to reinforce positive character traits, in addition to elective programming related to
aggression prevention. Hence both YLP and UP participated in the character
traits program in which one character attribute (e.g., respect, responsibility)
was discussed each month. Also common to both YLP and UP groups, all
students are provided access to guidance counselors, with whom they can
discuss personal issues, including peer aggression.

## Participants

Study participants were 509 middle school students who completed surveys
in the fall and the spring of one academic year. They were enrolled in 42
Grade 7 and 8 classrooms, located across the four middle schools. The two


-----

schools which received the YLP included 209 students assigned to 16 classrooms. The two schools which received the UP included 300 students
assigned to 26 classrooms. Participants’ age range was 11 to 14 years ( X =
12.37, _SD = .63) and gender was evenly distributed (51.4% female). The_
sample was ethnically diverse: Students described their backgrounds as being
South Asian (34.7%), Asian (20.0%), European (12.5%), Middle Eastern
(12.5%), African/Caribbean (12.5%), or Other (mixed heritage, Latino, First
Nations; 7.7%).

## Procedure

In each middle school, the violence prevention programs were provided to all
of the enrolled students. However, participation in the research evaluation
required written informed consent from the students and their parent. While all
students in the middle schools were invited to participate, not all did so. In the
two YLP middle schools’ participation rates at pretest were 58% and 73%. In
the UP schools, the rates were 42% and 55%. Sample attrition from pretest to
posttest was 12% and did not differ between UP and YLP. To evaluate whether
attrition from pretest to posttest might bias the study results, we compared two
groups of students: those who completed pretesting only and those who completed both pretest and posttest questionnaires. The t-test comparisons of the
outcome variables were uniformly nonsignificant as were chi-square tests for
gender and ethnicity. Overall, these findings suggest that attrition was not
biased toward any subgroup of the participants. Following the CONSORT
GROUP guidelines (Altman et al., 2001) a flowchart of the participation rates
in the schools from initial invitation to posttest is provided in Figure 1.
Pretest questionnaires were administered at the beginning of October and
posttest questionnaires at the end of May of the same academic year.
Depending on the wishes of the school principal, administration took place in
students’ classrooms, the school cafeteria, or gymnasium. The survey was
designed to be completed within a regular classroom period and took approximately 45 minutes to complete. Research assistants, but not teachers, were
present at each administration session and were available to answer questions
regarding item comprehension.

_Usual practice. The programs implemented by the UP schools were selected_
by the school principals from several board options and included: presentations from the police about gangs and peer aggression; antibullying presentations by internal staff or external personnel (e.g., a drama company);
antibullying discussions facilitated by the guidance counselor; and group discussions of personal safety issues specific to girls. While the UP programs


-----

|1 high school randomly assigned to provide the youth-led intervention program (YLP) to its 2 most adjacent “feeder” middle schools (n= 258 and n = 82)|Col2|Allocation|1 high school that did not offer the YLP and whose 2 most adjacent “feeder” middle schools therefore received the board- mandated usual practice (UP) (n= 256 and n = 357)|
|---|---|---|---|


**Figure 1. Flow of participants through each stage of the study.**
_Note: Flowchart is adapted from the flowchart offered by the CONSORT Group (Altman et al.,_
2001).

differed somewhat in format or content, all programs were implemented by
adults: teachers, guidance counselors, or adults from the community. Each of
the UP schools conducted three adult-led programs delivered in the classroom or in an assembly, for an estimated time of 90 minutes.

_Youth-led aggression prevention program. The YLP (Respect in Schools Every-_
where; RISE) is a manualized program in which middle school students


-----

receive two classroom presentations led by youth leaders from the local high
school (see Josephson et al., 2009, for a full description). In the RISE Program, experienced mental health workers recruit and train 25 students from
Grades 11 and 12 to be peer leaders. They provide these students with the
skills and knowledge they need to understand peer aggression and to lead
aggression prevention classroom workshops. The youth leaders may include
any interested student from the target high school. In the fall term, they participate in 16 afterschool sessions led by the mental health worker during
which they are provided with education and training in aggression prevention
and leadership skills. During the final sessions, the youth leaders plan two
aggression prevention presentations (one on bullying and the other on gender-based aggression, including sexual harassment and dating aggression).
While the youth have some flexibility in the format of the presentation, adult
directors ensure that they comply with the general instructions and guidelines
provided in the manual. This approach increases engagement of the youth
leaders by allowing them to personalize the presentations while still maintaining consistency with the manualized program. During the winter term,
these presentations are conducted in Grade 7 and 8 classrooms in the middle
schools. Two YLP leaders, a young man and a young woman, conduct the
classroom sessions. The classroom teacher is not present during the presentations, which are instead tactfully monitored by the mental health worker for
consistency with the manual. Each class is 45 minutes in duration, for an
approximate total of 90 minutes.

## Ethics

Prior to the start of the intervention, the study protocol was reviewed and
approved by the Ethics Review Panels (ERPs) of the investigators’ respective
institutions as well as by the host Board of Education. All ERPs confirmed
that ethical standards for research with youth were met.

## Measures

_Knowledge. Knowledge about peer aggression was measured with the RISE_
Knowledge Questionnaire (Moran & Weiser, 2004). It includes 30 true–false
items that assess three domains: bullying (15 items, for example, “Most bullying incidents have people watching them”), sexual harassment (3 items, for
example, “Calling someone a ‘fag’ or a ‘dyke’ is a form of sexual harassment”),
and dating aggression (12 items, for example, “Violence in relationships happens more often to teenagers than to adults”). The proportion of correct answers
was computed, with higher scores indicative of greater knowledge.


-----

_Attitudes. Three measures of attitudes were completed. Pro-bullying attitudes_
were assessed using the Provictim Scale (Rigby & Slee, 1991), which
includes 12 items rated on a 5-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). A sample item is “It makes me angry
when a teenager is picked on without reason.” Items were reverse scored and
then averaged so that higher scores indicated a more approving attitude
toward bullying. Previous research on the scale has reported strong internal
consistency (Cronbach’s α = .78) and demonstrated construct validity (Rigby,
2000; Rigby & Slee, 1991). Cronbach’s alpha for the current sample was .60
on the pretest and .68 on the posttest. Pro-sexual harassment attitudes were
assessed with the Adolescent Sexual Harassment Attitudes Scale. This scale
was developed for the current study and is derived from the American Association of University Women Scale of Sexual Harassment (2001). Because
our scale was unique to the current study, we conducted an exploratory factor
analysis to determine whether the items formed a single factor. The analysis
provided support for an eight-item scale with a Cronbach’s alpha of .72 in the
fall pretest and .73 in the spring posttest (sample items include “It is acceptable for someone to pull at another person’s clothing in a sexual way” “It is
OK to make sexual comments, jokes about a teen”). The items were rated on
a 5-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
_agree) and ratings were averaged to yield a summary score in which higher_
values were indicative of greater tolerance of sexual harassment. Pro-dating
violence attitudes were assessed with the Attitudes Towards Dating Violence
Scale (Price & Byers, 1999), which includes 18 items measuring psychological, physical, and sexual dating aggression (e.g., “It is OK for a guy to badmouth his girlfriend”; “It is OK for a girl to slap her boyfriend if he deserves
it”; and “When a guy pays on a date, it is OK for him to pressure his girlfriend
for sex,” respectively). The items were rated on a 5-point Likert-type scale,
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) and ratings were
averaged to yield a summary score in which higher values were indicative of
greater tolerance of sexual harassment. Previous research demonstrated good
internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = .72-.88). The present study showed
similar consistency (α = .74 at pretest, .80 at posttest).

_Victimization. Bullying victimization was assessed using the Canadian Public_
Health Association Safe School Survey for Grades 4-7 (Totten, Quigley, &
Morgan, 2004). This 4-item questionnaire measures physical, verbal, social,
and electronic victimization with the following items: “Have you been physically bullied at school”; “Have you been verbally bullied by insults, putdowns, or threats at school”; “Have you been left out by rumors, or by someone
making you look bad”; and “Have you been bullied using the Internet, email,


-----

phone, or cellular phone text messages.” Students rated the frequency with
which they had experienced each type of bullying in the past 2 months on a
4-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 0 (never) to 3 (many times a week).
Scores on the 4 items were averaged to yield a summary score with higher
values indicative of more victimization. Cronbach’s alpha was .62 for both the
pretest and posttest. Sexual harassment victimization was assessed using the
Sexual Harassment Questionnaire (McMaster et al., 2002), which includes 14
items of same- and cross-gender victimization. For example, the items “How
often has a teen touched, grabbed, or pinched you in a sexual way?” and “How
often has a teen made sexual comments, jokes, movements, or looks” were
followed by two ratings, one for “a girl (or group of girls)” and a second for “a
boy (or group of boys).” The response scale ranged from 1 (never) to 5 (daily),
and the items were averaged to yield a summary score with higher scores
indicative of more victimization. McMaster et al. reported strong internal consistency of the scale (α = .91). In the present study, Cronbach’s alpha was .83
for the pretest and .82 for the posttest. Dating aggression victimization was
assessed using the Conflict in Adolescent Dating Relationships Inventory
(CADRI; Wolfe et al., 2001) in which participants rated how often they had
been subjected by their dating partner to 21 acts of physical, emotional, or
verbal abuse. A response scale from 1 (never) to 4 (often) was used, and items
were averaged to obtain a summary score in which higher values indicate
more dating aggression. Sample items include “During a conflict or argument
I was kicked, hit, or punched by my boy/girlfriend”; “He or she tried to turn
my friends against me”; and “He or she made fun of me in front of others.”
Cronbach’s alpha of .68 has previously been reported (Wolfe et al., 2001). In
the present study, only participants who were in a current relationship or had
been in a relationship within the past 2 months completed the measure (n = 48;
α = .88 on the pretest, .85 on the posttest).

_Emotional school adjustment. Two measures were used. Connectedness to_
school was measured with the Psychological Sense of School Membership
Scale (PSSM; Goodenow, 1993). The PPSM includes 10 items that probe
students’ feelings of being respected and valued within their school (e.g.,
“This school listens to and values students’ ideas”; “The teachers here respect
me”). The items are rated on a 5-point Likert-type scale from 1 (strongly
_disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Items were averaged to obtain a summary_
score with higher scores indicative of greater school connectedness. Internal
consistency of .88 has previously been reported alongside evidence of construct validity (Goodenow, 1993). Comparable reliability was obtained in the
current study (α = .86 at both the pretest and posttest). Anxiety was assessed
using the Shortened Screen for Child-Related Anxiety Disorders (Birmaher,


-----

Khetarpal, Brent, Cully, Balach, Kaufman & Neer, 1997). The scale includes
20 items of symptomatic anxiety (e.g., “I get stomach aches in school” and “I
worry about how well I do things”), which are rated on a Likert-type scale
ranging from 0 (not at all) to 3 (a lot). Items are averaged to obtain a summary score with higher scores indicative of more anxiety. Acceptable internal
consistency (Cronbach’s α = .84) and construct validity have previously been
reported (Birmaher et al., 1997). Internal consistency in the current study was
.89 on both the pretest and posttest.

_Missing data. Where data were missing for individual items on scales, they_
were replaced with students’ mean score on other items of that scale. If more
than 30% of items were missing, mean substitution was not used, and the
scale score was treated as missing. Ninety-seven participants (18.9%) had
missing data for a scale. Only 48 participants (9%) reported being in dating
relationships at both the pretest and the posttest, and so the measure of dating
aggression victimization was missing for the majority of the sample.

## Statistical Design

Multilevel linear models (MLMs; Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002; Snijders &
Bosker, 1999) using Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) were
fitted to the data to determine the program effects on knowledge, attitudes,
victimization, and emotional school adjustment. This method was selected in
view of three factors: the cluster sampling used in the study, the nonindependence of students within classroom, and the repeated measurement (fall pretest and spring posttest) within students. A basic characteristic of MLM is the
capacity to include random subject and classroom effects into a regression
model in order to control for the influence of subjects on their repeated observations as well as nonindependence of students within the same classroom. A
second important characteristic of MLM using FIML is that it uses all the
available participant information for the analysis, even those with missing
data at one of the assessments. This use of all data when conducting inference
tests on groups with small sample size makes the inference more efficient and
also increases accuracy of the standard error (Laird, 1988).
In the current study, design randomization into UP or YLP conditions
occurred at the school level, while the intervention took place at the classroom level. However, school was not introduced as a level in our MLM analyses because the small number of schools in our sample precludes an accurate
estimation of between-school variance (Heck, 2001). This situation is not
uncommon in evaluations of school-based interventions (e.g., Salmivalli,
Kaukiainen, & Voeten, 2005). Thus, in our three-level multilevel model,


-----

Level 1 represents repeated outcome measures from pretest to posttest within
individuals, Level 2 represents individuals within classrooms, and Level 3
represents classrooms.
We performed a multilevel regression analysis for each outcome variable
separately using SAS Version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina;
Singer, 1998). Four outcome variables had skewness values greater than 1:
attitudes toward sexual harassment and the three victimization variables.
Because the bullying victimization measure included scores of 0, a constant
of .001 was first added to that score, to permit transformation. Log transformations were successful in reducing skewness of these measures. The predictors in the MLM regression analyses included time (pretest, posttest) at Level
1 and prevention program (YLP, UP) at Level 3. To address the key question
of this evaluation, namely, a difference in changes from pretest to posttest
between programs, the interaction between time, and prevention program
was included in the regression. The basic description of the regression equations is reported in Appendix A. To adjust for possible gender and ethnicity
effects, these variables were included as covariates in all MLM regression
analyses. To examine whether gender or ethnicity moderated program outcomes, we conducted additional MLM regression analyses by including the
three-way interactions of gender and ethnicity with time and prevention program as well as all two-way interactions and main effects of these variables.
Interactions with gender were uniformly nonsignificant. Significant threeway interactions with ethnicity were obtained for bullying knowledge and
pro-dating aggression attitudes. These are reported in subsequent sections.

## Results

 Descriptive Analyses

Descriptive statistics for all outcome variables are reported in Table 1.
Overall, students demonstrated high levels of knowledge and moderate tolerance of bullying, sexual harassment, and dating violence. Overall, low rates
of victimization were reported for all three types of peer aggression.
Emotional school adjustment was generally good, with students reporting
moderately high levels of school connectedness and lower levels of anxiety.
The correlations among outcome variables are shown in Table 2. Knowledge
and attitude variables were negatively correlated such that having greater
knowledge of peer aggression was associated with less tolerant attitudes
toward victimizing behaviors. Also, measures of school adjustment showed
predicted trends: Students who reported higher rates of victimization reported
less school connectedness and more anxiety.


-----

**Table 1. Outcome Measures for Youth-Led Program and Usual Practice.**

Youth-led program Usual practice program

Pretest Posttest Pretest Posttest

_X[–] (SD)_ _X[–] (SD)_ _X[–] (SD)_ _X[–] (SD)_

Knowledge
Bullying 0.78 (.15) 0.82 (.13) 0.77 (.15) 0.82 (.13)
Sexual harassment 0.69 (.28) 0.83 (.23) 0.62 (.29) 0.71 (.28)
Dating aggression 0.66 (.16) 0.73 (.14) 0.66 (.15) 0.69 (.15)
Attitudes
Pro-bullying 1.89 (.44) 1.86 (.49) 1.98 (.49) 1.89 (.49)
Pro-sexual harassment 1.34 (.43) 1.29 (.41) 1.37 (.51) 1.39 (.46)
Pro-dating aggression 1.92 (.51) 1.82 (.50) 2.01 (.51) 1.89 (.52)
Victimization
Bullying 0.32 (.42) 0.33 (.38) 0.37 (.42) 0.36 (.43)
Sexual harassment 1.17 (.34) 1.20 (.33) 1.18 (.32) 1.21 (.34)
Dating aggression 1.21 (.24) 1.21 (.24) 1.16 (.19) 1.30 (.36)
School connectedness 4.07 (.64) 4.09 (.63) 3.86 (.71) 3.73 (.70)
Anxiety 0.57 (.38) 0.52 (.36) 0.58 (.37) 0.60 (.37)

## Preliminary Analyses

Prior to computing the MLM, variances within and between classrooms as
well as the intraclass correlations were computed for all pretest variables.
Between classroom variances were significant for knowledge of bullying,
knowledge of dating violence, and bullying victimization. Within classroom
variances were significant for all outcomes. Intraclass correlations with values of .03 or higher were found for bullying knowledge, dating violence
knowledge, sexual harassment victimization, and school connectedness. The
intraclass correlations and the variances between and within classroom were
also computed for changes in the outcome variables at posttest. A similar pattern to the pretest findings was observed: Significant within classroom variance across all outcomes, modest between classroom variance (significant for
bullying knowledge), and intraclass correlation values of .03 or higher for the
three knowledge outcomes, pro-bullying and pro-sexual harassment attitudes, and school connectedness. The individual values are reported in
Appendix B. Taken together, these findings confirm the use of MLM for our
investigation of comparative changes in UP and YLP over time, given the
hierarchically structured nature of our data, namely, students nested within
classrooms, and repeated observations within student.


-----

-----

## Multilevel Linear Model Results: Changes in Outcomes From Pretest to Posttest

To provide the background for interpreting the Program × Time interactions,
we first examine the effects of YLP and UP on the outcome variables, as
revealed through the main effects of each program. Following this, we examine the comparison of the magnitude of change produced by YLP and UP on
the outcome variables, as revealed through the Time × Program interaction
effects. Finally, we consider whether gender or ethnicity moderated the program effects, as evidenced by significant three-way interactions. Tests of significance were conducted with alpha set at .05. Table 3 presents the estimated
changes from fall to spring for all outcome variables for the UP and YLP
intervention. The differences in the magnitudes of the estimated changes
between the intervention groups for each outcome variable are also shown.

_Knowledge. Students in both the UP and YLP schools had a significant_
increase in knowledge about bullying, sexual harassment, and dating aggression from fall to spring. Comparing the magnitude of the changes in the two
groups demonstrated a greater gain in dating aggression knowledge for the
YLP group than for the UP group. The Time × Program × Ethnicity interaction revealed two moderating effects for bullying knowledge: Middle Eastern
youth learned significantly more in the YLP program than the UP program,
estimate (SE) = −.11(0.04), p = .02, whereas South Asian youth benefitted
more from the UP program, estimate (SE) = 0.07(0.02), p = .002.

_Attitudes. Significant attitudinal changes were noted for both interventions._
Less accepting attitudes toward dating aggression were obtained for both
YLP and UP students. The magnitude of change in the two groups did not
differ overall. However, a moderating effect of ethnicity was obtained such
that the African/Caribbean youth showed significantly more change in the
YLP program than the UP program, estimate (SE) = − 0.34 (0.12), p = .005.
Attitudes toward bullying for students in the UP group became significantly
less tolerant in the spring, although a comparison of this change to that of the
YLP group was not significant. No significant changes in attitudes toward
sexual harassment were detected.

_Victimization. Reports of bullying and sexual harassment victimization did_
not change for students in either of the intervention groups. Reports of dating
aggression among students in the UP program increased over time, however,
the comparison with changes in the YLP group was not significant.


-----

-----

**Figure 2. Anxiety scores at pretest and posttest for YLP and UP.**
_Note. YLP = youth-led program; UP = usual practice._

_Emotional school adjustment. Significant differences favoring the YLP were_
noted for both indices of emotional school adjustment. YLP students reported a
significant reduction in anxiety from fall to spring, whereas the UP group did
not show any decline. Students in the YLP intervention maintained a high level
of school connectedness from fall to spring, whereas those in the UP group
showed a significant decline in this outcome variable. These patterns of change
in school connectedness and anxiety are shown graphically in Figures 2 and 3.

## Effect Sizes of Changes in Outcome Variables

To enhance comparability across outcomes, Cohen’s _d (Cohen, 1988) was_
computed for the difference between the UP and YLP in the amount of change
generated by the two groups. As shown in Table 3, the obtained values, ranging from 0.02 to 0.32, were indicative of small effect sizes.

## Discussion

The present study evaluated a prevention program that used youth leaders to
inform middle school students about bullying, sexual harassment, and dating
aggression. As such, this study is one of the first that we know of to extend
the use of youth leaders from the public health domain to violence prevention. Our research also extends prior studies by evaluating the impact of the
program on students’ emotional school adjustment and comparing the YLP
with UPs in the school board, which were adult-led programs. The results


-----

**Figure 3. School connectedness scores at pretest and posttest for YLP and UP.**
_Note. YLP = youth-led program; UP = usual practice._

revealed common changes associated with both of the intervention programs
and unique changes associated with the YLP. Overall, the results suggest that
youth leadership is a viable model for aggression prevention in schools, and
integration of this approach in current prevention strategies using adult leaders would be of benefit to students.
Most school-based aggression prevention programs target knowledge and
attitude change as key mechanisms for reducing aggressive behavior
(Whitaker et al., 2006) because research demonstrates a link from knowledge
to attitudes and from attitudes to peer victimization (Josephson & Proulx,
2008; Williams, Connolly, Pepler, & Craig, 2005). Increasing youth’s knowledge about bullying, sexual harassment, and dating aggression as well as
encouraging less accepting attitudes toward these behaviors are, therefore,
essential components for achieving a decrease in multiple forms of peer victimization. In our study, students in both the YLP and UP intervention programs experienced learning changes that could set the framework for future
behavior change. These findings are consistent with Mellanby and colleagues’
(2001) conclusions that adults are effective in transmitting information to
students. They extend prior research in showing that youth leaders can also
be effective in producing knowledge gains, and in the case of dating aggression, perhaps even more effective than adults. Students in both interventions
also reported attitudinal changes although the findings were less conclusive
than those for knowledge gains. While we had expected that youth leaders
would be more effective than teachers in shifting attitudes, we found that
both leadership forms produced quite similar changes in attitudes toward dating violence and adult-led programming produced some change in bullying


-----

attitudes. Neither intervention in our study was able to produce significant
improvements in attitudes toward sexual harassment. It is not immediately
clear why the programs did not yield consistent attitudinal changes. One possibility is a ceiling effect. Overall, the youths’ attitudes were already highly
intolerant of aggression, especially sexual harassment, thus making further
reductions very difficult to produce. It is also possible that the content of the
programs was not effective for this domain of peer aggression. Lastly, we
note that the interventions were very brief, and it may take more intense
efforts to create consistent changes in attitudes. Whatever the reason, attitudes toward peer aggression should continue to be addressed in future
research with youth in this age group, given that middle school is a critical
time for the emergence of diverse forms of peer aggression (Guerra, Williams,
& Sadek, 2011; McMaster et al., 2002).
Changes in these contributing factors, however, were not sufficient to
reduce rates of victimization in our study, and in fact, dating violence victimization showed a slight increase in the UP group across time. This outcome is
unfortunately consistent with the evaluations of many other programs, demonstrating that reducing aggressive peer behavior is difficult to do, especially
with limited programming (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2007; Multisite Violence
Prevention Project, 2008; Whitaker et al., 2006), and certainly that was the
case in the current study. Research is beginning to converge on the idea that
greater exposure to a program results in stronger outcomes (Ttofi & Farrington,
2011). Future work with youth leaders should extend the treatment to determine if this maximizes effectiveness (Charlebois, Brendgen, Vitaro,
Normandeau, & Boudreau, 2004; Farrington & Ttofi, 2009; Flannery et al.,
2003; Hahn et al., 2007; Lassen, Steele, & Sailor, 2006; Ttofi & Farrington,
2011; Wolfe et al., 2003). Researchers should also consider longer term outcomes in keeping with a model such as Kirkpatrick’s (Kirkpatrick & Hawk,
2006), in which the stages of change can be evaluated as they unfold in
sequence over time. This longer term focus might be particularly important for
detecting reductions in victimization from dating aggression. Romantic relationships are emergent in the middle school years and few youth report dating
at this time (Connolly et al., 2000). In our study, for example, less than 10% of
the youths were in a romantic relationship. While an intervention in the middle
school may change dating patterns, this effect may be detected only later on
when sufficient numbers of students are actively dating.
Mellanby et al. (2001) found evidence that youth and adult leaders had
strengths in specific domains, with youth being better than adults at changing social norms. Our findings provide empirical support for this premise as
they revealed unique gains of youth leadership in the domain of emotional
school adjustment. Indeed, the YLP produced its greatest effects on students’


-----

emotional adjustment, significantly better than the UP. Anxiety levels
declined and school connectedness remained high in the YLP, while students
in the UP persisted in their initial level of anxiety and decreased in school
connectedness over the course of the year. Previous research has demonstrated that students’ connection to school typically decreases as they progress through middle school (e.g., Durlak et al., 2011), and so our findings of
maintenance over time are encouraging. In general, these findings support
our expectation that a YLP to prevent peer aggression can have a positive
influence on the emotional climate of a school by reducing anxiety and supporting a sense of acceptance and respect among students and teachers. In
view of the modest effect sizes found for these outcomes, our findings
should be viewed as preliminary, and further work with more intensive programming is needed to substantiate them.
Although not central issues in our study, we did consider whether participants’ gender and ethnicity might moderate program effects. The absence of
gender effects in our study is in line with much previous research in which
inconsistent or nonsignificant moderator effects have been reported (e.g.,
Garaigordobil, Maganto, Pérez, & Sansinenea, 2009; Taylor, Stein, & Burden,
2010; Wilson et al., 2003). Our findings that certain ethnic groups benefitted
more from youth leadership whereas another group gained in the adult-led
program raise some intriguing questions. While a meta-analysis of aggression prevention studies did not find that ethnicity was a significant moderator
(Wilson et al., 2003), a recent clinical trial reported that the Olweus antibullying program was most effective for White youth, compared with Hispanic
or Black youth (Bauer, Lozano, & Rivara, 2007). The diverse ethnic groupings of our research differ from those typically reported in U.S. samples, and
so our findings add to emergent data that ethnicity may be an important
demographic feature to consider when planning prevention programs. We
note, however, that our findings lack a theoretical premise, and the numbers
of youth in each ethnic group were small. Hence the ethnicity findings should
be interpreted cautiously. Nonetheless it is reasonable to conclude that there
is a need for a more nuanced investigation of how the demographic characteristics of the target youth might influence the effectiveness of an intervention program, including one that uses youth leaders.
Several limitations must be considered when interpreting the results of the
current study. The absence of a no-treatment control is problematic, especially
given that “usual practice” was not a homogeneous set of interventions, except
in the sense of being offered by adults. This leaves open the possibility that the
changes noted in the study were due to something other than the prevention
programs, such as maturational changes or increased interest in the topics
stimulated by the pretest questionnaires. This problem could be addressed in


-----

future research by adding a control group in which the YLP is delayed to a
later part of the school year. We also note that our design assessed posttest
changes in the spring and compared them with pretest scores collected in the
fall. Because of this, we cannot be certain that the timing of assessment did not
influence the results. Research designs that control for time of year in collecting pre- and posttest data, such as an age-cohort design, would be important to
implement in future research (Ttofi & Farrington, 2011). Third, although
schools were randomly assigned to treatment groups, our findings are based
on only four middle schools. While these findings demonstrate promise for the
effectiveness of youth leaders, they should be replicated with a larger sample
of schools. Measurement issues represent another limitation of the present
study. The measure of bullying victimization proved to be relatively less reliable, and this may have reduced power to detect small changes in the behavioral domain. The small size of the effects obtained for the outcome variables,
which did show significant change is also an issue to be addressed in future
research. Evaluating interventions in which the intensity of the YLP is
increased would help to clarify whether such programs can produce more substantive effects or if small effect sizes are to be expected. Finally, the mechanisms of change related to youth-led programming are not addressed by this
study. It remains unclear what it is about youth leadership that results in greater
improvement in emotional school adjustment. We speculate that students’
identification with the youth leaders is a key ingredient. It would be fruitful to
investigate this possibility, along with other mechanisms of successful youth
leadership, in future research.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that a brief YLP to prevent peer
aggression can bring about changes in knowledge, attitudes, and emotional
school adjustment. Multipronged programs that take the best of adult-led
interventions and also harness the power of youth for positive change are a
critical direction for future programs to prevent aggression and improve
school safety.

## Appendix A

 General Multilevel Model Equation

The three-level model in terms of repeated observations (Level 1) nested
within subjects (Level 2) who are nested within classrooms (Level 3) is given
by the following:
Level 1: Individual changes over time (from pretest to posttest):

_ytik_ = π0ik + π1ik ⋅ time + εtik,


-----

where ytik is the outcome (e.g., bullying attitudes) of student i in classroom k
at time t (t = 0 for pretest and t =1 for posttest); π0ik is the outcome (e.g., bullying attitudes) of student i in classroom k at time 0 (i.e., pretest); π1ik is the
change from pretest to posttest in outcome (e.g., bullying attitudes) of student
_i in classroom k; εtik is the residual._
Level 2: Variability among individuals in the level of outcome (random
intercept only: initial level of outcome varying randomly among students in
each classroom)

π0ik = β00k + _r0ik_
π1ik = β10k,


where β00k is the mean initial level in classroom k; and r0ik is a random individual effect; β10k is the mean change from pretest to posttest in classroom k;
Level 3: Variability among classrooms (random intercept only: classroom
mean initial level of outcome varying randomly around a grand mean)

β00k = γ000 + γ001 × group + _u00k_


β10k = γ100 + γ101 ×


group,


where γ000 is the mean outcome for those in the UP program at pretest; γ001 is
the mean difference between the UP program and YLP in the outcome at pretest; and u00k is a random classroom effect. γ100 is the mean change from pretest to posttest for those in the UP program; γ101 is the mean difference between
the UP program and YLP in the change of outcome from pretest to posttest.

## Appendix B

**Table B1. Classroom Variances and Intraclass Correlations for Outcome**
Variables at Pretest.

Variance


Variable


Between Within Intraclass
classrooms classrooms correlation


Bullying knowledge 0.0027** 0.022** .11
Sexual harassment knowledge 0.0008 0.0515** .02
Dating violence knowledge 0.0022** 0.022** .09
Pro-bullying attitudes 0.00001 0.2227** .0001
Pro-sexual harassment 0.0001 0.087** .001
attitudes

Pro-dating violence attitudes 0.00001 0.25** .0001
Bullying victimization 0.16** 8.62** .02

_(continued)_


-----

**Table B1 (continued)**

Variable


Variance

Between Within Intraclass
classrooms classrooms correlation


Sexual harassment 0.0012 0.037** .03
victimization

Dating violence victimization 0.00001 0.051** .0001
Anxiety 0.00015 0.144** .001
School connectedness 0.018* 0.454** .04

_Note. Attitudes toward sexual harassment and all victimization variables were log transformed_
to reduce skewness.
*p < .10. **p < .05.

**Table B2. Classroom Variances and Intraclass Correlations for Change From**
Pretest to Posttest.

Variance


Variable


Between Within Intraclass
classrooms classrooms correlation


Bullying knowledge 0.0015** 0.019** .07
Sexual harassment knowledge 0.0016 0.06** .03
Dating violence knowledge 0.0013* 0.025** .05
Pro-bullying attitudes 0.0058 0.228** .025
Pro-sexual harassment 0.0036 0.089** .04
attitudes

Pro-dating violence attitudes 0.00001 0.21** .0001
Bullying victimization 0.00001 10.85** .0001
Sexual harassment victimization 0.0001 0.04** .001
Dating violence victimization 0.00001 0.04** .0001
Anxiety 0.0023 0.125** .02
School connectedness 0.018* 0.358** .05

_Note. Attitudes toward sexual harassment and all victimization variables were log transformed_
to reduce skewness.
*p < .10. **p < .05.

**Declaration of Conflicting Interests**

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


-----

**Funding**

The author(s) received financial support for the research from the Ontario Centre of
Excellence for Child and Youth Mental Health.

**References**

Altman, D.G., Schultz, K. F., Moher, D., Egger, M., Davidoff, F., Elbourne, D.,
Gotzsche, P. C., & Lang, T. (2001). The revised CONSORT statement for reporting randomized trials: Explanation and elaboration. Journal of Internal Medicine,
_134(8), 663-694. Available at http://www.consort-statement.org._
American Association of University Women. (2001). Hostile hallways: Bullying, teas_ing, and sexual harassment in school. Washington, DC: American Association of_
University Women and Educational Foundation.
Bauer, N. S., Lozano, P., & Rivara, F. P. (2007). The effectiveness of the Olweus
Bullying Prevention Program in public middle schools: A controlled trial.
_Journal of Adolescent Health, 40, 266-274._
Birmaher, B., Khetarpal, S., Brent, D., Cully, M., Balach, L., Kaufman, J., & Neer,
S. M. (1997). The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders
(SCARED): Scale construction and psychometric characteristics. Journal of the
_American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 545-553._
Capaldi, D. M., Knoble, N. B., Shortt, J. W., & Kim, H. K. (2012). A systematic
review of risk factors for intimate partner violence. Partner Abuse, 3, 231-280.
Card, N. A., & Hodges, E. V. E. (2008). Peer victimization among schoolchildren:
Correlations, causes, consequences, and considerations in assessment and intervention. School Psychology Quarterly, 23, 451-461. doi:10.1037/a0012769
Carney, J. V., Hazler, R. J., Oh, I., Hibel, L. C., & Granger, D. A. (2010). The relations between bullying exposures in middle childhood, anxiety, and adrenocortical activity. Journal of School Violence, 9, 194-211.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention
and Control. (2010). _Web-Based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting_
_System (WISQARS). Retrieved from www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/_
YV-DataSheet-a.pdf
Charlebois, P., Brendgen, M., Vitaro, F., Normandeau, S., & Boudreau, J. F. (2004).
Examining dosage effects on prevention outcomes: Results from a multi-modal
longitudinal preventive intervention for young disruptive boys. Journal of School
_Psychology, 42, 201-220. doi:10.1016/j/jsp/2003.12.003_
Cheon, J. W. (2008). Best practices in community-based prevention for youth substance-reduction: Towards strengths-based positive development policy. Journal
_of Community Psychology, 36, 761-779._
Chiodo, D., Wolfe, D. A., Crooks, C., Hughes, R., & Jaffe, P. (2009). Impact of sexual
harassment victimization by peers on subsequent adolescent victimization and
adjustment: A longitudinal study. _Journal of Adolescent Health,_ _45, 246-252._
doi:10.1016/j.adohealth.2009.01.006
Cohen, J. (1988). _Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.)._
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.


-----

Connolly, J., Pepler, D., Craig, W., & Taradash, A. (2000). Dating experiences of
bullies in early adolescence. Child Maltreatment, 5, 299-310.
Craig, W., & Harel, Y. (2004). Bullying, physical fighting, and victimization. In
C. Currie, C. Roberts, A. Morgan, R. Smith, W. Setterobulte, O. Samdel & V.
Rasmussen (Eds.), Young people’s health in context: International report from
_the HBSC 29 2001/02 survey (WHO Policy Series: Health policy for children and_
adolescents Issue 4). Copenhagen, Denmark: WHO Regional Office for Europe.
Deans, K. J., Minneci, P. C., Danner, R. L., Eichacker, P. O., & Natanson, C. (2010).
Practice misalignments in randomized controlled trials: Identification, impact,
and potential solutions. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 11, 444-450.
Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., & Schellinger, K.
B. (2011). The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: A
meta-analysis of school-based universal interventions. _Child Development,_ _82,_
405-432.
Espelage, D. L., & Holt, M. K. (2007). Dating violence and sexual harassment across
the bully-victim continuum among middle and high school students. Journal of
_Youth and Adolescence, 36, 799-811._
Farrell, A. D., & Flannery, D. J. (2006). Youth violence prevention: Are we there yet?
_Aggression and Violent Behavior, 11, 138-150. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2005.07.008_
Farrell, A. D., Meyer, A. L., Sullivan, T. N., & Kung, E. M. (2003). Evaluation of the
Responding in Peaceful and Positive Ways (RIPP) seventh grade violence prevention curriculum. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 12, 101-120.
Farrington, D. P., & Ttofi, M. M. (2009). School based programs to reduce bullying
_and victimization. (Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2009:6). Oslo, Norway: The_
Campbell Collaboration. Retrieved from http://www.campbellcollaboration.org/
lib/download/718/
Ferguson, C. J., Miguel, C. S., Kilburn, J. C., Jr., & Sanchez, P. (2007). The effectiveness of school-based anti-bullying programs: A meta-analytic review. Criminal
_Justice Review, 32, 401-414._
Finkelhor, D., Ormrod, R. K., & Turner, H. A. (2007). Poly-victimization: A
neglected component in child victimization. _Child Abuse & Neglect,_ _31, 7-26._
doi:10.1016/j.chiabu.2006.06.008
Flannery, D. J., Vazsonyi, A. T., Liau, A. K., Guo, S., Powell, K. E., Atha, H., &
Embry, D. (2003). Initial behavior outcomes for the peacebuilders universal
school-based violence prevention program. Developmental Psychology, 39, 292308. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.39.2.292
Garaigordobil, M., Maganto, C., Pérez, J., & Sansinenea, E. (2009). Gender differences in socioemotional factors during adolescence and effects of a violence
prevention program. Journal of Adolescent Health, 44, 468-477. doi:10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2008.09.014
Goodenow, C. (1993). The psychological sense of school membership among adolescents: Scale development and educational correlates. Psychology in the Schools,
_30, 79-90._
Gruber, J. E., & Fineran, S. (2007). The impact of bullying and sexual harassment on
middle and high school girls. Violence Against Women, 13, 627-643.


-----

Guerra, N., Williams, K., & Sadek, S. (2011). Understanding bullying and victimization during childhood and adolescence: A mixed methods study. _Child_
_Development, 82, 295-310._
Hahn, R., Fuqua-Whitley, D., Wethington, H., Lowy, J., Crosby, A., Fullilove, M.,
& Dahlberg, L. (2007). Effectiveness of universal school-based programs to prevent violence and aggressive behavior: A systematic review. American Journal
_of Preventive Medicine, 33, 114-129. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2007.04.012_
Halpern, C. T., Oslak, S. G., Young, M. L., Martin, S. L., & Kupper, L. L. (2001).
Partner violence among adolescents in opposite-sex romantic relationships:
Findings from the national longitudinal study of adolescent health. _American_
_Journal of Public Health, 91, 169-1685._
Heck, R. H. (2001). Multilevel modeling with SEM. In G. A. Marcoulides & R. E.
Schumacker (Eds.), _New developments and techniques in structural equation_
_modeling (pp. 89-127). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum._
Holt, M. K., & Espelage, D. L. (2003). A cluster analytic investigation of victimization among high school students: Are profiles differentially associated with
psychological symptoms and school belonging? _Journal of Applied School_
_Psychology, 19, 81-98. doi:10.1300/J008v19n02_06_
Holt, M. K., & Espelage, D. L. (2005). Peer victimization among adolescents: A
preliminary perspective on the co-occurrence of sexual harassment, dating violence, and bullying victimization. In K. Kendall Tackett & S. Giacomoni (Eds.),
_Victimization of children and youth: Patterns of abuse, response strategies (pp._
13.11-13.16). Kingston, NJ: Civic Research Institute.
Holt, M. K., & Espelage, D. L. (2012). A cluster analytic investigation of victimization among high school students. Journal of Applied School Psychology, 19,
81-98.
Jones, S. M., & Bouffard, S. M. (2012). Social and emotional learning in schools:
From programs to strategies. Social Policy Report, 26, 3-22.
Josephson, W. L., Connolly, J. C., Simkins-Strong, E., & Weiser, J. (2009). Preventing
adolescent dating aggression: Why it’s an issue and what to do about it. In W.
M. Craig, D. J. Pepler, & J. Cummings (Eds.), _PREVNet Series: Vol. 2. Rise_
_up for respectful relationships: Prevent bullying (pp. 125-138). Ottawa, Ontario,_
Canada: National Printers.
Josephson, W. L., & Proulx, J. B. (2008). Violence in young adolescents’ relationships: A path model. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 23, 189-208.
Juvonen, J., Wang, Y., & Espinoza, G. (2011). Bullying experiences and compromised academic performance across middle school grades. _Journal of Early_
_Adolescence, 31, 152-173. doi:10.1177/0272431610379415_
Kirkpatrick, J., & Hawk, L. (2006). Curricula and evaluation: Maximizing results.
_Training and Development, 60, 61-62._
Laird, N. M. (1988). Missing data in longitudinal studies. Statistics in Medicine, 7,
305-315.
Lassen, S. R., Steele, M. M., & Sailor, W. (2006). The relationship of school-wide
positive behavior support to academic achievement in an urban middle school.
_Psychology in the Schools, 43, 701-712._


-----

Libby, M., Rosen, M., & Sedonaen, M. (2005). Building youth-adult partnerships
for community change: Lessons from the Youth Leadership Institute. Journal of
_Community Psychology, 33, 111-120. doi:10.1002/jcop.20037_
Lichty, L., & Campbell, R. (2012). Targets and witnesses: Middle school students’
sexual harassment experiences. Journal of Early Adolescence, 32, 414-430.
Maticka-Tyndale, E., & Barnett, J. (2010). Peer-led interventions to reduce HIV risk
of youth: A review. Evaluation and Program Planning, 33, 98-112. doi:10.1016/j.
evalprogplan.2009.07.001
McMaster, L., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (2002). Peer to peer sexual
harassment in early adolescence: A developmental perspective. Development and
_Psychopathology, 14, 91-105._
Mellanby, A. R., Newcombe, R. G., Rees, J. J., & Tripp, J. H. (2001). A comparative
study of peer-led and adult-led school sex education. Health Education Research:
_Theory & Practice, 16, 481-492. doi:10.1093/her/16.4.481_
Mellanby, A. R., Rees, J. B., & Tripp, J. H. (2000). Peer-led and adult-led school
health education: A critical review of available comparative research. _Health_
_Education Research: Theory & Practice, 15, 533-545._
Moran, M., & Weiser, J. (2004). _RISE Knowledge Questionnaire. Unpublished_
Measure.
Multisite Violence Prevention Project. (2004). The Multisite Violence Prevention
Project: Background and overview. American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
_26, 3-11._
Multisite Violence Prevention Project. (2008). The Multisite Violence Prevention
Project: Impact of a universal school-based violence prevention program on
social-cognitive outcomes. Prevention Science, 9, 231-244. doi:10.1007/s11121008-0101-1
Nansel, T. R., Haynie, D. L., & Simons-Morton, B. (2003). The association of bullying and victimization with middle school adjustment. Journal of Applied School
_Psychology, 19, 45-61._
Nansel, T. R., Overpeck, M., Pilla, R. S., Ruan, W. J., & Simons-Morton, B. G.
(2001). Bullying behaviors among US youth: Prevalence and association with
psychosocial adjustment. _Journal of the American Medical Association,_ _285,_
2094-2100.
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and what we can do. Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Olweus, D., & Limber, S. (1999). Bullying Prevention Program. Boulder, CO: Center
for the Study and Prevention of Violence.
Peleg-Oren, N., Cardenas, G. A., Comerford, M., & Galea, S. (2012). An association between bullying behaviors and alcohol use among middle school students.
_Journal of Early Adolescence, 32, 761-775. doi:10.1177/0272431610387144_
Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (2000). Making a difference in bullying. Retrieved from
http://www.yorku.ca/lamarsh
Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (2003). Identifying and targeting risk for involvement in bullying and victimization. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 48,
577-582.


-----

Pepler, D. J., Craig, W. M., Connolly, J. A., Yuile, A., McMaster, L., & Jiang, D.
(2006). A developmental perspective on bullying. Aggressive Behavior, 32, 376384.
Price, E., & Byers, E. (1999). The Attitudes Towards Dating Violence Scales:
Development and initial validation. _Journal of Family Violence,_ _14, 351-375._
doi:10.1023/A:1022830114772
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). _Hierarchical linear models (2nd ed.)._
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Regan, M. E. (2009). Implementation and evaluation of a youth violence prevention
program for adolescents. Journal of School Nursing, 25, 27-33.
Rigby, K. (2000). Effects of peer victimization in schools and perceived social support on adolescent well-being. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 57-68. doi:10.1006/
jado.1999.0289
Rigby, K., & Slee, P. T. (1991). Bullying among Australian school children: Reported
behavior and attitudes toward victims. The Journal of Social Psychology, 131,
615-627.
Salmivalli, C., Garandeau, C., & Veenstra, R. (2012). KiVa anti-bullying program:
Implications for school adjustment. In A. M. Ryan & G. W. Ladd (Eds.), Peer
_relationships and adjustment at school (pp. 279-307). Charlotte, NC: Information_
Age Publishing.
Salmivalli, C., Kaukiainen, A., & Voeten, M. (2005). Anti-bullying intervention:
Implementation and outcome. _British Journal of Educational Psychology,_ _75,_
465-487. doi:10.1348/000709905X26011
Shapiro, J. P., Burgoon, J. D., Welker, C. J., & Clough, J. B. (2002). Evaluation of the
Peacemaker Program: School-based violence prevention for students in grades
four through eight. Psychology in the Schools, 39, 87-100.
Shochet, I. M., Dadds, M. R., Ham, D., & Montague, R. (2006). School connectedness is an underemphasized parameter in adolescent health: Results of a community prediction study. _Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,_
_35, 170-179._
Shute, R., Owens, L., & Slee, P. (2008). Everyday victimization of adolescent girls
by boys: Sexual harassment, bullying or aggression? _Sex Roles,_ _58, 477-489._
doi:10.1007/s11199-007-9363-5
Simoni, J. M., Nelson, K. M., Franks, J. C., Yard, S. S., & Lehavot, K. (2011). Are
peer interventions for HIV efficacious? A systematic review. Aids and Behavior,
_15, 1589-1595._
Singer, J. D. (1998). Using SAS PROC MIXED to fit multilevel models, hierarchical
models, and individual growth models. Journal of Educational and Behavioral
_Statistics, 24, 323-355._
Snijders, T. A. B., & Bosker, R. J. (1999). _Multilevel analysis: An introduction to_
_basic and advanced multilevel modeling. London, England: SAGE._
Taylor, B. G., Stein, N., & Burden, F. F. (2010). Exploring gender differences in
dating violence/harassment prevention programming in middle schools: Results


-----

from a randomized experiment. _Journal of Experimental Criminology,_ _6, 419-_
445. doi:10.1007/s11292-010-9103-7
Thompson, B. T., & Schoenfeld, D. (2007). Usual care as the control group in clinical
trials of nonpharmacologic interventions. Proceedings of the American Thoracic
_Society, 4, 577-582._
Totten, M., Quigley, P., & Morgan, M. (2004). CPHA 2004 Safe SchoolSurvey for
students in grades 4-7. Ottawa, Ontario: Canadian Public Health Association and
Department of Justice Canada.
Ttofi, M. M., & Farrington, D. P. (2011). Effectiveness of school-based programs to
reduce bullying: A systematic and meta-analytic review. Journal of Experimental
_Criminology, 7, 27-56._
Weiser, J., Simkins-Strong, E., Josephson, W., Moran, M., Moore, L., & Connolly,
J. (2011). Using the youth engagement model to RISE above violence: Applying
the model and evaluating the program. In D. Pepler, J. Cummings, & W. Craig
(Eds.), PREVNet Series: Vol. 3. Creating a world without bullying (pp. 161-174).
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: National Printers.
Weisz, A. N., & Black, B. M. (2010). Peer education and leadership in dating violence
prevention: Strengths and challenges. _Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment &_
_Trauma, 19, 641-660._
Whitaker, D. J., Morrison, S., Lindquist, C., Hawkins, S. R., O’Neil, J. A., Nesius,
A. M., & Reese, L. (2006). A critical review of interventions for the primary
prevention of perpetration of partner violence. Aggression and Violent Behavior,
_11, 151-166. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2005.07.007_
Williams, T., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (2005). Peer victimization, social
support and psychosocial adjustment of sexual minority adolescents. Journal of
_Youth and Adolescence, 34, 471-482._
Wilson, S. J., Lipsey, M. W., & Derzon, J. H. (2003). The effects of school-based
intervention programs on aggressive behavior: A meta-analysis. _Journal of_
_Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 136-149._
Wolfe, D. A., Scott, K., Reitzel-Jaffe, D., Wekerle, C., Grasley, C., & Straatman,
A. (2001). Development and validation of the Conflict in Adolescent Dating
Relationships Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 13, 277-293.
Wolfe, D. A., Wekerle, C., Scott, K., Straatman, A. L., Grasley, C., & Reitzel-Jaffe,
D. (2003). Dating violence prevention with at-risk youth: A controlled outcome
evaluation. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 279-291.

**Author Biographies**

**Jennifer Connolly** is a professor of psychology at York University in Toronto,
Canada. She is affiliated with the LaMarsh Centre for Child and Youth Research. Her
research examines development in adolescence, with a particular interest in promoting positive peer and romantic relationships.


-----

**Wendy Josephson** is a professor of psychology at the University of Winnipeg in
Manitoba. Her research concerns prevention of bullying, sexual harassment, and dating violence in schools and in the workplace.

**Jessica Schnoll** is a graduate student in the Clinical-Developmental Psychology
Program at York University. She studies youth engagement and the use of youth-led
programming to enhance public health and prevent violence.

**Emily Simkins-Strong is a clinical psychologist practicing in Toronto, Canada. She**
studies positive youth development and programs to enhance youth engagement.

**Debra Pepler is a professor of psychology at York University in Toronto, Canada.**
She is affiliated with the LaMarsh Centre for Child and Youth Research. Her research
examines bullying and victimization in childhood and adolescence, with a particular
focus on prevention.

**Alison MacPherson** is a professor of kinesiology at York University in Toronto,
Canada. She is affiliated with the LaMarsh Centre for Child and Youth Research. Her
research examines the epidemiology of childhood injury and prevention.

**Jessica Weiser conducts research and evaluation directed at translating research into**
practice to enhance the well-being of children and youth.

**Michelle Moran is the director of school programs at East Metro Youth Services in**
Toronto, Canada. She supervises school-based programs to prevent violence and promote student engagement in high-needs communities.

**Depeng Jiang** is an assistant professor in the Department of Public Health at the
University of Manitoba. He studies the application of statistical methods to applied
research questions in the fields of clinical psychology and public health.


-----

