

The impact of atmospheric particulate matter on 
cancer incidence and mortality in the city of 
São Paulo, Brazil 
Inﬂ uência do material particulado atmosférico na 
incidência e mortalidade por câncer no Município 
de São Paulo, Brasil 
Yoshio Yanagi 1 
João Vicente de Assunção 1 
Ligia Vizeu Barrozo 2 


1 Faculdade de Saúde 
Pública, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil. 
2 Faculdade de Filosofia, 
Letras e Ciências Humanas, 
Universidade de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brasil. 
Correspondence 
Y. Yanagi 
Faculdade de Saúde Pública, 
Universidade de São Paulo. 
Av. Dr. Arnaldo 715, 
São Paulo, SP 
01246-904, Brasil. 
yoshioy@usp.br 
This study aimed to verify the impact of inhalable 
particulate matter (PM10) on cancer incidence 
and mortality in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Statistical techniques were used to investigate the 
relationship between PM10 on cancer incidence 
and mortality in selected districts. For some types 
of cancer (skin, lung, thyroid, larynx, and blad- 
der) and some periods, the correlation coefficients 
ranged from 0.60 to 0.80 for incidence. Lung can- 
cer mortality showed more correlations during 
the overall period. Spatial analysis showed that 
districts distant from the city center showed high- 
er than expected relative risk, depending on the 
type of cancer. According to the study, urban PM10 
can contribute to increased incidence of some 
cancers and may also contribute to increased 
cancer mortality. The results highlight the need 
to adopt measures to reduce atmospheric PM10 
levels and the importance of their continuous 
monitoring. 

Various studies 1,2,3 have shown an association 
between air pollution and its effects on human 
health, even with low levels of pollutants. The 
effects are seen in overall mortality and specific 
areas such as cardiovascular and respiratory dis- 
eases and cancer 4,5,6. 
The broad term “particulate matter” (PM) 
includes a class of pollutants consisting of solid 
and liquid material that can remain suspended 
in the atmosphere due to their small size. Inhal- 
able particles have an aerodynamic diameter less 
than 10µm. Finer particles (less than 2.5µm) can 
reach the pulmonary alveoli, while larger parti- 
cles (from 2.5 to 10µm) are retained in the upper 
airways. 


The presence of carcinogenic agents in the 
air pollution mix could partially explain why air 
pollutants increase the risk of lung cancer and 
possibly that of other cancers 8. Cancer risk in a 
given population depends directly on the latter’s 
biological and behavioral characteristics as well 
as the surrounding social, environmental, politi- 
cal, and economic conditions. This understand- 
ing is essential for determining investments in 
risk assessment research and effective preven- 
tion measures 9. 
Cancer is a greatly feared disease worldwide. 
Much of the fear stems from the lack of effec- 



tive treatment for inoperable metastatic tumors. 
However, recent decades have witnessed prog- 
ress in therapies and surgical techniques, thus 
increasing patient survival 10. 
Studies on exposure to risk factors are use- 
ful for a more comprehensive view of cancer 
etiology 11. The two most important methods 
to identify the effects of pollution on health are 
epidemiological investigations and experimental 
studies 12. 
The city of São Paulo, Brazil, internationally 
known from the economic, political, and social 
points of view, suffers increasingly from prob- 
lems with gargantuan traffic jams and thus in- 
creasing air pollution. The city is divided into 96 
administrative districts. 
Cancer incidence and mortality in the city of 
São Paulo has shown a similar pattern to that of 
developed countries. According to Mirra et al. 13, 
this pattern may relate to several factors such 
as the growth of more elderly age groups, im- 
proved socioeconomic conditions in the region, 
and possibly also a drop in the fertility and infant 
mortality rates. 
Environmental changes caused by humans 
and lifestyle changes may lead to different types 
of cancer. 
According to the Brazilian National Can- 
cer Institute (Instituto Nacional de Câncer – 
INCA) 14, approximately 80% of all cancer cases 
in Brazil are associated with environmental fac- 
tors involving the general environment (water, 
land, and air), occupational environment (facto- 
ries and similar industrial facilities), consump- 
tion (food and medicines), and social and cul- 
tural environment (lifestyle and habits). 
The principal carcinogenic agents from en- 
vironmental pollution include byproducts of in- 
complete burning of fossil fuels, especially diesel. 
Air pollution is formed by a variable and complex 
mixture of these compounds 8. 
The realization that cancer is a nationwide 
public health problem in Brazil led to the formu- 
lation and implementation of actions, plans, and 
programs targeting control of the disease, includ- 
ing improvement and expansion of the special- 
ized network of medical and hospital care and 
early detection measures. Preventive measures 
include health promotion and intervention in 
cancer risk factors. An important component in 
the response to this national challenge is knowl- 
edge on the incidence and mortality related to 
the principal forms of cancer, as well as preva- 
lence of exposure to risk factors 15. 
Thus, due to the theme’s public health rel- 
evance, the current study aimed to assess the 
impact of air pollution on cancer incidence and 
mortality in the city of São Paulo. 

This was an ecological time series study. In eco- 
logical studies, the unit of analysis is a population 
or group of persons that generally belongs to a 
defined geographic area, such as a country, state, 
or city 16. 
Incidence and mortality for each type of can- 
cer in the districts with air quality monitoring 
were correlated with PM10 values using Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient, considering a time lag of 0 
to 17 years, also verifying the p-value as the mea- 
sure of statistical significance. The correlation co- 
efficient (r) was considered high if 0.60 < r < 0.80 17 
and statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. 
Relative risks (RR) were also calculated for 
the period in each administrative district, for the 
incidence and mortality of the types of cancer 
with the highest statistical correlation coefficient 
with PM10. Relative risks were calculated using 
SaTScan, version 8.0 (http:\\www.satscan.org, 
USA) as the ratio between the number of observed 
cases for each sex and age bracket according to 
World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines in 
each district and the number of expected cases 
for each, according to the population’s composi- 
tion by sex and age brackets. The reference rate 
was calculated based on the total number of cas- 
es in the city, by sex and age bracket, for the study 
period and was used for calculating the expected 
number of cases. 
The cartographic rendering of these results 
allows analyzing spatial risk distribution. Carto- 
graphic representation used the choropleth tech- 
nique since it indicated for depicting rates, pro- 
portions, or indices. According to this technique, 
the increasing order of relative values grouped 
in significant classes is transcribed by a corre- 
spondingly increasing visual order 18. 
The division of class intervals on the maps 
was done by standardized discretization. This 
technique uses the mean and standard deviation 
of the series of values, allowing comparison be- 
tween different maps. The point of departure was 
the elaboration of the histogram and calculation 
of the mean, median, mode, and asymmetry co- 
efficient. Since most of the series of relative risk 
values displayed marked asymmetry, the values 
were log-transformed before discretization to ap- 
proach normal distribution. The class intervals 
in the original values were obtained from the re- 
ciprocal function of the initial function, in this 
case the common logarithm, namely 10x. The 
mean was used as the center or class limit and 
the standard deviation to calculate the range of 
classes above and below the mean. Cartographic 
representation was elaborated with the software 
Philcarto v5.5 (http://philcarto.free.fr). 


The research project was approved by the In- 
stitutional Review Board of the School of Public 
Health, University of São Paulo (Faculdade de 
Saúde Pública, Universidade de São Paulo; OF. 
COEP/069/09). 

Considering the long-term effect of pollution on 
health, the mean annual PM10 levels were obtai- 
ned for the years 1988 to 1997. These data were 
furnished by the São Paulo State Environmental 
Company (Companhia Ambiental do Estado de 
São Paulo – CETESB), which monitors the air qua- 
lity in some districts of the city of São Paulo: Brás, 
Santana, Moóca, Cambuci, Moema, Freguesia do 
Ó, Campo Belo, Lapa, Consolação, Santo Amaro, 
and São Miguel. 
An important factor in air pollutant monitor- 
ing systems is data quality control based on the 
adoption of criteria for representativeness. When 
the data from a given air quality monitoring sta- 
tion and in a given period present measurement 
flaws, the results may be jeopardized. According 
to the CETESB 19, in order for the annual mean 
PM10 to be considered representative, the sta- 
tion should present half of the valid means for 
the four-month periods of January-April, May- 
August, and September-December. In the year 
1995, the monitoring stations located in the dis- 
tricts of Santana, Cambuci, Moema, Campo Belo, 
and Santo Amaro failed to meet this criterion. 
In 1996, among the selected districts, no station 
that measured PM10 met the criterion for data 
representativeness. 

We analyzed the most frequent types of cancer 
and those that caused the most deaths in the 
city of São Paulo: skin, breast, prostate, bladder, 
stomach, rectum, uterine cervix, esophagus, co- 
lon, larynx, thyroid, and lung, selected according 
to the International Classification of Diseases for 
Oncology (ICD-O) 20. Cancer data were collected 
from the São Paulo Cancer Registry for the years 
1997 to 2005 for incidence and 1997 to 2004 for 
mortality 13. Data for 2005 were not considered 
for mortality, since they were not consolidated 
according to this parameter for the study’s data 
collection period. The dataset included 36,534 
cases and 12,934 deaths. 
Incidence and mortality rates were calculated 
based on the population per administrative dis- 
trict of the city for 1997 to 2005, estimated by the 
Foundation of the São Paulo State Data Analysis 
System (Fundação Sistema Estadual de Análise 
de Dados – SEADE Foundation). 
The São Paulo Cancer Registry adopts qual- 
ity control indices suggested by the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and INCA. 
IARC is part of the WHO, and its work involves 
coordinating research on the causes of human 
cancer, mechanisms of carcinogenesis, and the 
development of scientific strategies for cancer 
prevention and control. Table 1 shows the quality 
indices obtained by the São Paulo Cancer Regis- 
try for the period from 1997 to 2005, compared to 
the indices suggested by IARC and INCA. 
According to the suggested quality control 
indices, only diagnoses based on histocytologi- 
cal examinations were considered. Notifications 
based only on the death certificate should not 
exceed 20% of the reported cases, since such 
notifications indicate that the diagnosis was not 
made until after death. Delay in diagnosis of the 
disease can also be observed when there is an un- 
specified primary site, which should be less than 
10% in order to guarantee the dataset’s quality. 
The mortality/incidence ratio may indicate lack 




















> 70.0 
≤ 20.0 






of notification of the disease. The rate of miss- 
ing data for age may indicate possible flaws in 
completing the notification form. The quality 
control percentages obtained by the São Paulo 
Cancer Registry from 1997 to 2005 indicated that 
they were within the values suggested by IARC 
and INCA, although the percentage of missing 
information on age and the mortality/incidence 
ratio showed only borderline acceptability. 

Incidence and mortality rates by type of cancer 
were calculated with the following formulas. 

(cid:129) 
(number of cancer cases / mid-year population) 
x 100,000 
(cid:129) Mortality rate: 
(number of cancer deaths / mid-year popula- 
tion) x 100,000 

Table 2 shows the distribution of cases by district, 
sex, and period in the city of São Paulo. 
Table 3 shows cancer deaths from 1997 to 
2004 in the selected districts in the city of São 
Paulo, distributed by sex, considering all types 
of cancer. 
In the city of São Paulo, the proportion of can- 
cer deaths from 1997 to 2004 was higher in men 
(52.6%) than in women (47.4%). 
Correlation analysis indicated that for some 
types of cancer (skin, lung, thyroid, larynx, and 
bladder), statistical correlation was high and sig- 
nificant in some periods, especially for incidence. 
Table 4 presents the correlation coefficients be- 
tween skin cancer incidence and PM10 and Table 
5 presents the correlation coefficients between 
lung cancer incidence and PM10. 
The time lag between skin cancer incidence 
rates and PM10 exposure varied from 7 to 14 years, 
while for lung cancer, the significant correlations 
occurred from 11 to 16 years after exposure. 
Figure 1 shows the types of cancer, according 
to the number of events with high correlations 
and significant p-values, based on monitoring 
PM10 for incidence. 
Skin cancer showed one value with high cor- 
relation in the year 1989, three in 1991, seven in 
1992, five in 1993, totaling 16 high correlations for 
incidence during the period. 




From 1997 to 2005, there were more cancer 
cases in women (53.3%) than in men (46.7%) in 
the city of São Paulo. 
PM10 values measured from 1988 to 1997 may 
possibly impact cancer incidence from 1997 to 
2005. 


















































































































































































































Figures 2 and 3 present the relative risk maps 
for incidence and mortality rates for skin and 
lung cancer showing high correlations with PM10. 
The opposing colors indicate that values below 
1 refer to the districts with fewer cases or deaths 
than expected, while values greater than 1 indi- 
cate more cases or deaths than expected for the 
respective districts. 
The relative risk map for skin cancer inci- 
dence on this scale of analysis shows a radial- 
concentric distribution, highlighting two districts 
with RR two standard deviations above the mean: 
Morumbi and Moóca. However, for skin cancer 
mortality, Morumbi no longer ranked highest. 
The highest risks were in the following districts: 
Butantã, Bela Vista, República, Brás, Moóca, and 
Tatuapé. The relative risk maps for lung cancer 
incidence and mortality showed similar spatial 
patterns during the study period. The risks for in- 
cidence were high in Santo Amaro, Butantã, Con- 
solação, Bela Vista, Bom Retiro, and Brás. Santo 
Amaro, Consolação, Bom Retiro, and Brás also 
showed high mortality risk. 

Pearson correlation showed high incidence 
rates for some types of cancer: skin, lung, lar- 
ynx, thyroid, and bladder. For skin cancer, the 
correlation coefficients were high and signifi- 
cant, considering the PM10 prior to 1993 and the 
incidence rates after 1999. The results for lung 
cancer were similar to skin cancer, showing high 
and significant correlations with PM10 prior to 
1993 and incidence rates starting in 2000. For the 
incidence of cancer of the larynx, thyroid, and 
bladder, there were fewer high correlations, but 
they mostly occurred prior to 1993. As for mor- 
tality, the high correlations occurred with lung 
cancer. The long time lag between PM10 and in- 
cidence and mortality rates confirmed the long 
latency period for lung cancer, corroborating the 
literature 21. 
Cangerana-Pereira et al. 22, in a study on the 
impact of overall air pollution on the incidence 
of lung and laryngeal cancer in the city of São 
Paulo in 1997, found a significant association be- 
tween laryngeal cancer and ozone, highlighting 
the need for future studies for verification and 
better understanding of the long-term impact of 
pollution on human health. 
A considerable proportion of known risk fac- 
tors for cancer relates to long-term exposures 9. 
According to a review by Pope 3rd 23, the adverse 
health effects depend on the concentration and 
duration of exposure. Long-term exposure to PM 
has larger, more persistent, and more cumulative 
effects than short-term exposure. Studies have 
shown that long exposure to PM is associated with 
deficits in pulmonary function and an increase in 
the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, like chronic cough and bronchitis. PM10 
is known to be an indicator of inhalable particles 
that can penetrate the thoracic region of the lungs. 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and 




Correlation coefﬁ cients and p-values for skin cancer incidence (1997 to 2005) and inhalable particulate matter (PM10) (1988 to 
1997), in selected districts in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. 















































































































































































































































nitro-polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (HPAHs) 
are byproducts of incomplete combustion pro- 
cesses and vehicle exhaust that are found in high 
concentrations in PM, and which require meta- 
bolic activation to become electrophilic and exert 
their carcinogenic potential 24. Valavanidis et al. 
25 emphasize that polycyclic aromatic hydrocar- 
bons are highly mutagenic, with tumor-promot- 
ing activity, and responsible for the increased risk 
of malignant neoplasms, especially lung cancer. 
However, there is still uncertainty about the effect 
of PM pollution on lung cancer risk. Literature re- 
views suggest that the combustion related to PM 
air pollution can result in a small increase in the 


Correlation coefﬁ cients and p-values for lung cancer incidence (1997 to 2005) and inhalable particulate matter (PM10) (1988 to 
1997), in selected districts in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. 
















































































































































































































































risk of this type of cancer, but there are still gaps in 
the knowledge on these questions 2. 
clear, since there were persistent uncertainties 
on exposure measurement and latency. 
Gallus et al. 26 reviewed epidemiological stud- 
ies on air pollution and cancer. The focus of the 
studies was the association between particulate 
matter and lung cancer. The association was not 
Franco et al. 27 reviewed PAHs and human 
health, discussing methodologies for the deter- 
mination of some biomarkers. PAHs are widely 
distributed in the environment due to the emis- 






















sions from gasoline and diesel engines, and some 
are carcinogenic, potentially acting on the skin 
and airway cells. Biomarkers are considered 
promising in the study of populations exposed to 
chemical contaminants. 
Randem et al. 28 showed that workers directly 
exposed to asphalt and tar in Denmark, Finland, 
Norway, and Sweden present evidence of in- 
creased risk of developing bladder cancer. They 
studied cancer incidence among 22,362 male 
workers for more than one work season involving 
exposure to tar (asphalt). The chemical agents 
that stand out in asphalt emissions are polycy- 
clic aromatic hydrocarbons. During paving work 
with asphalt, PAHs are adsorbed on the particu- 
late matter that is emitted, reaching the lungs all 
the way to the alveoli. 
The impacts of PM pollution on human health 
remain to be fully elucidated, including an under- 
standing of the greatest risk or susceptibility to the 
event, the impacts of exposure to particulate mat- 
ter on infant mortality and birth outcomes, includ- 
ing fetal growth, prematurity, intrauterine mortal- 
ity, and birth defects, the effects of exposure on 
lung cancer risk, and the role of the various char- 
acteristics and components of particulate matter 
and the relative importance of the related sources 
of pollutants 29. 
According to Danaei et al. 30, more than a 
third of cancer deaths in the world can be attrib- 
uted to nine potentially modifiable risk factors 
(smoking, alcohol consumption, low consump- 
tion of fruit, vegetables, and greens, smoke from 
burning solid fuels in closed environments, ur- 
ban air pollution, physical inactivity, overweight 
and obesity, unprotected sex, and contaminated 
injections in health units). In low and middle in- 
come countries, smoking accounts for an esti- 
mated 18% of cancer deaths, low consumption of 
fruit, vegetables, and greens for 6%, and alcohol 
consumption for 5%. 
Analysis of the spatial distribution of the vari- 
ous types of cancer during the period showed 
than in some districts of São Paulo, the relative 
risk of mortality was higher than that of inci- 
dence, possibly indicating some deficiency in 
access to diagnosis and treatment. In addition, 
the radial-concentric pattern of relative risks in 
this scale of analysis may be related to the greater 
predominance of the younger population on the 
urban periphery. 
Some study limitations should be considered. 
The principal difficulty in understanding chronic 
diseases derives from the long latency period. 
Since 1997, a considerable number of studies 
have dealt with the health effects of exposure to 
PM 29. Various cohort studies have highlighted 
the evidence of long-term or chronic health ef- 
fects 29. In studies with an ecological design, the 
data represent mean exposure levels rather than 
real individual levels. Controlling for confound- 
ers like smoking, alcoholism, and others was not 
possible due to the absence of this information in 
the databank. In addition, the population’s daily 
mobility, outdoor exposure time, and other im- 
portant variables cannot be considered in this 
type of study. The limited number of air quality 
monitoring stations in the city also prevents all 
the districts from being analyzed. Other impor- 
tant pollutants should also be investigated in fu- 
ture studies. 




Number of occurrences with high correlations, according to monitoring period for inhalable particulate matter (PM10) and 
incidence by type of cancer in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. 
















The results indicate the need to adopt mea- 
sures aimed at reducing the concentration of this 
air pollutant and the importance of its continu- 
ous monitoring. 

The study showed that urban PM10 air pollution 
in the city of São Paulo was associated with inci- 
dence and mortality for some types of cancer. For 
incidence, the types of cancer that showed high 
correlations were: skin, lung, thyroid, larynx, and 
bladder. For mortality, lung cancer showed the 
largest number of high correlations during the 
period. 

Mortality rates for skin cancer 
(relative risk) 
2.47 
2.17 
1.47 
1.00 
0.68 
0.46 
0.31 
0.05 

Skin cancer 
(relative risk) 
2.47 
2.17 
1.47 
1.00 
0.68 
0.46 
0.31 
0.05 



















Mortality rates for lung cancer 
(relative risk) 
2.09 
1.72 
1.45 
1.19 
1.00 
0.80 
0.53 
0.09 
Lung cancer 
(relative risk) 
2.09 
1.72 
1.45 
1.19 
1.00 
0.80 
0.53 
0.09 



Y. Yanagi participated in the literature search, analyzed 
the data, and wrote the article. J. V. Assunção conceived 
the theme, coordinated the research, and revised the 
article. L. V. Barrozo collaborated in the analysis of the 
spatial distribution, elaboration of the maps, and wri- 
ting of the article. 
O trabalho teve como objetivo verificar a influência 
do poluente atmosférico material particulado inalável 
(MP10) na incidência e na mortalidade por câncer, no 
Município de São Paulo, Brasil. Foram utilizadas téc- 
nicas estatísticas para verificar a relação do MP10 sobre 
a incidência e a mortalidade de alguns tipos de cân- 
cer nos distritos onde são monitorados este poluente. 
Pele, pulmão, tireoide, laringe e bexiga apresentaram 
coeficientes de correlação estatística entre 0,60 e 0,80, 
em alguns períodos, para a incidência. Para a morta- 
lidade, o câncer de pulmão apresentou mais correla- 
ções nesse intervalo. A análise espacial mostrou que 
distritos distantes do centro da cidade apresentaram 
risco relativo acima do esperado. O estudo mostrou 
que o MP10 urbano pode contribuir para o aumento 
da incidência de alguns tipos de câncer e pode contri- 
buir também para o crescimento da mortalidade por 
esta causa. Os resultados indicam a necessidade de se 
adotar medidas que visem à redução da concentração 
desse poluente na atmosfera e, também, a importância 
do seu contínuo monitoramento. 


1. Katsouyanni K, Pershagen G. Ambient air pollu- 
tion exposure and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 
1997; 8:284-91. 
2. Pope 3rd CA, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, Calle EE, 
Krewski D, Ito K, et al. Lung cancer, cardiopulmo- 
nary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine 
particulate air pollution. JAMA 2002; 287:1132-41. 
3. Gouveia N, Mendonça GAS, Ponce de Leon A, Cor- 
reia JEM, Junger WL, Freitas CU, et al. Poluição do 
ar e efeitos na saúde nas populações de duas gran- 
des metrópoles brasileiras. Epidemiol Serv Saúde 
2003; 12:29-40. 
4. Cendon S, Pereira LAA, Braga ALF, Conceição GMS, 
Cury Junior A, Romaldini H, et al. Air pollution ef- 
fects on myorcardial infarction. Rev Saúde Pública 
2006; 40:414-9. 
5. Hales S, Blakely T, Woodward A. Air pollution and 
mortality in New Zealand: cohort study. J Epide- 
miol Community Health 2010; 66:468-73. 
6. Gouveia N, Fletcher T. Respiratory diseases in chil- 
dren and outdoor air pollution in São Paulo, Brazil: 
a time series analysis. Occup Environ Med 2000; 
57:477-83. 

21. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative 
estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United 
States today. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981; 66:1191-308. 
22. Cangerana-Pereira FA, Assunção JV, Saldiva PH, 
Pereira LAA, Mirra AP, Braga ALF. Influence of air 
pollution on the incidence of respiratory tract neo- 
plasm. J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2005; 55:83-7. 
23. Pope 3rd CA. Mortality effects on longer term ex- 
posures to fine particulate air pollution: review 
of recent epidemiological evidence. Inhal Toxicol 
2007; 19 Suppl 1:33-8. 
24. Cecinato A, Marino F, DiFilippo P, Lepore L, Pos- 
sanzini M. Distribution of n-alkanes, polynuclear 
aromatic hydrocarbons and nitrated polynuclear 
aromatic hydrocarbons between fine and coarse 
fractions of inhalable atmospheric particulate. J 
Chromatogr A 1999; 846:255-64. 
25. Valavanidis A, Konstantinos F, Vlachogianni T. Air- 
borne particulate matter and human health: toxi- 
cological assessment and importance of size and 
composition of particles for oxidative damage and 
carcinogenic mechanisms. J Environ Sci Health C 
Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev 2008; 26:339-62. 
26. Gallus S, Negri E, Boffetta P, McLaughlin JK, Bosetti 
C, La Vecchia C. European studies on long-term 
exposure to ambient particulate matter and lung 
cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 2008; 17:191-4. 
27. Franco SS, Nardocci AC, Günther WM R. PAH 
biomarkers for human health risk assessment: a 
review of the state-of-the-art. Cad Saúde Pública 
2008; 24 Suppl 4:S569-80. 
28. Randem BG, Burstyn I, Langards S, Jarvholm B, 
Kauppinen T, Bergdahl IA, et al. Cancer incidence 
of Nordic asphalt workers. Scand J Work Environ 
Health 2004; 30:350-5. 
29. Pope 3rd CA, Dockery DW. Effects of fine particu- 
late air pollution: lines that connect. J Air Waste 
Manage Assoc 2006; 56:709-32. 
30. Danaei G, Hoorn SV, Lopez AD, Murray CJL, Ezzati 
M. Causes of cancer in the world: comparative risk 
assessment of nine behavioral and environmental 
risk factors. Lancet 2005; 366:1784-93. 
Submitted on 20/Jul/2011 
Final version resubmitted on 21/Dec/2011 
Approved on 19/Mar/2012 



7. Roseiro MNV. Morbidade por problemas respirató- 
rios em Ribeirão Preto – SP, de 1995 a 2001, segun- 
do indicadores ambientais, sociais e econômicos 
[Dissertação de Mestrado]. São Paulo: Escola de 
Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de 
São Paulo ; 2002. 
Junger WL, Ponce de Leon A, Azevedo G, Men- 
donça S. Associação entre mortalidade diária por 
câncer de pulmão e poluição do ar no município 
do Rio de Janeiro: um estudo ecológico de séries 
temporais. Rev Bras Cancerol 2005; 51:111-5. 
Instituto Nacional de Câncer. A situação do cân- 
cer no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Nacional de 
Câncer; 2006. 

10. Pollock RE, Doroshow JH. Manual de oncologia 
clínica da UICC. São Paulo: Fundação Oncocentro 
de São Paulo; 2006. 
11. Wunsch Filho V, Antunes JLF, Boing AF, Lorenzi RL. 
Perspectivas da investigação sobre determinantes 
sociais em câncer. Physis (Rio J.) 2008; 18:427-50. 
12. Wanner HU. Effects of atmospheric pollution on 

13. Mirra AP, Latorre MRDO, Veneziano DB. Mortali- 
dade por câncer no município de São Paulo, Brasil: 
1997-2003. São Paulo: Registro de Câncer de São 
Paulo; 2007. 
14. Instituto Nacional de Câncer. O que e o câncer? 
http://www1.inca.gov.br/conteudo_view.asp?id= 
322 (accessed on 07/Apr/2008). 
15. Kligerman J. Estimativas sobre a incidência e mor- 
talidade por câncer no Brasil – 2001. Rev Bras Can- 
cerol 2001; 47:111-4. 


17. Bisquerra R, Martinez F, Sarriera JC. Introdução à 
estatística: enfoque informático com o pacote es- 
tatístico SPSS. Porto Alegre: Editora Artmed; 2004. 
18. Martinelli M. Mapas da geografia e cartografia te- 

19. Companhia de Tecnologia de Saneamento Am- 
biental. Qualidade do ar no Estado de São Paulo 
1997: relatório técnico. São Paulo: Companhia de 
Tecnologia de Saneamento Ambiental; 1998. 
20. Centro Colaborador da OMS para a Classificação 
de Doenças em Português/Fundação Oncocentro 
de São Paulo. Classificação internacional de doen- 
ças para oncologia. 3a Ed. São Paulo: Edusp; 2005. 

