Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/conctc
The eﬀect of a vegan versus AHA DiEt in coronary artery disease (EVADE
CAD) trial: Study design and rationale
Binita Shaha,b,∗, Lisa Ganguzzaa, James Slatera, Jonathan D. Newmana, Nicole Allena,
Edward Fishera, John Larigakisa, Francisco Ujuetaa, Eugenia Gianosa, Yu Guoc, Kathleen Woolfd
a Department of Medicine (Cardiology), New York University (NYU) School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
b Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Veterans Aﬀairs New York Harbor Healthcare System: Manhattan Campus, New York, NY, USA
c Department of Population Health (Biostatistics), NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
d Department of Nutrition and Food Studies, NYU Steinhardt, New York, NY, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Diet intervention
Coronary artery disease
Inﬂammation
Glucose
Lipids
A B S T R A C T
Background: Multiple studies demonstrate the beneﬁt of a vegan diet on cardiovascular risk factors when
compared to no intervention or usual dietary patterns. The aim of this study is to evaluate the eﬀect of a vegan
diet versus the American Heart Association (AHA)-recommended diet on inﬂammatory and glucometabolic
proﬁles in patients with angiographically deﬁned coronary artery disease (CAD).
Study design: This study is a randomized, open label, blinded end-point trial of 100 patients with CAD as deﬁned
by ≥50% diameter stenosis in a coronary artery ≥2 mm in diameter on invasive angiography. Participants are
randomized to 8 weeks of either a vegan or AHA-recommended diet (March 2014 and February 2017).
Participants are provided weekly groceries that adhere to the guidelines of their diet. The primary endpoint is
high sensitivity C-reactive concentrations. Secondary endpoints include anthropometric data, other markers of
inﬂammation, lipid parameters, glycemic markers, endothelial function, quality of life data, and assessment of
physical activity. Endpoints are measured at each visit (baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks). Dietary adherence is
measured by two weekly 24-h dietary recalls, a 4-day food record during the week prior to each visit, and both
plasma and urine levels of trimethylamine-N-oxide at each visit.
Conclusion: This study is the ﬁrst to comprehensively assess multiple indices of inﬂammation and glucometa-
bolic proﬁle in a rigorously conducted randomized trial of patients with CAD on a vegan versus AHA-re-
commended diet.
1. Introduction
Inﬂammation plays a central role in the development and progres-
sion of atherosclerosis [1]. Several studies suggest an associated beneﬁt
between a reduction in inﬂammation via statin or anti-inﬂammatory
therapy and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with coronary artery
disease (CAD) [2–5]. The inﬂammatory state at the time of coronary
revascularization also predicts clinical outcomes. High concentrations
of C-reactive protein (CRP) at baseline, in particular, predict a sig-
niﬁcant increase in adverse cardiovascular outcomes after coronary
revascularization [6–8]. In relatively healthy subjects with elevated
concentrations of high sensitivity-CRP (hs-CRP) and normal low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, initiation of statin therapy signiﬁcantly
lowers both hs-CRP concentrations and long-term major adverse car-
diovascular events [9].
Approximately 30% of the treated stable CAD population has
elevated hs-CRP concentrations, highlighting the potential need for
alternative strategies to address the residual risk associated with base-
line inﬂammation in patients with CAD [2]. Addressing adverse dietary
patterns may allow patients with CAD to positively impact their overall
cardiovascular health. The American Heart Association (AHA) has
maintained a focus on a “heart healthy” diet that is low in saturated and
trans fats and high in fruits and vegetables to reduce the health burden
associated with cardiovascular disease and, as such, has been the re-
commended diet for patients with CAD. There is evidence to suggest
that the lowering of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol con-
centrations is responsible for the anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects noted with
statin medications [10]. Given the potential of lowering LDL-choles-
terol concentrations from the substitution of animal-based protein with
plant-based protein, an antioxidant-rich vegan diet may improve the
inﬂammatory and glucometabolic state better than the AHA-re-
commended diet in patients with CAD [11].
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conctc.2017.09.003
Received 11 April 2017; Received in revised form 1 September 2017; Accepted 13 September 2017
∗Corresponding author. 423 E 23rd Street, Oﬃce 12023-W, New York, NY 10010, USA.
E-mail address: binita.shah@nyumc.org (B. Shah).
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
Available online 14 September 2017
2451-8654/ Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T

Although multiple dietary factors inﬂuence cardiovascular disease,
only a few studies to date examine the eﬀects of overall healthy dietary
patterns on cardiovascular disease risk [12–15]. Even fewer studies
compare a particular diet to the standard recommended heart healthy
diet in patients with cardiovascular disease, but, instead, utilize an
inappropriate control condition (no active intervention, usual dietary
patterns) as the comparison group [15–18].
2. Study aims
The primary aim of this study is to determine the impact of an 8-
week vegan diet on inﬂammation, as measured by hs-CRP concentra-
tions, compared to the AHA-recommended diet in patients with an-
giographically deﬁned CAD. The secondary aims are to evaluate dif-
ferential eﬀects of these two diets on other surrogate endpoints that
may be aﬀected by diet and impact clinical outcomes, including an-
thropometric measures, other markers of inﬂammation, lipid para-
meters, glycemic markers, endothelial function, quality of life, and
physical activity patterns in patients with CAD.
3. Methods
3.1. Organizational structure
This study is a randomized, open-label, blinded end-point trial of
patients with angiographically deﬁned CAD at two campuses of the
New York University (NYU) School of Medicine, NYU Langone Medical
Center and Bellevue Hospital (New York, NY) [19]. The NYU School of
Medicine Institutional Review Board, which approved the study, does
not require a Data Safety Monitoring Committee for this study given
that the potential risks of participation in this study are only those as-
sociated with blood collection and breach of conﬁdentiality. The study
investigators, Binita Shah, MD, Jonathan Newman, MD, Kathleen
Woolf, PhD, RD, and James Slater, MD, oversee all study activities and
implementation of the study design. Drs. Shah and Newman review
data on a monthly basis to ensure the safe and proper treatment of
participants and determine whether there are any substantial deviations
from the protocol.
Kathleen Woolf, PhD, RD developed the dietary guidelines, sample
2-week menus, and recipes were developed for both groups. Binita
Shah, MD directs blood samples collection, processing, and analysis for
soluble adhesion molecules, as well as markers of neutrophil surface
activation and monocyte subtypes by ﬂow cytometry in the NYU
Smilow Research Building. Stanley L. Hazen, MD, PhD, at the Cleveland
Clinic (Cleveland, OH), measures markers of diet adherence (tri-
methylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), choline, and carnitine) in the plasma
and urine.
The Purjes Foundation (Salt Lake City, UT) is the primary sponsor of
the trial. The Cleveland HeartLab, Inc (Cleveland, OH) measures stan-
dard markers of inﬂammation (hs-CRP, myeloperoxidase, hemogram
with diﬀerential), comprehensive lipid proﬁles, and glucometabolic
parameters at no cost. Itamar Medical Ltd (Caesarea, Israel) provides
the EndoPat machine to measure endothelial dysfunction. The sponsors
did and will not contribute to the study design or data analysis. The trial
is registered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02135939).
3.2. Timeline
Recruitment began at NYU Langone Medical Center on March 11,
2014 and at Bellevue Hospital Center on November 21, 2014. Although
the recruitment period was expected to take 2 years, achievement of the
target study population of 100 patients with angiographically deﬁned
CAD was completed February 2, 2017, 11 months later than completed.
3.3. Eligibility criteria
The initial target study population was status post percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI). However, due to a delay in recruitment,
the inclusion criteria was amended to include any patient with angio-
graphically deﬁned CAD (≥50% lesion in an artery with ≥2 mm ca-
liber), which was approved on October 8, 2014. Speciﬁc inclusion and
exclusion criteria are summarized in Table 1. Participants have to be at
least 3 months post-myocardial infarction, coronary artery bypass graft
surgery, or infection to minimize confounders of the primary endpoint,
hs-CRP concentration. Every eﬀort is made to include equitable num-
bers of each sex, and there are no enrollment restrictions based on race
and/or ethnic origin. However, given that the study team, particularly
the study registered dietitian, can only provide detailed counseling in
English or Spanish, individuals who primarily speak a language other
than English or Spanish are not recruited for the study. The study does
not include any vulnerable subjects.
3.4. Screening
All study team members have speciﬁc training in the informed
consent process. Potential participants who meet inclusion/exclusion
criteria are provided with an oral and written description of the project
and are asked to demonstrate their understanding of each step by
Table 1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the Eﬀect of a Vegan versus AHA DiEt in Coronary Artery Disease (EVADE CAD) trial.
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
1. Angiographically deﬁned coronary artery disease (deﬁned as ≥50%
lesion in an artery with ≥2 mm caliber)
2. Speak English or Spanish
3. Age ≥18 years
1. History of an eating disorder
2. On a vegetarian or vegan diet
3. Use of steroids or non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory medications other than aspirin within 5 half-lives
of baseline visit and during the study period
4. History of a myocardial infarction or coronary artery bypass graft surgery within the preceding 3
months
5. Presence of infection within the preceding 3 months
6. Have a planned staged coronary revascularization or other surgical procedure during study period
7. History of colon cleansing (for stool microbiome analysis)
8. Use of probiotics or over the counter supplements other than standard vitamins (for stool
microbiome analysis)
9. Pregnant
10. Participating in a competing study
11. Have any condition (e.g., psychiatric illness) or situation that, in the investigator's opinion, may
confound the study results, or may interfere signiﬁcantly with the patient's ability to adhere with
study procedures.
12. Score of > 4 to any of the amotivational items or if the relative autonomy index (deﬁned as
average of answers for the 6 autonomous items – average of answers for the 6 controlled items) is ≤0
on the Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire (Fig. 1)
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
91

summarizing the study information.
Potential participants who express interest in the study complete a
written screening consent that allows the study team to administer a
Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire, a validated questionnaire
that assesses the degree to which one's motivation for a particular be-
havior is relatively autonomous or self-determined (Fig. 1) [20,21]. The
items on the questionnaire relate to the reasons why an individual
would make healthier changes to their diet or continue current habits.
Potential participants are excluded if they give an answer of > 4 to any
of the amotivational items (questions 13 and 14) or if the relative au-
tonomy index (deﬁned as the average of answers for the ﬁrst 6 auton-
omous items minus the average of answers for the second 6 controlled
items) is < 0 (Fig. 1) [20,21]. Participants who meet the inclusion
criteria based on the Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire are
provided a 4-day food record and instructions on how to ﬁll out these
food records during the week prior to their scheduled baseline visit
(Fig. 2).
3.5. Baseline visit and randomization
Participants who ﬁll out their 4-day food record are, again, provided
an oral description of the project and give written informed consent to
participate in the trial at the baseline visit. Only study team members
with speciﬁc training in the informed consent process obtain this con-
sent, and participants are required to demonstrate their understanding
by summarizing the information provided.
Participants then undergo randomization to either a vegan diet or
the AHA-recommended diet (based on the AHA Therapeutic Lifestyle
Changes (TLC) Diet). Given that weight loss is not a primary goal of the
study, participants are not given energy goals. Dietary recommenda-
tions for both diets were developed using a 2000 kcal intake. The
randomization sequence is computer-generated by the study biostatis-
tician using a 1 to 1 allocation. A member of the cardiovascular clinical
research center, who is not a member of the study team, has access to
this sequence and provides the dietary assignment via email after the
participant provides written consent. All laboratory technicians per-
forming the endpoint assays are blinded to randomization group.
Once a diet is assigned, the study registered dietitian counsels the
participant on the assigned diet (Supplemental appendix 1), providing
extensive nutrition education and resources. . Study participants are
given measuring cups, measuring spoons, a food scale, a cookbook,
handouts from the Nutrition Care Manual® of the Academy of Nutrition
and Dietetics (www.eatright.org) (12 pages), a 2-week sample menu
with recipes (Supplemental appendix 2), and a large magnet for the
participant's refrigerator with summary dietary guidelines. Nutrient
analyses for the 2-week sample menus were completed using Food
Processor 11.0.137 (ESHA research, Salem, OR). The 2-week sample
menus for both diets were developed using a 2000-kcal guideline with
15% calories from protein, 60% from carbohydrates, and 25% from fat.
The vegan and AHA diet groups are given the cookbooks Simply Vegan
Fig. 1. Treatment self-regulation questionnaire. Questions 1 through 6 assess autonomous regulation; questions 7 through 12 assess controlled regulation; and questions 13 through 14
assess amotivation. Patients were excluded if they give an answer of > 4 to any of the amotivational items or if the relative autonomy index (deﬁned as average of answers for the ﬁrst 6
autonomous items – average of answers for the second 6 controlled items) is < 0.
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
92

(Baltimore: Vegetarian Resource Group, 2012) and American Heart
Association Low-Fat, Low-Cholesterol Cookbook (New York: Clarkson
Potter, 2008), respectively. Kathleen Woolf, PhD, RD tested all recipes
provided in the 2-week sample menu prior to implementation. Of note,
all participants are encouraged and expected to continue to take any
medication his or her physician has prescribed.
3.6. Dietary follow-up
Participants are provided $80 worth of groceries per week from a
food delivery company that services their area. Participants supplement
the $80 per week with their own purchases and are counseled to eat
within the recommendations of their assigned diet with food choices
and purchases outside of grocery items. The study registered dietitian
calls the patient twice weekly on random days throughout the 8 weeks
of the study to answer questions, obtain 24-h dietary recalls (twice a
week), and obtain food requests from the participant for a grocery order
speciﬁcally designed for this study (once a week) (Supplemental ap-
pendices 3 and 4).
Two follow-up in-person visits are scheduled—one at 4 weeks and
one at 8 weeks (interim and ﬁnal visits, respectively). Participants are
instructed to ﬁll out a 4-day food record during the one week prior to
each follow-up visit.
Long-term follow-up is assessed by a telephone call at 3 months, 6
months, and yearly for up to 5 years. At each time point, details on
interim clinical events (stress test, coronary angiography and/or re-
vascularization, myocardial infarction, development or hospitalization
for congestive heart failure, stroke or transient ischemic attack, cardiac
arrest, death) are obtained and another 24-h dietary recall is completed.
Participants are also asked questions: 1) Are you still following the
assigned diet? (If not, are you following any speciﬁc diet); 2) How do
you rate the healthfulness of you overall diet? (not healthy, somewhat
healthy, healthy, very healthy, extremely healthy); and 3) What is you
current weight?
3.7. Covariates of interest
Demographic and socioeconomic information are self-reported, and
trained study personnel measure vital signs, including height (Seca 216,
Model 1814009, Chino, CA, USA), weight (Conair Weight Watchers,
Model WW24WN, East Windson, NJ, USA), and waist circumference
(Mabis tape measure, Model 35-780-000, Waukegan, IL, USA). Waist
circumference is measured at the level of the iliac crest while the par-
ticipant is in the standing position, and an average of two measures are
recorded. An average of three blood pressure measurements taken
1 min apart are recorded while the participant is in the sitting position
[22]. Pertinent medical history is obtained from participant interview
and review of the electronic medical record. Tobacco use is deﬁned as
use of > 100 cigarettes or 5 pipes in a lifetime, and current tobacco use
is deﬁned as use within the past 6 months. Baseline medications are
deﬁned as those used for at least 7 days prior to the baseline visit. Left
ventricular ejection fraction is categorized as normal or borderline
(≥50%), mildly or moderately reduced (35%–49%), or severely re-
duced (< 35%) and collected from review of noninvasive data or an-
giography, whichever modality was performed for clinical reasons
closest to the time of baseline visit. Finally, a physician investigator
determines the indication for coronary angiography and degree of CAD
based on review of the invasive coronary angiography report (Table 2).
At the 4-week interim and 8-week ﬁnal visits, trained study per-
sonnel again measure height, weight, waist circumference, and blood
pressure per protocol, and participants are asked about current smoking
status and changes in medications from the prior visit.
3.8. Endpoints of interest
For each visit (baseline, 4-week interim, and 8-week ﬁnal), parti-
cipants are instructed to 1) drink plenty of ﬂuids on the day before their
appointment; 2) not consume any food after midnight the night before
the visit (water is allowed); and 3) wear loose-ﬁtting, comfortable
clothing. Blood is collected using standard peripheral venipuncture
techniques with a 21-guage needle. Up to 45 cc of blood is collected in
the following order: 3.2% (0.109 mol L−1) sodium citrate tubes (BD
Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey), serum separator tubes (BD
Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey), 5.4-mg K2 EDTA tubes (BD
Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey), and a Z serum separator clot
activator lipotube (Greiner Bio-One, Monroe, North Carolina). Citrate-
and EDTA-anticoagulated bloods designated for plasma collection are
centrifuged within 15 min of collection at 2500g for 10 min. Blood in
the serum separator tubes and the lipotube are allowed to clot for
30 min at room temperature prior to centrifugation at 2500g for 10 min.
Fig. 2. Four-day food record.
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
93

Plasma and serum aliquots are stored at −80 °C until analysis. Good
clinical practices are followed to certify proper storage and daily and
long-term quality control of reagents, instruments, and technique.
Endpoints are shown in Table 3.
3.9. Primary endpoint
The primary endpoint is hs-CRP concentration. Serum samples for
hs-CRP are shipped on the same day of collection at 2 °C–8 °C to the
Cleveland HeartLab, Inc (Cleveland, OH) for analysis.
3.10. Secondary endpoints
Secondary endpoints include anthropometric measures, other mar-
kers of inﬂammation, lipid parameters, glycemic markers, endothelial
function, quality of life, and physical activity patterns.
Myeloperoxidase is measured from EDTA plasma, and white blood
cell count with diﬀerential is measured from EDTA whole blood.
Surface markers of neutrophil activity (L-selectin and CD11b) and
monocyte subtypes are measured using citrate-anticoagulated blood via
an Accuri C6 ﬂow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). For
neutrophil
analyses,
whole blood
is stained
with
anti-L-selectin
(CD62L) and anti-β2 integrin (CD11b) antibodies (BD Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes, NJ) within 15 min of collection. The neutrophil popu-
lation is identiﬁed by their characteristic forward-sidelight scatter
characteristics.
To
assess
monocyte
subtypes,
formaldehyde-ﬁxed
whole blood is stained with CD86, CD14, and CD16 (BD Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes, NJ). Monocytes are identiﬁed as CD86+ and have
characteristic forward-side light scatter properties. All antibodies are
directly conjugated and IgG antibodies are used as controls for all ﬂow
cytometry analyses. All other inﬂammatory markers (such as soluble
selectin and integrin molecules) will be measured in triplicate on stored
plasma at the end of the study using commercially available multiplex
assays.
Lipid proﬁles are measured using nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. The lipid proﬁles include measures of total cholesterol;
LDL cholesterol (calculated); high-density lipoprotein (HDL) choles-
terol; triglycerides; LDL, small LDL, and HDL particle numbers; large
very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and large HDL; LDL, VLDL, and
HDL size; and lipoprotein insulin resistance index.
Glycemic markers, such as blood glucose and insulin, are measured
from serum, while hemoglobin A1c is measured from EDTA whole
blood.
Endothelium-mediated changes in vascular tone are measured using
the EndoPat device. Biosensors are placed on ﬁngertips, and en-
dothelium-mediated changes in arterial tone are elicited by a down-
stream hyperemic response induced by a standard 5-min occlusion of
the brachial artery. Measurements from the contralateral arm are used
to control for concurrent non-endothelial dependent changes in vas-
cular tone, and the ratio of the two measurements result in an index of
endothelial function. An index score of < 1.67 is considered abnormal
[23].
Quality of life is assessed using the EuroQol ﬁve dimensions ques-
tionnaire, which is comprised of a health state description and an
evaluation component. On the questionnaire, health status is evaluated
in ﬁve areas (mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and
Table 2
Covariates of interest in the Eﬀect of a Vegan versus AHA DiEt in Coronary Artery Disease (EVADE CAD) trial.
Baseline Characteristics
Baseline Characteristics (continued)
1. Demographic data
a. Age
b. Sex
c. Race
d. Ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic)
2. Socioeconomic data
a. Highest level of education
b. Total household income
c. Employment status
d. Marital status
e. Home zip code
3. Vital signs
a. Height
b. Weight
c. Waist circumference
d. Heart rate
e. Blood pressure (sitting position; average of 3 measures)
4. Pertinent medical history
a. Hypertension
b. Hyperlipidemia
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Percutaneous coronary intervention
e. Coronary artery bypass graft
f. Congestive heart failure requiring treatment
g. Diabetes mellitus
h. Peripheral artery disease
(known ≥50% or moderate or severe stenosis; history of
revascularization)
i. Carotid artery disease
(known ≥50% or moderate or severe stenosis; or history of
revascularization)
j. Cerebrovascular disease
(clinical history of TIA or stroke)
k. Abdominal aneurysm
l. Chronic renal dysfunction (creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL)
m. Inﬂammatory condition
n. Malignancy
5. Smoking history
a. Use of > 100 cigarettes or 5 pipes in lifetime
b. Use within 6 months (current vs former)
6. Baseline medications (for at least the 7 days prior visit)
7. Left ventricular ejection fraction
8. Indication for coronary angiography
9. Number of coronary arteries diseased (≥50% diameter stenosis in an artery with ≥2 mm caliber; or
physiologically signiﬁcant by fractional ﬂow reserve; or previously revascularized)
4-Week Interim and 8-Week Final Visits
1. Height, weight, and waist circumference
2. Smoking status
3. Changes in medications from baseline and interim use of antibiotics
4. Interim events
a. Emergency room visit with or without observation or inpatient admission
b. Heart attack (details of cardiac biomarkers collected if answered aﬃrmatively)
c. Stroke or mini-stroke
d. Hospitalization for heart failure
e. Resuscitated cardiac arrest
f. Cardiac procedure (including coronary angiography and/or coronary revascularization)
g. Outpatient clinic visits
h. Cardiac rehabilitation visits
i. Death
Long-Term Follow-Up Calls
1. Patient-reported weight
2. Changes in cardiac medications from last contact
3. Interim events (same as above)
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
94

anxiety/depression), and each area is rated on a three-level scale (1-no
problems; 2-having some problems; 3-having extreme problems). The
self-reported data are then summarized using the United States pre-
ference-weighted index score [24]. Health evaluation is assessed using
a visual analogue scale, a 20 cm vertical scale that ranges from 0 to 100
(“worst” to “best imaginable health state”), and reﬂects the participant's
overall health on the day of the visit.
Physical activity is assessed using the International Physical Activity
Questionnaire – short form (IPAQ-SF) [25]. Participants complete the
questionnaire at the baseline, 4-week interim, and 8-week ﬁnal visits.
Brieﬂy, the IPAQ-SF is a short, well-validated instrument used to assess
a typical week of physical activity [25]. The IPAQ-SF asks participants
to report frequency (days per week) and time spent engaging in activ-
ities that have been performed for at least 10 min in the past 7 days at
three diﬀerent levels of intensity (“walking”, “moderate”, and “vig-
orous”). Examples for each intensity level are provided and include
leisure, work, household, and transport-related activities. The physical
activity data are scored following established methods and reported as
a continuous measure in the metabolic equivalent of task-minutes per
week.
Finally, rate of major adverse cardiovascular events (a composite of
all-cause mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke,
and repeat coronary revascularization) are assessed. Participants are
asked about interim clinical events (emergency room visit, hospital
observation or inpatient stay, admission to an extended care facility,
cardiac rehabilitation, stress test, coronary angiography and/or re-
vascularization, myocardial infarction, development or hospitalization
for congestive heart failure, stroke or transient ischemic attack, cardiac
arrest, death). If a clinical event does occur outside the NYU system,
participants are asked for authorization to obtain details of this event
from the outside physician or facility if their NYU physician did not
already do so. Information regarding interim clinical events is also
captured on long-term telephone follow-ups.
All secondary endpoints are measured at NYU School of Medicine,
with the exception of myeloperoxidase, white blood cell count with
diﬀerential, lipid proﬁles, and glycemic markers, which are shipped on
the same day of collection at 2 °C–8 °C to the Cleveland HeartLab, Inc
(Cleveland, OH) for analysis.
3.11. Measures of dietary adherence
We developed a novel assessment tool to evaluate adherence to the
animal protein recommendations for each diet. Adherence is assessed
each week using the information collected during the two 24-h dietary
recalls. Participants on the vegan diet receive 1 point for abstinence
from each of the following: 1) meat/poultry/eggs, 2) dairy, 3) seafood.
A score of ≥5 of 6 is considered adherent for that week. Participants on
the AHA diet receive 1 point for consumption of each of the following:
1) ≤5 oz of animal protein/day, 2) only low-fat/fat-free dairy, 3) ﬁsh
≥2 times/week. A score of ≥4 of 5 is considered adherent for that
week. Participants are determined to be adherent at the 4-week interim
and 8-week ﬁnal follow-ups if they are adherent for ≥2 of 3 weeks
evaluated between visits. As a secondary measure of dietary adherence,
MyPlate servings of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains intake will be
assessed in each diet group.
Participants are told that adherence to their assigned diet will also
be measured via blood and urine, but no further details are provided.
Both plasma and spot urine trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) con-
centrations, an oxidized metabolite of choline, are measured in all
participants from aliquots stored at −80 °C. L-carnitine is an abundant
nutrient in red meat and contains a structure similar to choline [26].
These markers will be used as objective evidence of adherence.
3.12. Data storage and conﬁdentiality
All participant study data are kept strictly conﬁdential and managed
electronically with REDCap, a secure web-based application for
building and managing online databases [27]. The program provides
automated export of data to common statistical packages (e.g. SPSS, R),
and branching logic, ﬁle uploading, and calculated ﬁelds. Hard copies
of data are secured in a locked cabinet in a locked oﬃce on NYU School
of Medicine property. All biological specimens are encoded with a study
number that had no patient identiﬁer information.
Food Processor 11.0.137 (ESHA research, Salem, OR) is used to
enter the 24-h dietary recalls and food records for each participant. De-
identiﬁed dietary intake data are obtained for24 days as per the fol-
lowing schedule: 4-day food record from the week prior to the baseline
visit and at weeks 4 and 8; and twice a week 24-h dietary recalls during
weeks 1 through 3 and weeks 5 through 7. The nutrient variables of
interest include: energy (kcal), protein (g), carbohydrates (g), dietary
ﬁber (g), soluble ﬁber (g), fat (g), saturated fat (g), trans fatty acids (g),
cholesterol (mg), omega 3 fatty acids (g), sodium (mg), and proportion
of recommendations met for MyPlate.gov food groups (grain, vegetable,
fruit, dairy, protein).
3.13. Statistical analysis
Demographic
and
baseline
characteristics
will
be
presented.
Summary
statistics
(number,
mean,
standard
deviation,
median,
Table 3
Endpoints of interest in the Eﬀect of a Vegan versus AHA DiEt in Coronary Artery Disease
(EVADE CAD) trial.
Primary Endpoint
High sensitivity C-reactive protein
Secondary Endpoints
Anthropometric data
Weight
Body mass index
Waist circumference
Waist circumference to height ratio
Other markers of inﬂammation
Myeloperoxidase
White blood cell count
Neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio
Neutrophil-surface expression of L-selectin and the β2 integrin CD11b
Soluble L-selectin and E-selectin
Soluble intercellular adhesion molecule and vascular cell adhesion protein
Soluble neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
Monocyte subtypes
Oxidized LDL
Urine F2-isoprostane/creatinine
Lipid parameters
Total cholesterol
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (calculated)
Direct high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
Triglycerides
Non-HDL cholesterol
LDL, small LDL, and HDL particle numbers
Large very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and large HDL
LDL, VLDL, and HDL size
Lp-PLA2
Lipoprotein insulin resistance index
Glycemic markers
Fasting blood glucose
Blood insulin
Hemoglobin A1c
Other
Index of endothelial function (EndoPAT, Itamar Medical Ltd, Caesarea,
Israel)
Quality of life (EuroQol 5 dimensions questionnaire, health evaluation on a
visual analogue scale)
Physical Activity (International Physical Activity questionnaire)
Clinical outcomes
Major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) (a composite of all-cause
mortality, non-fatal
myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, and repeat coronary
revascularization)
Individual components of MACE
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
95

interquartile range) will be calculated for continuous variables.
Frequency and percentages will be calculated for categorical variables.
Normal assumptions will be checked using quantile-quantile plots and
Shapiro-Wilks test. Non-parametric alternatives and transformations
will be considered.
Baseline variables will be compared between the two dietary groups
with t-test for normally distributed continuous variables, Mann-
Whitney-Wilcoxon for skewed continuous variables, and tests of pro-
portions for categorical variables. Changes in endpoints over time
within and between groups will be compared using a linear mixed eﬀect
model to assess the outcome over covariates including collection time
point (baseline, 4-week interim, and 8-week ﬁnal), type of diet, and the
interaction term between these two variables. The interaction term will
assess whether the changes in outcome over time diﬀer between
treatment groups. Although the anticipated rate of missing data is an-
ticipated to be low, appropriate statistical methods (e.g. last observa-
tion forward, multiple imputation) will be used based upon the re-
commendations of the study biostatistician. Statistical signiﬁcance for
the primary endpoint will be tested using a 2-sided alpha level of 0.05.
The primary analysis will be conducted as intention-to-treat. Secondary
analyses will include a per-protocol evaluation and a sensitivity ana-
lysis will be conducted for diﬀerent thresholds of adherence as deﬁned
by the adherence tool and metabolites.
3.14. Sample size calculation
Preliminary data from our cardiac catheterization laboratory de-
monstrated a mean hs-CRP concentration of 2.07 mg/L ± 0.57 mg/L in
patients with CAD. Based on an estimated decrease in mean hs-CRP
concentration by 20% with the vegan diet as compared to the AHA diet,
and a 2-sided 2 sample t-test, the number of participants needed in each
group to achieve 80% power at the 0.05 signiﬁcance level was esti-
mated to be 30 [16]. We approximated that up to 40% of the partici-
pants enrolled may have low hs-CRP concentrations at baseline (ﬂoor
eﬀect) or drop out, and, thus, increased the sample size in each group to
50. Finally, approximately 1/3 of participants who signed screening
consent were expected to not show up to their baseline visit prior to
randomization. Therefore, IRB approval was granted for the consent of
150 screened participants to reach our goal of 100 randomized parti-
cipants.
4. Discussion
Patients with CAD require evidenced-based strategies to reduce in-
ﬂammation and improve clinical outcomes. Lifestyle interventions, in-
cluding diet, may be an important approach to address the risks asso-
ciated with inﬂammation and impact cardiovascular health. Although
epidemiological research supports the relationship between “heart
healthy” dietary patterns and vegan diets on inﬂammatory markers,
well-designed randomized clinical trials are limited and the results are
mixed [28–31]. Furthermore, the study participants included in pre-
vious research may have been free from cardiovascular disease. We
present the ﬁrst study to date to comprehensively assess the impact of a
vegan diet compared to the currently recommended AHA diet on
multiple indices of inﬂammation and glycometabolic risk in a rando-
mized clinical trial of patients with angiographically deﬁned CAD.
Our study design incorporates several unique and innovative ele-
ments to address the research questions. First, this study compares the
impact of a vegan diet and the AHA diet on multiple indices of in-
ﬂammation and glycometabolic risk. All participants receive random
assignment to an intervention with the potential to improve health.
Thus, the study design calls for as much attention to the control group
(AHA) as the comparator group (vegan). Participants are counseled
equally on their respective dietary guidelines and complete twice
weekly 24-h dietary recalls that allow for equal amount of contact with
the research dietitian. The intervention groups are also provided with
the same resources: provision of a starter kit that includes a food scale,
measuring cups, measuring spoons, cookbook, two-week sample menu
with recipes, nutrition education materials summarizing the diet (12
pages), and handouts on serving size and instructions on how to read
nutrition labels, as well as weekly groceries. The only diﬀerence in
these resources is the substitution of animal-based protein in the AHA
group for plant-based protein in the vegan group.
Second, we provide groceries and dietary counseling for all study
participants. Participants in this study receive $80 in weekly groceries
as part of the study design. During a weekly phone call from the study
dietitian, participants complete a grocery order for food items to be
delivered to their home from a grocery delivery service. Participants are
able to select items from a list of foods/ingredients (Supplemental ap-
pendix 4) that support the dietary recommendations of their interven-
tion assignment. Participants are also provided with a two-week sample
menu that incorporates the foods/ingredients on the grocery order
(Supplemental appendix 2). Most nutrition clinical studies utilize nu-
trition education, cooking classes, educational resources, and in-
dividual/group counseling as part of the study design when educating
research participants on their respective intervention assignment.
However, providing whole foods/ingredients to research participants
may enhance adherence to the dietary guidelines and is an innovative
aspect of this study. During the 15 one-on-one educational sessions with
the study research dietitian, the research participants learn how to in-
corporate these foods/ingredients into healthy meals, which may con-
tinue once the study has ended. Other studies have provided some food
items to research participants, such as meal replacement products,
frozen food entrees, and margarine [32,33]. However, increasing data
suggest a failure of translating research ﬁndings into clinical practice,
particularly those related to adherence to dietary advice [34]. Our
study provides study participants with the education and tools neces-
sary to prepare healthy meals that follow the dietary recommendations
of their intervention assignment and sustain the behavior. This, to-
gether with the twice a week telephone calls from the study registered
dietitian, may beneﬁcially impact dietary adherence [35].
Third, this study incorporates detailed scripts and guidelines, al-
lowing the intervention materials to be disseminated consistently by the
study registered dietitian. A counseling guide was developed to en-
courage a similar discussion between the study registered dietitian and
study participants randomly assigned to each intervention group.
Furthermore, a script was created for the 24-h dietary recalls so that the
initiation of the conversation, questions asked, and guidance for par-
ticipants were similar for participants assigned to the same intervention
group.
Fourth, the multiple measures of adherence are another central
aspect of the study's design. These measures include dietary intake
(animal protein recommendation for each diet; MyPlate servings of
fruits, vegetables, and whole grains) and both plasma and urine TMAO
concentrations. Although TMAO concentrations are only detected after
the consumption of red meat, participants were only told that there was
a marker in the blood and urine that allowed investigators to determine
dietary adherence [26]. A unique study-speciﬁc scoring system was also
developed, as described above, to quantitate level of dietary adherence
using similar criteria in each group.
There are several limitations to the current study. First, the use of a
Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire may limit generalizability of
the study results. Given our relatively small sample size, we need to
eﬀectively enroll potentially adherent participants, allowing us to
better examine the impact of the intervention. Second, although the
study registered dietitian consistently encourages intake of whole food
choices at each of the 15 educational one-on-one sessions, convenience
items are allowed to promote adherence to the diets in the real-world
setting. Third, the study nutrition education materials are based on the
TLC Program, guidelines that were recommended by the AHA at the
time the intervention materials were developed. Although dietary re-
commendations continue to evolve, the TLC Program is consistent with
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
96

the current AHA guidelines.
Finally, irrespective of the primary ﬁndings, this randomized
blinded-endpoint trial will be of scientiﬁc importance as a large re-
pository of biological specimens with a comprehensive analysis of in-
ﬂammatory markers, lipid proﬁles, and glucometabolic parameters in
conjunction with detailed dietary reports in patients with CAD. Thus,
the biologic repository can allow for exploration of the eﬀects of dif-
ferent dietary strategies on additional markers of cardiometabolic
health. In addition, the results of this study may provide preliminary
data for a larger randomized trial evaluating the eﬀects of the two
dietary strategies on traditional clinical cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with CAD. Alternatively, if signiﬁcant reductions in in-
ﬂammatory or glucometabolic proﬁles are noted in both groups, data
from the current study may be used to support the evaluation of a
rigorous approach to dietary counseling on long-term cardiovascular
events in patients with established CAD.
In summary, the EVADE CAD study is a unique and innovative
randomized clinical trial comparing the eﬀectiveness of an 8-week
vegan diet to the AHA-recommended diet on hs-CRP concentrations in
patients with angiographically deﬁned CAD. The study results may
provide important information for a larger outcomes-based trial eval-
uating dietary strategies to decrease inﬂammation and improve gluco-
metabolic proﬁles in patients with CAD.
Acknowledgements
Binita Shah was supported in part by the National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences (NYU CTSA UL1TR000038) and New
York State (Empire Clinical Research Investigator Program) in 2015 and
the Biomedical Laboratory Research & Development Service of the VA
Oﬃce of Research and Development (iK2CX001074) in 2016. Dr.
Newman was partially funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute
(NHBLI)
of
the
National
Institute
of
Health
(NIH,
K23HL125991) and the American Heart Association Mentored Clinical
and Population Research Award (15MCPRP24480132). Statistical sup-
port was provided in part by the New York University School of
Medicine Cardiovascular Outcomes Group.
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of Bryan Velez de
Villa, BS; Erini Farid; Christine A. Berthoumieux, BA; Elissa Driggin, BS;
Melissa Goldman, MA; and Tamsin Shephard, BS to the data collection
and electronic entry for this study.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.conctc.2017.09.003.
References
[1] R.R. Packard, P. Libby, Inﬂammation in atherosclerosis: from vascular biology to
biomarker discovery and risk prediction, Clin. Chem. 54 (2008) 24–38.
[2] M. Nidorf, P.L. Thompson, Eﬀect of colchicine (0.5 mg twice daily) on high-sensi-
tivity C-reactive protein independent of aspirin and atorvastatin in participants with
stable coronary artery disease, Am. J. Cardiol. 99 (2007) 805–807.
[3] S.M. Nidorf, J.W. Eikelboom, C.A. Budgeon, et al., Low-dose colchicine for sec-
ondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 61 (2013)
404–410.
[4] G. Patti, C. Massimo, V. Pasceri, D. Colonna, A. Nusca, M. Miglionico,
A. D'Ambrosio, E. Covino, G. Di Sciascio, Protection from procedural myocardial
injury by atorvastatin is associated with lower levels of adhesion molecules after
percutaneous coronary intervention: results from the ARMYDA-CAMs substudy, J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 48 (2006) 1560–1566.
[5] V. Pasceri, G. Patti, A. Nusca, C. Pristipino, G. Richichi, G. Di Sciascio, Randomized
trial of atorvastatin for reduction of myocardial damage during coronary inter-
vention: results from the ARMYDA study, Circulation 110 (2004) 674–678.
[6] M. Kwaijtaal, R. van Diest, F.W. Bar, A.J. van der Ven, C.A. Bruggeman, M.H. de
Baets, A. Appels, Inﬂammatory markers predict late cardiac events in participants
who are exhausted after percutnaeous coronary intervention, Atherosclerosis 182
(2005) 341–348.
[7] A. Buﬀon, G. Liuzzo, L.M. Biascucci, P. Pasqualetti, V. Ramazzotti, A.G. Rebuzzi,
F. Crea, A. Maseri, Preprocedural serum levels of C-reactive protein predict early
complications and late restenosis after coronary angioplasty, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.
34 (1999) 1512–1521.
[8] D.H. Walter, S. Fichtlscherer, M. Sellwig, W. Auch-Schwelk, V. Schachinger,
A.M. Zeiher, Preprocedural C-reactive protein and cardiovascular events after
coronary stent implantation, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 37 (2001) 839–846.
[9] P.M. Ridker, E. Danielson, F.A. Fonseca, J. Genest, A.M. Gotto Jr., J.J. Kastelein,
W. Koenig, P. Libby, A.J. Lorenzatti, J.G. MacFadyen, B.G. Nordestgaard,
J. Shepherd, J.T. Willerson, R.J. Glynn, JUPITER Study Group. Rosuvastatin to
prevent vascular events in men and women with elevated C-reactive protein, N.
Engl. J. Med. 359 (2008) 2195–2207.
[10] A. Oesterle, U. Laufs, J.K. Liao, Pleiotropic eﬀects of statins on the cardiovascular
system, Circ. Res. 120 (2017) 229–243.
[11] xxx.
[12] L.J. Appel, T.J. Moore, E. Obarzanek, W.M. Vollmer, L.P. Svetkey, F.M. Sacks,
G.A. Bray, T.M. Vogt, J.A. Cutler, M.M. Windhauser, P.H. Lin, N. Karanja, A clinical
trial of the eﬀects of dietary patterns on blood pressure. DASH Collaborative
Research Group, N. Engl. J. Med. 336 (1997) 1117–1124.
[13] L.J. Appel, F.M. Sacks, V.J. Carey, E. Obarzanek, J.F. Swain, E.R. Miller 3rd,
P.R. Conlin, T.P. Erlinger, B.A. Rosner, N.M. Laranjo, J. Charleston, P. McCarron,
L.M. Bishop, OmniHeart Collaborative Research Group. Eﬀects of protein, mono-
unsaturated fat, and carbohydrate intake on blood pressure and serum lipids: results
of the OmniHeart randomized trial, JAMA 294 (2005) 2455–2464.
[14] B.V. Howard, L. Van Horn, J. Hsia, J.E. Manson, M.L. Stefanick, S. Wassertheil-
Smoller, L.H. Kuller, A.Z. LaCroix, R.D. Langer, N.L. Lasser, C.E. Lewis,
M.C. Limacher, K.L. Margolis, W.J. Mysiw, J.K. Ockene, L.M. Parker, M.G. Perri,
L. Phillips, R.L. Prentice, J. Robbins, J.E. Rossouw, G.E. Sarto, I.J. Schatz,
L.G. Snetselaar, V.J. Stevens, L.F. Tinker, M. Trevisan, M.Z. Vitolins, G.L. Anderson,
A.R. Assaf, T. Bassford, S.A. Beresford, H.R. Black, R.L. Brunner, R.G. Brzyski,
B. Caan, R.T. Chlebowski, M. Gass, I. Granek, P. Greenland, J. Hays, D. Heber,
G. Heiss, S.L. Hendrix, F.A. Hubbell, K.C. Johnson, J.M. Kotchen, Low-fat dietary
pattern and risk of cardiovascular disease: the Women's health initiative rando-
mized controlled dietary modiﬁcation trial, JAMA 295 (2006) 655–666.
[15] R. Estruch, E. Ros, J. Salas-Salvadó, M.I. Covas, D. Corella, F. Arós, E. Gómez-
Gracia, V. Ruiz-Gutiérrez, M. Fiol, J. Lapetra, R.M. Lamuela-Raventos, L. Serra-
Majem, X. Pintó, J. Basora, M.A. Muñoz, J.V. Sorlí, J.A. Martínez, M.A. Martínez-
González, PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary prevention of cardiovascular
disease with a Mediterranean diet, N. Engl. J. Med. 368 (2013) 1279–1290.
[16] H.S. Dod, R. Bhardwaj, V. Sajja, G. Weidner, G.R. Hobbs, G.W. Konat,
S. Manivannan, W. Gharib, B.E. Warden, N.C. Nanda, R.J. Beto, D. Ornish,
A.C. Jain, Eﬀect of intensive lifestyle changes on endothelial function and on in-
ﬂammatory markers of atherosclerosis, Am. J. Cardiol. 105 (2010) 362–367.
[17] D. Ornish, L.W. Scherwitz, R.S. Doody, D. Kesten, S.M. McLanahan, S.E. Brown,
E. DePuey, R. Sonnemaker, C. Haynes, J. Lester, G.K. McAllister, R.J. Hall,
J.A. Burdine, A.M. Gotto Jr., Eﬀects of stress management training and dietary
changes in treating ischemic heart disease, JAMA 249 (1983) 54–59.
[18] D. Ornish, S.E. Brown, L.W. Scherwitz, J.H. Billings, W.T. Armstrong, T.A. Ports,
S.M. McLanahan, R.L. Kirkeeide, R.J. Brand, K.L. Gould, Can lifestyle changes re-
verse coronary heart disease? The Lifestyle Heart Trial, Lancet 336 (1990) 129–133.
[19] L. Hansson, T. Hedner, B. Dahlöf, Prospective randomized open blinded end-point
(PROBE) study. A novel design for intervention trials. Prospective Randomized
Open Blinded End-Point, Blood Press 1 (1992) 113–119.
[20] R.M. Ryan, J.P. Connell, Perceived locus of causality and internalization: examining
reasons for acting in two domains, J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 57 (1989) 749–761.
[21] C.S. Levesque, G.C. Williams, D. Elliot, M.A. Pickering, B. Bodenhamer, P.J. Finley,
Validating the theoretical structure of the Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire
(TSRQ) across three diﬀerent health behaviors, Health Educ. Res. 22 (2007)
691–702.
[22] T.G. Pickering, J.E. Hall, L.J. Appel, B.E. Falkner, J. Graves, M.N. Hill, D.W. Jones,
T. Kurtz, S.G. Sheps, E.J. Roccella, Recommendations for blood pressure measure-
ment in humans and experimental animals: part 1: blood pressure measurement in
humans: a statement for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and
Public Education of the American Heart Association Council on High Blood Pressure
Research, Circulation 111 (2005) 697–716.
[23] P.O. Bonetti, G.M. Pumper, S.T. Higano, D.R. Holmes Jr., J.T. Kuvin, A. Lerman,
Noninvasive identiﬁcation of patients with early coronary atherosclerosis by as-
sessment of digital reactive hyperemia, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 44 (2004) 2137–2141.
[24] R. Rabin, F. de Charro, EQ-5D: a measure of health status from the EuroQol Group,
Ann. Med. 33 (2001) 337–343.
[25] C.L. Craig, A.L. Marshall, M. Sjöström, A.E. Bauman, M.L. Booth, B.E. Ainsworth,
M. Pratt, U. Ekelund, A. Yngve, J.F. Sallis, P. Oja, International physical activity
questionnaire: 12-country reliability and validity, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc 35 (2003)
1381–1395.
[26] R.A. Koeth, Z. Wang, B.S. Levison, et al., Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-
carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis, Nat. Med. 19 (2013)
576–585.
[27] P.A. Harris, R. Taylor, R. Thielke, J. Payne, N. Gonzalez, J.G. Conde, Research
electronic data capture (REDCap)-A metadata-driven methodology and workﬂow
process for providing translational research informatics support, J. Biomed. Inf. 42
(2009) 377–381.
[28] J. Jiao, J.Y. Xu, W. Zhang, S. Han, L.Q. Qin, Eﬀect of dietary ﬁber on circulating C-
reactive protein in overweight and obese adults: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials, Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 66 (2015) 114–119.
[29] B. Gopinath, A.E. Buyken, V.M. Flood, M. Empson, E. Rochtchina, P. Mitchell,
Consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids, ﬁsh, and nuts and risk of inﬂammatory
disease mortality, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 93 (2011) 1073–1079.
[30] A. Oliveira, F. Rodríguez-Artalejo, C. Lopes, The association of fruits, vegetables,
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
97

antioxidant vitamins and ﬁbre intake with high-sensitivity C-reactive protein: sex
and body mass index interactions, Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 63 (2009) 1345–1352.
[31] J. Corley, J.A. Kyle, J.M. Starr, G. McNeill, I.J. Deary, Dietary factors and bio-
markers of systemic inﬂammation in older people: the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936,
Br. J. Nutr. 114 (2015) 1088–1098.
[32] D.H. Ryan, M.A. Espeland, G.D. Foster, S.M. Haﬀner, V.S. Hubbard, K.C. Johnson,
S.E. Kahn, W.C. Knowler, S.Z. Yanovski, Look AHEAD Research Group. Look
AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes): design and methods for a clinical trial of
weight loss for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in type 2 diabetes, Control
Clin. Trials 24 (2003) 610–618.
[33] M. de Lorgeril, S. Renaud, N. Mamelle, P. Salen, J.L. Martin, I. Monjaud,
J. Guidollet, P. Touboul, J. Delaye, Mediterranean alpha-linolenic acid-rich diet in
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease, Lancet 343 (1994 Jun 11)
1454–1459.
[34] S. Desroches, A. Lapointe, S. Ratte, K. Gravel, F. Legare, J. Thirsk, Interventions to
enhance adherence to dietary advice for preventing and managing chronic diseases
in adults: a study protocol, BMC Public Health 11 (2011) 111.
[35] S. Desroches, A. Lapointe, S. Ratte, K. Gravel, F. Legare, S. Turcotte, Interventions to
enhance adherence to dietary advice for preventing and managing chronic diseases
in adults, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. (2013) CD008722.
B. Shah et al.
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 8 (2017) 90–98
98

