Original article 
RESEARCH 
................................................................................................................................. 

hospital admission rates and reduce costs: a case 
study of telehealth among chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease patients 
Birthe Dinesen*, Lisa KE Haesum*, Natascha Soerensen*, Carl Nielsen†, 
Ove Grann‡, Ole Hejlesen*, Egon Toft* and Lars Ehlers§ 
*Department of Health Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, Denmark; †Department of Pulmonary 
Diseases, Aalborg Hospital, A˚ rhus University Hospitals, Denmark; ‡Vejgaard Healthcare Center and Healthcare Center, Aalborg, Denmark; 
§Department of Business and Management, Faculty of Social Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, Denmark 
Summary 
We studied whether preventive home monitoring of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) could 
reduce the frequency of hospital admissions and lower the cost of hospitalization. Patients were recruited from a health 
centre, general practitioner (GP) or the pulmonary hospital ward. They were randomized to usual care or 
tele-rehabilitation with a telehealth monitoring device installed in their home for four months. A total of 111 patients 
were suitable for inclusion and consented to be randomized: 60 patients were allocated to intervention and three were 
lost to follow-up. In the control group 51 patients were allocated to usual care and three patients were lost to follow-up. 
In the tele-rehabilitation group, the mean hospital admission rate was 0.49 per patient per 10 months compared to 
the control group rate of 1.17; this difference was signiﬁcant (P ¼ 0.041). The mean cost of admissions was E3461 per 
patient in the intervention group and E4576 in the control group; this difference was not signiﬁcant. The 
Kaplan-Meier estimates for time to hospital admission were longer for the intervention group than the controls, but 
the difference was not signiﬁcant. Future work requires large-scale studies of prolonged home monitoring with more 
extended follow-up. 
Introduction 
.............................................................. 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of 
the most common chronic diseases worldwide and a 
common cause of hospitalization.1 It is estimated that 210 
million people have COPD worldwide. In 2005, over three 
million people died of COPD, equal to 5% of all deaths 
globally.2 In Denmark ( population 5.2 million), 
approximately 400,000 people suffer from COPD, 
accounting for 20% of acute admissions to medical wards. 
The admission rate for COPD patients within the ﬁrst 
month is 24%.3 


Accepted 29 January 2012 
Correspondence: Birthe Dinesen, Telehomecare Research Group, Medical 
Informatics, Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, 
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7 D1, DK-9220 Aalborg Ø, Denmark (Fax: þ45 9815 4008; 
Email: bid@hst.aau.dk) 
improved health-related quality of life, improved exercise 
capacity and reduced hospitals admissions.4,5,6 A systematic 
review of home telehealth for COPD patients concluded that 
clinical heterogeneity was present in outcome measures. 
Home telehealth was found to reduce rates of 
hospitalization, emergency department visits and number of 
hospital bed days, but there was considerable variation in 
results among the studies.7 Another systematic review of two 
randomized trials and four evaluations of telemonitoring 
concluded that studies are limited, that the beneﬁts of 
telemonitoring for COPD have not yet been conﬁrmed and 
cited the need for large-scale implementation studies.8 A 
small randomized clinical trial conducted on COPD patients 
receiving tele-assistance in Italy has shown that the 
intervention group experienced fewer hospitalizations 
compared to a control group who did not receive 
tele-assistance.9 There are no randomized studies of COPD 
patients participating in preventive home monitoring across 
sectors in order to avoid admission to hospital. 
The aim of the present study was to test whether 
preventive home monitoring in COPD reduced the 



admission rate to hospital and the cost of hospitalization. 
The study was conducted as part of the Danish TELEKAT 
project (Telehomecare, Chronic Patients and the 
Integrated Healthcare System, see http://www.telekat.eu). 
The TELEKAT project seeks to develop a preventive 
home monitoring concept for COPD patients. Patients 
perform self-monitoring and rehabilitation activities 
in their homes so that they can avoid admission to 
hospital. 
Methods 
.............................................................. 
A randomized controlled trial of the tele-rehabilitation 
programme was conducted. Approval was obtained from the 
appropriate ethics committee. The patients participating in 
the study were selected according to the following inclusion 
criteria: 
(1) Over 18 years; 
(2) Can understand oral and written trial information; 
(3) Diagnosed COPD10 in stage III or IV (severe or very 



(1) Living outside Aalborg Municipality; 
(2) Heart disease that could limit physical function; 
(3) Mental illness; 
(4) Terminal malignant disease; 
(5) 
Severe rheumatoid arthritis; 
(6) Pregnancy. 

For power calculations, our goal was to detect a 10% change 
in the patients’ quality of life with 90% power for exposing 
differences with a P value of 5%. When using health-related 
quality of life (Short Form Health Survey - SF36), a typical 
drop-out rate of 10% was expected, which is why it was 
planned to include 66 patients in the tele-rehabilitation and 
control group. The results on health-related quality of life 
will be reported in a future paper. 

a health centre, general practitioner (GP) or the 
pulmonary hospital ward. After conﬁrming eligibility and 
obtaining written informed consent, the patients drew 
envelopes to see which group they would attend. The 
envelopes were sealed and therefore the allocation was 
blinded for health-care professionals, patients and 
researchers. 

offered the possibility of carrying out preventive 
self-monitoring using a telehealth monitor. The control 
group followed the standard regime for rehabilitation. 

After the patients were enrolled in the study, the doctor 
collected baseline clinical data. The tele-rehabilitation 
group had a telehealth monitoring device installed in their 
home for four months, and a doctor prescribed how often 
the individual patient had to measure values during a week. 
Patients were instructed to monitor their symptoms so that 
they could contact their GP or health-care professionals at 
hospitals at an earlier stage than usual, in order to start 
treatment and avoid hospitalization. On installing the 
telehealth equipment in the home, the patient was taught 
how to measure the clinical values, how to use a step 
counter and was advised on how to exercise. In order to 
provide the patients with standardized information on 
exercises, they were given a set of instructional guidelines 
from the Danish Lung Association. The exercises included 
sitting exercises on a chair, stretching of neck muscles, 
exercises for the legs, standing exercises for arms and chest 
cavity, and walking exercises. A calibration exercise was 
conducted with the patients and their relatives in order to 
avoid information bias. 

collect and transmit data via a secure line. The data, 
including the patient’s blood pressure, pulse, weight, 
oxygen level and lung function (spirometry) were sent to a 
web-based portal or to the patient’s electronic health care 
record. Health-care professionals such as GP, district nurses, 
nurses and doctors at the health-care centre or hospital 
could assess the patient’s data, monitor the patient’s 
disease and training inputs, and provide advice to the 
patient. The patients and relatives could also view the data 
on the web portal and decide with whom they want to share 
their data, but this was based on the patient’s written 
consent. 
Once per month, a tele-rehabilitation team consisting 
of health-care professionals from primary and secondary 
care held a video meeting in order to coordinate and 
discuss the COPD patients’ individual rehabilitation 
programme. The video meetings operated with a 
standardized agenda. 

instructed on performing home exercises. Each patient was 
then made responsible for performing the activities by 
themselves, and they had no planned contact with health- 
care professionals regarding their home exercises. Both the 
intervention and control groups were informed that if they 
needed urgent treatment, they should contact their GP or 
an emergency doctor. 

Data on admission were collected over a 10-month period, 
beginning from the time when the patients were included 
in the study. The admission rate was deﬁned as the number 
of participants admitted to hospital during a 10-month 
follow-up period. The cost of hospitalization was estimated 
using actual patient speciﬁc reimbursement data (Danish 



DRG codes). The data were accessed via a database in the 
regional ofﬁce responsible for collecting and storing the 
patients’ personal data on hospital admissions and bed days 
of care. The mean cost of hospitalization for each group was 
calculated for the 10-month follow-up period by dividing 
the total costs by the number of hospitalized patients. 

The intention to treatment approach was also used in order 
to compare patients according to the group to which they 
were randomly allocated, regardless of patients’ compliance, 
withdrawal from the study or crossover to other treatments. 
The intention to treatment emphasizes greater 
accountability for all patients entered into the study and 
minimizes the inﬂuence of drop-outs and patients lost to 
follow up. 
The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the 
probabilities of admission over time. A log-rank test was 
applied to compare Kaplan-Meier estimates for the two groups. 
Statistical analyses were carried out using a standard package 
(Stata version 11, StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). 
Results 
.............................................................. 
Due to lack of time we did not succeed in recruiting 132 
patients as planned. A total of 111 patients were suitable for 
inclusion and consented to be randomized. 60 patients were 
allocated to intervention and three were lost to follow up 
due to worsening in their disease. Thus the intervention 
group consisted of 57 patients. In the control group 51 
patients were allocated and three patients were lost to follow 
up due to personal reasons. Thus the control group 
consisted of 48 patients. In Table 1 the baseline 
characteristic of the COPD patients can be seen. Figure 1 
illustrates the patient ﬂow chart for the randomizing 
process. Table 2 provides an overview of the patients 
recruited to each arm in the study. 

The admission rates and costs of hospitalization for the two 
groups are shown in Table 3. There was a signiﬁcant 
difference (P ¼ 0.041) between the groups for the rate of 
admissions. 


the control groups are summarized in Figure 2. The 
tele-rehabilitation group showed better progress than the 
control group over a longer time period. However, there was 
no signiﬁcant difference between the groups (P ¼ 0.09). 
Discussion 
.............................................................. 
Reviews7,8,9,11 of home telehealth for COPD patients 
indicate a lower level of hospital admissions compared to 
patients who do not receive telehealth monitors, but these 
studies are not similar to the present study. In the TELEKAT 
project, a preventive approach was used in the 
tele-rehabilitation programme, and the study was 
conducted across sectors. We have found no studies where 
tele-rehabilitation was conducted across sectors with 
representatives from the health-care centre, GP, hospital and 
district nurses, and where the health-care professionals were 
able to share data and meet virtually. The small sample size 
in our study precluded us from conducting a subgroup 
analysis on disease severity and health sector. 
Overall, the tele-rehabilitation group had an admission 
rate of 0.48 per 10 months compared to 1.17 for the control 
group. There was also a trend towards the tele-rehabilitation 
group having a longer time to ﬁrst admission to hospital 
than the control group (see Figure 2) with a lower proportion 
of telerehabilitation patients admitted to hospital. 
There was a drop out of three patients in both the trial 
groups. The patients gave reasons such as worsening in their 
disease and personal reasons for dropping out. Although 
relatively few patients dropped-out of the study, the matter 
requires consideration. Is preventive home monitoring for 
everybody? If they have worsening symptoms, do patients 
have the psychological capacity to monitor themselves and 
accept the associated responsibility? This raises the question 
of whether we need to screen patients more intensively 
before offering them home monitoring. We have not been 
able to ﬁnd studies that focus on this question. 

addressed in studies, using a longer duration of home 
monitoring and a more extended period of follow-up. There 
is a need for large scale randomized studies in multicentre 
settings in order to obtain solid evidence for implementing 
tele-rehabilitation. Polisena et al.12, in an economic review, 




Age, y 
Forced expiratory volume in 1 second, L 
Bodyweight, kg 
Body mass index, kg/m2 
Oxygen saturation, % 
Blood pressure, mmHg 
Heart rate,/min 
MRC dyspnoea score 
68 (45; 82) 
0.90 (0.26; 2.09) 
72.9 (39.0; 118.0) 
25.5 (16.0; 41.0) 
93.5 (89.0; 99.0) 
136/81 (97/52; 180/126) 
82 (57; 111) 
3.6 (2; 5) 
68 (46; 89) 
0.93 (0.33; 2.13) 
69.3 (38.0; 123.7) 
24.6 (13.5; 38.5) 
94.3 (86.0; 98.0) 
134/78 (107/57; 165/98) 
80 (46; 115) 
3.8 (2; 5) 


0.67 
0.36 
0.44 
0.14 
0.57 
0.44 
0.56 
0.16 







GP 
Hospital 
Health-care centre 
District nursing 
Total 
15 
10 
20 
15 
60 
6 
12 
20 
13 
51 
Table 3 Hospital admission rate and cost of admissions in the two 
groups 
Tele-rehabilitation 
(n 5 57) 
Control 
(n 5 48) 




Admission rate per patient 
over a 10-month period 



found that most studies of home telehealth resulted in 
savings when seen from a health-care system and provider 
perspective. They thus concluded that home telehealth has 
the potential to reduce health-care costs. 
Our own qualitative analysis of COPD patients in the 
TELEKAT project13 found that preventive home monitoring 
taught many patients to identify symptoms at an earlier 
stage so that they contacted a doctor. The patients reported 
that the technology helped them to visualize the data and 
obtain an overview of the development of symptoms. Most 
of the patients reported feeling empowered to handle their 
illness in their everyday lives, and better equipped to avoid 
re-hospitalization. They also reported that their interaction 
with the health-care professionals14 became a mutual 
learning process and that their relationship moved from 
subservience to a medical authority to a more reciprocal 
dialogue with nurses, doctors and health-care providers. 
This helped them to better manage their illness in everyday 
life. The fact that most of the COPD patients felt empowered 
to deal with their illness in their everyday lives may help to 
explain why patients’ admission rates decreased. However, 
the question is how long will this period of empowerment 
last? It is necessary to study the effects of the intervention 
over a longer time period in order to be able to assess the 
long-term effect of preventive home monitoring. 

technologies promote patient engagement in handling 
their own disease and taking more responsibility. However 
our study also shows that the technology cannot stand 
alone as it has to be combined with a programme for 
rehabilitation activities, continuous dialogues and contact 
with health-care professionals. 

The tele-rehabilitation group had signiﬁcantly fewer 
admissions during the 10-month follow-up period. The 
tele-rehabilitation group also improved more than the 
control group for a longer period, with a lower proportion 
of them in need of hospitalization. Future work requires 
large-scale studies of prolonged home monitoring and more 
extended follow-up. 


by cause 1990 –2020: Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet 
1997;349:1498 –504 

who.int/respiratory/copd/burden/en/index.html (last checked 30 
November 2011) 

obstructive pulmonary disease. Admission, course and prognosis. Ugeskr 
Laeger 2003;165:3499 – 502 [Danish] 

TJ, Schrijvers AJ. Systematic review of the effects of chronic disease 
management on quality-of-life in people with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Respir Med 2007;101:2233 – 9 
5 Peytremann-Bridevaux I, Staeger P, Bridevaux PO, Ghali WA, Burnand B. 
Effectiveness of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-management 
programs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Med 
2008;121:433 – 443.e4 





and mortality in COPD – a review of potential interventions. Int J Chron 
Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2009;4:203 – 23 
7 Polisena J, Tran K, Cimon K, et al. Home telehealth for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Telemed 
Telecare 2010;16:120 –7 
8 Bolton CE, Waters CS, Peirce S, Elwyn G. Insufﬁcient evidence of beneﬁt: 
a systematic review of home telemonitoring for COPD. J Eval Clin Pract 
2011;17:1216 –22 
9 Vitacca M, Bianchi L, Guerra A, et al. Tele-assistance in chronic respiratory 
failure patients: a randomised clinical trial. Eur Respir J 2009;33:411 –8 
10 Rabe KF, Hurd S, Anzueto A, et al. Global strategy for the diagnosis, 
management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: GOLD executive summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2007;176:532 – 55 

chronic diseases: the evidence base. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2007;14:269 –77 

disease management: a systematic review and an analysis of economic 
evaluations. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 2009;25:339 –49 
13 Huniche L, Dinesen B, Grann O, Toft E, Nielsen C. Empowering patients 
with COPD using tele-homecare technology. Stud Health Technol Inform 
2010;155:48 –54 
14 Dinesen B, Andersen SK, Hejlesen O, Toft E. Interaction between COPD 
patients and healthcare professionals in a cross-sector tele-rehabilitation 
programme. Stud Health Technol Inform 2011;169:28 – 32 



