The Impact of a Telemedicine Monitoring System on Positive Airway 
Pressure Adherence in Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial 
Nurit Fox, MSc1; AJ Hirsch-Allen, BA1; Elizabeth Goodfellow, RT1; Joshua Wenner, BA1; John Fleetham, MD1,2,3; C. Frank Ryan, MD1,2,3; Mila Kwiatkowska, PhD5; 
Najib T. Ayas, MD, MPH1,2,3,4 
1Sleep Disorders Program, University of British Columbia Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 2Department of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 3Respiratory Division, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 
4Critical Care Division, Providence Healthcare, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 5Department of Computing Science, Thompson Rivers University, 
Kamloops, British Columbia, Canada 

Study Objectives: First-line therapy for patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is positive airway pressure (PAP). Al- 
though PAP is a highly efficacious treatment, adherence to PAP is still a substantial clinical problem. The objective of this study was to determine 
whether PAP adherence can be improved with a telemedicine monitoring system. 
Design: A nonblinded, single-center, randomized controlled trial that compared standard PAP treatment versus PAP treatment and a telemedicine 
monitoring system 
Setting: University sleep disorders program in British Columbia, Canada 
Patients: Adult patients (≥ 19 yr of age) with moderate to severe OSA (apnea hypopnea index (AHI) ≥ 15 events/hr determined by polysomnog- 
raphy) prescribed PAP 
Interventions: Patients were randomized to either standard care with an autotitrating PAP machine or an autotitrating PAP machine that trans- 
mitted physiologic information (i.e., adherence, air leak, residual AHI) daily to a website that could be reviewed. If problems were identified from 
information from the website, the patient was contacted by telephone as necessary. 
Measurements: PAP adherence after 3 mo, subjective sleep quality, and side effects 
Results: Seventy-five patients were enrolled; 39 were randomized to telemedicine and 36 to standard care. The mean age ± standard deviation 
(SD) was 53.5 ± 11.2 yr, mean AHI was 41.6 ± 22.1 events/hr, and 80% of patients were male. After 3 mo, mean PAP adherence was significantly 
greater in the telemedicine arm (191 min per day) versus the standard arm (105 min per day; mean difference = 87 min, 95% confidence interval 
(CI): 25-148 min, P = 0.006, unpaired t test). On days when PAP was used, mean adherence was 321 min in the telemedicine arm and 207 min in 
the standard arm (difference = 113 min, 95% CI: 62-164 min, P < 0.0001). Significant independent predictors of adherence included age, baseline 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale score, and use of telemedicine. On average, an additional 67 min of technician time was spent on patients in the tele- 
medicine arm compared with the standard arm (P = 0.0001). 
Conclusions: PAP adherence can be improved with the use of a web-based telemedicine system at the initiation of treatment. 
Keywords: Obstructive sleep apnea, telemedicine, remote monitoring, adherence, positive airway pressure 
Citation: Fox N; Hirsch-Allen AJ; Goodfellow E; Wenner J; Fleetham J; Ryan CF; Kwiatkowska M; Ayas NT. The impact of a telemedicine monitoring 
system on positive airway pressure adherence in patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. SLEEP 2012;35(4):477-481. 

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common disease charac- 
terized by recurrent collapse of the upper airway during sleep, 
leading to nocturnal hypoxemia, sleep fragmentation, and day- 
time hypersomnolence. Moreover, untreated OSA is associated 
with numerous adverse health and safety consequences includ- 
ing stroke, heart failure, cardiovascular disease, and motor ve- 
hicle crashes.1 
First-line therapy for moderate to severe OSA is a positive air- 
way pressure (PAP) machine, a portable device attached to the 
patient with a mask and plastic tubing that establishes positive 
pressure in the upper airway during sleep.2 Although PAP is highly 
effective in resolving upper airway collapse, a major clinical chal- 
Submitted for publication June, 2011 
Submitted in final revised form September, 2011 
Accepted for publication October, 2011 
Address correspondence to: Najib Ayas, MD, MPH, Room 224, Comox 
Building, St. Paul’s Hospital, 1080 Burrard St., Vancouver, British Colum- 
bia, Canada; Tel: (604) 906-9420; E-mail: nayas@providencehealth.bc.ca 
lenge is maximizing adherence with therapy. Many patients dis- 
continue or do not use the device substantially. This is of clinical 
importance as increased adherence is associated with a reduced 
risk of motor vehicle crashes, improved cardiovascular outcomes, 
increased alertness, and improved quality of life.3-5 Optimizing 
adherence is thus an important aspect of patient management. 
Adherence to PAP therapy is influenced by many factors, 
including severity of the disorder, side effects, therapeutic re- 
sponse, claustrophobia, patient’s perception of disease serious- 
ness, family support, and cost. Increased air leak with auto-PAP 
therapy is associated with reduced adherence,6 and general 
management with interventions such as heated humidification, 
mask optimization, and topical nasal therapy improves adher- 
ence.7 Adherence can also be significantly improved by a com- 
prehensive support program and timely interventions by health 
professionals. This suggests that technical innovations that per- 
mit close monitoring of physiologic variables (such as air leak) 
during therapy and rapid troubleshooting of potential problems 
may improve adherence to PAP therapy.8 
Telemedicine can be defined as “the use of information and 
communication technology to deliver health services, exper- 




tise and information over distance, geographic, time, social and 
cultural barriers.”9 Current technology enables PAP machines 
to monitor applied pressures, air leaks, apnea hypopnea index 
(AHI), and objective adherence, and to send this information by 
modem to the patient’s healthcare provider on a daily basis. This 
system should allow early detection of problems with appropriate 
interventions thereby improving early experience with continu- 
ous positive airway pressure (CPAP), and potentially improving 
adherence. The primary purpose of this study was to determine 
whether such a telemedicine monitoring system could improve 
3-mo PAP adherence in patients with moderate to severe OSA. 

We performed a single-center, randomized controlled trial of 
a telemedicine system versus standard care in patients with mod- 
erate to severe OSA. Patients were randomized to either stan- 
dard care or telemedicine (1:1 ratio) using sequential numbered 
envelopes prepared by one of the authors (JW). The study was 
approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Board at the Universi- 
ty of British Columbia. The study was registered prior to patient 
enrolment (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00561860). 

Patients were recruited from adult (≥ 19 yr of age) patients 
with moderate to severe OSA (AHI ≥ 15 events/hr by poly- 
somnography (PSG) using the Chicago scoring criteria for the 
determination of apneas and hypopneas, according to the Amer- 
ican Academy of Sleep Medicine)10 diagnosed at the Sleep Dis- 
orders Program who were seen by one of three respirologists 
(JF, CFR, NTA) at the University of British Columbia (UBC) 
between April 8, 2008 to June 1, 2010. Patients with OSA who 
were prescribed PAP therapy by their regular sleep physician 
and who were willing to accept a trial of therapy were poten- 
tially eligible for the trial. 
Patients were excluded from participating if they were un- 
able or unwilling to provide informed consent, had active 
cardiopulmonary or psychiatric disease, had been previously 
treated for OSA, did not have a telephone line in their bedroom 
(necessary to transmit information by the modem), or could not 
return for follow-up visits. 

All patients were oriented to PAP during a 20-min session 
and fitted with a nasal or oronasal mask by the PAP coordina- 
tor from our clinic, who is a trained respiratory therapist with 
many years of experience with patients with sleep apnea. All 
patients were provided with a REMstar® Pro nasal CPAP 
device (Phillips Respironics Inc., Murrysville, PA). These 
types of machines are commonly used to treat patients with 
OSA. The autotitrating machine monitors patient airflow 
and adjusts pressure automatically to eliminate sleep apnea. 
Specifically, the machines were set to autotitrate at pressures 
between 6 and 16 cm H2O; this setting reflects our current 
clinical practice to allow for an adequate range of pressures. 
Patients were also provided with the telephone number of the 
PAP coordinator who could be contacted if any problems or 
questions arose. 




Patients were contacted after 2 days to ask about progress and 
adherence, and to troubleshoot any problems with the machine. 
After 4-6 wk of therapy, patients returned to the clinic to see the 
PAP coordinator and their doctor, and information was down- 
loaded from their machines. This information included a vari- 
ety of physiologic variables, including PAP adherence, applied 
PAP pressure, mask leak, and residual respiratory events. Any 
problems with treatment were addressed at this time. After 8 
wk, patients came to the research coordinator who downloaded 
the machine information. After 3 mo of treatment, information 
was downloaded from the machine and patients saw their sleep 
specialist. An Epworth Sleepiness Scale score and a variety of 
survey questions concerning side effects and sleep quality were 
completed (see next paragraphs). 

Identical to the standard pathway, all patients were oriented 
to CPAP, fitted with a mask, and given an autotitrating machine. 
A modem was attached to the PAP device (EncoreAnywhere®, 
Philips Respironics Inc.), and patients were instructed in its use 
by the research coordinator. The modem was programmed to 
send physiologic information directly to a web-based database 
across the telephone line each morning (PAP adherence, ap- 
plied PAP pressure, mask leak, and residual respiratory events). 
Patients were contacted by the research coordinator after 2 
days to ask about progress and compliance, and to troubleshoot 
any problems with the machine. The research coordinator at UBC 
reviewed the downloaded information every weekday morning 
except holidays and contacted the patient if any of the following 
were present: mask leak > 40 L/min for greater than 30% of the 
night, < 4 hr of use for two consecutive nights, machine mea- 
sured AHI > 10 events/hr, and 90th percentile of pressure > 16 
cm H2O. The research coordinator called the patient and inquired 
about symptoms such as dry mouth, mask issues, discomfort 
with the device, or any other problems. If the only issue was low 
adherence due to lack of motivation, the research coordinator en- 
couraged the patient to use PAP. Otherwise, the research coordi- 
nator would discuss the case with the PAP coordinator (the same 
person who helped care for the patient in the standard arm) and 
arrange for the patient to talk with or visit the PAP coordinator, 
depending on the responses from the patient and the physiologic 
data. Specific interventions to improve compliance that would be 
standard in our clinic (e.g., a different mask, chin strap, modifica- 
tions of pressure settings, modifications of humidifier settings, 
saline nasal sprays) would then be prescribed. 
After 4-6 wk of therapy, patients returned to the clinic to 
see their regular doctor and information was reviewed (includ- 
ing CPAP pressure, mask leak, residual respiratory events, and 
compliance). Any problems with treatment were also addressed 
at this time. 
After 3 mo of treatment patients came to see their sleep spe- 
cialist, who reviewed the data received via the modem. Surveys 
and Epworth Sleepiness Scale score (ESS) were completed 
(same as the standard group). 

At the end of 3 mo, patients were administered the ESS. This 
is a validated commonly used survey that assesses the degree of 


subjective daytime sleepiness. Scores range from 0 to 24, with 
a higher score indicating greater sleepiness. Patients were also 
asked to complete a variety of questions according to a visual 
analog scale. There was one question that assessed subjective 
sleep quality: “Overall, how satisfied were you with your qual- 
ity of sleep on CPAP over the past mo? Place a mark on the 
line”. Patients were asked to mark a point on the line ranging 
from 0 (extremely dissatisfied) to 10 (extremely satisfied). Sev- 
en additional questions elicited information about side effects 
including frequency of awakenings, discomfort with the device, 
difficulty exhaling, mask leaks, dry mouth, nasal congestion, 
and difficulty falling asleep. These questions had a visual ana- 
log scale for every question, in which patients were asked to 
assess a score between 0 to 10, with a higher score representing 
a more favorable response. 

We also recorded the amount of time our research coordi- 
nator or PAP coordinator spent with patients. Amount of time 
spent was written in a daily log sheet. This included time spent 
fitting masks, problem solving, talking with patients on the 
phone, meeting with patients, and reviewing downloaded or 
transmitted information. 

The primary outcome was PAP adherence after 3 mo (min 
used per day), using an intention-to-treat approach (unpaired 
2-tailed t-test). A variety of secondary outcomes were analyzed, 
including time spent with the patient, ESS, sleep quality, side 
effects, and adherence on days PAP was used. A multivariate 
linear regression analysis was also done to assess independent 
predictors of PAP adherence. SAS 9.2 (Cary, NC) was used for 
the analyses. 

Over this time period, 1,521 patients were seen by these phy- 
sicians. A flow chart of patient recruitment is shown in Figure 1. 
A total of 75 patients were enrolled in the study. Their mean 
age (± SD) was 53.5 ± 11.2 yr, and mean AHI was 41.6 ± 22.1 
events/hr. Most of the patients were males. Patient characteris- 
tics are shown in Table 1. There was no significant difference in 
age, BMI, AHI, or ESS in the groups. 
Overall, adherence to PAP was significantly greater in 
the telemedicine arm than in the standard arm (Table 2 and 
Figure 2). Specifically, patients in the telemedicine arm used 
PAP a mean of 191 min/day versus 105 min/day in the stan- 
dard arm (mean difference = 87 min, 95% CI: 25-148 min, 
P = 0.006). Furthermore, on nights PAP was used, time used 
was much greater in the telemedicine arm (321 min/day) than 
in the standard arm (207 min/day) with a mean difference of 
113 min/day (95% CI: 62-164 min, P < 0.0001). There was 
no significant difference in the percentage of nights PAP was 
used (46% versus 56% in the standard versus telemedicine 
arm). Mean AHI on treatment and change in ESS was similar 
in both groups. 
Patients with a greater ESS had improved CPAP compliance; 
however, significant differences still persisted between the stan- 
dard and telemedicine arms. For instance, in patients with an 




Assessed for eligibility 
(n = 1,521) 


• Not approached in clinic as 
coordinator not available (395) 


Allocated to Telemedicine 
(n = 39) 
Allocated to Standard 
(n = 36) 
Discontinued CPAP 
(n = 10) 
Discontinued CPAP 
(n = 11) 
Adhered to CPAP 
(n = 26) 
Adhered to CPAP 
(n = 28) 

Number of patients 
% male 
Mean age 
Mean BMI 
Mean AHI 
Mean ESS 
Standard 
36 
77.8 
55.2 ± 11.5 
32.6 ± 6.2 
39.5 ± 19.6 
9.7 ± 4.7 

39 
82.0 
52.0 ± 10.8 
31.9 ± 5.0 
44.3 ± 24.8 
9.9 ± 5.0 
aResults are given as means ± SD. AHI, apnea hypopnea index; BMI, 
body mass index; ESS, Epworth Sleepiness Scale Score. 


Standard 
45.9 ± 38.0 
Telemedicine P value 
55.9 ± 40.0 




Mean adherence on nights 
PAP used (min per day) 


Mean amount of time spent 
with patients (min over 3 mo) 












aResults are given as means ± SD. AHI, apnea hypopnea index; ESS, 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale Score; PAP, positive airway pressure. 
(P = 0.04), and use of telemedicine (P = 0.006). Sex and AHI 
were not significant predictors (P > 0.7). We then constructed 
a multivariate model using baseline ESS, age, and telemedi- 
cine use. All three variables were independently associated with 
daily adherence (Table 4). 
More time was spent with patients in the telemedicine arm. 
Over 3 mo, an average of 210 ± 42 min was spent with each 
patient in the telemedicine arm compared with 143 ± 48 min 
spent with patients in the standard arm (P < 0.0001) (Table 2). 
In other words, on average, an additional hour was spent with 
these patients over the 3-mo trial. 
Results of the sleep quality and side effects surveys are 
shown in Table 3. Although side effects in general appeared to 
be less severe in patients in the telemedicine arm, none other 
than mouth dryness was statistically significant. Similarly, there 
was no significant difference in sleep quality. 

In our single-center, randomized controlled trial, telemedi- 
cine monitoring improved PAP adherence at 3 mo in patients 
with moderate to severe OSA. 
Telemedicine has been used in previous studies to promote 
and reinforce CPAP therapy; the results have been mixed. Tay- 
lor and colleagues randomized 114 patients to either a telehealth 
(intervention) arm or traditional care.11 In the intervention arm, 
a cognitive behavioral intervention was applied. Questions re- 
lated to CPAP use and quality of sleep were sent to patients 
electronically. The patients’ responses were monitored by a 
sleep medicine practitioner, and the patient telephoned if neces- 
sary. Adherence was not significantly different between the tra- 
ditional and intervention groups (4.22 versus 4.29 hr per night; 
P = 0.87). Failure to show benefit may have been due to diffi- 
culties in contacting patients (sometimes delayed several days). 
Furthermore, the intervention only provided self-reported data 
to the healthcare provider; objective compliance and detailed 
physiologic information (as was used in our study) may have 
been more effective. 
In a relatively small study, Smith and colleagues random- 
ized 19 patients who were nonadherent with CPAP for 3 mo 
to either a telemedicine intervention or placebo.12 Both groups 
were scheduled for telehealth sessions with a nurse (14 30-min 
sessions over 12 wk) using a video teleconferencing system in 
the patient’s home. The intervention group received specific 
advice about CPAP, whereas the placebo group had advice fo- 
cused on a neutral health topic (i.e., vitamins). Although the 
numbers of patients were small, by the end of the study there 
was a significantly greater rate of adherence (90% versus 44%, 
P = 0.033) in the intervention group compared with the placebo 
group. In a small study by DeMolles et al., a computer tele- 
phone system in addition to usual care was used in 15 patients 
and compared to usual care only in another 15 patients.13 The 
group using the telehealth system had better CPAP adherence 
by the end of the study that trended to significance (4.4 versus 
2.9 hr/night, P = 0.08). 
Sparrow and colleagues report on the use of a telehealth 
intervention to improve CPAP adherence in a relatively large 
randomized controlled study (250 patients with sleep apnea).14 
In the intervention arm, an automated telephone-linked commu- 
nication (TLC) system was tailored to promote CPAP use and 
ESS ≥ 11 (38 patients total), PAP adherence was 153 ± 122 min/ 
day in the standard arm and 225 ± 137 min/day in the telemedi- 
cine arm (P = 0.035). 
In univariate analyses, significant predictors of PAP adher- 
ence included increased age (P = 0.03), increased baseline ESS 



Average CPAP Use 
All Days 
Average CPAP Use 
on Days Used 


















Parameter Estimate 
(daily min of use) 
7.24* 
3.96** 

P value 
0.004 
0.02 
0.0007 
Baseline ESS 
Age 
Telemedicine 
aA multivariate linear regression model was done to assess the 
independent effects of each of these three variables. ESS, Epworth 
Sleepiness Scale Score. *Increase in daily positive airway pressure 
(PAP) use for every 1-yr increase in ESS score. **Increase in daily PAP 
use for every 1-yr increase in age. 




Woken up frequently 
CPAP discomfort 
Difficulty exhaling 
Mask leaks 
Dry mouth 
Nasal congestion 
Difficulty falling asleep 
5.50 ± 2.5 
4.41 ± 3.2 
4.80 ± 3.5 
4.24 ± 3.0 
4.16 ± 2.6 
5.88 ± 2.7 
5.72 ± 3.5 
5.79 ± 2.6 
5.19 ± 2.8 
5.79 ± 3.0 
5.08 ± 2.8 
5.81 ± 2.3 
6.83 ± 2.4 
6.22 ± 2.8 



0.69 
0.34 
0.27 
0.29 
0.01 
0.16 
0.55 

aScores ranged from 0 to 10 with a larger number representing a more 
favorable response. Results are given as mean ± SD. CPAP, continuous 
positive airway pressure. 
designed around the concepts of motivational interviewing. Ev- 
ery wk for the first month and every month thereafter, patients 
would telephone the system and report perceptions and experi- 
ences with OSA and CPAP (including compliance) over the pre- 
vious week. Tailored feedback and counselling were provided 
by telephone to motivate patients to use CPAP. The control arm 
received general health information through the TLC system. 
At 12 months, median CPAP use was significantly greater in the 
intervention arm (2.98 hr/night versus 0.99 hr/night). 
The potential mechanisms by which telemedicine improved 
adherence in our study is open to speculation. One possibility 
is that prompt attention to problems might have resulted in im- 
proved side effects. Consistent with this concept is the reduc- 
tion in side effect complaints shown in the visual analog scales. 
However, the overall effect was fairly modest suggesting that 
other factors may also have been important. Another possibil- 
ity is that the patients in the telemedicine arm, due to the daily 
monitoring, might have had a greater sense of accountability 
and were more motivated to not disappoint their healthcare 
providers (an extension of the Hawthorne effect). Future stud- 
ies designed to ascertain how much of the effect is contributed 
from the monitoring of the physiologic variables, and how 
much from the prompt interventions (such as mask change, in- 
tranasal saline, steroid spray etc.) would be useful. 
Although adherence was improved, on average more time was 
required to manage patients in the telemedicine arm. However, 
the overall magnitude of this was fairly minor (1 hr per patient), 
and we believe would be justified by the improved adherence. 

We acknowledge that there are many limitations to our study. 
First, only patients with moderate to severe disease were in- 
cluded in our study and our results cannot be extrapolated to 
patients with less severe disease. Second, this is a single-center 
study with a relatively modest number of patients. Reproducing 
these findings in other centers and patient populations would be 
important to demonstrate generalizability. Third, adherence in 
the standard care arm was relatively low (1.75 hr/night). How- 
ever, this is similar to the adherence reported by the study by 
Sparrow et al.11 and other studies in the literature. Our low ad- 
herence might also have been explained by our low baseline 
ESS scores, suggesting that our patients were not particularly 
sleepy. In support of this concept, adherence was much great- 
er in both treatment arms when only patients with a baseline 
ESS of 11 or greater were included. Fourth, we did not have 
a sham telemedicine control group (i.e., patients with the tele- 
medicine device that was not being monitored by the investi- 
gators). Inclusion of such a control arm might have allowed 
us to determine whether the increased adherence might have 
been due to the perception of monitoring by the patients, or 
the more prompt institution of clinical interventions. A future 
study should also take into consideration both the monitoring 
of physiologic data (such as leak and nasal congestion), and the 
respective intervention (such as mask change, intranasal saline, 
steroid spray, etc.), to determine whether it was the monitoring 
alone or the interventions which may have contributed to the 
positive findings. 

In our single-center study, adherence with PAP was improved 
with a web-based telemedicine monitoring system. Although 
these findings must be verified in other centers, adoption of this 
type of system could result in substantially improved care of 
patients with OSA. 

This study was partially supported by a research grant from 
Phillips Respironics Inc. The authors have indicated no finan- 
cial conflicts of interest. 

1. Al Lawati NM, Patel SR, Ayas NT. Epidemiology, risk factors, and con- 
sequences of obstructive sleep apnea and short sleep duration. Prog Car- 
diovasc Dis 2009;51:285-93. 
2. Fleetham J, Ayas N, Bradley D, et al. Canadian Thoracic Society 2011 
guideline update: diagnosis and treatment of sleep disordered breathing. 
Can Respir J 2011 Jan-Feb;18:25-47. 
3. George CF. Sleep. 5: Driving and automobile crashes in patients with ob- 
structive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome. Thorax 2004;59:804-7. 
4. Marin JM, Carrizo SJ, Vicente E, Agusti AG. Long-term cardiovascular 
outcomes in men with obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea with or with- 
out treatment with continuous positive airway pressure: an observational 
study. Lancet 2005; 365:1046-53. 
5. Weaver TE, Maislin G, Dinges DF, et al. Relationship between hours of 
CPAP use and achieving normal levels of sleepiness and daily function- 
ing. Sleep 2007 Jun 1;30:711-9. 
6. Valentin A, Subramanian S, Quan SF, Berry RB, Parthasarathy S. Air leak 
is associated with poor adherence to autoPAP therapy. Sleep 2011 Jun 
1;34:801-6. 
7. Ballard RD,Gay PC,Strollo PJ. Interventions to improve compliance in 
sleep apnea patients previously noncompliant with continuous positive 
airway pressure. J Clin Sleep Med 2007 December 15;3:706-12. 
8. Zozula R, Rosen R. Compliance with continuous positive airway pressure 
therapy: assessing and improving treatment outcomes. Curr Opin Pulmo- 
nary Med 2001;7:391-8. 


10. AASM. Sleep related breathing disorders in adults: recommendations 
for syndrome definition and measurement techniques in adults. Sleep 
1999;22:667-89. 
11. Taylor Y, Eliasson A, Andrada T, Kristo D, Howard R. The role of tele- 
medicine in CPAP compliance for patients with obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome. Sleep Breathing 2006;10:132-8. 
12. Smith CE, Dauz ER, Clements F, et al. Telehealth services to im- 
prove nonadherence: a placebo-controlled study. Telemed J E Health 
2006;12:289-96. 
13. DeMolles DA, Sparrow D, Gottlieb DJ, Friedman R. A pilot trial of a 
telecommunications system in sleep apnea management. Medical Care 
2004;42:764-9. 
14. Sparrow D, Aloia M, DeMolles DA, Gottlieb DJ. A telemedicine inter- 
vention to improve CPAP adherence: a RCT. Thorax 2010;65:1061-6. 



