This article was downloaded by: [Ryerson University] 
On: 09 October 2014, At: 22:54 
Publisher: Routledge 
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK 
Journal of the American College of Nutrition 
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uacn20 
Weight Loss by Telemonitoring of Nutrition and Physical 
Activity in Patients with Metabolic Syndrome for 1 Year 
Claus Luley MDa, Alexandra Blaik PhDa, Alexander Götzb, Florian Kicherer MBAd, Siegfried 
Kropf PhDa, Berend Isermann MDa, Gabriele Stumm MDc & Sabine Westphal MDa 
a Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, GERMANY 
b “Die Schwenninger Krankenkasse” Health Insurance, Villingen-Schwenningen, GERMANY 
c 4sigma GmbH, Oberhaching, GERMANY 
d Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO, Stuttgart, GERMANY 
Published online: 08 Aug 2014. 
To cite this article: Claus Luley MD, Alexandra Blaik PhD, Alexander Götz, Florian Kicherer MBA, Siegfried Kropf PhD, 
Berend Isermann MD, Gabriele Stumm MD & Sabine Westphal MD (2014): Weight Loss by Telemonitoring of Nutrition 
and Physical Activity in Patients with Metabolic Syndrome for 1 Year, Journal of the American College of Nutrition, DOI: 
10.1080/07315724.2013.875437 


Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained 
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no 
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the 
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and 
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and 
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for 
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever 
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of 
the Content. 
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic 
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any 
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// 
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions 

Weight Loss by Telemonitoring of Nutrition and Physical 
Activity in Patients with Metabolic Syndrome for 1 Year 
Claus Luley, MD, Alexandra Blaik, PhD, Alexander G¨otz, Florian Kicherer, MBA, Siegfried Kropf, PhD, Berend Isermann, 
MD, Gabriele Stumm, MD, Sabine Westphal, MD 
Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, GERMANY (C.L., A.B., S.K., B.I., S.W.), “Die Schwenninger Krankenkasse” Health 
Insurance, Villingen-Schwenningen, GERMANY (A.G.), and 4sigma GmbH, Oberhaching, GERMANY (G.S.), Fraunhofer Institute 
for Industrial Engineering IAO, Stuttgart, GERMANY (F.K.) 

Objective: Mobile technology can improve lifestyle programs, but the monitoring techniques and carer 
feedback need to be optimized. To this end, we investigated the efﬁcacy of telemonitoring physical activity and 
nutrition over 12 months in patients with metabolic syndrome in a randomized, parallel-group, open trial. 
Methods: Screening all over Germany yielded 184 patients with metabolic syndrome. All patients attended 
a single 2-hour instruction meeting in their region concerning a combination diet and the importance of physical 
activity. Thereafter they were randomized into a control group (controls, n = 62) or one of 2 different intervention 
groups. Both intervention groups were issued accelerometers, which measured physical activity, recorded daily 
weight and calorie intake, and transmitted these data to a central server for use by patient carers. In the Active Body 
Control Program of University of Magdeburg (ABC) intervention group (n = 60), information and motivation 
was ensured by weekly letters. In the 4sigma telephone coaching (4S) intervention group (n = 58), this was 
accomplished by monthly telephone calls from the carers. Clinical and biochemical data for all patients were 
collected at 0, 4, 8, and 12 months without any regular face-to-face meetings between patients and carers. The 
primary endpoint was weight loss and the secondary endpoint was the presence of metabolic syndrome. 
Results: After 12 months the dropout rates in the control, 4S, and ABC groups were respectively 35%, 17%, 
and 18%. The adjusted relative weight losses after 12 months were respectively 3.7%, 8.6%, and 11.4% (all 
p < 0.000 versus baseline). ABC was more effective than 4S (p = 0.041); 43% of the patients completing the 
study in the ABC group lost more than 15% of their baseline weight. The diagnosis of metabolic syndrome was 
no longer applicable in 58% of the cases in the ABC group, in 41% of the 4S group, and in 33% of the controls. 
Conclusions: Telemonitoring of physical activity and nutrition markedly improves weight loss and markers 


A diagnosis of metabolic syndrome is made when abdom- 
inal overweight occurs together with at least 2 additional risk 
factors such as elevated triglycerides, blood glucose, blood pres- 
sure, and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol [1]. Although 
the exact criteria for the presence or absence of these risk fac- 
tors are still the subject of discussion, there is broad agreement 
that metabolic syndrome carries an increased risk of develop- 
ing obesity-associated disorders, in particular type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and cardiovascular diseases. 
The central cause of metabolic syndrome is obesity, which 
has evolved into a worldwide epidemic [2]. The steady increase 
in its prevalence indicates that the measures used at present are 
unable to curb this development and that new and more effective 
alternatives are urgently needed. 
Obesity has 2 basic causes: an excessive calorie intake and 
insufﬁcient calorie expenditure by physical activity. Though 
there are numerous programs aimed at modiﬁcation and con- 
trol of calorie intake, the number of measures for increasing 
calorie consumption by increasing physical activity is limited. 
One major reason for this is that activity programs require a 

Disclosure Statement: This study is a subproject of the Lifescience.biz project, which was partially funded by the Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF) 
and involved 4sigma, the Schwenninger Health Insurance Company, and the University Hospital in Magdeburg. 4sigma is an independent company offering health services 
such as disease management, prevention programs, and medical hotlines. Dr. Stumm from 4sigma was responsible for medical advice, general project management, and 
coordination between the study partners and does not have a conﬂict of interests. All other authors have nothing to disclose. 
Journal of the American College of Nutrition, Vol. 0, No. 0, 1–12 (2014) C(cid:2) American College of Nutrition 
Published by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 


considerable time input from both patients and coaches. There- 
fore, approaches that use mobile technology and the Internet for 
lifestyle improvements are being developed and tested. Three 
recent reviews [3–5] agree that in the short-term weight loss can 
be improved by these programs. They also agree, however, that 
the published data differ markedly with respect to technologies 
used, patient groups studied, and study durations and that fur- 
ther research is needed in order to optimize telemonitoring as an 
effective tool for the management of obesity. 
The Active Body Control (ABC) program is a lifestyle pro- 
gram that combines such telemonitoring with a combination 
diet, the Magdeburg Dual Diet. This program was ﬁrst shown 
to be effective in obese adults [6] and subsequently in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus [7]. In the present work we inves- 
tigated the effects of telemonitoring over a period of 12 months 
in patients with metabolic syndrome in an open, randomized 
trial with parallel groups. We also compared 2 different ways of 
communicating with the patients: by weekly letters, as routinely 
done in the ABC program, and by monthly telephone calls from 
a specialized enterprise, 4sigma (4S), as an alternative commu- 
nication pathway. 


The patients were recruited by advertising in several major 
companies in southern and western Germany and by a newspaper 
advertisement in the region of Magdeburg in northeast Germany. 
Interested persons visited either their company doctors or the 
lipid clinic of Magdeburg University Hospital. None of these 
patients had participated in an earlier study carried out by the 
authors. Five hundred sixty-four individuals were screened and 
received condensed information about the trial, and fasting blood 
samples were then collected to test for inclusion or exclusion 
criteria concerning the metabolic syndrome (see the ﬂowchart 
in Fig. 1). 
The criteria for diagnosis of metabolic syndrome accord- 
ing to the International Diabetes Federation recommendations 
[8] were as follows: waist circumference > 80 cm in females 
and > 94 cm in males plus any 2 of the following 4 factors: 
triglycerides ≥ 150 mg/dl (1.7 mmol/L), high-density lipopro- 
tein cholesterol < 50 mg/dl (1.29 mmol/L) in females and 
< 40 mg/dl (1.03 mmol/L) in males, systolic blood pressure 
(BP) ≥ 130 or diastolic BP ≥ 85 mmHg or treatment of any 
of the above conditions, and fasting blood glucose ≥ 100 mg/dl 
(5.6 mmol/L). A telephone and access to the Internet via a per- 
sonal computer were required. The exclusion criteria were age 
less than 30 or over 60 years and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, 
coronary heart disease, chronic heart failure, or cerebrovascular 
disorders, as well as other conditions possibly co-inﬂuencing 
physical activity or body weight, such as psychiatric disorders, 

use of antidepressants, neuroleptic or cortisol therapy, thyroid 
dysfunction, active cancer or other severe and life-threatening 
diseases, disabling disorders of the motor system, pregnancy, 
or changes in oral contraception. One hundred eighty-four per- 
sons met these criteria and were invited to a 2-hour instruction 
meeting. These meetings were held only once in each of the 
participating 8 regions. The instruction consisted of 2 parts. All 
individuals participated in the ﬁrst part, which included an ex- 
planation of the Magdeburg Dual Diet and the importance of 
physical activity (details of both are given below). After this 
basic instruction the subjects were randomized by lot to one of 
3 groups: controls (n = 62), ABC (n = 60), or 4S (n = 62). 
The different ﬁnal group sizes after the 8 meetings are a conse- 
quence of the fact that the cohorts in each of the 8 participating 
regions were not necessarily a multiple of 3. The patients in 
the control group then left, and the remaining subjects received 
their accelerometers and instructions on their operation and data 
transmission. Because the intervention investigated in this trial 
was purely telemedical, there were no additional appointments 
with the patients except for determination of their biochemi- 
cal and clinical parameters after 4, 8, and 12 months. It should 
be emphasized that all 3 groups received identical instructions 
about the Magdeburg Dual Diet and identical recommendations 
concerning physical activity. The difference between the 2 in- 
tervention groups and the control group was merely the tele- 
monitoring of physical activity and nutrition by means of the 
Aipermotion instruments and the regular feedback from carers, 


either by weekly letters (ABC group) or by monthly telephone 
calls (4S group). 
The Magdeburg Dual Diet is a combination of 2 diets. 
The ﬁrst consists of conventional calorie restriction, lowering 
the calorie intake by 500 kcal per day. The second is a low- 
carbohydrate diet, developed originally by Ludwig [9] and mod- 
iﬁed by Worm [10]. Emphasis was placed on preference for car- 
bohydrates with low glycemic index (GI) but not on avoidance 
of carbohydrates as in the Atkins diet [11]. Many practical ex- 
amples were presented, and a booklet was distributed containing 
an overview of the aims and background of the study, a table of 
calorie contents, and a table of GI values for a broad range of 
carbohydrates. 
As far as exercise was concerned, the subjects were advised 
to increase their usual daily physical activity, like walking or cy- 
cling, rather than to engage in particular sports. The recommen- 
dation was to perform these activities moderately but steadily, 
slowly enough to be able to talk at the same time [12], and to 
keep the pulse below 120/min. 
The accelerometer used was an Aipermotion 440 model from 
Aipermon GmbH (Munich, Germany). The accelerometers were 
programmed individually for each patient, with an allowance 
for age, sex, weight, and individual step lengths for 3 walking 
speeds: normal, fast, and jogging. The instruments calculate the 
current and daily distances at the 3 walking speeds and the cur- 
rent and daily exercise-related energy expenditure in kilocalories 
and displays the results on a screen. Movements that are only 
inadequately recorded by the instrument, such as swimming or 
cycling, are manually keyed in according to their duration and 
intensity. The validity of these measurements has been satis- 
factorily demonstrated by comparison with spiroergometry in 
different patient groups with heart failure [13] and by compari- 
son with the 6-minute-walk test [14]. The patients were required 
to carry the matchbox-sized instrument in a little holster tied 
to the belt from the time they dressed in the morning until they 
undressed in the evening. The instrument measured the daily du- 
ration of active usage and transmitted it to the carer, expressed 
as percentage of 24 hours. An additional feature of the instru- 
ment is the recording of meal calories in a simpliﬁed form. 
The registration of nutritional calories occurs ﬁrst by selection 
of the meal; for example, “breakfast,” “snack,” “main meal,” or 
“drink” followed by choice of “mini,” “normal,” or “maxi.” How 
to determine mini, normal, or maxi was covered in the 2-hour 
training. Although the actual calorie intake can only be roughly 
assessed by this approach, there is a satisfactory psychological 
effect because the patients are continuously aware of their nutri- 
tional behavior. Finally, the patients can read on the display the 
actual balance between the total calorie intake and the calories 
used up by the basal metabolic rate plus their physical activity. 
These data and the daily body weights from the subjects’ 
personal scales were transmitted once a week to a server in 
Magdeburg University Hospital by means of a USB connec- 
tion to a home computer with automatic extraction of new data. 

Using the ABC platform on this server, the ABC carer gener- 
ated weekly individual report letters, which were sent out to all 
ABC patients by mail. Each letter showed the patient’s weight 
loss curve from the beginning of the intervention (a red line) 
together with weight loss curves of the other participants in this 
group (black lines). A second graph showed, for each day of the 
preceding week, the duration of sensor use as a percentage of 
24 hours, the kilocalories used up by exercise with 4 coloured 
bars reﬂecting the 4 activity intensities from “passive” to “jog- 
ging,” and the distance covered in kilometers. A third graph 
showed the cumulative number of kilocalories from nutrition. 
Finally, the letter also contained comments assessing progress 
over the past week aiming to motivate the patients. 
Patients in the 4S group received a monthly telephone call 
from specialist doctors and nurses from the 4sigma company 
in Munich, Germany. This company specializes in telephone- 
based health coaching including the use of telemonitoring. The 
calls took on average 20 minutes each, and the carers used the 
same ABC platform described above but communicated and 
commented on the data verbally. 
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the 
School of Medicine and all subjects provided written informed 
consent. 

Blood samples were taken from the antecubital vein after 
a 12-hour overnight fast and sent by mail to the central labora- 
tory at Magdeburg University Hospital. All laboratory tests were 
done by commercial enzymatic methods in a random-access an- 
alyzer (Modular, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) in 
serum for all parameters except glucose, which was determined 
in sodium ﬂuoride plasma. HbA1c was determined in EDTA 
tubes by high-performance liquid chromatography (Variant II, 
Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany). The homeostasis model of assess- 
ment (HOMA) index was calculated according to Haffner et al. 
[15]. Body weight, height, waist circumference, and blood pres- 
sure were measured by the investigating doctors at baseline and 
then at 4, 8, and 12 months. Blood pressure was determined 
using manual sphygmomanometers. 

The primary aim of the analyses was to compare the results 
between the different treatment arms. The primary endpoint was 
the weight loss from baseline to month 12 as a percentage from 
baseline. The main secondary endpoint was the presence of 
metabolic syndrome. Further secondary endpoints were abso- 
lute weight loss and changes in body mass index (BMI), waist 
circumference, and laboratory parameters. 
The study was designed to detect differences in weight loss 
at the 12-month visit between the 3 treatment arms with a power 
of at least 80% if the difference amounted to 5 kg or more. 



As a simpliﬁed scenario for the sample size calculation we 
used Bonferroni-corrected pairwise t tests at the 2-sided level 
0.05/3 = 0.0167 and assumed a common standard deviation of 
7 kg in all treatments. This would require about 45 persons per 
treatment arm; with a supposed dropout rate of 25% this meant 
that 60 patients had to be recruited for each treatment arm. 
We begin with a description of demographic and baseline pa- 
rameters stratiﬁed by treatment arm, completed by a comparison 
of these parameters between the treatment arms in Bonferroni- 
corrected chi-squared tests for gender and Tukey tests for all 
continuous parameters. 
The main analysis for the primary endpoint, the percent- 
age weight loss, is the comparison between the 3 treatment 
arms. Patients were allocated to the 3 groups according to the 
intention-to-treat principle. Weight loss at the 4-month, 8-month, 
and 12-month visits were modeled in a mixed linear model with 
a random patient effect (intercept) and ﬁxed effects for treat- 
ment arm, visit, baseline value (covariable), and interactions 
between treatment arm and visit as well as between visit and 
baseline value. Although values from all visits were included 
in the analyses, the main focus was on the results at the 12- 
month visit. A Bonferroni correction was used to adjust the 3 
pairwise comparisons between the treatment arms at 12 months 
and also for corresponding conﬁdence intervals for the pairwise 
differences. In addition, estimates of the groupwise means with 
unadjusted conﬁdence intervals and unadjusted p values for the 
tests versus 0 (i.e., no weight loss) were taken from the mixed 
model for all visits. In a secondary consideration, in each group 

the weight loss was compared between the 3 visits based on 
the same mixed model (also with Bonferroni adjustment for 3 
pairwise visit comparisons). 
Because dropout is an essential issue in this study (as in 
nearly all diet studies), several missing value strategies were 
considered simultaneously. The primary analysis (“original” es- 
timates in the results tables) used all available measurements at 
corresponding visits (note that the mixed model approach does 
not require complete data from all visits). In sensitivity analy- 
ses, we substituted missing values from dropouts by multiple 
imputation and by the last observation carried forward strat- 
egy (LOCF) as well as by baseline observation carried forward 
(BOCF). For multiple imputations we used 5 replications, where 
missing values were substituted in a Markov chain Monte Carlo 
method based on the available measurements for the patient at 
other visits and a random disturbance. 
Analogous analyses were carried out with the continuous 
secondary endpoints but with absolute differences from base- 
line. For variables with skewed distributions (triglycerides, apo 
B, ALT, AST, C-reactive protein [CRP], glucose, HbA1c, in- 
sulin, and HOMA), the test results (p values) were taken from 
analyses with log-transformed data, but the estimates and conﬁ- 
dence intervals were derived from additional analyses with the 
original data for more convenient presentation uniform over all 
variables. 
The main secondary outcome variable, metabolic syndrome, 
was considered in pairwise Bonferroni-corrected chi-squared 
tests. Missing values were treated by the LOCF protocol. 




Gender: No. (%) 
Age (years) 
Weight (kg) 
BMI (m2/kg) 
Waist (cm) 
BP systolic (mmHg) 
BP diastolic (mmHg) 
Triglycerides (mmol/L) 
Cholesterol (mmol/L) 
HDL cholesterol (mmol/L) 
LDL cholesterol (mmol/L) 
Uric acid (μmol/L) 
AST (μmol/s ∗ L) 
ALT (μmol/s ∗ L) 
Apolipoprotein B (g/L) 
CRP high-sensitivity (mg/L) 
Glucose (mmol/L) 
Hba1c IFCC (mmol/mol) 
Insulin (pmol/L) 
HOMA 
F: 18 (30); M: 42 (70) 
50.3 ± 7.8 
104.8 ± 18.5 
34.0 ± 4.9 
111.8 ± 11.8 
142.0 ± 16.8 
88.3 ± 10.2 
2.45 ± 1.41 
5.86 ± 1.08 
1.14 ± 0.30 
3.72 ± 0.92 
354.1 ± 85.2 
0.51 ± 0.16 
0.65 ± 0.34 
1.15 ± 0.23 
5.62 ± 8.72 
4.18 ± 0.53 
39.6 ± 4.8 
93.8 ± 54.0 
2.42 ± 1.32 
F: 27 (47); M: 31 (53) 
50.3 ± 8.0 
97.8 ± 16.3 
33.3 ± 5.8 
109.8 ± 11.8 
144.2 ± 21.0 
90.2 ± 11.2 
2.22 ± 0.97 
5.82 ± 1.22 
1.21 ± 0.32 
3.67 ± 1.02 
357.9 ± 87.4 
0.56 ± 0.23 
0.72 ± 0.54 
1.16 ± 0.28 
3.93 ± 5.85 
4.21 ± 0.77 
38.9 ± 5.8 
88.5 ± 60.3 
2.37 ± 1.92 
F: 28 (47); M: 32 (53) 
50.1 ± 8.1 
96.1 ± 19.7 
32.6 ± 4.9 
107.9 ± 13.1 
140.9 ± 17.6 
88.1 ± 12.6 
2.12 ± 0.81 
5.77 ± 1.19 
1.19 ± 0.25 
3.62 ± 1.06 
342.9 ± 81.0 
0.53 ± 0.20 
0.61 ± 0.39 
1.12 ± 0.28 
3.69 ± 5.03 
4.22 ± 0.77 
39.2 ± 6.1 
82.6 ± 54.4 
2.16 ± 1.55 
p ABC 
vs 4S 
p ABC 
vs Controls 
p 4S 
vs Controls 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
0,025 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
ABC = Active Body Control Program of University of Magdeburg, 4S = 4sigma telephone coaching, BMI = body mass index, BP = blood pressure, HDL = high- 
density lipoprotein, LDL = low-density lipoprotein, AST = Aspartat-Aminotransferase, ALT = Alanin-Aminotransferase, CRP = C-reactive protein, IFCC = International 
Federation of Clinical Chemistry, HOMA = homeostasis model of assessment. 


All analyses were carried out using SAS Version 9.2 (SAS 
Institute Inc., Cary, NC; procedures FREQ, GLM, MEAN, 
MIXED, MI, MIANALYZE). The tests were carried out at a 
signiﬁcance level of 0.05. 

A ﬂowchart of the study is presented in Fig. 1. Six of the 
randomized patients were excluded from the ﬁnal evaluation. 
Documentation of the baseline data was lost in 2 cases (both 
in the control group). Four more patients were found during 
the ﬁrst 4 months to suffer from severe preexisting conditions 
having an effect on body weight at the baseline visit: 2 severe 
depressions, 1 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 1 cancer of the 
colon (all 4S group). 
Table 1 gives the baseline data for the remaining patients 
for the 3 groups. A statistically signiﬁcant difference between 
the groups was observed for the baseline weight, which was 
higher in the ABC group than in the controls. The difference 
is due to an incidental higher proportion of men in the ABC 
group: (70%) vs 53% in both the 4S group and the controls. 
To compensate for this imbalance, we analyzed the different 
primary and secondary metrical endpoints not only as the change 
from the baseline but additionally included the baseline value as 
a covariable. In addition, the relative weight loss and the decrease 
in BMI are reported, both of which are less inﬂuenced by the 
absolute baseline weight. Table 2a gives the dropout rates in the 
3 groups. These increased in the course of the study and after 12 
months became almost equal at 18% and 17% in the ABC and 
4S group but at 35% were twice as high in the control group. 
Table 2b shows the reasons for dropout. Loss of sensor was the 
prevailing technical reason with a consecutive unwillingness to 
pay a second security deposit for a replacement instrument. 
Fig. 2 shows the unadjusted individual weight loss curves in 
kilograms in the 2 intervention groups over the year; the mean 
is shown in red. Weight loss did not differ between men and 
women in any of the groups, either in absolute (kg) or in relative 
(%) terms. The adjusted relative weight losses according to the 
mixed model evaluation are given in Fig. 3 at months 0, 4, 8, and 
12. It is apparent that weight loss was greatest in the ABC group 


ABC 
4S 
Controls 

2 (3%)∗∗ 
4 (6%)∗ 
11 (18%) 

7 (12%)∗∗ 
8 (13%)∗ 
20 (32%) 

11 (18%)∗ 
10 (16%)∗ 
22 (35%) 
ABC = Active Body Control Program of University of Magdeburg, 4S = 4sigma 
telephone coaching. 
p vs. controls: ∗p < 0.05. ∗ ∗p < 0.01. 





Contact not possible after 12 months 
Technical issues 
Not satisﬁed with the program 
Familial/professional 
Metformin therapy 
5 (8%) 
5 (8%) 
0 
1 (2%) 
0 
4 (7%) 
2 (3%) 
1 (2%) 
2 (3%) 
1 (2%) 
16 (28%) 
0 
3 (4%) 
0 
3 (4%) 
ABC = Active Body Control Program of University of Magdeburg, 4S = 4sigma 
telephone coaching. 
and decreased in the control group between 8 and 12 months, 
whereas in the 2 intervention groups they increased further. 
The data collected from the accelerometers were generally in 
line with the greater weight loss in the ABC group. This group 
had longer walking distances (ABC: 6.5 km/day, 4S: 5.9 km/day) 
and a lower nutritional energy input (ABC: 1487 kcal/day, 4S: 
1510 kcal/day). None of these differences reached statistical sig- 
niﬁcance; however, the minor daily difference in calorie intake 
and exercise-induced calorie burn added up over one year to ap- 
proximately an average of additional negative balance of 24,000 
kcal and is, therefore, in line with the additional weight loss in 
the ABC group. 
Table 3 shows the proportion of completing patients whose 
relative weight loss exceeded 5%, 10%, or 15%. Highest values 
were again observed in the ABC group, in which almost every 
other patient lost more than 15% of their baseline weight. 
Table 4 shows the changes in various clinical and biochemi- 
cal parameters after 12 months. Four patients developed diabetes 
mellitus (3 controls, 1 4S). They remained in the evaluation with 
their original data until the beginning of therapy with metformin, 
which is known to inﬂuence body weight and associated parame- 
ters. Thereafter they were treated as dropouts. The changes from 
baseline in Table 4 are given as adjusted means after different 
approaches to account for the dropouts. The original estimates 
from the mixed model approach used all available measurements 
at corresponding visits. MI shows values after multiple imputa- 
tion, and LOCF and BOCF give values after the last observation 
carried forward and baseline observation carried forward proce- 
dure. In all 3 groups body weight, blood pressure, and most of 
the obesity-related biochemical parameters improved relative to 
baseline (ﬁrst 3 columns). Compared with the controls (columns 
4 and 5), the groups with telemonitoring showed statistically 
Table 3. Proportions (%) of Patients Completing the Study 
Whose Weight Loss Exceeded 5%, 10%, or 15% of Their Base- 
line Weight after 12 Months 


≥5% 
≥10% 
≥15% 
82 
57 
43 

68 
43 
19 

32 
8 
5 
ABC = Active Body Control Program of University of Magdeburg, 4S = 4sigma 
telephone coaching. 






























Fig. 2. Individual absolute weight losses in kilograms in the 2 intervention groups over the entire study. Red lines represent the mean weight loss 
(unadjusted kilograms) in each group. A frequent weight increase by 2 to 3 kg after 240 days reﬂects the time around Christmas and was corrected in 
most cases thereafter. (Color ﬁgure available online.) 
greater effects on relative and absolute weight, BMI, and waist 
circumference and, in the ABC group only, on triglycerides, 
CRP, HbA1c, and the parameters of insulin resistance. The mag- 
nitude of the effects was greatest for the high-sensitivity CRP 
(−48% and −28%) and for the HOMA index (−38% and −36%) 
in the ABC and 4S groups, respectively. If we compare ABC 
with 4S, the former was more effective with respect to the abso- 
lute and the relative weight, BMI, as well as apolipoprotein B. 
Quality of life was assessed by means of the WHO-5 ques- 
tionnaire [16]. The return rates after 12 months were 62%, 57%, 
and 45% in groups ABC, 4S, and controls, respectively, and 
the well-being indices increased by 44% (p < 0.001), 33% 
(p < 0.001), and 20% (nonsigniﬁcant). 
Fig. 4 shows the proportion of patients for whom a diagnosis 
of metabolic syndrome was no longer applicable after 12 months 
because one or more of the International Diabetes Federation 
criteria had disappeared. This rate was 33% in the control group, 
as opposed to 41% in the 4S group and 58% in the ABC group. 

The major ﬁnding of this study is that telemonitoring of 
both physical activity and food intake considerably improves 
weight reduction and corrects metabolic syndrome in a majority 
of patients. With regard to communication with the patients, the 
weekly letters of the ABC program were more effective than the 
monthly telephone calls in the 4S group. 
The magnitude of the observed weight loss can be re- 
garded as quite satisfactory, in particular in the ABC group, 
with a reduction of adjusted body weight by 12.2 kg (11.4%). 
A weight reduction program is regarded as medically rele- 
vant when an individual loses more than 5% of the baseline 
weight [17–21]. This aim was achieved in 82% of the sub- 
jects completing the study in the ABC group and in 68% 
in the 4S group. The substantial > 15% weight loss was 
achieved by a remarkable 43% of the subjects in the ABC 
group. 
Fig. 3. Relative weight losses in the 2 intervention groups and in the control group after 4, 8, and 12 months. These data are taken from the mixed 
model approach, which used all available data at all time points. The changes between months 8 and 12 are not statistically signiﬁcant but the weight 
loss trends show a further increase in groups ABC and 4S but a decrease in the control group. 



Fig. 4. Proportions of patients free from metabolic syndrome after 12 
months (data from LOCF evaluation). 
Mobile technology has been used repeatedly in weight loss 
studies, but the technical approaches differed considerably. Sev- 
eral studies used PDAs, mobile phones, and the Internet to ex- 
change written information concerning meals, activities, and 
respective recommendations. Intervention studies of this kind 
during 1 year [22–27] report weight losses of between 1.3 kg 
[25] and 7.6 kg [24]. Studies using pedometers or accelerome- 
ters to measure physical activity are less frequent [28–31]. All 
included regular face-to-face counseling and were carried out 
for periods shorter than in the present study. Richardson et al. 
[29] achieved a weight loss of 4.1 lbs after 3 weeks in 12 partici- 
pants (BMI 37), and Polzien et al. [28] reported a weight loss of 
6.2 kg in 19 patients (BMI 32.6) after 12 weeks. Andersen et al. 
[31] reported data that can be compared with our results. They 
advised 20 women (BMI 32.4) to observe a 1200 kcal/d diet and 
to increase their moderate physical activity by 30 minutes per 
day over 16 weeks. In addition, the patients wore accelerometers 
whose readings were evaluated at each of 16 weekly counsel- 
ing meetings. This group lost 8.7% (7.9 kg), which compares 
well with our 4-month weight reductions of 9.2% in the ABC 
group and of 7.5% in the 4S group. Our effects are, therefore, 
in line with satisfactory results obtained by other investigators. 
However, our study extends the knowledge taken from earlier 
studies in 2 respects: in the ﬁrst place, higher weight losses can 
be achieved by longer interventions (Figs. 2 and 3). Secondly, 
this weight loss can be achieved by telemonitoring without face- 
to-face counseling, which is time-consuming for both patients 
and carers. 
What are the major elements contributing to these favorable 
results? In her review of technology-based weight loss interven- 
tions Anna Khaylis [3] concluded that 5 key components are re- 
quired for effective weight loss: self-monitoring, counselor feed- 
back and communication, social support, a structured program, 
and the use of an individually tailored program. These 5 compo- 
nents are indeed elements of the intervention used in our study, in 
particular in the ABC group. Self-monitoring is carried out using 
the screen of the Aipermotion instrument. Counselor feedback 
was provided by mail (ABC) or by telephone (4S). A kind of 
social support was ensured by the ABC letters showing the 
weight loss curves of the other patients, thus introducing group 
dynamics. The program was structured in terms of goals for diet 
and activity, with regular feedback. Finally, individual tailoring 
was ensured by speciﬁc reactions of the carers to the nutritional 
and physical data transmitted to them via the Internet. 
The weight reductions were associated with relevant bene- 
ﬁts in blood pressure and in biochemical parameters. The most 
pronounced effect was the improvement in parameters known 
to be associated with insulin resistance. This ﬁnding strength- 
ens our belief that the 2 combined intervention measures used in 
this study, namely, a low-calorie diet replacing high-GI carbohy- 
drates with low-GI carbohydrates plus an increase in moderate 
physical activity, reinforce each other in reducing insulin re- 
sistance. The number of patients with a baseline pathological 
HOMA index decreased from 18 to 4 after 12 months in the 
ABC group (−78%) and from 13 to 5 in the 4S group (−61%). 
The overall improvements are also reﬂected in the satisfying pro- 
portion of patients in whom a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome 
was no longer applicable (Fig. 4). 
The ﬁnding that even the control group lost 3.7 kg (“original” 
in Table 4) warrants discussion, in particular because this was 
accompanied by a 33% reduction in the occurrence of metabolic 
syndrome in this group (Fig. 4). Three points may be considered. 
The ﬁrst is that we believe that the instruction given to all 3 
intervention groups, namely, the recommendations concerning 
the Magdeburg Dual Diet and optimized physical exercise, was 
quite effective. Secondly, this instruction was given at a time 
at which the participants became concerned about health risks 
detected in their initial physical and blood examinations. The 
third point concerns a potential selection bias. The control group 
had the highest rate of dropouts (36%) as opposed to 16% and 
18% in the other 2 groups. It is probable that the lost cases 
were those with the smallest weight losses. This assumption is 
supported by the intention-to-treat assessment using the LOCF 
and BOCF protocols (Table 4), which yielded weight losses of 
3.0 and 2.5 kg instead of 3.7 kg from the “original” evaluation for 
the control group. It may be therefore concluded that the results 
for the control subjects who completed the study overestimate 
the true effects. 
This study also compared 2 methods of communication be- 
tween the carers and the patients. The results show clearly that 
weekly information letters are better than monthly telephone 
calls. This was not expected at the outset, because communi- 
cation by mail occurred entirely without personal contact for a 
whole year, whereas the monthly telephone calls allowed about 
20 minutes of personal attention each time. We believe that 3 
aspects contribute to the better effect in the ABC group. First, 
the feedback was more frequent: weekly instead of monthly. 
Second, a letter provides written documentation of the patient’s 
data, in particular of his or her progress and of the carers’ mo- 
tivating responses. Finally, an element of group dynamics was 


introduced by displaying the weight loss curves of other patients 
in the given group. 
One important question in all weight reduction programs is 
the dropout rate. In this study the rates after 1 year were 18% 
in the ABC group and 17% in the 4S group. A recent study of 
772 participants using a conventional weight reduction program 
known worldwide [32] reported a 12-month dropout rate of 39%, 
which is more than twice as high. This satisfactory adherence 
to the program most probably reﬂects an important advantage 
of telemonitoring, namely, that the patients do not lose time by 
visiting their carers. 
A second major question relating to weight reduction con- 
cerns rebound weight gain. In many studies weight loss reaches a 
maximum after about 6 months and is then followed by a steady 
weight gain [33,34]. Such weight gain was observed in our 
study only in the control group after 8 months (Fig. 3). Groups 
ABC and 4S showed additional—although small—increases in 
weight loss (Figs. 2 and 3). One major reason for the frequent 
failure to maintain an achieved weight loss is that intake and 
storage of nutritional energy is one of the most important self- 
preservation instincts. Continuous suppression of this instinct, 
particularly when one is confronted with a wealth of calorie-rich 
food and powerful advertisements for its consumption, requires 
more willpower than many individuals can exert. In contrast, 
increasing and maintaining physical activity may in the long run 
be easier, especially when one is rewarded by daily readings 
of personal achievement in combination with regular positive 
feedback from a respected carer. 
STRENGTHS, LIMITATIONS, 
AND CONCLUSION 
The strengths of this study are sufﬁciently large group sizes, 
duration of the intervention, and an elaborate intent-to-treat eval- 
uation of the data. A limitation is that the data for dropouts can 
only be estimated, as in many other weight loss studies. Over- 
estimation (e.g., in the LOCF procedure) is probable, as is un- 
derestimation (e.g., in BOCF). In addition, there was a certain 
imbalance in baseline weight caused by a higher proportion of 
men in the ABC group. This may have only partly been balanced 
by reporting parameters that are less dependent of the baseline 
weight such as relative weight loss and lowering of BMI. A 
further limitation of this study is that it does not allow one to 
decide which of the telemonitoring components is more effec- 
tive: physical activity or nutrition. Finally, more work is needed 
to test the long-term effects of this new treatment strategy. 
Taken together, the results show that telemonitoring of nu- 
trition and physical activity without intermittent face-to-face 
counseling can yield satisfactory weight loss, in particular when 
communication with the patients is by weekly letters as in the 
ABC group. In association with weight loss, there were relevant 
improvements in symptoms of metabolic syndrome. 


This study was embedded within the “lifescience.biz” project 
kindly cofunded by the German Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (BMBF), reference number 01FC08063. 

1. Grundy SM, Brewer HG Jr, Cleeman JI, Smith SC Jr, Lenfant C: 
Deﬁnition of metabolic syndrome: report of the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute/American Heart Association Conference 
on Scientiﬁc Issues Related to Deﬁnition. Reviewed by John Beilby. 
Circulation 109:433–438, 2004. 
2. Swinburn BA, Sacks G, Hall KD, McPherson K, Finegood DT, 
Moodie ML, Gortmaker SL: The global obesity pandemic: shaped 
by global drivers and local environments. Lancet 378:804–814, 
2011. 
3. Khaylis A, Yiaslas T, Bergstrom J, Gore-Felton C: A review of efﬁ- 
cacious technology-based weight-loss interventions: ﬁve key com- 
ponents. Telemed e-Health 16:931–938, 2010. 
4. Neve M, Morgan PJ, Jones PR, Collins CE: Effectiveness of web- 
based interventions in achieving weight loss and weight loss main- 
tenance in overweight and obese adults: a systematic review with 
meta-analysis. Obes Rev 11:306–321, 2011. 
5. Bacigalupo R, Cudd P, Littlewood C, Bissell P, Hawley MS, 
Buckley Woods H: Interventions employing mobile technology for 
overweight and obesity: an early systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Obes Rev 14:279–291, 2013. 
6. Luley C, Blaik A, Aronica S, Dierkes J, Kropf S, Westphal S: 
Evaluation of three new strategies to ﬁght obesity in families. J Nutr 
Metab 2010:751905, 2010. 
7. Luley C, Blaik A, Reschke K, Klose S, Westphal S: Weight loss 
in obese patients with type 2 diabetes: effects of telemonitoring 
plus a diet combination—the Active Body Control (ABC) Program. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 91:286–292, 2011. 
8. Alberti KG, Zimmet P, Shaw J: Metabolic syndrome—a new world- 
wide deﬁnition. A consensus statement from the International Dia- 
betes Federation. Diabet Med 23:469–480, 2006. 


10. Worm N: “Gl¨ucklich und Schlank. Mit viel Eiweiß und dem Richti- 
gen Fett. Die Logi-Methode in Theorie und K¨uche.” [Happy and 
slim: with plenty of protein and the right fat. The LOGI-method in 
theory and kitchen] L¨unen, Germany: Systemed Verlag, 2003. 
11. Wood RJ, Fernandez ML: Carbohydrate-restricted versus low- 
glycemic-index diets for the treatment of insulin resistance and 
metabolic syndrome. Nutr Rev 67:179–183, 2009. 
12. Janiszewski PM, Ross R: The utility of physical activity in the 
management of global cardiometabolic risk. Obesity (Silver Spring) 
17: (Suppl 3)S3–S14, 2009. 
13. Correll M, Hanssen H, Grimme C, Zelger O, Ertlmeier M, Schweizer 
T, K¨ohler F, Halle M, Schmidt-Trucks¨ass A: Absch¨atzung des 
k¨orperlichen Aktivit¨atsmaßes mittels Aktivit¨atssensor bei Patien- 
ten mit chronischer Herzinsufﬁzienz [Abstract]. Dtsch Z Sportmed 
58:222, 2007. 



14. Jehn M, Schmidt-Trucks¨aess A, Schuster T, Hanssen H, Weis 
M, Halle M, Koehler F: Accelerometer-based quantiﬁcation of 
6-minute walk test performance in patients with chronic heart fail- 
ure: applicability in telemedicine. J Card Fail 15:334–340, 2009. 
15. Haffner SM, Miettinen H, Stern MP: The homeostasis model in the 
San Antonio Heart Study. Diabetes Care 20:1087–1092, 1997. 
16. Bech P: Measuring the dimensions of psychological general well- 

17. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse JM: Inﬂuence of 
weight reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Hypertension 42:878–884, 2003. 
18. The Look AHEAD Research Group: Long-term effects of a lifestyle 
intervention on weight and cardiovascular risk factors in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: four-year results of the Look AHEAD 
trial. Arch Intern Med 170:1566–1575, 2010. 
19. Wood PD, Stefanick ML, Dreon DM, Frey-Hewitt B, Garay SC, 
Williams PT, Superko HR, Fortmann SP, Albers JJ, Vranizan KM: 
Changes in plasma lipids and lipoproteins in overweight men during 
weight loss through dieting as compared with exercise. N Engl J Med 
319:1173–1179, 1988. 
20. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research 
Group: Effects of weight loss and sodium reduction intervention 
on blood pressure and hypertension incidence in overweight peo- 
ple with high-normal blood pressure: the Trials of Hypertension 
Prevention, phase II. Arch Intern Med 157:657–667, 1997. 
21. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Lachin 
JM, Walker EA, Nathan DM, and the Diabetes Prevention Program 
Research Group: Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with 
lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med 346:393–403, 
2002. 
22. Tate DF, Jackvony EH, Wing RR: Effects of Internet behavioral 
counseling on weight loss in adults at risk for type 2 diabetes: a 
randomized trial. JAMA 289:1833–1836, 2003. 
23. Cussler EC, Teixeira PJ, Going SB, Houtkooper LB, Metcalfe LL, 
Blew RM, Ricketts JR, Lohman J, Stanford VA, Lohman TG: Main- 
tenance of weight loss in overweight middle-aged women through 
the Internet. Obesity 16:1052–1060, 2008. 
24. Harvey-Berino J, Pintauro S, Buzzell P, Gold EC: Effect of Internet 
support on the long-term maintenance of weight loss. Obes Res 
12:320–329, 2004. 
25. McConnon A, Kirk SF, Cockroft JE, Harvey EL, Greenwood DC, 
Thomas JD, Ransley JK, Bojke L: The Internet for weight control 
in an obese sample: results of a randomized controlled trial. BMC 
Health Serv Res 7:206–215, 2007. 
26. McTigue KM, Conroy MB, Hess R, Bryce CL, Fiorillo AB, Fischer 
GS, Milas NC, Simkin-Silverman LR: Using the Internet to translate 
an evidence-based lifestyle intervention into practice. Telemed J 
e-Health 15:851–858, 2010. 
27. Micco N, Gold B, Buzzell P, Leonard H, Pintauro S, Harvey-Berino 
J: Minimal in-person support as an adjunct to Internet obesity treat- 
ment. Ann Behav Med 33:49–56, 2007. 
28. Polzien KM, Jakicic JM, Tate DF, Otto AD: The efﬁcacy of a 
technology-based system in a short-term behavioral weight loss 
intervention. Obesity 15:825–830, 2007. 
29. Richardson CR, Brown BB, Foley S, Dial KS, Lowery JC: Feasibil- 
ity of adding enhanced pedometer feedback to nutritional counseling 
for weight loss. J Med Internet Res 7:e56, 2005. 
30. Hurling R, Catt M, De Boni M, Fairley BW, Hurst T, Murray P, 
Richardson A, Sodhi JS: Using Internet and mobile phone technol- 
ogy to deliver an automated physical activity program: randomized 
controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 9:e7, 2007. 
31. Andersen RE, Wadden TA, Bartlett SJ, Zemel B, Verde TJ, Franck- 
owiak SC: Effects of life-style activity vs structured aerobic ex- 
ercise in obese women. A randomized trial. JAMA 281:335–340, 
1999. 
32. Jebb SA, Ahern AL, Olson AD, Aston LM, Holzapfel C, Stoll 
J, Amann-Gassner U, Simpson AE, Fuller NR, Pearson S, Lau 
NS, Mander AP, Hauner H, Caterson ID: Primary care referral 
to a commercial provider for weight loss treatment versus stan- 
dard care: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 378:1485–1492, 
2011. 
33. Elmer PJ, Obarzanek E, Vollmer WM, Simons-Morton D, Stevens 
VJ, Young DR, Lin PH, Champagne C, Harsha DW, Svetkey LP, 
Ard J, Brantley PJ, Proschan MA, Erlinger TP, Appel LJ: PREMIER 
Collaborative Research Group: Effects of comprehensive lifestyle 
modiﬁcation on diet, weight, physical ﬁtness, and blood pressure 
control: 18-month results of a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 
144:485–495, 2006. 
34. Stevens VJ, Obarzanek E, Cook NR, Lee IM, Appel LJ, Smith 
West D, Milas NC, Mattfeldt-Beman M, Belden L, Bragg C, 
Millstone M, Raczynski J, Brewer A, Singh B, Cohen J: Tri- 
als for the Hypertension Prevention Research Group: Long-term 
weight loss and changes in blood pressure: results of the Trials 
of Hypertension Prevention, phase II. Ann Intern Med 134:1–11, 
2006. 
Received August 20, 2012; revision accepted November 11, 
2013. 


