Original Research 
Telehealth Remote Monitoring for Community-Dwelling Older Adults 
with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Kristen De San Miguel, BSc,1 Joanna Smith, BPsych,1 
and Gill Lewin, BSc Hons, MSc, MPH, PhD1,2 
1Silver Chain Group, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 
2Centre for Research on Ageing, Curtin Health Innovation 
Research Institute, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 
Abstract 
Objective: To determine if self-monitoring via home-based telehealth 
equipment could, when combined with ongoing remote monitoring by 
a nurse, reduce the incidence of hospitalizations and emergency 
department (ED) presentations for people with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Subjects and Methods: A randomized 
controlled trial was used to compare the outcomes for participants 
receiving the telehealth equipment and monitoring with those for 
participants in an information-only control group, over a period of 
6 months. Participants receiving the telehealth intervention were 
taught to measure and record their vital signs (blood pressure, 
weight, temperature, pulse, and oxygen saturation levels) on a daily 
basis. These were then transmitted automatically via telephone to a 
secure Web site where they were monitored each day by the tele- 
health nurse. Results: The telehealth group had fewer ED presen- 
tations and hospital admissions and a reduced length of stay in 
comparison with the control group. These results were not statisti- 
cally significant. However, the reduction in health service use was 
large enough to result in significant cost savings, with the annual 
cost savings of the telehealth group compared with the control group 
being $2,931 per person. Conclusions: Telehealth monitoring of 
patient vital signs reduced health service utilization for individuals 
with COPD and resulted in significant cost savings. In terms of 
individual health benefits, 
improvements in participants’ self- 
management behaviors and control over their condition was evident. 



problems faced by many community care agencies as the 
population ages and we consider how we can assist people 
living with chronic illness to manage their disease more 
effectively to improve their quality of life and reduce the demand on 
health services. One of the growing areas of telehomecare is the re- 
mote monitoring of patients’ vital signs by a clinician using equip- 
ment installed in the patient’s own home. Remote monitoring has 
gained momentum in recent years because it is seen not only as a way 
of providing prompt medical intervention before deterioration in the 
patient’s condition that can prevent unnecessary hospital admis- 
sions,1 but also as a way of managing staffing shortages, reducing 
costs,2 and improving patients’ knowledge and self-efficacy.3 
One particular chronic condition that requires ongoing self- 
management to minimize morbidity and has begun to show positive 
outcomes using remote monitoring is chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD).4 COPD is a progressive and disabling disease that 
causes restrictions in lung airflow. People with COPD can often suffer 
from acute exacerbations, which are characterized by severe short- 
ness of breath, coughing fits, and sputum production.4 Not only are 
these exacerbations costly in terms of increased healthcare utiliza- 
tion and hospitalizations, but they can also significantly reduce the 
quality of life for the person living with COPD.5 
Although there is a growing body of research on the benefits of 
telehomecare for chronic conditions such as heart failure,6 diabetes,7 
and wounds,8 there is still limited methodologically sound evidence 
in relation to the benefits and financial viability of telehealth mon- 
itoring for people with COPD.1 A recent systematic review of the 
literature available on home telemonitoring for pulmonary condi- 
tions found only two studies that conducted a detailed cost analysis 
of this approach.9 They concluded that more evaluative research, 
using larger samples sizes and more robust study designs, particu- 
larly randomized controlled trials, was required in order to confirm 
the economic viability of this kind of telehomecare program.9 An- 
other review by Polisena et al.10 also reported that although home 
telehealth was generally clinically effective, the current evidence 
regarding the effect on health service utilization was limited and that 
once again more robust research was required. 
This study therefore aimed to address this gap in current knowl- 
edge on health service utilization, cost-effectiveness, and any asso- 
ciated benefits of telehealth monitoring for people living with COPD. 
Subjects and Methods 
STUDY DESIGN AND POPULATION 
A randomized controlled trial was used to compare the outcomes 
for participants receiving the telehealth monitoring with participants 
receiving information only. The study was conducted by Silver 
Chain, a large health and community care organization based in 
Western Australia. The study population consisted of Silver Chain 
clients who had a diagnosis of COPD, were receiving domiciliary 
oxygen, spoke English, and lived in the metropolitan area. Clients 
were excluded if they had dementia, were receiving palliative care, 
did not have a telephone landline, or were unable to use the telehealth 



equipment because of cognitive or physical impairment. Ethics ap- 
proval for this project was granted by the Silver Chain Human Re- 
search Ethics Committee. 

Earlier analysis of Silver Chain client hospital admission data had 
found an annual admission rate of 1.7 times for clients with COPD. 
Previous research examining the impact of telehealth monitoring on 
individuals with chronic disease has found a reduction in hospital 
admissions of up to 68% can be achieved.11 Anticipating a 45% 
reduction in hospital admissions, it was calculated that 40 partici- 
pants in each group were required in order to detect this difference 
with 80% power and alpha = 0.05. 

Clients meeting the selection criteria were identified using Silver 
Chain’s client information management system (ComCare) and were 
then invited to participate by letter. The letter included an informa- 
tion statement and explained that a research assistant would tele- 
phone them in the next few days to discuss the research trial. If during 
this phone call clients expressed an interest in participating, a time 
was arranged to visit them at home. During this visit the research 
assistant obtained informed consent (which included permission to 
contact their general practitioner [GP]/specialist), collected baseline 
data, and randomly assigned the participant to the intervention or 
control group. 
Prior to recruitment, the random number generator in STATA 
version 9 (StataCorp., College Station, TX) was used to randomly 
allocate 80 study numbers to the intervention or control group (40 in 
each). Envelopes were then made up with the study number written 
on the outside and the group assignment inside. 
After a participant had been recruited, their GP/specialist was sent 
a fax that included an information statement and a consent form. The 
fax explained that their patient had consented to take part and re- 
quested that they accept clinical governance for the participant 
during the research. If their patient was allocated to the telehealth 
group, the fax also included a threshold document for the doctor to 
define the normal parameters for their patient in terms of blood 
pressure, temperature, pulse, oxygen flow rate, and oxygen satura- 
tion levels. 

This study used the HealthHUB(cid:2) (Docobo Ltd., Bookham, Surrey, 
United Kingdom), a small portable unit that has an integrated display 
and large functional keys. Participants were visited at home by the 
telehealth nurse, who installed the telehealth equipment and trained 
participants in its use. Participants were also provided with an edu- 
cational book about COPD and a telehealth instruction manual. 
Participants measured their vital signs (blood pressure, weight, 
temperature, pulse, and oxygen saturation levels) and answered 
questions relating to their general state of health, on a daily basis. 
These were transmitted automatically via telephone to a secure Web 
site where they were monitored daily by the telehealth nurse. Any 

deviations outside the participant’s normal parameters, specified by 
their GP or specialist, triggered an alert. The telehealth nurse would 
then phone the participant to discuss his or her measurements and 
provide advice/support or recommend he or she make an appoint- 
ment to visit the GP. The outcome of the phone call and any rec- 
ommendations/actions taken were then recorded on the telehealth 
Web site. The participants’ GPs/specialists were also provided with a 
secure log-in so they could access the telehealth Web site and view 
their patient’s readings. 
The control group were also visited by the telehealth nurse, who 
provided them with the same COPD book. There was no other contact 
with this group apart from data collection. 

Participants were provided with a calendar to record every time 
they used any health service. This information was then collected by 
phone each month, for the 6-month study period. Participant de- 
mographics and the number and duration of telehealth nurse visits, 
telephone calls, and monitoring were extracted from Silver Chain’s 
ComCare. Quality of life was measured during the initial interview 
and again at 6 months using the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire 
Self-Administered Standardized Version (CRQ-SAS).12 Client satis- 
faction was evaluated via face-to-face interviews at the completion 
of the trial. 

Paired and independent-samples t tests and chi-squared tests were 
used to compare the demographics, quality of life, and health service 
use of the two groups. STATA version 11 was used for all analyses. 
The cost evaluation examined the extra costs of providing the 
telehealth intervention and determined whether there was a net 
benefit in health system usage and any annualized cost savings for 
those in the telehealth group compared with the control group. Two 
types of costs were included: actual equipment costs and labor costs, 
which included telehealth nurse visits, daily monitoring calls, and 
any associated travel expenses to participants’ homes, calculated as a 
weekly cost. Net benefits were derived by comparing the health 
system usage of both groups. Unit costs for GP, specialist, and 
emergency department (ED) visits were taken from the 2005/06 unit 
costs in Table 7.2 of Flatau et al.,13 adjusted by 6.51% per annum 
increase14 in the Australian Bureau of Statistics health services price 
index. Hospital visit costs were based on length of stay rather than 
number of hospitalizations. Length of stay cost was calculated using 
the average cost per bed-day in public hospitals15 adjusted by a 
6.51% per annum increase.14 

Eighty clients (40 telehealth and 40 control) were recruited into the 
study, with 71 clients (36 telehealth and 35 control) completing the 
trial. Nine participants were lost to follow-up (seven died, two 
withdrew). Of the two participants who withdrew, one was unable to 
manage the equipment, and one was no longer interested in taking 
part. 

Table 1 shows the gender, age, living arrangement, and carer 
availability for both groups; none of these differences was statisti- 
cally significant. 

Table 2 shows the number of GP and specialist visits, ED presen- 
tations, number of hospital admissions, and length of stay in hospital 
for each group. These health contacts are shown for COPD-related 
contacts, non–COPD-related contacts, and the combined totals. 
There are substantial differences between the two groups in their 
health service usage. The telehealth group were hospitalized less than 
half as many times as the control group and spent a total of 77 fewer 
days in the hospital over the 6-month period. The telehealth group 
had nearly 25% more GP visits than the control group, but the ma- 
jority of these visits were non–COPD-related. None of these differ- 
ences reached statistical significance. 

Costs and net benefits of the telehealth group compared with the 
control group were calculated for the 6-month period and then an- 
nualized. Two types of costs were included: equipment costs and 
labor costs. Equipment costs are shown in Table 3. They include the 
cost of the equipment depreciated over 3 years using the straight line 
method plus the weekly cost of monitoring. Table 4 applies unit costs 
to the difference in all health system contacts. 


The questions in the CRQ-SAS are divided into four domains: 
dyspnea, fatigue, emotional function, and mastery (ability in self- 
managing their disease). Each is scored separately. There were no 
statistically significant differences between the telehealth and con- 
trol group for any of the domains at baseline or at 6 months. There 
was, however, a clinically significant change found within the tele- 
health group for the mastery domain between baseline and 6 months. 
The minimum amount of change that has been found to be clinically 
significant or important in a respondent’s day-to-day life is an 






TELEHEALTH 
GROUP 
(N = 36) 
INFORMATION- 
ONLY GROUP 
(N = 35) 




















NUMBER OF OCCASIONS; 
MEAN (SD) 
CONTROL 
GROUP 
TELEHEALTH 
GROUP 

































































COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ED, emergency department; GP, 
general practitioner; LOS, length of stay; SD, standard deviation. 
NUMBER 
OF MINUTES 
NUMBER 
OF HOURS 

TOTAL 
COSTS 




Monitoring 
(18 min/week) 






PER PATIENT 
UNIT COSTS 
DEPRECIATED 
PER PATIENT 
UNIT COSTS 















improvement of 0.5 per question per dimension.12 There are four 
questions in mastery domain, and therefore to achieve clinical sig- 
nificance a change of 2 is required. The telehealth group improved by 
2.3, achieving clinical significance, whereas the information group 
changed by only 1.3. 

Overall, participants found the equipment easy to use, and en- 
tering their daily measurements took an average of 5 min. Ap- 
proximately half felt that the telehealth intervention had reduced the 
number of times they had been to the hospital. Participants com- 
mented that in the past they may have gone to the hospital because 
they were worried or anxious about breathing difficulties, but being 
able to take their own measurements reassured them that their 
measures were within normal limits: 
There is no doubt that it has probably saved a couple of trips to 
hospital or has made me go to the doctor where previously I would 
have hung on and ended up going to hospital by ambulance. 
Table 5. Summary of Annual Cost Savings of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Telehealth (n = 36) 

Participants also described the telehealth monitoring as beneficial 
because it helped them to identify if they were getting sick earlier, 
which ultimately impacted on them seeking treatment before their 
condition deteriorated and required hospitalization: 
I know if my blood pressure was up the day before they will ring 
me.so then I’d go to the doctors and if there was a problem, he 
would find it before it blew into something huge. 
Those who felt that the service had not had an impact on their 
hospitalization rate generally described this as due to the fact that 
they had been living with their condition for several years so had 
already learned to recognize the early signs of an acute exacerbation. 
This group commented that they thought this type of service would 
be extremely beneficial for people who had been newly diagnosed 
with COPD: 
I can see it being absolutely marvellous for people who are just 
starting to be crook because they don’t know what the heck is 
going on, they don’t know what the body can handle so it is all a 
bit scary.panic is a hard thing to control, it happens, you know 
it’s happening and try as you might you can’t stop it, and if you 
can’t control the panic you’ll end up in hospital whether you want 
to or not. 
Participants generally agreed that receiving telehealth monitoring 
had provided reassurance and peace of mind knowing that a nurse 
was monitoring their results daily. Participants described having 
more control over their condition and being more confident in self- 
managing their condition as they were now more conscious of what 
their body was doing. 
Some participants also recorded their readings to take to their GP. 
This prompted more communication with their GP, and in 2 cases 
participants used their monitoring results to justify/open discussion 
with their GP about reviewing their medications. 

The results of this research demonstrate that self-monitoring via 
home-based telehealth equipment can, when combined with remote 
monitoring of patients’ results by a nurse, provide measurable health 
benefits for people living with COPD. These benefits were found to 
include a reduction in ED presentations, hospital admissions, and 
days in the hospital. 
Much of the research investigating the use of telehealth technol- 
ogy has reported good outcomes in terms of reduced hospitalizations 
and ED presentations.16,17 However, there has been no consistent or 
definitive evidence in relation to how much this type of technology 
reduces health service utilization.9 This research shows that although 
there was not a statistically significant difference between the groups 
in terms of health service utilization, the intervention resulted in the 
telehealth group having almost half the number of COPD-related ED 
presentations, hospitalizations, and days spent in the hospital com- 
pared with the control group. 

















UNIT 
COSTS 
DIFFERENCE 
(TELEHEALTH 
MINUS 
CONTROL) 
TOTAL 
COST 
SAVINGS 



















Prior to this study there was limited evidence as to the economic 
benefits of telehealth monitoring, particularly in relation to people 
with COPD.1 A recent systematic review of the literature available on 
home telemonitoring for pulmonary conditions9 found only two 
studies that conducted a detailed cost analysis of this approach, and 
only one of these reported actual dollar savings. This study, by Pare 
et al.,1 showed a $355 saving per person in the intervention group 
over 6 months. Although these previous results are consistent with 
ours insofar as there were savings for those receiving a telehealth 
intervention, the $2,931 savings per annum found in our study were 
somewhat more substantial. This research therefore makes an im- 
portant contribution to building the evidence base regarding the 
economic viability of such services within the wider health com- 
munity. 
This research has also shown that telehealth monitoring can pro- 
vide users of the service with more than just reduced health service 
contacts. Participants reported benefits relating to increased self- 
confidence, control, and awareness in managing their condition, as 
well as an improved sense of security and reduced anxiety. Partici- 
pants’ self-reports of improvement in self-management were sup- 
ported by the increase in a sense of mastery of their disease, as found 
by the CRQ-SAS quality of life tool over time. These results are 
similar to previous studies that also found that telemonitoring en- 
hanced confidence in self-management,18 improved individuals’ 
sense of security,19 and increased their personal awareness of their 
health status.20 As with previous work exploring the acceptability of 
telehealth technology for older adults,18 participants in this study 
reported a high level of satisfaction with the user-friendliness of the 
equipment. 
Daily monitoring was also found for some participants to have 
prompted more communication about their condition with their GP, 
and in some cases the monitoring results were used to open discus- 
sion with their GP about reviewing their medications, demonstrating 
that participants were taking a more proactive role in managing their 
condition. 
If telehealth remote monitoring is to become a widely adopted and 
viable service for homecare agencies in the future, it is important to 
understand to whom best to target this kind of service. Although our 
initial findings from participant interviews suggest that there are more 
benefits for those who have been newly diagnosed with their disease, 
this is something that needs further exploration. It is also essential that 
we understand how long the telehealth monitoring service needs to be 
provided to be most cost-effective. What is the optimal time for people 
to learn to self-manage more effectively and be able to recognize their 
own symptoms of exacerbation without relying on the telehealth 
monitoring or equipment? These are important questions to consider 
in future research for telehomecare models. 

Information about participants’ pretrial hospitalizations was 
not collected, so the research was unable to explore any differences 
for individual health service use over time, only between-group 
differences. 

In addition, this research relied on retrospective self-report of 
health system contacts. To assist in participant recall, calendars were 
given to all participants and were referred to at the monthly data 
collection phone calls. 
A further limitation was the timing of the study. Because of 
funding constraints, the research was conducted over summer when 
participants with COPD are least likely to be hospitalized owing to 
respiratory infections.21 As a consequence the hospital admission 
rate was markedly lower than expected, and the study was insuffi- 
ciently powered for the difference between the two groups in hospital 
utilization to achieve statistical significance even though the tele- 
health group’s hospital utilization was virtually half that of the 
control group. Future research needs to be conducted over a longer 
period that includes all seasons. 

This research has shown that remote monitoring of patient vital 
signs using telehealth equipment resulted in a smaller number of 
health service contacts for individuals with COPD and resulted in 
significant cost savings. In terms of individual health benefits, im- 
provements in participants’ self-management and control over their 
condition were evident, and it is importantl that older people were 
receptive to using this type of technology and enjoyed using it as a 
tool in managing their COPD. 







telehomecare program for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Telemed J E Health 2006;12:114–121. 





Snippenburg R, Peters A, Lammers J, Schrijvers A. Effects of telemonitoring in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Telemed J E Health 
2008;14:138–146. 
5. Seemungal AR, Donaldson GC, Paul EA, Bestall JC, Jeffries DJ, Wedzicha JA. 
Effect of exacerbation on quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1418–1422. 
6. Clark RA, Inglis SC, McAlister FA, Cleland JG, Stewart S. Telemonitoring or 
structured telephone support programmes for patients with chronic heart 
failure: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2007;334:942. 







Janna M, Pare G, Sicotte C. Home telemonitoring for respiratory conditions: 
A systematic review. Am J Manag Care 2009;15:313–320. 



telehealth for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Telemed Telecare 2010;16:120–127. 
19. Dimmick SL, Mustaeleski C, Burgiss SG, Welsh T. A case study of benefits and 
potential savings in rural home telemedicine. Home Healthc Nurse 2000; 
18:125–133. 


opportunity through technology and coordination: A multisite case study. 
Telemed J E Health 2003;9:265–271. 

(CRQ-SAS) and Individualized Version (CRQ-SAI) background information and 
suggestions for application. Hamilton, ON, Canada: Department of Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics McMaster University, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
2006. 
13. Flatau P, Zaretzky K, Brady M, Haigh Y, Martin R. The Cost-Effectiveness of 
Homelessness Programs: A First Assessment, Volume 1—Main Report. WA 
Research Centre, Report No. 119. Perth: Australian Housing and Urban 
Research Institute, 2008. 





coordination/home telehealth: The systematic implementation of health 
informatics, home telehealth, and disease management to support the care 
of veteran patients with chronic conditions. Telemed J E Health 2008;14: 
1118–1126. 


Telemonitoring increases patient awareness of health and prompts health- 
related action: Initial evaluation of the TELE-ERA Study. Telemed J E Health 
2011;17:461–466. 
21. Vikman S, Keistinen T, Tuuponen T, Kivela SL. Seasonal variation in hospital 
admissions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Finland. Arctic Med 
Res 1996;55:182–186. 
Address correspondence to: 
Kristen De San Miguel, BSc 
Silver Chain Group 
6 Sundercombe Street 
Osborne Park 
Perth, WA 6017 
Australia 

Received: September 26, 2012 
Revised: December 28, 2012 
Accepted: December 31, 2012 

