Wearable Sensor/Device (Fitbit One) and SMS Text-Messaging 
Prompts to Increase Physical Activity in Overweight and Obese Adults: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial 
Julie B. Wang, PhD, MPH,1–3 Lisa A. Cadmus-Bertram, PhD,1 
Loki Natarajan, PhD,1 Martha M. White, MS,1 
Hala Madanat, PhD,2 Jeanne F. Nichols, PhD, FACSM,4 
Guadalupe X. Ayala, PhD, MPH,2 and John P. Pierce, PhD1 
1Moores Cancer Center and 4Center for Wireless Population 
Health Systems, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California. 
2Graduate School of Public Health, San Diego State University, 
San Diego, California. 
3Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, 
San Francisco, California. 
This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov with clinical trial registration 
number NCT02188875. 
Abstract 
Background: Studies have shown self-monitoring can modify 
health behaviors, including physical activity (PA). This study 
tested the utility of a wearable sensor/device (Fitbit(cid:2) One(cid:3); 
Fitbit Inc., San Francisco, CA) and short message service (SMS) 
text-messaging prompts to increase PA in overweight and obese 
adults. Materials and Methods: Sixty-seven adults wore a Fitbit 
One tracker for 6 weeks; half were randomized to also receive 
three daily SMS-based PA prompts. The Fitbit One consisted of a 
wearable tracker for instant feedback on performance and a Web 
site/mobile application (app) for detailed summaries. Outcome 
measures were objectively measured steps and minutes of PA by 
intensity using two accelerometers: Actigraph(cid:3) (Pensacola, FL) 
GT3X+ (primary measure) at baseline and Week 6 and Fitbit One 
(secondary measure) at baseline and Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
Results: Mixed-model repeated-measures analysis of primary 
measures indicated a significant within-group increase of +4.3 
(standard error [SE] = 2.0) min/week of moderate- to vigorous- 
intensity PA (MVPA) at 6-week follow-up (p = 0.04) in the 
comparison group (Fitbit only), but no study group differences 
across PA levels. Secondary measures indicated the SMS text- 
messaging effect lasted for only 1 week: the intervention group 
increased by +1,266 steps (SE = 491; p = 0.01), +17.8 min/week 
MVPA (SE = 8.5; p = 0.04), and +38.3 min/week total PA (SE = 
15.9; p = 0.02) compared with no changes in the comparison 
group, and these between-group differences were significant for 
steps (p = 0.01), fairly/very active minutes (p < 0.01), and total 
active minutes (p = 0.02). Conclusions: These data suggest that 
the Fitbit One achieved a small increase in MVPA at follow-up 
and that the SMS-based PA prompts were insufficient in in- 
creasing PA beyond 1 week. Future studies can test this inter- 
vention in those requiring less help and/or test strategies to 
increase participants’ engagement levels. 
Key words: behavioral health, e-health, mobile health, sensor 
technology, technology 


activity (PA) is associated with several chronic con- 
ditions, including diabetes, cardiovascular disease, 
and many cancers.1–3 With over a third of U.S. adults 
obese4,5 and half not meeting recommended levels of 150 min/ 
week of moderate- to vigorous-intensity PA (MVPA),6,7 de- 
veloping low-cost interventions to increase PA levels is a 
public health priority. 
Interventions to increase PA have involved several mo- 
dalities, including in-person (individual or group), telephone, 
and Web-based counseling/coaching approaches.8–11 More 
recently, there is growing interest among health behavior 
researchers in mobile health interventions that use mobile 
devices.12 
In the United States, mobile phone usage is ubiquitous, and 
in 2012, approximately 86% of subscribers reported using short 
message service (SMS) text-messaging.13 Researchers agree 
that text messaging has the potential to reach large audiences, 
including traditionally underserved populations,14 and possi- 
bly serve as an inexpensive intervention modality.15 Previous 
studies have shown that text messaging as a primary mode of 
communication can be successful for diabetes management,15–17 
smoking cessation,18–23 and diet and/or PA for weight loss.24–27 
In these studies, text-messaging components were used in a 
variety of ways, ranging from simple reminders for medication 
adherence to rapid feedback on PA performance. Several 
studies with text messaging as the main intervention 



intensity level using two accelerometers: the Actigraph (Pen- 
sacola, FL) GT3X+ (primary measure) and Fitbit One (secondary 
measure). The Actigraph GT3X+ is a valid and reliable measure 
of PA among adults46,47 and thus provided primary measures of 
PA change from the baseline week to Week 6. The Fitbit One’s 
technology allowed collection of additional days of PA mea- 
surement throughout the entire study period (up to 49 days). A 
study aim was to test the feasibility of the Fitbit One as a daily 
measure of PA without limitations in the number of days. A 
priori power and sample size estimates were calculated to 
compare likely differences in change in steps (primary outcome) 
between study groups. We hypothesized that SMS-based PA 
prompts plus the Fitbit One would show a greater increase in PA 
levels than the Fitbit One alone at 6-week follow-up. 
Materials and Methods 
STUDY DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS 
A two-group design was used to test the effects of daily text 
messaging as simple prompts to increase PA in a sample of 
overweight and obese adults (Fig. 1). Initial eligibility criteria 
were screened over the telephone and included being a non- 
smoker, 18–69 years old, overweight or obese (body mass 
index [BMI] ‡25 kg/m2), not meeting recommended levels of 
PA (<150 min/week of MVPA),48 ability to safely increase PA, 
component to promote PA have reported higher levels at follow- 
up compared with their respective comparison groups,28–35 with 
a few showing no improvement.36–38 It is unclear, however, 
whether these study effects were associated with the content 
(and/or intensity) of the text messages or simply because par- 
ticipants were responding to behavioral cues39 as they received 
text messages that were reminding them to increase their activity 
levels. There is evidence that simple cues or prompts such as 
signs can be sufficient to increase the use of stairwells.40–43 We 
hypothesize that prompts delivered as text messages could be 
equally effective at increasing daily PA. 
An analysis of different behavioral strategies across 122 
dietary and PA intervention studies concluded that 
the 
greatest behavioral change effects were achieved using self- 
monitoring plus at least one other self-regulatory technique 
(i.e., intention formation, specific goal setting, review of be- 
havioral goals, and feedback on performance).44 New com- 
mercially available wearable sensors/devices with integrated 
Web sites and mobile applications (apps) such as the Fitbit(cid:2) 
One(cid:3) (Fitbit Inc., San Francisco, CA) offer a user-friendly tool 
for enhanced self-monitoring of PA (compared with tradi- 
tional recordkeeping using diaries) that can help users to de- 
ploy their self-regulatory skills. These trackers allow users to 
collect objective measures of their own PA levels with a 
wearable device/sensor (an accelerometer), upload 
these data onto a personal Web site/mobile app 
account, view daily summary data to obtain more 
detailed feedback on their PA performance, and 
set/review goals. Wearable sensors/devices like the 
Fitbit One possess the technology that allows users 
to collect and monitor large amounts of their own 
PA data. However, there is a scarcity in the pub- 
lished literature on the usability of these devices 
and their effects on increasing PA. 
The primary objective of this study was to test the 
effects on PA level of a technology-based inter- 
vention that delivered simple prompts using SMS 
text messaging in conjunction with the Fitbit One for 
self-monitoring. The study sample consisted of 
overweight and obese adults (mostly women) who 
were interested in increasing their PA.45 A secondary 
objective was to examine the usability and effects of 
a wearable device/sensor (the Fitbit One) on PA 
levels. Specifically, the 6-week study tested and 
compared the effects of daily SMS-based PA 
prompts plus self-monitoring with the Fitbit One 
(intervention group) versus self-monitoring with the 
Fitbit One only (comparison group). Outcome mea- 
sures were number of steps and minutes of PA by 



which was assessed using the Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire,49 text-messaging capabilities on a personal 
mobile phone, and meeting operation systems’ requirements 
for the Fitbit One on a personal computer. Additionally, par- 
ticipants were eligible if they indicated willingness to increase 
their PA levels within 1 month of screening. 
The study recruitment pool consisted of 177 subjects, of 
whom approximately 69% were women who had consented 
during their mammography appointments at the University of 
California at San Diego (UCSD) to be contacted for future 
research opportunities. Additionally, 19% were recruited via 
word-of-mouth and 12% from flyers that were posted 
throughout the community, including the UCSD and San 
Diego State University campuses. In total, 117 participants 
completed the initial telephone eligibility screening. The 
UCSD Institutional Review Board approved (on January 3, 
2013) the study protocol and consent, and all participants 
provided written informed consent. 

Baseline clinic visit and run-in period (prior to randomiza- 
tion). Eligible participants were inactive and overweight/obese 
adults with varying history of PA and invited to a 1-h baseline 
clinic visit at UCSD Moores Cancer Center. The visit included a 
baseline questionnaire and measure of height (Seca(cid:2) [Chino, 
CA] stadiometer) and weight (Scale-Tronix [White Plains, NY] 
medical scale) to verify self-reported height and weight taken at 
telephone screening. To set the PA agenda for all participants, 
study personnel provided participants with a brief 5-min in- 
tervention to review motivation, set goals (i.e., toward 10,000 
steps/day), and plan for challenging situations. They also pro- 
vided print materials from the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for 
Americans).48 Participants were randomized to one of two study 
groups: Fitbit One alone or Fitbit One plus SMS text messaging. 
Study personnel demonstrated how to wear the Actigraph 
GT3X+ (on an elastic belt clipped at the hip) and Fitbit One 
(clipped at the pocket, hip, or bra), as well as other functions of 
the Fitbit One (e.g., charging the tracker, wirelessly uploading 
data, and navigating the Fitbit Web site and/or app). They also 
demonstrated how to access personal Fitbit accounts for daily 
summaries of PA levels (i.e., steps, minutes of PA by ‘‘lightly 
active,’’ ‘‘fairly active,’’ and ‘‘very active’’ minutes) and high- 
lighted the importance of charging and uploading the tracker 
almost every day to minimize missing data. Participants wore 
the Actigraph GT3X+ and Fitbit One devices concurrently for 
7 days to assess baseline PA levels and to demonstrate their 
ability to use the Fitbit One. A ‘‘valid’’ day of measure was 
defined as wearing both devices concurrently for a minimum 
of 600 min/day. Only those who provided at least 5 valid days 
with at least 1 weekend day from both devices met the eligi- 
bility criteria for randomization. 
Intervention group: self-monitoring with Fitbit One plus SMS text- 
messaging prompts. Intervention participants were asked to 
indicate three preferred times of the day to receive text mes- 
sage prompts to engage in PA. The study used a commercial 
text-messaging Web site (EzTexting.com) to program auto- 
matic delivery of messages according to participants’ pre- 
specified times. Participants were asked to contact the study if 
they wanted to change their schedules. Messages were limited 
to 150 characters, typically stated the time of delivery, and 
prompted participants to do PA (Example: ‘‘Good morning 
[name]! This is your 9AM reminder to do at least a 10-minute 
bout of moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity.’’). In 
total, 42 text messages were delivered sequentially, in which 
three messages were delivered every day within a 14-day 
cycle, and this pattern was repeated every 2 weeks throughout 
the 6-week study period. All participants were asked to con- 
tinue wearing the Fitbit One tracker and upload data every day 
for the duration of the study. 

self-monitoring with Fitbit One only. 
Participants who were randomly assigned to the comparison 
group were also asked to continue wearing the Fitbit One 
tracker and upload data every day for the duration of the study. 

PA assessments: Actigraph GT3X+ and Fitbit One. This study 
objectively measured PA using two types of triaxial accel- 
erometers: (1) the Actigraph GT3X + , a well-validated as- 
sessment tool46,47 that does not provide feedback to the 
individual, and (2) the Fitbit One, a more recent assessment 
tool that has not been well validated but does provide feed- 
back on both the tracker and Web site/mobile app. The com- 
parative validity of the Fitbit One measure will be addressed in 
a separate article. In this study, we examined number of steps 
(primary outcome) and minutes of PA by intensity levels. 
Actigraph GT3X + . The maximum recording time of an Ac- 
tigraph GT3X+ accelerometer is approximately 19 days before 
it needs to be returned to the study site for recharging. There- 
fore we provided participants with these accelerometers to wear 
for two weekly periods: at baseline (Week 0) and at the end of 
the intervention (Week 6). A minimum of 600 min/day was 
used as the cutoff for a valid day of measurement.50 Data were 
processed using ActiLife version 6.10 software (Actigraph) 
(using Troiano default settings50) for nonwear bouts, spike 



tolerance, and days with less than 600 min of measurement. 
Changes from baseline to Week 6 were calculated for steps per 
week and minutes per week of MVPA and total PA. 
Fitbit One. The Fitbit One accelerometer can be recharged 
by participants using a USB cable, and it also wirelessly 
uploads data to the participant’s personal computers or 
mobile devices. An initial validation report on Fitbit One 
(based on treadmill PA) has been published.51 The Fitbit of- 
fers an added advantage to the Actigraph GT3X+ in that it 
can provide continuous measurement of PA across the entire 
study period. As this is a relatively novel device, one of our 
study aims focused on the usability of the Fitbit One as a self- 
monitoring system. Fitbit One measures of steps, fairly/very 
active minutes, and total active minutes were collected for 
Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
Study personnel accessed participants’ Fitbit.com accounts 
(with consent) and recorded daily summary data. They were 
trained to identify days with nontypical wear patterns by vi- 
sually scanning Fitbit graphs and flagging wear periods of 
zero movement for 4 or more h. These days were marked as 
‘‘nontypical’’ to suggest that the tracker may not have been 
consistently worn throughout the day and/or data were not 
recorded possibly due to a depleted battery. The number of 
such nontypical days, however, was rare, particularly during 
baseline and follow-up weeks, and ranged from 5% to 9% of 
all observation points for all participants across all days for 5 
weeks. Nonetheless, these days were excluded in the final 
analysis of daily Fitbit One data. 
Baseline questionnaire. Participants completed a brief self- 
administered questionnaire during the baseline clinic visit 
that included items on demographics (i.e., age, sex, race, and 
education), text-messaging use, previous Web and/or app use 
for PA, personal and environmental factors associated with 
PA including motivation, and attitudes pertaining to self- 
monitoring and text messaging. Participants were also asked 
to rate on a 4-point scale (from ‘‘Very Confident’’ to ‘‘Not at All 
Confident’’) their answers to the question ‘‘How confident are 
you in your ability to increase your current physical activity 
levels to 150 min/wk of moderate-to-vigorous intensity 
physical activity in the next 6 weeks?’’ Three items with 
Likert-type responses were used to calculate a composite 
index score to assess baseline text-messaging use: (1) number 
of days used in a typical week, (2) average number of messages 
received per day, and (3) average number of messages sent per 
day. Participants’ scores were categorized around the median 
split to determine whether their baseline text-messaging use 
was ‘‘frequent’’ or ‘‘infrequent.’’ 
Follow-up questionnaire items. Participants were asked to 
complete a 5–10-min telephone questionnaire at follow-up 
that assessed attitudes/behaviors pertaining to each inter- 
vention component (i.e., Fitbit tracker, Web site, and/or text 
messages). Participants were asked to rate on a 5-point scale 
from ‘‘Very Often’’ to ‘‘Never’’: ‘‘On a typical day, I checked the 
Fitbit tracker to see (a) how many steps I’ve taken (b) how 
much distance I’ve travelled and (c) if the flower grew taller 
(for intensity).’’ They were also asked ‘‘In a typical week, I 
logged onto my Fitbit account.’’ and to rate their response on 
a 5-point scale from ‘‘Everyday’’ to ‘‘Never.’’ Items on text 
messaging included ‘‘The three daily text messages that 
prompted me to be physically active were.’’ with responses 
on a 3-point scale of ‘‘Too many’’ to ‘‘Too few,’’ as well as an 
open-ended item, ‘‘Please describe in your own words how the 
text messages were useful or not useful in increasing your 
physical activity levels.’’ 

Power and sample size estimates were calculated a priori to 
test the primary hypothesis that the group provided with the 
Fitbit One plus SMS-based PA prompts would have a greater 
increase in number of steps at follow-up than the group pro- 
vided the Fitbit One only. From the literature52–55 we assumed 
that the combined intervention effect on the standardized mean 
difference in steps would be at least 17% higher at follow-up 
than for the Fitbit only group. We assessed power at 80% with 
an alpha level of 0.05 for a two-sided two-sample t test. Al- 
lowing for 10% attrition, these calculations required us to en- 
roll a minimum of 54 participants in the study. 

A study personnel member who was not involved in 
baseline clinic visits used a permuted-block randomization 
procedure to allocate participants into study groups. Parti- 
cipants were contacted by e-mail to notify them of their 
group assignments. 

To assess if baseline demographic and lifestyle factors were 
comparable between randomized groups, we applied two- 
sided t tests for continuous variables (i.e., age, BMI, PA levels 
defined as steps and minutes by intensity level measured by 
the Actigraph GT3X+) and chi-squared tests for categorical 
variables (i.e., sex, education, race/ethnicity, text-messaging 
use, previous Web and/or app use for PA). A mixed-model 
repeated-measures analysis56 was conducted to test and 
compare PA effects between intervention and comparison 
groups. An important advantage of this modeling paradigm is 


that subjects with partially missing data can still be included 
in the models, thus potentially avoiding selection biases that 
would result from including only subjects with complete data 
(i.e., all 7 days of Actigraph GT3X+) (see Cnaan et al.56 and 
Holzapfel et al.57). The outcome in the models was daily es- 
timates of PA from the Actigraph GT3X+ at pre- (baseline), 
and postintervention (6-week follow-up) with up to seven 
measures per time point. A random subject-specific intercept 
was included to model between-subject variability, and fixed 
effects were time (i.e., pre- and postintervention), group, and 
the group by time interactions. A statistically significant 
group by time interaction indicated whether pre- to post- 
intervention changes in PA differed by study groups. All an- 
alyses were adjusted for daily wear-time minutes of the 
accelerometer. Mixed-models were for three outcomes: (a) 
steps (b) minutes of MVPA, and (c) minutes of total PA. Ad- 
herence to modeling assumptions was tested using residual 
plots (e.g., Q-Q plots to examine if residuals followed a 
Gaussian distribution). 
To examine trajectories of activity over the 6-week period, 
mixed-model repeated-measure analysis were conducted for 
Fitbit One measures of PA levels at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 
for (a) steps, (b) minutes of fairly/very active minutes, and (c) 
minutes of total active minutes. These analyses were also 
adjusted for wear-time minutes. All reported p values were 
considered statistically significant at an alpha level of < 0.05. 
Analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.3 software 
(SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). 
Results 
STUDY SAMPLE 
In total, 67 participants were randomized from January 
2013 to January 2014 (see Fig. 1 for the CONSORT partici- 
pant flow). Thirty-three participants were allocated to the 
SMS-based intervention group and 34 in the comparison 
group. Two participants were lost to follow-up in each study 
group. Additionally, two comparison participants indicated 
they were too busy and withdrew from the study within 1 
week of randomization. All results were based on an intent- 
to-treat analysis and included all 67 subjects in the mixed 
models. 
The study sample was 91% female, 61% college graduates, 
and 67% non-Hispanic white, with a mean (standard devi- 
ation) age of 48.2 (11.7) years (range, 19–66 years) and a BMI 
of 31.0 (3.7) kg/m2; 49% were overweight (BMI 25–29 kg/ 
m2), and 51% were obese (BMI ‡30 kg/m2) (Table 1). At 
baseline, 50% reported that they frequently used SMS text 
messaging. Thirty-nine percent reported previously using a 
Web and/or mobile app for PA. Randomization achieved 

Data are mean (standard deviation) values or percentages. 
aA three-item composite index score assessed ‘‘frequent’’ and ‘‘infrequent’’ text- 
messaging use: (1) number of days text messaging used in a typical week, (2) 
average number of text messages received per day, and (3) average number of 
text messages sent per day. 
bPrevious Web and/or application (app) use specifically to monitor physical 
activity (PA). 
cChi-squared or t tests, alpha level p < 0.05. 
BMI, body mass index. 



INTERVENTION 
(N = 33) 
COMPARISON 
(N = 34) 














































































































comparable study groups except for baseline confidence 
level in meeting recommended MVPA by the end of the study 
period. Baseline PA levels indicated significant group dif- 
ferences in steps ( p = 0.05) and MVPA ( p = 0.04) between 
those who were ‘‘Very Confident’’ versus ‘‘Confident’’ or 
‘‘Somewhat Confident’’ 
(data not shown). Accordingly, 
overall and stratified analyses by baseline confidence level 
were conducted using the primary PA data. 
ACTIGRAPH GT3X + : PA CHANGE FROM BASELINE 
TO WEEK 6 
Primary assessment of PA was measured using the Ac- 
tigraph GT3X+ at baseline (Week 0) and 6-week follow-up. 
Device wear times were comparable across assessment pe- 
riods and group, which suggests results were not skewed by 
more or less PA that was collected depending on the 
amount of time devices were worn: baseline medians were 7 
days (range, 5–7 days) and 843.8 min/day (range, 601.0– 
1,178.3 min/day), and 6-week follow-up medians were 7 
days (range, 5–7 days) and 872.5 min/day (range, 607.3– 
1,110.3 min/day) (Table 2). There were no between-group 
differences in changes for steps or minutes of PA by in- 
tensity level (group by time interactions, p > 0.1). However, 
there was a significant within-group increase of +4.3 (stan- 
dard error [SE] = 2.0) min/week of MVPA from baseline to 
Week 6 ( p = 0.04) in the comparison group. 
A significant difference in baseline confidence levels in 
achieving PA goals suggested the need for stratified ana- 
lyses. In the overall analyses, three-way interaction terms 
were tested in each model that included baseline confidence 
level (group by time by baseline confidence level) and were 
not significant for any of the outcomes. Nonetheless, we 
conducted stratified analyses by baseline confidence level, 

and the results indicated no between-group differences 
(group by time interactions, p ‡ 0.2) (data not shown). In 
summary, 
that participants in the 
comparison group achieved a small increase in MVPA at 6- 
week follow-up (within-group difference from baseline to 
Week 6) and that baseline confidence level did not mod- 
erate this effect. 
FITBIT ONE: PA LEVELS AT BASELINE 
AND WEEKS, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, AND 6 
Fitbit One measures of PA were collected at baseline (Week 
0) and Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 (Fig. 2). When comparing the 
pattern of PA over the 6-week period, there were statistically 
significant group by time interactions for (a) steps ( p = 0.02), 
(b) fairly/very active minutes ( p < 0.001), and (c) total active 
minutes ( p = 0.04), with the intervention group having on 
average higher activity levels over the 6 weeks compared with 
the comparison group. 
To further investigate the intervention effects across time, 
group differences in PA were examined at each week com- 
pared with baseline in the mixed models: group by time in- 
teractions indicated significant between-group differences 
in PA change from baseline to week 1 for steps ( p = 0.01), 
fairly/very active minutes ( p < 0.01), and total active min- 
utes ( p = 0.02). These PA changes, however, were short term 
and not maintained through Weeks 2–6. In a further exam- 
ination of these results within each study group, at Week 
1, 
the intervention participants significantly increased 
their steps by +1,266 (SE = 491; p = 0.01), fairly/very active 
minutes/week by +17.8 (SE = 8.5; p = 0.04), and total active 
minutes/week by +38.3 (SE = 15.9; p = 0.02) (Fig. 2). During 
the same period, 
there were no significant changes in 
PA levels in the comparison group: steps, -48 (SE = 240, 
Table 2. Change in Physical Activity Levels Measured by Actigraph GT3X+ from Baseline to 6-Week Follow-Up, 
Adjusted for Wear Time 
Data are mean (standard error) values. 
aMixed-model repeated-measures (group by time), alpha level p < 0.05. 
bMixed-model repeated-measures three-way interactions (group by time by baseline confidence) for steps: p = 0.63; moderate to vigorous physical activity (PA), p = 0.60; 
all intensity PA, p = 0.67. 
cSignificant, within-group increase, p = 0.04. 


































with a Fitbit One device were not able to achieve 
sustained (i.e., 6-week) PA change. 
Instead, 
Fitbit One alone may help to increase MVPA at 6 
weeks in overweight and obese adults. However, 
further research is needed with larger sample 
sizes and longer study periods to elucidate these 
findings. 
FOLLOW-UP ATTITUDES AND BEHAVIORS 
ON THE FITBIT ONE 
AND SMS PA PROMPTS 
At follow-up, a greater proportion of com- 
parison (versus intervention) participants re- 
ported that, on a typical day, they viewed their 
Fitbit trackers ‘‘Very Often’’ or ‘‘Often’’ for steps 
(90% versus 71%) and distance (70% versus 
55%). Those who self-reported that they fre- 
quently viewed their tracker were associated with 
greater increases in PA (even more so compared 
with the Web site). In the intervention group, 
approximately half indicated that the three daily 
text messages were ‘‘Too Many.’’ Additionally, in 
an open-ended question about the text-messaging 
intervention, a common response among partici- 
pants was that they had stopped reading them 
altogether when they noticed that the messages 
were ‘‘automated.’’ Other notable phrases were 
that the messages were ‘‘inconvenient,’’ ‘‘annoy- 
ing,’’ and ‘‘impersonal.’’ 

Fig. 2. Weekly physical activity levels measured by the Fitbit One from baseline 
(Week 0) to Week 6, adjusted for baseline wear time: (A) number of steps, (B) fairly 
active and very active minutes, and (C) total active minutes. Group by time inter- 
actions were significant for steps ( p = 0.02), fairly/very active minutes ( p < 0.001), 
and total active miutes ( p = 0.04). Cntl, control; Intv, intervention. 
p = 0.84); fairly/very active minutes/week, +2.3 (SE = 4.1, 
p = 0.57); and total active minutes/week, -6.7 (SE = 11.7, 
p = 0.55) (Table 3). 
In summary, these data suggest that the Fitbit One (com- 
parison group) was able to achieve a small within-group in- 
crease in MVPA at the 6-week follow-up among a sample of 
overweight and obese adults. This small within-group effect 
was significant in the Actigraph GT3X+ measures of PA. In the 
present study, it was feasible to collect daily objective mea- 
sures of PA using the Fitbit One for up to 49 days throughout 
the study period. Analyses of these data suggest that a com- 
bination of daily SMS-based PA prompts and the Fitbit One 
(intervention group) increased PA levels for steps and minutes 
of PA by intensity, although only for a short-term period of 1 
week. Therefore, daily SMS-based PA prompts in combination 
This study focused on a technology-based 
intervention to increase PA in a sample con- 
sisting mostly of inactive and overweight/obese 
women. Providing a technology-based self-monitoring device 
(Fitbit One) led to a small and statistically significant (within- 
group) increase in MVPA (in minutes/week) from baseline to 
Week 6. The intervention group included three daily SMS- 
based prompts to undertake PA, which were associated with 
increased PA over the first week, but this effect was lost by 
Week 2 of the 6-week intervention. 

Results from the follow-up questionnaire indicated that 
participants in the comparison group, compared with the in- 
tervention group, was more engaged in using the Fitbit 
tracker, which might help to explain their small increase 
in MVPA at follow-up. These findings support several stud- 
ies that have shown a positive association between self- 



Table 3. Summary of Changes in Physical Activity Levels Measured Using the Actigraph GT3X+ and Fitbit One 
from Baseline to Week 1 (Short-Term Effect) and Baseline to 6-Week Follow-Up, Adjusted for Wear Time 
aMixed-model repeated-measures (group by time), alpha level p < 0.05, adjusted for baseline wear time (in minutes/week). 
bBetween-group significance. 
cWithin-group significance ( p = 0.04). 
FA + VA, fairly active + very active; FB, Fitbit One; MVPA, moderate- to vigorous-intensity physical activity; PA, physical activity. 
monitoring and PA change.58–62 In the present study, the 
Fitbit tracker allowed participants to access quick readings 
of their PA performance throughout the day. It is unclear as 
to why comparison participants were more engaged com- 
pared with those in the intervention. A possible explanation 
might be that, although the randomization procedure 
achieved group comparability on most variables, there was a 
difference in baseline confidence level in their ability to 
increase PA. Therefore, it is possible that the comparison 
group had higher baseline confidence or self-efficacy to 
increase their PA levels.63 However, further analyses also 
indicated that this small 
increase in MVPA within the 
comparison group was probably not moderated by baseline 
confidence. 
Another possible explanation for the higher level of en- 
gagement in the comparison group might be that, because 
they only had the Fitbit One, they relied solely on that device. 
In contrast, the intervention group also received daily SMS- 
based prompts, which at follow-up they indicated were too 
frequent and automated. Thus, the text messages could have 
distracted them from further engagement in the study. It is 
important to note that, although the improvement in MVPA 
was significant in the comparison group, the effect was small 
and not accompanied by an increase in daily steps. Therefore, 
these findings need to be replicated before we can consider 
them as evidence to support that simply providing a wearable 
sensor/sensor for self-monitoring would be sufficient to in- 
crease PA in inactive overweight/obese adults. 

In this study, adding automated daily text messages as 
simple prompts for PA was not associated with increased PA at 
follow-up. However, using the Fitbit data, we were able to 
analyze change throughout the study period. During the first 
week, there was a significant increase in PA, which suggests 
these messages were able to serve as cues (or reminders); 
however, this effect was not maintained by the second week 
and into the remainder of the study. Indeed, many participants 
reported that they quickly stopped reading the daily texts 
when they discovered that the messages were not tailored to 
their performance. In addition, three messages a day as re- 
minder messages were perceived too frequent to be helpful. 
Clearly, these SMS-based prompts were not effective in mo- 
tivating change in PA levels for more than the first week. 
Previous studies have used more intensive messaging 
strategies than simple prompts to promote PA.28,30–35 A 9- 
week study used automated messages to help participants 
identify/reduce barriers and identify motivating benefits.29 
However, this more intensive messaging intervention reported 
similar results to the present study—an increase in MVPA that 



TEXTS + FB 
(INTERVENTION) 
FB ONLY 
(COMPARISON) 

TEXTS + FB 
(INTERVENTION) 
FB ONLY 
(COMPARISON) 
















































was not maintained after the first week (assessed using a wrist- 
worn accelerometer).29 The similarity in results between the 
two studies suggests that it might be the automated nature of 
text messaging rather than the content and/or frequency of 
messages associated with the studies’ inability to maintain 
study effects for longer than a week. In the present study, it is 
possible that participants no longer felt accountable once they 
realized that the text messages were automated, which might 
explain the loss of PA effects. Other studies have reported 
longer-term effects but did not include objective measures of 
PA32,34,35; self-reported measures can easily be biased in 
many trial settings. In future studies, we recommend reducing 
the frequency of messages if they are used as basic cues/ 
prompts. However, in order for these cues to be motivational, 
the messages might need to include some level of individually 
tailored (and/or adaptive) feedback on PA performance. For 
example, wearable sensors/devices like the Fibit One could 
include push notifications with PA feedback to cue users to 
increase their PA levels. 

The study sample consisted of overweight and obese adults, 
mostly women who were participating in breast cancer 
screening within a clinic in a tertiary teaching hospital and 
indicated an interest in a PA study. Therefore, generalizability 
of these results is limited. This intervention might have had 
better success with a sample of adults that was more repre- 
sentative of the general population and among those with 
higher motivation to increase their PA levels. Participants 
were asked to concurrently wear the Actigraph GT3X+ and 
Fitbit One at baseline. Therefore, participants were inadver- 
tently exposed to some PA intervention with the Fitbit One 
during baseline measure of PA and prior to the start of the 
study, which could have diminished the effects of either the 
Fitbit One and/or text messaging. A strength of this study was 
the use of the Actigraph GT3X + , which is a valid and reliable 
measure of PA.46,47 A validation study has compared Fitbit One 
measures with the Actigraph GT3X+ for steps that were taken 
on a treadmill,51 and validation in a real-world setting is cur- 
rently underway. More generally, improvements are needed in 
these technologies for more accurate measures across an array 
of activities beyond steps (e.g., cycling and swimming). 

Results from this study suggest that simply providing a 
wearable sensor/device for self-monitoring of PA was insuf- 
ficient in achieving increases in target PA levels in a sample of 
overweight and obese adults consisting mostly of women. 
Future studies on wearable sensors/devices may require closer 
examination of engagement levels with the technology and 
level of help needed to achieve target PA levels. The addition 
of daily automated text messages as simple reminders in 
conjunction with the wearable sensor/device did not help to 
increase PA levels. These data suggest that text-messaging 
interventions 
likely require more individualized and/or 
adaptive strategies such as feedback on PA performance. More 
research is needed to investigate an optimal intervention 
package that feature wearable sensors/devices to effectively 
promote PA change. Text messages (or even push notifications 
via mobile apps) may be part of such an intervention, but 
results from this study suggest that messages should be more 
responsive to participants’ individual PA performance. 

This research was supported by a gift from the Carol Vas- 
siliadis family and in part by grant CA-113710 from the Na- 
tional Cancer Institute. The study would like to acknowledge 
UCSD undergraduate interns Quynh Nguyen and Amy Nham 
for their assistance in study implementation. 



1. Bassuk SS, Manson JE. Epidemiological evidence for the role of physical activity 
in reducing risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. J Appl Physiol 
2005;99:1193–1204. 
2. Eheman C, Henley SJ, Ballard-Barbash R, et al. Annual Report to the Nation on 
the status of cancer, 1975–2008, featuring cancers associated with excess 
weight and lack of sufficient physical activity. Cancer 2012;118:2338–2366. 









activity in the United States measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2008;40:181–188. 


Jakicic JM, Marcus BH, Lang W, Janney C. Effect of exercise on 24-month 
weight loss maintenance in overweight women. Arch Intern Med 
2008;168:1550–1559; discussion 1559–1560. 
Irwin ML, Alvarez-Reeves M, Cadmus L, et al. Exercise improves body fat, lean 
mass, and bone mass in breast cancer survivors. Obesity 2009;17:1534–1541. 
10. Rock CL, Flatt SW, Sherwood NE, Karanja N, Pakiz B, Thomson CA. Effect of a 
free prepared meal and incentivized weight loss program on weight loss and 
weight loss maintenance in obese and overweight women: A randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA 2010;304:1803–1810. 
11. Pierce JP, Natarajan L, Caan BJ, et al. Influence of a diet very high in vegetables, 
fruit, and fiber and low in fat on prognosis following treatment for breast 
cancer: The Women’s Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL) randomized trial. JAMA 
2007;298:289–298. 



12. Norman GJ, Zabinski MF, Adams MA, Rosenberg DE, Yaroch AL, Atienza AA. 
A review of eHealth interventions for physical activity and dietary behavior 
change. Am J Prev Med 2007;33:336–345. 

Available at http://www.nielsen.com/content/dam/corporate/uk/en/documents/ 
Mobile-Consumer-Report-2013.pdf (last accessed May 1, 2014). 
14. Fjeldsoe BS, Marshall AL, Miller YD. Behavior change interventions delivered by 
mobile telephone short-message service. Am J Prev Med 2009;36:165–173. 
15. Cole-Lewis H, Kershaw T. Text-messaging as a tool for behavior change in 
disease prevention and management. Epidemiol Rev 2010;32:56–69. 
16. Hanauer DA, Wentzell K, Laffel N, Laffel LM. Computerized Automated Prompt 
Diabetes System (CARDS): E-mail and SMS cell phone text-messaging prompts 
to support diabetes management. Diabetes Technol Ther 2009;11:99–106. 
17. Franklin V, Waller A, Pagliari C, Greene S. ‘‘Sweet Talk’’: Text-messaging support 
for intensive insulin therapy for young people with diabetes. Diabetes Technol 
Ther 2003;5:991–996. 
Short-term results of a randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 
2014;16:e77. 
34. Fjeldsoe BS, Miller YD, Marshall AL. MobileMums: A randomized controlled trial of 
an SMS-based physical activity intervention. Ann Behav Med 2010;39:101–111. 
35. King AC, Ahn DK, Oliveira BM, Atienza AA, Castro CM, Gardner CD. Promoting 
physical activity through hand-held computer technology. Am J Prev Med 
2008;34:138–142. 
36. Haapala I, Barengo NC, Biggs S, Surakka L, Manninen P. Weight loss by mobile 
phone: A 1-year effectiveness study. Public Health Nutr 2009;12:2382–2391. 
37. Nguyen HQ, Gill DP, Wolpin S, Steele BG, Benditt JO. Pilot study of a cell phone- 
based exercise persistence intervention post-rehabilitation for COPD. Int J 
Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2009;4:301–313. 
38. Gasser R, Brodbeck D, Degen M, Luthiger J, Wyss R, Reichlin S. Persuasiveness 
of a mobile lifestyle coaching application using social facilitation. In: IJsselsteijn 
WA, Kort YAW, Midden C, Eggen B, Hoven E, eds. Persuasive technology. Berlin: 
Springer, 2006:27–38. 


randomised trial of smoking cessation using mobile phone text-messaging. Tob 
Control 2005;14:255–261. 
19. Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, et al. Smoking cessation support delivered via 
mobile phone text-messaging (txt2stop): A single-blind, randomised trial. 
Lancet 2011;378:49–55. 





text-messaging is as effective in Maori as non-Maori. N Z Med J 
2005;118:U1494. 
23. Haug S, Meyer C, Schorr G, Bauer S, John U. Continuous individual support of 
smoking cessation using text-messaging: A pilot experimental study. Nicotine 
Tob Res 2009;11:915–923. 
24. Patrick K, Raab F, Adams MA, et al. A text message-based intervention for 
weight loss: Randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2009;11:e1. 
25. Gerber BS, Stolley MR, Thompson AL, Sharp LK, Fitzgibbon ML. Mobile phone 
text-messaging to promote healthy behaviors and weight loss maintenance: 
A feasibility study. Health Inform J 2009;15:17–25. 
26. Napolitano MA, Hayes S, Bennett GG, Ives AK, Foster GD. Using Facebook and 
text-messaging to deliver a weight loss program to college students. Obesity 
2013;21:25–31. 

messaging for monitoring sugar-sweetened beverages, physical activity, and 
screen time in children: A pilot study. J Nutr Educ Behav 2008;40:385–391. 
28. Cheung PP, Chow BC, Parfitt G. Using environmental stimuli in physical activity 
intervention for school teachers: A pilot study. Glob J Heal Educ Promot 
2008;11:47–56. 
29. Hurling R, Catt M, Boni MD, et al. Using internet and mobile phone technology 
to deliver an automated physical activity program: Randomized controlled trial. 
J Med Internet Res 2007;9:e7. 

intentions on exercise be enhanced using text messages? Psychol Health 
2009;24:677–687. 

messages promote brisk walking? A randomized trial. Health Psychol 
2010;29:40–49. 
32. Conroy MB, Yang K, Elci OU, et al. Physical activity self-monitoring and weight loss: 
6-month results of the SMART trial. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2011;43:1568–1574. 
33. Antypas K, Wangberg SC. An Internet- and mobile-based tailored intervention 
to enhance maintenance of physical activity after cardiac rehabilitation: 

40. Anderson RE, Franckowiak SC, Snyder J, Barlett SJ, Fontaine KR. Physical activity 
promotion by the encouraged used of stairs. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:363–369. 


42. Brownell KD, Stunkard AJ, Albaum JM. Evaluation and modification of exercise 
patters in the natural environment. Am J Psychiatry 1980;137:1540–1545. 
43. Kerr J, Eves FF, Carroll D. The influence of poster prompts on stair use: The 
effects of setting, poster size and content. Br J Health Psychol 2001;6:397– 
405. 
44. Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. Effective techniques in 
healthy eating and physical activity interventions: A meta-regression. Health 
Psychol 2009;28:690–701. 
45. Williams AD. Use of a text-messaging program to promote adherence to daily 
physical activity guidelines: A review of the literature. Bariatr Nurs Surg Patient 
Care 2012;7:13–16. 




48. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical activity guidelines for 
Americans. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
2008:21–25. 


50. Cain KL, Geremia GM. Accelerometer data collection and scoring manual for 
adult and senior studies. San Diego, CA: San Diego State University, 2012. 
Available at http://www.drjamessallis.sdsu.edu/, accessed May 1, 2014. 
51. Takacs J, Pollock CL, Guenther JR, Bahar M, Napier C, Hunt MA. Validation of the 
Fitbit One activity monitor device during treadmill walking. J Sci Med Sport 
2014;17:496–500. 
52. Friedenreich C, Woolcott C, McTiernan A, et al. Adiposity changes after a 1-year 
aerobic exercise intervention among postmenopausal women: A randomized 
controlled trial. Int J Obes 2010;35:427–435. 


54. Rogers LQ, Hopkins-Price P, Vicari S, et al. Physical activity and health outcomes 
three months after completing a physical activity behavior change intervention: 
Persistent and delayed effects. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
2009;18:1410–1418. 




56. Cnaan A, Laird NM, Slasor P. Using the general linear mixed model to analyse 
unbalanced repeated measures and longitudinal data. Stat Med 1997;16:2349– 
2380. 
57. Holzapfel C, Cresswell L, Ahern AL, et al. The challenge of a 2-year follow-up 
after intervention for weight loss in primary care. Int J Obes 2014;38:806–811. 
58. Carels RA, Darby LA, Rydin S, Douglass OM, Cacciapaglia HM, O’Brien WH. The 
relationship between self-monitoring, outcome expectancies, difficulties with 
eating and exercise, and physical activity and weight loss treatment outcomes. 
Ann Behav Med 2005;30:182–190. 
59. Gleeson-Kreig JM. Self-monitoring of physical activity: Effects on self-efficacy 
and behavior in people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educ 2006;32:69–77. 
60. Napolitano MA, Fotheringham M, Tate D, et al. Evaluation of an internet-based 
physical activity intervention: A preliminary investigation. Ann Behav Med 
2003;25:92–99. 






Address correspondence to: 
Julie B. Wang, PhD, MPH 
University of California, San Francisco 
530 Parnassus Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94143-1390 

Received: August 26, 2014 
Revised: December 4, 2014 
Accepted: December 4, 2014 


