JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61
DOI10.1007/s10840-008-9321-3
Remote monitoring of patients with biventricular
defibrillators through the CareLink system improves clinical
management of arrhythmias and heart failure episodes
Massimo Santini&Renato P. Ricci&Maurizio Lunati&
Maurizio Landolina&Giovanni B. Perego&
Maurizio Marzegalli&Milena Schirru&Chiara Belvito&
Roberto Brambilla&Giuseppe Guenzati&
Serena Gilardi&Sergio Valsecchi
Received:16July2008/Accepted:15September2008/Publishedonline:31October2008
#SpringerScience+BusinessMedia,LLC2008
Abstract Results Sixty-seven patients performed 264 data trans-
Purpose The aim of the present study is to evaluate if missions. Twenty-three unscheduled data transmissions
remote monitoring with the CareLink Network may were requested by the centers after patient contact.
improve clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and Ventricular tachyarrhythmias were reported in nine patients
heart failure episodes in patients treated with biventricular during 16 data reviews. Thirteen data reviews (81%) were
defibrillators (CRT-D). performed remotely via CareLink transmissions (nine
Methods Patients implanted with CRT-D for more than scheduled and four unscheduled), in seven patients. Of
6 months received the CareLink monitor and were trained these events, in two cases (15%) in-hospital visits were
to perform device interrogation. At-home transmissions requested, while in 11 (85%) no action was needed and no
were scheduled at 2 weeks, 1 and 2 months after training, additional in-clinic visits were scheduled. During the study
with a final in-office visit after 3 months. period, in 20/28 (71%) intra-thoracic impedance alerts, the
patients remotely transmitted their device data. After
: remote data review, in ten cases drug therapy was adjusted
M.Santini(*) R.P.Ricci
DepartmentofCardiology,SanFilippoNeriHospital, by phone and in four cases no action was needed and the
ViaMartinotti,20, patient reassured. In six episodes an in-hospital extra visit
00135Rome,Italy wasscheduled.Onthewhole,in14cases(70%),thepatient
e-mail:m.santini@rmnet.it
couldbemanagedremotelyavoiding avisittothehospital.
:
Conclusions Our study showedthat remotefollow-upisan
M.Lunati M.Schirru
NiguardaHospital, efficient method to manage tachyarrhythmias and heart
Milan,Italy failure episodes in CRT-D patients. Early reaction to
: clinical events may improve overall patient care.
M.Landolina C.Belvito
FondazionePoliclinicoS.MatteoIRCCS,
Pavia,Italy Keywords Defibrillator.Cardiacresynchronization
: therapy.Homemonitoring.Remotecontrol.Heartfailure.
G.B.Perego R.Brambilla
Tachyarrhythmias
IstitutoAuxologicoS.LucaHospital,
Milan,Italy
:
M.Marzegalli G.Guenzati
S.CarloBorromeoHospital, 1 Introduction
Milan,Italy
: Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy for the
S.Gilardi S.Valsecchi
prevention of sudden cardiac death [1–4], and cardiac
MedtronicItalia,
Rome,Italy resynchronization therapy (CRT), with or without ICD
54 JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61
capabilities [5, 6], for the treatment of heart failure have Thepatientshadtobeabletousethemonitorandhadto
been shown to be effective in improving overall survival, sign the informed consent approved by the Ethical
and are now included in current guidelines [7, 8]. This has Committees.
led to a rise in device implantation rate and to a growing Attheenrollment,abaselinevisitwasperformedandthe
demand for device follow-up. In response, several systems patients received the CareLinkmonitor and were instructed
are being introduced in Europe capable of remote device on how to use the system to perform home interrogation
monitoring. [9–11]. and transmission.
For heart failure patients, remote monitoring provides Patients completed a test transmission approximately
an alternative option to frequent in person visits and, by 2 weeks after the baseline clinic visit and training session.
the data stored in the implanted device memory, makes Subsequent data transmissions were performed 1 and
physicians early aware of issues related to device 2 months after the baseline visit. A final in-clinic visit was
function or patient clinical status. The CareLink Network scheduledapproximately3monthsafterthebaselinevisit.
(Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) has been Theclinicstaffwasaskedtoreviewtheimplanteddevice
operational in the United States since 2001 and to it has datathathadbeenremotelytransmittedfromthepatientsto
been adopted by several clinics to allow remote device the Web site.
check in defibrillator patients. The patients were instructed to contact the center either
The aim of the present study is to evaluate if remote if they had received an ICD discharge or if they had heard
monitoring with the CareLink Network may improve an audible alert or in case of symptoms. Under these
clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and acute heart circumstances, the responsible physician had to assess the
failure episodes in patients treated with CRT-D devices. patient file, to contact him by phone and he could request
additional device transmissions, unscheduled visits or
emergency room admissions.
2 Methods Inthisreportcontinuousdataareexpressedusingmeans
andstandarddeviation,andcategoricaldatainpercentages.
2.1 The system
The CareLink system includes a patient monitor plugged 3 Results
into a standard analog telephone connection, and a
lightweight wand to communicate with the implanted Sixty-seven patients implanted with a CRT-D device have
device. Interrogation of the device and transmission of the been enrolled. In Table 1 demographics and clinical
data occur when the patient places the wand over the parameters at implant have been summarized. The median
implanted device. The patient’s information is sent to a time since the implant was 11 months [range 6–20].
secure Network server via the telephone connection. It is
not possible to remotely reprogram the implanted device.
The clinical staff can review device information, on a
Table 1 Demographics and baseline clinical parameters at device
secureWebsiteviatheInternet.Availabledataareequivalent implantation
tothatwhichcanberetrievedatanin-officevisit:presenting
Patients N=67
rhythm,automaticdevicediagnosticdataandstoredepisode
electrograms.
Malegender,n(%) 58(87)
Age,years 64±9
2.2 Study design Ischemicetiology,n(%) 24(36)
Primaryprevention,n(%) 56(84)
Patients implanted with a CRT-D device according to NYHAclass 2.5±0.5
QRSduration,ms 152±32
current guidelines were eligible for the study. At the
LVejectionfraction,% 26±6
enrollment the CRT-D (InSync Sentry model 7298, Med-
LVend-diastolicvolume,ml 242±115
tronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) had to be implanted
LVend-systolicvolume,ml 170±89
from more than 6 months. These devices, in addition to LVend-diastolicdiameter,mm 69±8
standard features, are capable of continuously assessing LVend-systolicdiameter,ml 58±11
several diagnostic variables such as patient activity, mean Mitralregurgitation,grade 2.2±1.0
heart rate, heart rate variability and intra-thoracic imped- Chronicatrialfibrillation,n(%) 5(7)
Hypertension,n(%) 29(43)
ance (as a measure of fluid overload). For this latter
Chronicobstructivepulmonarydisease,n(%) 5(7)
variable, an audible alarm may be enabled to alert the
Diabetes,n(%) 8(12)
patient when a programmable threshold is crossed.
JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61 5555
Table2 Programmingofdevicefeaturesatenrollmentwithregardto sion, and cardiac symptoms leading to medical interven-
ventricular tachyarrhythmia detection and intra-thoracic impedance
tion.Duringthefollow-up,32clinicaleventswerereported
monitoring
in 29 patients.
Deviceparameters One patient died because of refractory heart failure. Six
patients had to be hospitalized because of acute heart
VFtherapyON,n(%) 67(100)
failure; furthermore four emergency room admissions and
DetectioncutoffforVF,ms 312±16
five in-hospital visits were reported.
NIDforVF:12/16,n(%) 67(100)
VTtherapyON,n(%) 30(45) Two patients underwent five hospitalizations because of
VTtherapy:CV,n(%) 3(5) tachyarrhythmias and three additional in-hospital visits
VTtherapy:ATP,n(%) 27(40) were reported during follow-up.
DetectioncutoffforVT,ms 396±22
NIDforVT:16,n(%) 47(70) 3.2 Data transmissions and reviews
NIDforVT:20,n(%) 5(8)
NIDforVT:24,n(%) 15(22)
During the evaluation, the clinics performed 32 sessions of
Intra-thoracicimpedancemonitoringON,n(%) 67(100)
remote data review. The minimum set of data analyzed by
Alertthreshold:60ohm×day(nominalvalue),n(%) 58(87)
Alertthreshold:from70to120ohm×day,n(%) 4(6) the investigators during the review sessions included the
Alertthreshold:from130to180ohm×day,n(%) 5(7) intra-cardiac electrograms collected at the time of the
interrogation, the overall summary of the device status
VFventricularfibrillation,VTventriculartachycardia,NIDnumberof
and the arrhythmic and alert episode counters, the lead
intervalstodetect,CVcardioversion,ATPantitachycardiapacing
parameters andclinical diagnostic long-term data trends. In
19ofthe32reviewsessions,1ormoretechnicalorclinical
In Table 2 the programming of device features at trigger events came up (Table 3).
enrollment is reported, with regard to ventricular tachyar- On the whole, the 67 patients performed 264 trans-
rhythmia detection and therapy, and intra-thoracic imped- missions, 23 of which were unscheduled. In all unplanned
ance monitoring. remote sessions, data transmissions were requested by the
clinical staff following symptoms or events.
3.1 Clinical events Reasons for these unplanned transmissions were as
follows: the audible alert was triggered signifying possible
Clinical events documented in the study included death, intra-thoracic fluid accumulation (n=11), a shock was
hospitalizationforcardiacreasons,emergencyroomadmis- delivered by the device (n=3), patients reported symptoms
Table3 Deviceandpatientrelatedobservationsrecordedduringfollow-upwithscheduledandunscheduleddatareviews
Events/patients Description Management/outcome
Devicemanagement
6observationsin6patients Pacingparameterstobemodified Thereprogrammingwasjudgedasnon-urgentanddeferredto
Activationofrateresponse theupcomingin-hospitalvisit.
OptimizationofA-Vdelays
Arrhythmicepisodes
16interrogationswithepisodes Ventriculartachycardiaandfibrillation Afterremotedatareview(13events)
detectedin9patients detectedbytheICD In-hospitalvisitswererequired(2events)
Noactionsneeded(11events)ERadmissionswithoutdata
transmission(3events)for
Arrhythmicstorms(2eventsin1patient)
Ventricularfibrillationwithmultipleshocks(1event)
1episodein1patient Symptomaticatrialfibrillation Anin-hospitalvisitwasrequiredafterdatareview
Devicealerts
28alertsin23patients Decreaseinintra-thoracicimpedance Afterremotedatareview(20episodes)
In-hospitalvisitswererequired(6episodes)
Telephoneassessmentwithdrugtherapyadjustment(10
episodes)
Noactionsneeded(4episodes)
In-hospitalvisitswithoutdatatransmission(8episodes):
ERadmissions(5episodes)
Outpatients’visits(3episode)
56 JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61
of worsening heart failure or palpitations (n=2), patients In Fig. 1, an episode of fast ventricular tachycardia
requested to reassess the stored data after a previous appropriately detected and interrupted by shock delivery is
episode of decompensation or arrhythmia (n=7). reported. After a phone contact to verify the appropriate-
ness of drug therapy and the general status, the patient was
3.3 Device issues reassured and no further action was planned.
Inonepatient,anepisodeofparoxysmal2:1atrialflutter
During the study no device related adverse event occurred. was detected and remotely reviewed, as shown in the
In addition, there was no need to schedule any additional Fig. 2. After data remote reviewing, the patient was called
follow-up in order to reprogram the device. back to the hospital for an extra visit. Antiarrhythmic drug
therapy was modified.
3.4 Tachyarrhythmia episodes
3.5 Heart failure alerts
Previously undetected ventricular tachyarrhythmias were
reported in nine patients during 16 data reviews. Of the 16 During the study, 22 episodes of worsening heart failure
data reviews, three were performed in hospital since two with signs of impending pulmonary congestion occurred in
patients experienced three emergency room admissions for 19 patients (28%). Of these, 20 were associated with a
arrhythmic storm in one case and for multiple shocks decrease in intra-thoracic impedance based on the diagnos-
delivered on an episode of ventricular fibrillation in the tic data in the device and communicated via audible alert.
other. In these two patients no pre-admission remote data Onthewhole28alertsforpossiblefluidaccumulationwere
reviewwasperformed.Theremaining13datareviewswere triggered, of which eight were judged to be false positive.
performed remotely via CareLink transmissions (nine Device alerts were defined as false positive in the absence
scheduled, four unscheduled), in seven patients. Of these of an episode of heart failure decompensation diagnosed
events, in two cases (15%) in-hospital visits were within 2 weeks after initial alert. According to these data,
requested, while in 11 (85%) no action was needed and the sensitivity of OptiVol Alert was 91% and the positive
no additional in-clinic visits were scheduled. predictive value was 71%.
Fig. 1 Diagnostic data (atrial and ventricular electrograms and investigator to verify the appropriateness of the device programming
interval plots) pertaining to the episode of ventricular arrhythmia intermsoftachycardiadetectionandtherapy.Afteraphonecontactto
occurred in a patient (male, 61 years, ischemic cardiomyopathy, verifytheadequacyofthedrugtherapyandtoreassurethepatient,no
NYHAClassIII,ejectionfraction28%,QRSwidth150ms)reviewed furthervisitswerescheduled
via unscheduled remote transmission. These data allowed the
JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61 5577
Fig.2 Thepatient(male,70years,dilatedcardiomyopathy,NYHAClass requested and the 10 s atrial and ventricular electrogram captured at
II, ejection fraction 35%, QRS width 160 ms) called the center for interrogationshowedtheoccurrenceofanongoingepisodeofparoxysmal
worseningofsymptomsandpalpitations.Anextradatatransmissionwas 2:1atrialflutter.Anextrain-hospitalvisitwasperformed
Among the 28 intra-thoracic impedance alerts, in 20 the increased mean heart rate. Diuretic dosage was adapted by
patients remotely transmitted their device data, which phone and the benefits of modified therapy could be
allowedtheaccesstomoreinformationinordertoevaluate evaluated after 1 week by a new remote transmission.
their clinical condition. In ten cases drug therapy was
adjusted by phone, in four cases no action was needed and
the patient reassured, while in six episodes an in-hospital 4 Discussion
extra visit was scheduled. On the whole, in 14 cases, the
patient could be managed remotely avoiding a visit to the The present study demonstrates that in patients implanted
hospital. with a CRT-D device atrial and ventricular tachyarrhyth-
In eight cases, the patients went directly to the hospital miasandheartfailureepisodesmaybeeffectivelymanaged
without transmitting their device data to the clinic either to by the CareLink Network system for remote follow-up.
the Emergency Department (five cases) or to the outpatient The CareLink performs full interrogation and transmis-
clinic (three cases). sion of device data. The intra-cardiac electrograms collect-
In Fig. 3(a) case report of a patient remotely managed ed at the time of the interrogation, the overall summary of
afteranintra-thoracicimpedancealertisreported.Thefluid the device status and the counters of arrhythmic and alert
index alert was associated with reduced daily activity and episodes, the trends of lead parameters and the long-term
58 JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61
Fig. 3 The patient (male,
65years,dilatedcardiomyopathy,
NYHAClassII,ejectionfraction
23%,QRSwidth160ms)heard
thealertandcontactedthecenter.
Anextratransmissionwas
requestedandadecreaseofintra-
thoracicimpedance(a)with
increaseofthe“FluidIndex”
abovethealertthreshold(b)was
verifiedviaremotedatareview,
togetherwithareductionofthe
patientdailyactivity(c).Atthe
telephonefollow-up,thepatient
reportedtheworseningofheart
failuresymptoms.Theincreaseof
diureticsdosagewasprescribed
andanextradatatransmission
wasscheduledafter1week.This
subsequentassessmentdemon-
stratedanongoingincreaseof
impedanceanddailyactivity(d)
thatwasaccompaniedbythe
remissionofpatientsymptoms
trends of clinical diagnostics may be reviewed remotely. A major objective for device follow-up is to ensure
Available information is not different from that retrieved at proper sensing, classification, and therapy of any tachycar-
anin-officevisit.Themainadvantageisrepresentedbythe dia episodes. The electrograms stored in the ICD memory
possibilityofearlyreactiontopatientsymptomsanddevice represent the most useful tool to evaluate appropriate
alertswithoutwaitingforthepatientcomingtothehospital detectionandtreatmentofatrialandventriculararrhythmias
either for scheduled or unscheduled follow-ups. [12, 13]. With remote monitoring systems the electrograms
Lazarus [10] showed a high number of device and can be retrieved remotely [9, 14, 15].
clinical observations recorded in the subgroup of his CRT- In our experience, the majority of cases of ventricular
D patients. Similarly, we noticed many events during arrhythmia episodes were managed remotely without
scheduled and extra transmissions. In particular, the scheduling additional visits, confirming that a large
overwhelming majority of episodes and alerts were dis- proportion of post-shock interrogations do not require
ease-related: ventricular arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation, and any device reprogramming, as we previously observed
heart failure related events. [16].
JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61 5599
In one patient we recorded the occurrence of an episode Moreover,patientsmightnotrespondorheartheaudible
of symptomatic paroxysmal atrial flutter that triggered an impedancealert,asrecentlyreported[21].Thus,automated
extra transmission and the prompt adjustment of the telemetric transmission of alerts to the physician may
therapy. shorten the delay between alert and therapy initiation,
Early detection of atrial tachyarrhythmias may facilitate further improving the clinical outcome.
the timely introduction of protective interventions against Althoughwetestedremotefollow-uponlyinstableCRT
thromboembolic events, limit inappropriate therapy deliv- patients,wecanhypothesizethatitmaybeveryusefulalso
ery in ICD recipients, and anticipate adverse hemodynamic in the initial time of CRT. Indeed, monitoring of heart
effects,notablylossofresynchronization,inpatientstreated failure parameters could early identify responders to CRT
with CRT. Thus, remote monitoring with automatic early andcouldallowprompttitrationofdrugtherapy.Definitely,
detection may become an important tool in order to allow this could result in more frequent patient transmissions and
prompt and early reaction [17, 18]. heavier workload for remote data review, but this aspect
TheCareLinkdevicetestedinthisstudydidnotpermitto will be better addressed with the new system version that
automatically detect atrial fibrillation episodes and perform allows automatic wireless transmissions.
transmission without patient cooperation. However, the The lack of remote programming capabilities, common
incoming new system version will be able to perform toallcurrentlyavailablefollow-upsystems,couldrepresent
automatic detection and transmission of asymptomatic a potential limitation. However, in our population we did
episodes. not report any need to reprogram the device or to schedule
A previous study showed that intra-thoracic impedance, extra visits for this purpose. This confirms our preliminary
measured by an implanted device, correlates inversely with data showing that reprogramming of device parameters are
thepulmonarycapillarywedgepressureandthenetfluidloss significantly less frequent 6 months after implant, allowing
inheartfailurepatientshospitalizedforfluidoverload[19]. an efficient use of remote follow-up systems [16].
A recent observational study followed 373 patients Finally, as regard to technical issues [22], during the
implanted with an ICD presenting such diagnostic capabil- study we did not record device-related observations.
ity and reported that in clinical practice the algorithm was Nonetheless, it is predictable that in the long-term an
able to detect clinical heart failure decompensation with increasing rate of such events (i.e. impending elective
both sensitivity and positive predictive value of 60% [20]. replacement indicator) will be transmitted.
For thefirst time we studiedthefollow-upofa group of Battery depletion is currently identified by standard
heart failure patients implanted with a device capable of devicesurveillanceandbyshorteningoffollow-upintervals
intra-thoracic impedance measurement and alert for possi- when the ICD approaches end-of-life [23]. This accelera-
ble fluid accumulation, managed with a device for remote tion of the rate of ambulatory visits could be obviated by
monitoring. Regardless of the short follow-up period, we remote monitoring.
recorded many episodes of heart failure decompensation
and signs of impending pulmonary congestion. Many of 4.1 Limitations
them were correctly identified by the algorithm (sensitivity
91%, positive predictive value 71%). Themainlimitationofpresentstudyisthelackofacontrol
The better results obtained in our series with respect to group of patients managed by traditional methods. Al-
previousexperienceswiththisalgorithm[20],maybeascribed though our findings suggest that remote monitoring may
tothefactthatweenrolledpatientsimplantedfrommorethan improve the clinical management of CRT-D patients,
6months.Indeed,insomecasesthepatientshadexperienced randomized controlled trials are warranted to evaluate the
aprecedingeventandthedevicealertthresholdwasadjusted clinical impact of remote monitoring when compared with
in response to that, in order to optimize the detection. standard method.
Theaccuracyofanalgorithmforthedetectionofclinical
decompensation assumes even higher importance in the
perspectiveofremotemanagementofheartfailurepatients: 5 Conclusions
ifthepatientisseenlessoften,thedetectionandsubsequent
therapy might be significantly delayed in the absence of Our study demonstrates that remote monitoring may
adequate alert systems. improve clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and
Inadditiontotheperformanceofthedetectionalgorithm,it heart failure in patients implanted with CRT-D devices
should be emphasized the high percentage of episodes that and that it may lead to a reduction of health care
were successfully managed without requiring additional in- utilizations, if included in a disease management program.
hospitalvisits,bymeansofremotedatareviewandassessment Earlydetectionandreviewofdeviceandclinicalevents,
ofsymptomstatusandtherapycompliancebyphone. allowed by the diagnostic features of current ICDs and by
60 JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61
remote follow-up systems, suggest the potential impact of tee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and
ManagementofHeartFailure).Circulation,112,1116–1143.
this technology on overall patient care. Controlled studies
8. Swedberg, K., Cleland, J., Dargie, H., Drexler, H., Follath, F.,
areneededtodemonstrateifsuchanewapproachtopatient
Komajda, M., et al. (2005). Task force for the diagnosis and
care may improve overall clinical outcome. treatment of chronic heart failure of the European society of
cardiology.Guidelinesforthediagnosisandtreatmentofchronic
heartfailure:executivesummary(update2005):Thetaskforcefor
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Walter the diagnosis and treatment of chronic heart failure of the
Bernardini and Marco Vimercati (clinical service team, Medtronic European society of cardiology. European Heart Journal, 26,
Italy)forthedatamanagement,andJaneMooreforherassistance in 1115–1140.
theeditingofthismanuscript. 9. Schoenfeld, M. H., Compton, S. J., Mead, R. H., Weiss, D. N.,
Sherfesee, L., Englund, J., et al. (2004). Remote monitoring of
ConflictofInterestDisclosure SerenaGilardiandSergioValsecchi implantable cardioverter defibrillators: a prospective analysis.
areemployeesofMedtronic,Inc. PacingandClinicalElectrophysiology,27(6Pt1),757–763.
Nootherconflictsexist. 10. Lazarus, A. (2007). Remote, wireless, ambulatory monitoring of
implantable pacemakers, cardioverter defibrillators, and cardiac
resynchronization therapy systems: analysis of a worldwide
database. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 30(Suppl 1),
References S2–S12.
11. Saxon, L. A., Boehmer, J. P., Neuman, S., & Mullin, C. M.
1. Moss,A.J.,Hall,W.J.,Cannom,D.S.,Daubert,J.P.,Higgins,S. (2007).RemoteActiveMonitoringinPatientswithHeartFailure
L.,Klein,H.,etal.(1996).Improvedsurvivalwithanimplanted (RAPID-RF): design and rationale. Journal of Cardiac Failure,
defibrillator in patients with coronary disease at high risk for
13,241–246.
ventricular arrhythmia. Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Im- 12. Rosenqvist,M.,Beyer,T.,Block,M.,denDulk,K.,Minten,J.,&
plantationTrialInvestigators.NewEnglandJournalofMedicine, Lindemans, F. (1998). Adverse events with transvenous implant-
335,1933–1940. able cardioverter-defibrillators: a prospective multicenter study.
2. Buxton, A. E., Lee, K. L., Fisher, J. D., Josephson, M. E., European 7219 Jewel ICD investigators. Circulation, 98, 663–
Prystowsky, E. N., & Hafley, G. (1999). A randomized study of 670.
the prevention of sudden death in patients with coronary artery 13. Theuns,D.A.,Klootwijk,A.P.,Goedhart,D.M.,&Jordaens,L.
disease. Multicenter Unsustained Tachycardia Trial Investigators. J. (2004). Prevention of inappropriate therapy in implantable
NewEnglandJournalofMedicine,341,1882–1890. cardioverter-defibrillators: results of a prospective, randomized
3. Moss, A. J., Zareba, W., Hall, W. J., Klein, H., Wilber, D. J., study of tachyarrhythmia detection algorithms. Journal of the
Cannom, D. S., et al. (2002). Multicenter automatic defibrillator
AmericanCollegeofCardiology,44,2362–2367.
implantation trial II investigators. Prophylactic implantation of a 14. Perings,C.,Klein,G.,Toft,E.,Moro,C.,Klug,D.,Bocker,D.,et
defibrillator in patients with myocardial infarction and reduced al. (2006). RIONI Investigators. The RIONI study rationale and
ejection fraction. New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 877– design: validation of the first stored electrograms transmitted via
883. home monitoring in patients with implantable defibrillators.
4. Bardy,G.H.,Lee,K.L.,Mark,D.B.,Poole,J.E.,Packer,D.L.,
Europace,8,288–292.
Boineau,R.,Domanski,M.,etal.(2005).SuddenCardiacDeath 15. Koos, R., Sinha, A. M., & Stellbrink, C. (2005). Home
in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-HeFT) Investigators. Amiodarone or MonitoringinanICDpatientwithincessantventriculartachycar-
an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for congestive heart
dia.ZeitschriftfuÉrKardiologie,94,461–464.
failure.NewEnglandJournalofMedicine,352,225–237. 16. Lunati,M.,Gasparini,M.,Santini,M.,Landolina,M.,Perego,G.B.,
5. Cleland,J.G.,Daubert,J.C.,Erdmann,E.,Freemantle,N.,Gras, Pappone, C., et al. (2008). on behalf of the InSync ICD Italian
D., Kappenberger, L., et al. (2005). Cardiac Resynchronization- RegistryInvestigators.Follow-UpofCRT-ICD:Implicationsforthe
Heart Failure (CARE-HF) Study investigators. The effect of Use of Remote Follow-Up Systems. Data from the InSync ICD
cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mortality in heart
ItalianRegistry.PacingandClinicalElectrophysiology,31,38–46.
failure.NewEnglandJournalofMedicine,352,1539–1549. 17. Varma, N., Stambler, B., & Chun, S. (2005). Detection of atrial
6. Bristow,M.R.,Saxon,L.A.,Boehmer,J.,Krueger,S.,Kass,D. fibrillation by implanted devices with wireless data transmission
A.,DeMarco,T.,etal.(2004).ComparisonofMedicalTherapy, capability. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 28(Suppl 1),
Pacing, and Defibrillation in Heart Failure (COMPANION)
S133–S136.
Investigators. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy with or without 18. Ricci, R. P., Morichelli, L., & Santini, M. (2008). Home
animplantabledefibrillatorinadvancedchronicheartfailure.New monitoring remote control of pacemaker and ICD patients in
EnglandJournalofMedicine,350,2140–2150. clinicalpractice.Impactonmedicalmanagementandhealthcare
7. Hunt, S. A., Abraham, W. T., Chin, M. H., Feldman, A. M., resourceutilization.Europace,10,164–170.
Francis,G.S.,Ganiats,T.G.,etal.(2005).AmericanCollegeof 19. Yu,C.M.,Wang,L.,Chau,E.,Chan,R.H.,Kong,S.L.,Tang,M.
Cardiology; American Heart Association Task Force on Practice O., et al. (2005). Intrathoracic impedance monitoring in patients
Guidelines; American College of Chest Physicians; International with heart failure: correlation with fluid status and feasibility of
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation; Heart Rhythm earlywarningprecedinghospitalization.Circulation,112,841–848.
Society. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline update for the diagnosis and 20. Vollmann,D.,Nagele,H.,Schauerte,P.,Wiegand,U.,Butter,C.,
managementofchronicheartfailureintheadult:summaryarticle: Zanotto,G.,etal.(2007).EuropeanInSyncSentryObservational
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Study Investigators. Clinical utility of intrathoracic impedance
AssociationTaskForceonPracticeGuidelines(WritingCommit- monitoring to alert patients with an implanted device of
JIntervCardElectrophysiol(2009)24:53–61 6611
deteriorating chronic heart failure. European Heart Journal, 28, 22. Scholten, M. F., Thornton, A. S., Theuns, D. A., Res, J., &
1835–1840. Jordaens, L. J. (2004). Twiddler’s syndrome detected by home
21. Knackstedt,C.,Mischke,K.,Schimpf,T.,Waringer,J.,Fache,K., monitoring device. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 27,
Frechen, D., et al. (2008). Integration of automatic intrathoracic 1151–1152.
fluid content measurement into clinical decision making in 23. Schoenfeld,M.H.,&Markowitz,H.T.(2000).Devicefollow-up
patients with congestive heart failure. Pacing and Clinical intheageofautomaticity.PacingandClinicalElectrophysiology,
Electrophysiology,31,961–967. 23,803–806.
