RESEARCH/Original Article
JournalofTelemedicineandTelecare
Effectiveness of a novel, automated 0(0)1–8
!TheAuthor(s)2018
telephone intervention on time to Articlereuseguidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI:10.1177/1357633X18800211
hospitalisation in patients with COPD:
journals.sagepub.com/home/jtt
A randomised controlled trial
Eric Sink1,2 , Kunjan Patel1,2, Jacob Groenendyk2,3,
Robert Peters2,3 , Avik Som2,3, Ellen Kim1,2, Maggie Xing2,3 ,
Melvin Blanchard3 and Will Ross3
Abstract
Introduction: Owing to its capacity to perform remote assessments, telemedicine is rising as a new force in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management. We conducted an eight month randomised-controlled-trial to
study the effect of an automated telemedicine intervention on patients’ time-to-hospitalisation.
Methods: A total of 168 patients with a diagnosis of COPD in the past 24 months were enrolled to receive the
intervention at a primary care clinic. The treatment group received daily phone messages from an automated system
asking them to report if they were breathing better than, worse than, or the same as the day prior. Patients reported
theirbreathingstatusbyrespondingtothetextmessageorcall.Ifapatientreportedbreathingworse,analertwassent
directly to that patient’s provider within the clinic. The control group received the same daily phone messages as the
treatment group. However, no proactive breathing alerts were ever generated to the provider for these subjects. The
primary outcome was the subjects’ time-to-first-COPD-related hospitalisation following the start of messages.
Results:Thetreatmentgroup’stime-to-hospitalisationwassignificantlydifferentthanthecontrolgroup’swithahazard
ratio of 2.36 (95% confidence interval 1.02–5.45, p¼0.0443). The number needed-to-treat ratio was 8.62. Subject
engagement consistently ranged between 60% and 75%. The treatment group received both proactive monitoring and
follow-up care from the providers.
Discussion: Active monitoring with provider feedback enables the detection of exacerbation events early enough for
subjects to avoid admissions. The use of non-smartphone interventions reduces barriers to care presented by more
complicated and expensive technologies. This intervention represents a simple, innovative, and inexpensive tool for
improved COPD management.
Keywords
Telemedicine, telehealth, home telecare, self care
Datereceived:17July2018;Dateaccepted:16August2018
Introduction
heavy burden on the US healthcare system. In 2006
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a alone, there were more than 1.25 million hospital
common condition worldwide that impacts nearly admissions classified as acute exacerbation episodes
everyaspectofpatients’healthrelatedqualityoflife.1,2 resulting in a total in-patient cost of US$11.9 billion.5
COPD is the third leading cause of death and the fifth
leading cause of disability in the United States (US).3
1SaintLouisUniversitySchoolofMedicine,USA
Patientssufferfromfrequentshortnessofbreath,exer- 2EpharmixResearchCenteratWashingtonUniversityinSaintLouis,USA
ciseintoleranceandrespiratoryinfections.4Owingtoits 3WashingtonUniversityinSaintLouisSchoolofMedicine,USA
capacitytoperformremoteassessments,telemedicineis
Correspondingauthor:
risingasanewforceinCOPDmanagement.
WillRoss,WashingtonUniversityinSaintLouisSchoolofMedicine,
Despite the preventable and treatable nature of
660SouthEuclidAvenue,SaintLouis,MO63110,USA.
COPD, it is an extremely costly disease that places a Email:rossw@wustl.edu
2 Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 0(0)
Around 50–75% of the total cost of COPD care participate due to other residency commitments, co-
is associated with acute exacerbation events.4 residents filled in tocover each other’s patients.
Exacerbations place unnecessary physical and mental A list of 633 potential trial participants was queried
strain on the patient, and they are associated with a from the clinic’s EMR based on an ICD-9 or ICD-10
higher risk of short-term and long-term mortality.6 diagnostic code for COPD in the 24 months preceding
The hypothesis surrounding the application of tele- thetrial.Inclusioncriteriaincludedthosewithadiagno-
medicinetoCOPDisthatmorefrequentmonitoringof sis of COPD made in the preceding 24 months, age
patients’ symptoms will allow for early detection and greater than 18 years, and a willingness to provide a
intervention of exacerbation events before they lead to telephone number at which they can receive text mes-
the utilisation of clinical resources.7,8 A well-designed sagesorvoicephonemessages.Exclusioncriteriainclud-
COPD intervention could improve patient quality of ed people withintention totransfer care away fromthe
life, lower hospitalisations, and reduce associated clinic during the trial period. Mental status was not
healthcare costs.9 The intervention should make the specifically assessed prior to enrolment. Ability tocom-
patient’s respiratory condition more visible to the pro- pletetheenrolmentprocesswasacceptedasappropriate
vider, allow providers to monitor long-term trends, capacity to participate in the trial and understand
effectively triage patients based on their respiratory English voice calls. Subjects elected themselves to
condition and, most importantly, detect exacerbation choose the text message or voice phone option.
events before they result in hospitalisation.10 Research staff independent from the trial investiga-
However, the results of past studies have not dem- torsperformedthetrialrecruitmentandinformedcon-
onstrated a definitive clinical or economic benefit to sent over the phone between January and April 2016.
these interventions. Several systematic reviews have Consenting subjects were randomised by simple ran-
concludedthatwhilemanypasttrials haveshownpos- domisation and allocated into two cohorts in a 1:1
itive trends, there is not sufficient evidence at this time ratiousingtheExcelRandomNumbergeneratorfunc-
to say that COPD telemedicine interventions have a tion. Once subjects were consented and randomised,
significant effect on the standard of care.11,12 they were enrolled in the EpxCOPD system. All sub-
The Epharmix COPD system, hereafter referred to jects were given the option of receiving messages via
as EpxCOPD, is an intervention designed to remotely either SMS text message or voice phone and selected
monitor the self-reported breathing status of patients thetimeofdaythattheypreferredtoreceivemessages.
with COPD through the use of automated phone calls Usual care was continued for both groups.
and SMS text messages. EpxCOPD was originally EpxCOPDispartofbroadertelemedicineplatform,
developed by researchers at Washington University in Epharmix, that has recently been developed and
SaintLouis.Theproducthasnowbeencommercialised applied to many different disease states. EpxCOPD
in the form of Epharmix Inc. (Epharmix Inc. Saint differs from many previously attempted interventions
Louis, MO, USA). The system wasintentionallystruc- since all it requires of patients is the capability to
turedtomeettheneedsofpatientswithlowtechnology receive phone calls or simple SMS (short message ser-
literacy. The major goals of the system are to improve vice)textmessages.Patientssendandreceiveautomat-
patients’ quality of life, increase their connection to ed messages from the Epharmix central server in
their care team, and reduce their rate of COPD exac- order to communicate disease-specific biometric data
erbations. We set out to demonstrate the effective (Figure2).Themessagealgorithms,builtinassociation
implementation and clinical benefits of EpxCOPD by with physicians, nurses, patients, and medical
running an eight month randomised-controlled-trial students from our affiliated programs, use Bayesian
(RCT) in a primary care medicine clinic. branching logic to generate meaningful provider
alerts and reports to keep providers up-to-date on
Materials and methods their patients’ conditions.
Trial design Intervention
Participants were recruited between January and April Thetreatmentgroupreceivedadailymessagefromthe
2016ataresident-runprimarycaremedicineclinicatan EpxCOPD system via automated phone call or text
academicinstitutioninSt.Louis,Missouriforaneight message asking them ‘Are you breathing better than,
month,double-blindedRCT(Figure1).Thetrialregis- worsethan,orthesameasyesterday’?(Figure3).After
tration number is NCT03002311 (see https://clinical consideringhisorhercurrentbreathingstatus,thesub-
trials.gov/show/NCT03002311). Residents participat- ject then responded to the question by typing a
inginthetrialincluded1st,2nd,and3rdyearresidents. response into their telephone. If a subject responded
Inthecaseofoneresidentbeingtemporarilyunableto ‘better’ or ‘the same’, then no action was taken by
Sinket al. 3
Figure1. In theEpxCOPDtrial, all subjectsreceived thesamebreathing messagesbutonly thetreatment grouphadreports of
worse breathing relayedtoproviders.
the EpxCOPD system. If a subject responded ‘worse’, subject who had set off the alert. The provider then
then the EpxCOPD system immediately triggered an had the opportunity to counsel the subject on how to
alert to the subject’s assigned provider in the resident returntoastablebreathingstateortoordertheappro-
clinic. To minimise any potential liability, all priate clinical intervention.
EpxCOPD message sequences ended by instructing The control group received the same daily message
the subject that if they were experiencing a medical from the EpxCOPD system via automated phone call
emergency, to present to the emergency department or text message asking them ‘Are you breathing better
to seek care. than, worse than, or the same as yesterday’? However,
The medical residents assigned to the subjects the control group did not have their alerts proactively
received alerts in the form of a text message and in transmitted to their providers. When a subject in the
messages placed in their task folders in the clinic control group reported breathing worse, no alert was
EMR. The alert message included a notice that the generatedtoinformtheirprovidertoprovidefollow-up
subject had reported breathing worse and provided a care.However,thesesubjectsstillhadthecapabilityto
phone number and subject-specific alert code to use to call into the system on their own accord and be con-
contact the subject for follow-up. When residents nected to their provider.
dialled this subject-specific alert code, they were Subjects in both the treatment and control groups
routed through the Epharmix server directly to the began the trial by receiving the EpxCOPD message
4 Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 0(0)
Figure2. Epharmixisaplatformthatfacilitatesbidirectionalcommunicationbetweenpatientsandproviders.Messagesaresentand
storedon a HIPAA-secured webserver.
HIPAA: HealthInsurancePortability andAccountability Act.
Figure3. Afterconsenting toreceiveEpharmixmessages, subjects beganreceiving adaily messageinquiringthem oftheir
breathing status.
Sinket al. 5
sequence once per day. EpxCOPD included a smart from the analysis on the last day data was collected,
schedule feature that scaled back the number of mes- whether or not the subjects stopped the placebo mes-
sages if there was evidence that a subject was doing sages themselves.
relatively well. If a subject reported breathing ‘better’
or‘thesame’for30consecutivedays,theywereshifted
Results
toatwice-weeklymessage schedule. If asubject on the
twice-weekly schedule ever reported breathing ‘worse’, At the end of the enrolment period, 168 subjects were
the subject would be temporarily placed back onto the successfullyconsentedandenrolledintotheEpxCOPD
daily schedule plan for a period of time until their telemedicine system, of which 83 subjects were rando-
breathing stabilised. mised into the treatment group. Only the clinic resi-
dents served as ‘providers’ receiving alerts for the
Data analysis purpose of the trial. However, 17 subjects receiving
care from the clinic site were included in the trial
The primary outcome was subjects’ time-
even though they were not assigned to one of the res-
to-hospitalisation, defined as the number of days
idents at the time of enrolment. This occurred because
between a subject’s enrolment in the EpxCOPD
these patients had been seen in previous years by resi-
system and their day of admittance to the hospital.
dent physicians who had graduated at the time of
For the purposes of this study, we defined the onset
the start of the study. These patients not been yet
of an ‘exacerbation’ as a subject’s day of admittance
assigned to a new resident as a PCP, but still
to the hospital. The secondary outcome was subjects’
appeared on the initial list of 633 patients queried
cumulative weekly engagement with the Epharmix
from the medical record. Because these subjects could
telemedicine system.
not functionally be placed into the intervention group,
Time-to-hospitalisationdatawascollectedbyanaly-
they were included in the control group without
sis of subjects’ medical records in the EMR. Using
randomisation.Therefore,68subjectswererandomised
Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, powered at 80%,
into the control group; 17 subjects were placed
withanapriorialphasetat0.05andexpectinganabso-
lutedeltaof10%,fromanestimatedpre-trial20%hos- by default into the control group without randomisa-
pitalisation rate, we expected to require 296 patients. tion. Demographic information collected during the
The hypothesis was that subjects in the treatment enrolment suggests that the cohorts were mostly non-
group receiving proactive communication with alerts white individuals of low socioeconomic status. There
transmitted to their primary care providers would be werenostatistically significantdifferences inthedistri-
detected sooner when an exacerbation occurred. bution of age, gender, race, smoking status, smoking
The subject engagement rate was calculated from history or annual income between the two cohorts
data stored on the Epharmix HIPAA-secure web (Table 1).
server as the fraction of total subjects responding to
at least one message during a 1-week period. Subject Table1. Trialdemographics.
demographic information was collected by pre-trial
Studygroup
enrolment survey. Pre-trial disease severity was
assessed by retrieving subject’s most recent Treatment Control P
pulmonaryfunctiontest(PFT)fromtheEMR,ifavail-
Characteristic n¼83 n¼85
able. Not all of the subjects had a PFT available Age 59.89(cid:2)1.09 61.94(cid:2)1.07 0.18
for inclusion. Gender
Because some subjects revoked their consent to Male 29 32 0.72
receive Epharmixmessagesduringthetrial,itwasnec- Female 54 53
Race
essary to consider in some cases if a subject revoked
White 24 24 0.41
their consent before or after the date of any COPD-
AfricanAmerican 55 55
relatedhospitalisationfoundinthemedicalrecord.No NativeAmerican 1 0
efforts were made to prevent subjects from revoking Asian 1 0
Declinedtoanswer 2 6
their consent or to recruit subjects back onto the
Smokingstatus
system after they withdrew their consent to receive
Currentsmoker 41 32 0.50
messages. To test the effectiveness of EpxCOPD in Previouslybutquit 34 43
preventinghospitalisations,thosesubjectswhostopped Neversmoker 3 4
messagesintheinterventiongroupwerecensoredfrom Declinedtoanswer 5 6
Smokinghistory
the Kaplan–Meier analysis the day they stopped mes-
PackYears 33.66(cid:2)2.29 32.42(cid:2)2.61 0.72
sages. For the control group, subjects were censored Annualincome US$11,402(cid:2)626 US$12,774(cid:2)1,029 0.26
6 Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 0(0)
Table 2. DegreeofCOPD severity betweencohorts. Table 3. COPD severity between randomisedand
non-randomised membersofcontrolgroup.
Studygroup
Studygroup
Treatment Control P
Non-
PFTsavailable n¼63 n¼ 72
Randomised randomised
FEV1 Post/FVC Post 0.64(cid:2)0.02 0.61(cid:2)0.02 0.17
control control P
FEV1 Post (%of 0.65(cid:2)0.03 0.63(cid:2)0.02 0.69
predicted value) PFTsavailable n¼56 n¼ 16
Goldcriteria FEV1 Post/FVC Post 0.62(cid:2)0.02 0.54(cid:2)0.03 0.03
Mild 14 16 FEV1 Post 0.64(cid:2)0.02 0.60(cid:2)0.06 0.45
(FEV1 post>0.8) (%ofpredictedvalue)
Moderate 38 35 GoldCriteria
(0.5>FEV1post>0.8) Mild(FEV1 post>0.8) 13 3
Severe 7 16 Moderate 27 8
(0.3>FEV1 post>0.5) (0.5>FEV1post>0.8)
Verysevere 4 5 Severe 13 3
(FEV1post<0.3) (0.3>FEV1 post>0.5)
Verysevere 3 2
(FEV1post<0.3)
Analysis of the subjects’ most recent PFTs revealed
that thetreatmentandcontrol groupswereverysimilar
intheirpre-triallungfunction.Nosignificantdifference
inthe FEV /FVCorFEV % predicted existed between
1 1
groups. The subjects were grouped according to their
classification in the GOLD criteria (Table 2). Subjects
forwhomwewereunabletolocatePFTswereexcluded
from this analysis. Additionally, we compared the lung
function of the 68 randomised and 17 non-randomised
members of the control group. The FEV % predicted
1
referstothe forcedexpiratoryvolume ofairthatasub-
jectisabletoexpelin1scomparedwithpredictedvalues
for a reference population with similar age and body
weight.TheFEV /FVCratiocomparestheforcedexpi-
1
ratoryvolumein1srelativetothesubject’stotalforced Figure4. Theengagementratewascalculatedasthefractionof
total subjectsrespondingto atleastone Epharmix message
vitalcapacity.TheFEV /FVCisusedclinicallytomea-
1 during a1-weekperiod.
suretheseverityoflungdamageinpatientswithCOPD.
Although there was no significantdifference in FEV %
1
predicted,therewasasignificantdifferenceintheFEV /
1
FVC ratio between the randomised and non-
randomised members (Table 3).
Throughoutthetrial,thecumulativesubjectengage-
ment rate consistently ranged between 65% and 87%
(Figure 4); 13 members of the intervention group and
15membersofthecontrolgrouprevokedtheirconsent
to receive message prior to the stop date of the trial.
The reasons cited for revoking consent included mes-
sagefatigue,notenoughcontactwiththeirprovider,or
loss of interest in participating in the study. There was Figure5. TheKaplan–Meiersurvivalanalysisindicatesthatthe
a significant change in time to hospitalisation between primaryoutcome–timetoCOPDhospitalisationafterthestart
ofEpxCOPD messages–wassignificant aftereightmonths
thetreatmentgroupandcontrolgroups,withahazard
ofmessages.
ratio of 2.36 (95% confidence interval 1.02–5.45,
p¼0.0443 (Figure 5). The number of subjects at the control group, with six and 16 respectively. The
risk at the start of each month of the trial is shown absolute risk reduction was 11.6% and the relative
in Table 4. There were significantly fewer COPD- risk reduction was 61.7%. The number needed to
related hospitalisations in the treatment group than treat (NNT) was 8.62.
Sinket al. 7
Table4. Numberofsubjectsat risk.
Month1 Month2 Month3 Month4 Month5 Month6 Month7 Month8
Treatment 83 82 81 80 78 78 78 77
Control 85 83 80 79 74 74 73 71
Discussion There are several limitations to this study which we
wish to address. First, the analysis of the primary
The management of patients with COPD remains an
outcome was limited to specifically examining COPD-
extremely complex, multifactorial process. The ambi-
related hospitalisations as opposed to all-cause hospi-
guity of the disease’s primary symptom, dyspnoea, has
talisations.Wewishedtolimitthescopeoftheanalysis
made designing a COPD telemedicine intervention a
in order to expressly show the effect of EpxCOPD on
particular challenge. The intervention must be easy-
hospital admissions related to changes in respiratory
to-use for patients, easy for providers to manage, and
status. In addition, the data collection for the primary
provide measurable clinical benefits.
outcome was performed only within the host clinic’s
EpxCOPD was designed to address the economic
EMR. The hospitalisations recorded in the clinic
and social barriers that may limit a COPD patient’s
EMR are limited to admissions that occurred within
access to high quality telemedicine monitoring. The
the affiliated hospital system. It is possible that some
system is inexpensive to operate, and all messages
hospitalisationsoccurredoutsidethescopeofrecordof
are free to patients. The cost of operating the messag-
the EMR and thus were omitted from the analysis of
ing system is approximately US$10 per patient per
the primary outcome.
month. Message sequences were designed to be
Analysis of the subjects’ pulmonary function tests
understood by anyone with at least a fourth-grade
revealed that the 17 non-randomised members of the
reading level. The messages are accessible with any
control group may have had slightly worse lung func-
type of phone, mobile or landline, smartphone or
tion at the start of the trial than the randomised mem-
burner phone.
bers of the control group. However, during the trial
The study population consisted primarily of elderly
period, the fraction of subjects in the group of 17 sub-
subjects with low annual income. Elderly populations
jects not assigned to a resident who experienced a
are sometimes considered to have too low technology
COPD hospitalisation during the trial (17.6%) was
literacy to use telemedicine tools. However, the rate at
less than the fraction of patients hospitalised in the
which subjects complied with EpxCOPD seems to dis-
rest of the control group (19.1%). Therefore, we do
credit this theory (Figure 4). Well-designed, simple to not believe the 17 patients affected the analysis of the
use telemedicine interventions can be accessible to primary outcome.
patients drawn from any age group or socioeconom- There was some variability in the rate at which the
ic class. residents responded to subjects’ alerts. Some providers
Survival analysis of the treatment and control were very good at responding to alerts in a timely
groups indicated a statistically significant difference in manner; other providers took longer to respond or
subjects’time-to-hospitalisation.Wearehighlyencour- failed to respond at all. If some alerts went without
aged by this result as confirmation that this interven- follow-up, subjects in the intervention group who
tion is having a meaningful effect not only on patient may have benefited from receiving attention from
engagement, but also on clinical outcomes. The theirproviderdidnotreceiveit.Despitethisvariability,
number of patients needed to treat to prevent one enough residents complied with the intervention to
COPD hospitalisation was 8.62; this is an extremely demonstrate a significant change in the prima-
economically efficient alternative to both alternative ry outcome.
COPD telemedicine interventions and certainly less We intend to expand the EpxCOPD algorithm to
expensive that the cost of a COPD hospitalisation. include additional questions beyond the current ques-
This study is one of the first, if not the first, RCTs of tion,‘Areyoubreathingbetterthan,worsethan,orthe
a COPD telemedicine system to demonstrate a statisti- same as yesterday’? When EpxCOPD was created, it
callysignificantclinicaloutcomeamongalargepatient was intentionally limited to just one question in order
population with many participating providers. No to keep the algorithm as simple as possible. Adding
other trial has used simple text messages or phone additional questions to the algorithm will hopefully
calls to reach a more underserved population with increase the specificity of alerts, so providers only
many different participating providers. receive alerts that critically require follow-up.
8 Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 0(0)
Conclusion BMJ 2011;342: d142.Available from: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.d142
This eight month RCT demonstrated the successful
3. Lopez AD. Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors.
implementation of the EpxCOPD telemedicine system WashingtonDC:WorldBankPublications,2006.475p.
amongalargecohortofsubjectsandalargenumberof Available from: https://market.android.com/details?id¼
providers. EpxCOPD facilitated a statistically signifi- book-F8Abr-ofOwIC
cant change in subjects’ time to hospitalisation, and 4. Standards for the diagnosis and care of patients with
subjects remained highly compliant with messages chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
throughout the trial. EpxCOPD is a cost-effective, asthma. This official statement of the American
easy-to-use clinical tool for improved COPD manage- Thoracic Society was adopted by the ATS Board of
Directors, November 1986. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987;
ment accessible by nearly all potential patients, includ-
136: 225–244. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
ing those in underserved urban communities.
ajrccm/136.1.225
5. PereraPN,ArmstrongEP,SherrillDL,etal.Acuteexac-
Supporting Information
erbationsofCOPDintheUnitedStates:inpatientburden
S1 Checklist.CONSORT Checklist. and predictors of costs and mortality. COPD 2012; 9:
S2Protocol.TrialProtocolasApprovedbyEthicsCommittee. 131–141. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/
15412555.2011.650239
Acknowledgements 6. VestboJ,HurdSS,Agust(cid:1)ıAG,etal.Globalstrategyfor
the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic
We are thankful to S. Ramnarine of Janssen Scientific
obstructivepulmonarydisease:GOLDexecutivesumma-
Affairs,LLC forherreview ofthe dataanalysis.
ry. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 187: 347–365.
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/rccm.2012
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
04-0596PP
The author(s) declare the following potential conflicts of 7. MillerEA.Solvingthedisjuncturebetweenresearchand
interestwithrespecttotheresearch,authorship,and/orpub- practice: telehealth trends in the 21st century. Health
licationofthisarticle:JGandAShaveafinancialinterestin Policy 2007; 82: 133–141. Available from: http://dx.doi.
Epharmix, Inc. These authors assisted in the design of the org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2006.09.011
interventionandtrialbutdidnotcontributetothedataanal- 8. Goldstein RS and O’Hoski S. Telemedicine in COPD:
time to pause. Chest 2014; 145(5): 945–949. Available
ysisor writing ofthe manuscript.
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1378/chest.13-1656
9. WarwickM,GallagherR,ChenowethL,etal.Self-man-
Funding
agement and symptom monitoring among older adults
The author(s) received nofinancial support forthe research, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Adv Nurs
authorshipand/orpublicationofthis article. 2010; 66: 784–793. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-2648.2009.05238.x
ORCID iD 10. VassilevI,RowsellA,PopeC,etal.Assessingtheimple-
mentability of telehealth interventions for self-
Eric Sink http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4922-485X
management support: a realist review. Implement Sci
Robert Peters http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1828-0525
2015; 10: 59. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
MaggieXing http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8460-3631
s13012-015-0238-9
11. McLean S, Nurmatov U, Liu JLY, et al. Telehealthcare
References for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Cochrane
1. YohannesAM,RoomiJ,WatersK,etal.Qualityoflife Review and meta-analysis. Br J Gen Pract 2012; 62:
inelderlypatientswithCOPD:measurementandpredic- e739–e749. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.3399/
tive factors. Respir Med 1998; 92: 1231–1236. Available bjgp12X658269
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9926154 12. PedoneC,LelliD.Systematicreviewoftelemonitoringin
2. Pinnock H, Kendall M, Murray SA, et al. Living COPD: an update. Pneumonol Alergol Pol 2015; 83:
anddyingwithseverechronicobstructivepulmonarydis- 476–484. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.5603/
ease: multi-perspective longitudinal qualitative study. PiAP.2015.0077
