PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
DOI10.1007/s11121-012-0293-2
Shifting Boundaries: An Experimental Evaluation of a Dating
Violence Prevention Program in Middle Schools
BruceG.Taylor&NanD.Stein&ElizabethA.Mumford&
DanielWoods
Publishedonline:19October2012
#SocietyforPreventionResearch2012
Abstract We randomly assigned the Shifting Boundaries combined interventions were effective in reducing sexual
interventionsto30publicmiddleschoolsinNewYorkCity, violencevictimizationinvolvingeitherpeersordatingpart-
enrolling 117 sixth and seventh grade classes (over 2,500 ners at 6-months post-intervention. This was mirrored by
students)toreceiveaclassroom,abuilding,acombined,or reductions in sexual violence perpetration by peers in the
neither intervention. The classroom intervention included a building-only intervention. While the preponderance of
six-session curriculum emphasizing the laws and conse- results indicates that the interventions were effective, an
quences for perpetrators of dating violence and sexual har- anomalous result (increase in sexual harassment victimiza-
assment(DV/H),thesocialconstructionofgenderroles,and tion reports that was contradicted by lower frequency esti-
healthy relationships. The building-based intervention mates)didemerge.However,afteranalysistheseanomalous
includedtheuseofbuilding-basedrestrainingorders,higher results were deemed to be most likely spurious. The suc-
levelsoffaculty/securitypresenceinsafe/unsafe“hotspots” cess of the building-only intervention alone is important
mapped by students, and posters to increase DV/H aware- because itcan beimplemented with veryfew extra costs to
ness and reporting. Student surveys were implemented at schools.
baseline, immediately after the intervention, and 6-months
post-intervention.Ashypothesized,behaviorsimprovedasa Keywords Teendatingviolence .Youthviolence
result of the interventions. The building-only and the prevention .Middleschools .Experiment
Thisstudy(Datingviolencepreventionprogramsinpublicmiddle
schools:Amulti-levelexperimentalevaluation)wasfundedbythe Introduction
NationalInstituteofJustice(Grant#2008-MU-MU-0010),alongwith
co-fundingfromtheOfficeofSafeandDrug-FreeSchools,U.S.
Dating violence and sexual harassment (DV/H) (including
DepartmentofEducation.Theviewsexpressedarethoseoftheauthors
“interpersonal” or“gender” violence)1among adolescentsin
anddonotnecessarilyrepresenttheviewsortheofficialpositionofthe
NationalInstituteofJustice,U.S.DepartmentofEducationorany schoolsettingsispervasiveandassociatedwithanumberof
otherorganization. problems(Jourilesetal.2009;MulfordandGiordano2008).
:
B.G.Taylor(*) E.A.Mumford DV/Hcanleadtoseriousinjuriesforvictims,poorermental/
NORCattheUniversityofChicago, physical health, more “high-risk”/deviant behavior, and
Bethesda,MD,USA increased school avoidance (Gruber and Fineran 2008;
e-mail:taylor-bruce@norc.org
Howardetal.2007a,b).IntheirreviewoftheDV/Hpreven-
tionresearch,CorneliusandResseguie(2007)notethatmost
N.D.Stein
WellesleyCollege,CenterforResearchonWomen,
WellesleyCentersforWomen, 1Inthisreport,weusethetermdatingviolenceandharassment(DV/
Wellesley,MA,USA H) to represent physical, emotional, or sexual abuse within a dating
relationship, the definition that CDC uses for teen dating violence
D.Woods (TDV) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2010). Where
PoliceExecutiveResearchForum(PERF), cited studies used the term TDV,we also follow the language of the
Washington,DC,USA originalresearch.
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 65
of these evaluations have documented at least a short-term concerning the effectiveness of targeting a young, universal
positivechangeinknowledgeand/orattitudesrelatedtoyouth primary prevention audience with interventions at multiple
DV/Hprevention.However,manyofthesestudiesdidnotuse levels. The study was designed to yield data that could help
randomizedexperimentsorotherrigorousdesigns.Inthelast increase the capacity of schools to prevent DV/H. We
few years,new rigorousresearchhas beenconductedonthe hypothesizedthattheinterventionswillreducesexualharass-
effectiveness of youth DV/H prevention programs (Foshee ment in all three groups that receive any one of the three
andReyes2009;Jaycoxetal.2006;Tayloretal.2010a;Wolfe interventions compared to the control group. Further, we
et al. 2009). However, these studies are few and generally expectedthethreeinterventionswouldreducetheoccurrence
addressonlyeighthand/orninthgradeorolderstudents.Some of dating and peer violence compared to the control group.
researchindicatesthatadolescentsmayexperienceDV/Hand Thesetwooverarchinghypothesesappliedtoallthetreatment
sexual harassment as early as sixth grade (Callahan et al. conditions. Our final hypothesis was that creating a broader
2003; Eaton et al. 2010; O’Keefe 1997), suggesting that environmental intervention (the combined treatment of the
preventionprogramsshouldtargetstudentsinmiddleschool classroom and building-level interventions) would be more
(Espelage and Holt 2007; McMaster et al. 2002; Wolitzky- effectiveinreducingsexualharassmentandviolencethanthe
Tayloretal.2008).Accordingtoonesampleofseventhgrade classroom intervention on its own. We proposed no hypoth-
studentswhoindicatedthattheyhavebegundating,one-third esiscomparingtheclassroom-onlytothebuilding-onlyinter-
reported having committed acts of physical, sexual, or ventionsbecausethereisnobasisintheory.
psychological aggression toward their dating partner (Sears
etal.2007).Finally,DV/Hduringadolescenceisasignificant
riskfactorforyoungadultintimatepartnerviolence(Gómez Methods
2010);asmuchashalfofteendatingviolencemaypersistinto
adulthood(Halpernetal.2009). Our study employed a multi-level, experimental, longitudi-
There has only been one evaluation (Taylor et al. 2010a) naldesign,withdatacollectiontakingplacefromSeptember
addressing sixth and/or seventh grade students that that 2009 to June 2010 in NYC, the largest school district and
assessed behavioral measures with an experimental design oneofthemostethnically,linguistically,andraciallydiverse
(CorneliusandResseguie2007;Whitakeretal.2006).Eval- populations in the U.S. Our team randomly assigned a
uating two components of a DV/H prevention program for building-based and classroom-based intervention through a
sixthandseventhgradestudentsinmiddleschoolsbordering stratification process with 30 public middle schools. With
Cleveland, overall, we found that the intervention improved the exception of three schools (which had three instead of
knowledgeandattitudesrelatedtoyouthdatingviolenceand four classrooms in the study), each school included two
reduced self-reported peer violence victimization and self- sixth and two seventh grade classrooms in each building,
reportedperpetration(Tayloretal.2010a).Therewasacon- yielding a total of 117 classrooms (n058 classes in sixth
flictingfindingregardingself-reporteddatingviolenceperpe- grade plus 59 classes in seventh grade) and 2,655 students.
tration. The intervention seemed to increase self-reported An average of 354 students participated in our study from
datingviolenceperpetration(butnotself-reporteddatingvio- each of the 30 school buildings. We had good statistical
lence victimization). This iatrogenic finding was examined power (80 %) to find differences even as small as 8 %
closelyandwasinterpretedtobemostlikelyduetoreporting between the treatment and control groups; see project final
issuesasopposedtoactualincreasesinperpetrationbetween report at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/
theinterventionandcontrolgroup(Tayloretal.2010a).Our 236175.pdf for greater detail (Taylor et al. 2011). We used
team’s research was important because it demonstrated a stratified random allocation procedure (Boruch 1997).
through an experiment that a condensed five-session class- Schools were classified by two stratifying criteria (school
room curriculum could be effective for a group as young as size and borough), ensuring that the comparison groups
sixth and seventh grade students. The qualitative aspects of started out with some identical characteristics and adequate
the research were also useful to expanding and honing the numbers of schools in each of the study cells. The schools
intervention applied in New York City (NYC) as described were assigned to one of the four cells: (1) receive the
below.AlthoughnotareplicationofthisClevelandstudy,the building and classroom interventions, (2) receive the build-
current study builds on this work in assessing modified ver- ing-only intervention, (3) receive the classroom-only inter-
sions of the classroom curricula from this earlier study and vention or (4) control group (in which schools/students
addingschoolbuilding-wideinterventioncomponents. experienced their normal class schedule, without receiving
In this paper we provide the results of an evaluation that any elements of our classroom-or building-level interven-
used a randomized controlled trial of a DV/H prevention tions).Withineachofthesecells,arandomsampleofclass-
program for sixth and seventh grade students in NYC. Our rooms was selected for study participation to complete all
purpose was to provide high-quality scientific evidence three waves ofthe survey.
66 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
Descriptionof ‘ShiftingBoundaries’ Interventions developedmapswhichwereinturnusedtoplanforagreater
presence of faculty or school security personnel in identified
Thedesignofourinterventionswasinformedbythetheoryof “hot spots.” These building-based components also aim to
reasoned action (TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein have students develop a greatersense of respectforpersonal
1967). Based on TRA, attitudes toward and perceived norms boundaries, as with the classroom curriculum, but through
about the desired behavior facilitate the intention to change, differentmechanisms,asdescribedabove.
modify,oradoptaparticularbehavior.TheTRAmodelserved To promote greater comparability across our interven-
avaluablefunctionoforientingthedeveloperofShiftingBoun- tions, we applied the same basic “dosage” for the building
dariestoconsidertheenvironmentalcontextthatsurroundsand interventionasweappliedfortheclassroomlessons.Thatis,
influences intentions and behavior. The addition of the the building interventions were conducted for the same
building-levelcomponentwasalsoaddedbasedonrecommen- numberofweeksastheclassroom-basedintervention(about
dations from an NIJ/NIH teen dating violence expert meeting 6–10 weeks).
(Dec.4–5,2007)toaddothercomponentstoclassroom-based
interventions.Belowisasummaryofourinterventions,includ- Data Collection
ingclassroom-andbuilding-wideactivities.
Schoolpersonneltrainedbyourresearchteamadministered
Classroom-Based Intervention The NYC classroom-based pencil-and-paper surveys. The school staff distributed sur-
interventionsynthesizedthelessonsfromthetwocomponents veysimmediatelybeforeschoolswereassignedtooneofthe
(apersonalinteractioncomponentandaLaw&JusticeTreat- four study conditions, immediately after the treatment (or
ment)fromourearlierstudythattheClevelandareainterven- controlcondition)wascompleted,andabout6monthsafter
tionists concurred were the most successfully received by the intervention (post school assignment in the case of
students. Our team further refined the classroom-and control schools). The student response rate was 93 % at
building-based(seebelow)interventionswithsignificantinput the baseline survey, with no statistically significant differ-
from the New York City Department of Education (NYC ences observed for the treatment and control groups on
DOE)centralofficepersonnel.Thelessonswereimplemented participating in the baseline survey. Eight-seven percent of
by trained school personnel known as SAPIS (Substance participating students completed the survey immediately
AbusePreventionandInterventionSpecialists),generallyover after the intervention and 82 % completed the 6-month
a period of 6–10 weeks. The six-session curriculum empha- follow-up survey. Therewerenostatisticallysignificantdif-
sized the consequences for perpetrators of DV/H, state and ferencesforthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsonparticipating
federallawsrelatedtoDV/H,the settingandcommunicating inthefirstorsecondfollow-upsurveys.Followingapproved
ofone’sboundariesininterpersonalrelationships,andtherole IRB protocols (NYC DOE and Police Executive Research
ofbystandersasinterveners.Thekeyfeatureoftheclassroom Forum), in advance of survey administration, parents were
curriculumis the framingof activities to help students deter- individuallyinformedofthegoalsofthestudyandaccompa-
mine and set personal boundaries. Educators introduce the nyingrisksand benefitsina formthrough whichtheycould
conceptofboundariesandteachabouttheconstraintsofrele- choose towaive their parental consent for their child topar-
vantlaws.Usingthecurriculum,educatorspromptstudentsto ticipate.Parentalconsentincludedpermissionforthestudents
consider their interpersonal interactions and use of physical to complete a baseline and all of the subsequent follow-up
spaces within the school walls. Activities included exploring surveys.Studentswereaskedtoreturnparent/guardiandecline
the concepts of laws and boundaries, plotting the shifting forms to the school as soon as possible (parents/guardians
nature of personal space, considering laws as they apply by weretoldthatnothing had tobedoneiftheychose toallow
genderandactivitiesrelatedtosexualharassmentprevention. their child to participate in the survey). For students whose
Thelessonsemployedbothconcreteandappliedmaterials,as parents chose to waive consent (i.e., provided passive con-
wellasactivitiesrequiringabstractthinking. sent), school personnel distributed child assent forms to the
students prior to survey implementation. The surveys took
Building-BasedIntervention Ourbuilding-levelinterventions about 40 min to complete (one classroom period) and were
include the following features: the introduction of temporary administeredduringregularschoolhours.
building-basedrestrainingorders(termedaRespectingBoun-
daries Agreement or RBA), and the placement of posters in Measures
schoolbuildingstoincreaseawarenessandreportingofDV/H
toschoolpersonnel.Inaddition,buildingonresearchbyAstor SexualHarassmentVictimizationandPerpetration Thesur-
etal.(1999, 2001), ourbuildinginterventionincludesathird veys included prevalence and incidence questions on the
componenttohelpschoolsworkwithstudentstoidentifyany experience of being a victim and/or perpetrator of sexual
unsafeareasofschoolsthroughhotspotmapping.Thestudents harassment. Greater detail and copies of the actual surveys
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 67
usedinourstudytomeasureharassmentandallofourother Sexual violence prevalence (victimization and perpetration
measurescanbefoundintheprojectFinalReport(Tayloret separately coded) was coded in the same manner as the
al. 2011). A response of “yes” any of the following items sexual harassment coding: A response of “yes” any of the
was coded “1” and the sum was coded as a dichotomous itemswascoded“1”andthesumwascodedasdichotomous
variable marking any respondent with a value of one or variable marking any respondent with a value of one or
greater for sexual harassment prevalence (victimization greater. The composite frequency measures (victimization
and perpetration separately coded). The composite fre- and perpetration separately coded) for sexual violence fre-
quency measures (victimization and perpetration separately quency was coded as the sum total of the following values
coded) for sexual harassment frequency was coded as the foreachcategoricalresponse(0codedas0,1–3codedas2;
sum total of the following values for each categorical 4–9codedas6.5;10+codedas10)foreachofthefollowing
response (0 coded as 0, 1–3 coded as 2; 4–9 coded as 6.5; two items. Sexual violence items included: (a) pushing,
10+ coded as 10) for each sexual harassment item. Sexual grabbing, shoving, or kicking in the private parts; and (b)
harassment questions included: (a) made sexual comments, made you touch their private parts or touched yours when
jokes, gestures, or looks; (b) showed, gave, or left sexual you did not want them to. A positive response to any one
pictures, photographs, messages, or notes about you; (c) iteminthephysicalorsexualviolencecategoryiscodedas
wrote sexual messages or graffiti about you on bathroom “1” in the dichotomous composite measure. The composite
walls, in locker rooms, or other places; (d) spread sexual frequency measures for a given outcome (e.g., sexual vic-
rumors about you; said you were gay or a lesbian, as an timization)arethesumtotalofthefollowingvaluesforeach
insult; spied on you as you dressed or showered at school; categorical response (0 coded as 0, 1–3 coded as 2; 4–9
(e) “flashed” or “mooned” you; (f) touched, grabbed, or codedas6.5;10+codedas10)foreachrelevantitem(e.g.,
pinched you in a sexual way; (g) intentionally brushed up thefrequencyofrecentsexualviolencevictimizationequals
againstyouinasexualway;(h)pulledatyourclothingina thenumberoftimesinthepast6monthstherespondentwas
sexualway;(i)pulledyourclothingoffordown;(j)blocked pushed,grabbed,shoved,orkickedintheprivatepartsplus
your way or cornered you in a sexual way; (k) made you thenumberofinstancesofunwanted‘privatepartscontact’
kisshimorher;and(l)madeyoudosomethingsexual,other reported by the respondent). Most of the violent victimiza-
than kissing. The items for this survey were adapted from tion measures had Cronbach’s alpha scores above .80, and
other work (AAUW Educational Foundation 1993, 2001; onlyonemeasurewasbelowthe.70level(theprevalenceof
Basileetal.2009;FineranandBennett1999)andwereused any peer violence perpetrationin Wave 1 at0.60).
in our Cleveland study (Taylor et al. 2010a). All of the
sexual harassment victim and perpetrator measures have Behavioral Intentions The intention of the students to
Cronbach’salpha scoresabove0.80.Wenote thatananon- engageinoravoidviolenceisanimportantcontrolmeasure
ymous reviewer of this manuscript raised concerns of (Jaffe et al. 1992; Wekerle and Wolfe 1999). We measured
decreased statistical power for alpha values below 0.80. behavioral intentions by asking about willingness to inter-
vene in harmful situations, avoid violence, engage in retal-
Sexual and Physical Violence Victimization and Perpetra- iatory behavior, and engage in violence. We provided a
tion Wemeasuredtheprevalenceandincidenceofviolence varietyofscenariosforthestudentstoconsiderinassessing
bothintermsofvictimizationandperpetration,distinguish- their intentionstouse ornotuseviolence. From thebehav-
ing the nature of the relationship (specifying whether the ioral intentions survey items (Taylor et al. 2010a; Ward
victim/perpetrator was a peer2 or a dating partner3). These 2002), we developed a single summed scale. All the inten-
itemsweredesignedtoassesstheimpactofDV/Hprograms tionstoreduce oravoidviolencemeasuresacrossWaves1,
(Foshee et al. 1998; Taylor et al. 2008; Ward 2002). The 2, and 3have Cronbach’s alpha scores above 0.75.
surveys included prevalence (yes/no) and incidence (num-
ber of times) questions on the experience of being a victim DV/HKnowledge Wealsocontrolledforknowledgerelated
and/or perpetrator of sexual violence and physical/non-sex- to definingDV/H, its prevention, and consequences. Based
ual violence by/of peers and people that you have dated. ontheknowledgeindexfromourearlierwork(Tayloretal.
2008), our knowledge measures included “true” or “false”
questions about State rape laws, definitions of abuse and
2Defined for students as, “People about the same age as you. They
sexual harassment, resources for help, and sexual harass-
maybeyourclassmates,kidsinyourschool,neighborhood/commun-
ity, and are both girls and boys the same age as you. You might or mentmyths.Theitemsforthisindexweredevelopedbythe
mightnotknowthemorthinkofthemasyourfriends.”
studyteamandpilottestedpriortouseinNYC.Ourknowl-
3Definedforstudentsas,“Peoplewhoyouare‘goingwith,’‘dating,’
edge measures across Waves 1, 2, and 3 had acceptable
‘goingsteadywith,’orhave‘goneoutwith,’‘dated,’or‘gonesteady
with’for atleastaweek.Thisgroupalso includesanyonewhoisor Cronbach’s alpha scores (Nunnally and Bernstein 1994;
wasyourboyfriend/girlfriendforatleastaweek.” Streinerand Norman 2003) of0.66, 0.77 and 0.80.
68 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
Other Variables The surveys included demographic and variableswheretherewerepre-treatmentdifferencesintoour
background descriptors of the students, including age, gen- latermodelsascovariatestoremoveanypotentialbiasesthese
der,andethnicity/racialbackground.Wealsoincludedques- smallimbalancesmighthavepresented(Armitage1996).
tions on prior attendance at an educational program about Thesamplewasfairlyevenlysplitbetweensixth(n01,266
sexual assault, harassment, or violence, and individuals’ students)andseventhgradestudents(1,388students).Slightly
history of dating. moreoftheoverallsamplewasfemale(53%).About34%of
our sample was Hispanic, and among students not self-
identifying as Hispanic the distribution was 31 % African-
Pre-treatment Study Arm Comparison and Sample American,16%Asian-American,13%whiteandtheremain-
Description der in the “other” racial category). Over a third of the study
sample(40 %) had prior experiencewitha violence preven-
The30publicmiddleschoolsinourstudyincluded58sixth tion educational program. Nearly half of the sample (48 %)
grade classrooms and 59 seventh grade classrooms reportedatleastoneexperienceofbeinginadatingrelation-
(n02,655 students). The vast majority of the schools had a shipthatlastedaweekorlonger.Arelativelylargenumberof
studentbodyofmostlynon-whites(86%ofthestudentsin sixthandseventhgradestudentshadexperiencedsexualvio-
the 30 schools were non-white). The schools in our study lenceindating(20%)andpeer(66%)relationshipsatsome
have low levels of student mobility (out of the 30 schools point in their life. Further description of the sample at the
only 7 % of the students leave the school each year), and individuallevelisprovidedintheproject’sfinalreport(Taylor
91 % of the students are in attendance each day. A third of etal.2011).Alldifferencesattheschoollevelarecontrolled
the students are from families below the poverty level. The for in the analyses through individual characteristics and
schools in our study are fairly large with on average 891 accountingforclusteringbyschool.
studentsineach,andonaverage108suspensionsareissued
each year in the 30 schools. The mean ratio of students to Statistical Analyses
teachersis14.Regardingacademicperformance,only57%
of the students in the schools meet or exceed the minimum Given the nested nature of our data, variables at the student
standards for math proficiency, and only 48 % of the stu- level, class level, and building level may be correlated.
dentsintheschoolsmeetorexceedtheminimumstandards Becauseoursubstantiveinterestisintheindividualoutcomes,
for reading proficiency. No statistically significant differ- and because of the need to adjust for correlated standard
ences were observed across the four randomly assigned errors,wedonotpresentsimplemeansforthetreatmentand
conditions based onthese aggregateschool characteristics. control groups. We included a robust variance estimate to
Next we examined individual-level survey data from the adjust for within-cluster correlation called the Huber/White/
baselinesurvey.Apre-treatmentcomparisonoftheinterven- sandwich estimate of variance (Froot 1989; Huber 1967;
tionandcontrolgroupsbasedonindividual-levelsurveydata Rogers 1993; White 1980; Williams 2000), the vce (cluster
from the baseline survey indicated that all four groups were clustvar) optionin Stata 8.0 . For our count data, we used a
similar regarding the following characteristics at baseline: negativebinomialregressionwitharobustvarianceestimate.
Age,gender,priorexperiencewithdatingviolenceprevention Weusedlogisticregressionwitharobustvarianceestimatefor
programs, number of people dated for more than 1 week, our prevalence outcome variables. To address missing data
lengthofpriordatingrelationships,anylifetimepeerviolence from partially completed questionnaires, we used multiple
victimization,andanylifetimedatingviolencevictimization. imputationsintheanalyses.Wecreatedfivemultiplyimputed
Despite random assignment, some small but significant pre- datasetsinSPSS18.0(applyingthefullyconditionalspecifi-
treatmentdifferencesinthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsdid cation, an iterative Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
emerge(Tayloretal.2011)intheareasofrace,datinghistory, method)andanalyzedthedatasetsinStata8.0,whichsupports
andpriorlifetimehistoryofperpetratingviolenceandbeinga theanalysisofmultipleimputeddata.
victimofsexualharassment(basedonindividual-levelsurvey We modeled sexual harassment and sexually violent
data). Overall, while we found few differences between the behavior outcomes in for Wave B (immediately post-
treatmentandcontrolconditionspriortotheexperiment,most treatment) and Wave C (about 6-months post-treatment).
ofthesewerenotverylargedifferences.Forthemostpart,the For each model we present only the treatment assignment
four study conditions were similar on the majority of our variable (coded as “Building Only,” “Classroom only,”
measuresleavingtheonlymajordifferencesacrossthegroups “Both/Combined” and the control group as the “reference”
theirassignedinterventionorcontrolcondition.Additionally, category) (see Table 1). However, where the intervention
random assignment procedures were followed closely. All conditions were significantly effective at reducing the out-
schoolsassignedtotreatmentreceivedtheirappropriatetreat- come (compared to the control), we also tested the relative
ment. The same held true for the controls. We included the effectivenessofthethreeseparateinterventions.Inpractice,
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 69
Table1 Sexualharassmentandsexualviolencemodels
Outcome Treatmentcondition Immediatelypostintervention Sixmonthspostintervention
SexualHarassmentVictimization:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.287(.27) 2.067(.48)**
Classroomonly 0.936(.18) 1.208(.21)
Building&classroom 1.031(.22) 1.180(.24)
Frequency Buildingonly 0.912(.11) 0.695(.10)**
Classroomonly 0.881(.12) 0.990(.11)
Building&classroom 0.896(.11) 0.736(.10)*
SexualHarassmentPerpetration:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.047(.20) 1.161(.18)
Classroomonly 0.995(.18) 0.918(.15)
Building&classroom 0.838(.16) 1.001(.17)
Frequency Buildingonly 0.947(.13) 0.658(.12)*
Classroomonly 0.950(.14) 0.963(.13)
Building&classroom 0.859(.12) 0.744(.13)
PeerSexualViolenceVictimization:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.013(.17) 0.662(.12)*
Classroomonly 0.902(.15) 0.965(.16)
Building&classroom 0.680(.12)* 0.659(.11)**
Frequency Buildingonly 0.911(.13) 0.654(.13)*
Classroomonly 0.823(.12) 0.929(.13)
Building&classroom 0.658(.10)** 0.597(.10)**
PeerSexualViolencePerpetration:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.062(.20) 0.527(.11)**
Classroomonly 0.856(.16) 1.115(.18)
Building&classroom 0.726(.13) 0.524(.10)***
Frequency Buildingonly 1.063(.15) 0.605(.12)*
Classroomonly 0.877(.16) 1.027(.13)
Building&classroom 0.868(.14) 0.644(.11)**
DatingSexualViolenceVictimization:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.007(.26) 0.498(.12)**
Classroomonly 1.059(.31) 0.919(.19)
Building&classroom 0.838(.19) 0.843(.18)
Frequency Buildingonly 0.971(.22) 0.474(.13)**
Classroomonly 1.044(.25) 0.856(.15)
Building&classroom 0.809(.17) 0.790(.15)
DatingSexualViolencePerpetration:Prevalence Buildingonly 1.045(.30) 0.503(.18)
Classroomonly 1.199(.35) 1.038(.26)
Building&classroom 0.833(.21) 1.013(.25)
Frequency Buildingonly 0.938(.20) 0.479(.17)
Classroomonly 1.211(.33) 0.946(.22)
Building&classroom 0.731(.17) 0.947(.22)
Adjustedforstudentage;gender;ethnicity/racialbackground;priorattendanceataneducationalprogramaboutsexualassault;studenthistoriesof
harassment,violence,anddating;DV/Hknowledgescores,andbehavioralintentions.Ourimmediatepost-treatmentoutcomemodels(WaveB)use
ourbaseline(WaveA)covariates.Our6-monthspost-interventionoutcomemodels(WaveC)useourWaveBcovariates(wealsoestimatedthis
sameWaveCoutcomemodelwithWaveAcovariatesandfoundthattheresultsdidnotdiffer).*p<.05;**p<.01;***p<.001
becausetheresultsrevealedtheclassroom-onlyintervention distribution of these covariates across the treatment and
not to be effective, the only comparisons discussed are control groups that may have occurred due to chance
between the “building only” and the combined conditions. (Armitage 1996; Gelber and Zelen 1986). We estimated
While not strictly necessary because we are working with models of Wave B outcome measures with baseline (Wave
experimental data,we also introduceda set ofcovariates to A) covariates. We present estimated models of Wave C
ouroutcomemodels.Weadjustedforcovariatestoimprove outcome measures with Wave B covariates (we also esti-
theprecisionofthetreatmentcomparisonsbyreducingerror mated this same Wave C outcome model with Wave A
variance and correcting for any major imbalances in the covariates and found that theresultsdidnot differ).
70 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
Results treatment, at which point we estimate a 34 % reduction in
the prevalence of sexual victimization by a peer (OR0.659,
Sexual Harassment p0.011)forstudentsinthecombinedinterventionarmcom-
pared to students in the control group. This reduction was
Experienced Sexual Harassment as a Victim The results mirroredbyresultsreportedbystudentsinthebuilding-only
6monthsaftertheinterventionswereimplementedindicated intervention arm (OR0.662, p0.028). Further, the reported
a treatment effect contrary to expectations. The odds ratio frequencyofsexualvictimizationbyapeerindicatesthesame
(OR) of students in the building-only intervention reporting positiveeffectsofthebuilding-onlyandcombinedclassroom
the prevalence of any sexual harassment victimization was andbuildinginterventions.Sixmonthspost-treatment,results
107 % more than that of the control group (OR02.07, indicatea 35%reductioninthefrequency ofsexualvictim-
p0.002). However, the frequency of sexual harassment vic- ization by peers for students in the building-only treatment
timizationreportedbystudentsinthebuilding-onlyinterven- group (IRR0.654, p0.03) and a 40 % reduction in the fre-
tionwas30.5%lowerthanthereportedfrequencyofsexual quency of sexual victimization by peers for students in the
harassmentvictimizationinthecontrolgroup(IncidenceRate combinedtreatmentgroup(IRR0.597,p0.002).
Ratio,IRR0.695,p0.014).Likewise,thefrequencyofsexual A direct comparison of the combined and the building-
harassment victimization reported by students receiving the only interventions reveals that combined treatment lead to
combined classroom and building intervention was 26 % 33 % lower prevalence of reported victimization by peers
lower than the reported frequency of sexual harassment vic- compared to the control group and the “building only”
timizationinthecontrolgroup(IRR0.736,p0.026). group (OR0.671, s.e.0.11, p0.02) immediately post-
Giventhesefindings,wedirectlycomparedthecombined treatment. This finding is supported by the post-
and thebuilding-only interventions. The prevalence ofsex- intervention assessment of peer sexual violence victimiza-
ualharassmentvictimizationreportsinschoolsreceivingthe tionfrequency,forwhichthecombinedinterventionagainis
combined treatment (building included) was 43 % lower significantly more effective (28 %) than the building-only
(OR0.570, standard error, s.e.0.14, p0.022) than reports treatment(IRR0.722, s.e.0.11, p0.028).
ofsexualharassmentvictimizationinschoolsreceivingonly
thebuildingtreatment.Becausethecombinedtreatmentwas Perpetration in a Peer Relationship Six-months post-
not significantly different than the control group, these intervention,studentsassignedtothebuilding-onlyinterven-
results mean that while the building intervention appears tion as well as students participating in the combined class-
to increase the reported prevalence of sexual harassment room and building intervention reported significant lower
victimization, providing the building intervention in con- prevalence of perpetrating sexual violence on peers. The
junctionwiththeclassroominterventionisneutralcompared reductionwascomparable(approximately47%)forthetwo
tono intervention. groups(building-onlyOR0.527,p0.002;combinedinterven-
tion OR0.524, p0.001) in comparison to the control group.
Perpetrated Sexual Harassment Six months following the The reported frequency declined close to 40 % vis-à-vis the
intervention, the reported prevalence of perpetrating sexual control group for students experiencing the building-only
harassment was no different between the intervention and intervention(IRR0.605,p0.016)andthe“both”intervention
control groups. However, students in the building-only (IRR0.644, p0.009). However, there was no difference
interventionarmreporteda34%reductioninthefrequency between the building-only intervention and the “both” inter-
of perpetrating sexual harassment against others compared vention on this same measure of prevalence of perpetrating
tocontrol group reports(IRR0.658, p0.025). sexualviolenceonpeers(IRR0.939,p0.778).
Sexual Violencein Peer Relationships Sexual Violencein Dating Relationships
Victimization by a Peer Immediately post-treatment, the Victimization by a Dating Partner Six-months post-
resultsindicatea32%reductionintheprevalenceofsexual intervention, students in the building-only group reported
victimizationbyapeer(OR0.68,p0.025)forstudentsinthe 50%reductionintheprevalenceofsexualvictimizationby
combinedinterventionarmcomparedtostudentsinthecon- adatingpartner(OR0.498,p0.007)anda53%reductionin
trol group. Immediately post-treatment, the estimated fre- the frequency of such events (IRR0.474, p0.011). More-
quency of sexual victimization by a peer was also over, the building-only group reported a 40 % reduction in
significantlylower(34%)forstudentsinthecombinedinter- the prevalence of sexual victimization by a dating partner
vention arm compared to students in the control group (OR0.59,s.e.0.14,p0.025)6monthsaftertheintervention
(IRR0.658, p0.005). This finding persists 6-months post- comparedtothe“both”group.Thisisincontrasttothepeer
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 71
victimizationresults,forwhichthecombinedtreatmentwas interventionshasbeendocumentedinotherareasofcriminal
more effectivethan thebuilding-onlytreatment. behavior such as hotspots policing of violent crime areas
where areas near a treated area received similar benefits as
PerpetrationinaDatingRelationship Therewasnostatisti- thetreatedareas(ClarkeandWeisburd1994).Also,thisfind-
cally significant evidence for declines in perpetrating sexual ing of reductions in sexual violence is important given the
violenceagainstadatingpartnerforanyoftheinterventions generalscarcityofpositiveresultsinreducingsexualviolence
immediatelypost-treatmentor6monthslater. inadults(Lonswayetal.2009).
Althoughourearlierapplicationoftheclassroominterven-
tionintheClevelandareawaseffectiveinreducingpeer(but
notdating)violence(Tayloretal.2010b),inthisNYCstudy
Discussion theclassroomcomponentbyitselfwasnoteffectiveinreduc-
ing either forms of violence. There could be a number of
We explored the effectiveness of a DV/H prevention pro- reasons for this discrepancy in results. It is possible that the
gram for sixth and seventh grade students in 30 middle intervention is not effective in different contexts outside the
schools. This sample size exceeds other published experi- Midwestern, suburban environment of the Cleveland area
ments on youth DV/H (Foshee et al. 2000; Jaycox et al. study. The large urban, unique environment of NYC may
2006; Wolfe et al. 2009) allowing for a more powerful interactwiththenatureoftheclassroomintervention,reduc-
examination of treatment effects. Therefore, even if fairly ingitseffectiveness.Thepersonneldeliveringtheintervention
small statistical differences between the treatment and variedacrosstheClevelandandNYCsites.Basedonschool
control groups were to emerge we would have a stronger administrationpreferences,insomeClevelandschoolsteach-
probability of detecting those differences than earlier ers implemented the interventions; in other schools, a rape
studies. We report on sexual harassment and sexual vio- crisis center prevention specialist delivered the lessons. By
lence behavioral measures, although violence outcomes contrast in NYC, all of the lessons were implemented by
are sometimes not even measured in teen dating violence school personnel called substance abuse prevention special-
(TDV) prevention studies (Nightingale and Morrissette ists. Further, this study was not a replication experiment. In
1993; Rosen and Bezold 1996), where the focus has often Cleveland,wetestedtwoformsoftheclassroomintervention:
been on attitude/knowledge changes (Macgowan 1997; a ‘law and justice’ curriculum and an interaction-based cur-
Whitaker et al. 2006). riculum.InNYC,weintegratedthestrongestcomponentsof
Regardingsexualharassment,overall,thebuildinginter- eachcurriculumbasedonqualitativeanalyses,anditispossi-
vention was effective in reducing the frequency of both ble that this integrated NYC curriculum lost some critical
sexual harassment perpetration and victimization. While element present in the distinct Cleveland curricula. These
reportsoftheprevalenceofanyexperienceofsexualharass- resultsraisethequestionoftheneedforfurtherexperimenta-
ment victimization for students exposed to the building tion regarding classroom curricula components, comparing
intervention increased at 6-months post-treatment, the fre- the‘lawandjustice,’theinteraction-based,andtheintegrated
quency reported by students in the building-only interven- NYCcurriculatoacontrolcondition.
tion was lower, as were frequency reports from students in We did believe that a building-level intervention would
the combined classroom and building intervention. Further, makeanimportantadditiontoShiftingBoundaries,andhad
whendeliveredincombinationwiththeclassroominterven- hypothesized that the combined approach would be more
tion, the building intervention did not increase the reported effective.Ourdataprovidesupportforthevalueofthisnew
prevalence ofsexual harassment. building component both as a stand-alone intervention and
Regarding sexually violent behavior, the building-only implemented in combination with the classroom interven-
treatment and the combined intervention were consistently tion. More specifically, our hypothesis that the broader
effectiveinreducingsexualviolencevictimizationinvolving environmental intervention (combined treatment) would be
eitherpeersordatingpartnersat6-monthspost-intervention. more successful in reducing DV/H than classroom alone
Thiswasmirroredbyreductionsinsexualviolenceperpetra- was supported, in that the classroom intervention failed to
tionbypeersforstudentsinthebuildingintervention.While achieve the program goals on its own. The success of the
thefocusoftheclassroominterventionwasondatingpartner combined treatment in comparison to the building-only
violence, we believe that the building intervention (with its condition is mixed. In one case (for our Dating Sexual
broaderpreventionelementsandrelocationofschoolperson- Violence Victimization Prevalence measure), building-only
nelbasedonhotspotmappingofallviolentencounters)canbe is better than the combined treatment, but in two cases (for
effectiveforaddressingavarietyofformsofsexualviolence, our Peer Sexual Violence Victimization Prevalence and
even when combined with the classroom focus on dating Frequency measures) the combined treatment is better than
relationships.Thisphenomenonofdiffusionofbenefitsfrom the building-only treatment. Thus, our initial inference that
72 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
the classroom intervention paired with the building inter- possibility that the building-only intervention increased the
ventioncould be effective ispartiallysupported. proportion of students who were victims of sexual harass-
An argument can be made that the classroom sessions ment and that the other desirable results are themselves
could be effective, but they seem to need to be done in spurious. However, we do not believe there is a basis for
combinationwiththebuildingintervention.Itispossiblethat this type of interpretation. To begin with, the iatrogenic
the broader focus of the building intervention creates some finding emerged only for the building-only intervention,
importantchangesinthediverseNYCmiddleschoolclimate which was also associated with many positive findings.
thatallowedfortheclassroominterventiontohaveaneffect. We did not find any iatrogenic results for our classroom-
Futureresearchwillneedtomeasureclimatechangetoassess only or our both interventions. Next, the iatrogenic finding
thishypothesis.Thebuilding-onlyinterventionincludedmore onlyemergesonoursexualharassmentprevalencemeasure
material that focused on violence prevention more broadly, (i.e., did X occur, yes or no), and is countered by desirable
whiletheclassroomcurriculumfocusedmoreparticularlyon results on our frequency/incidence measures for the same
dating violence. Perhaps adjusting school personnel for hot- variable(i.e., howoften did Xoccur).
spots of violence can reduce peer violence as well as dating Furthermore, we need to consider the “other side of the
violence. These findings raise the question of whether we coin” (i.e., sexual harassment perpetration), for which we
shouldbethinkingofdatingviolenceinthecontextofyouth observed a decreased frequency. While not directly compa-
violencemorebroadly,ratherthanaddressingdatingviolence rable due to the different perspective of respondents when
as an isolated problem. This approach has been taken by answering questions about victimization and perpetration,
otherswithsomesuccess(Wolfeetal.2009). these measures do provide different accounts regarding the
There is clear potential for implementing the building efficacy of the building intervention in addressing sexual
intervention by itself. To date, most of the dating violence harassment.Thatis,theinterventionisfocusedonsixthand
preventioneffortsinschoolshavereliedonclassroomcurric- seventhgradestudents,butthevictimsmaybereportingon
ula, but we should not lose sight of the potential for other violence and harassment from eighth grade students who
pointsforinterventions.Forexample,onlinedatingrelation- were not the target of our intervention. Therefore, the per-
ship simulation games that communicate an anti-violence petration measure may be a better gauge of the success of
message (e.g., see http://jenniferann.org/2010-game-runner- the intervention since the sixth and seventh grade students
up-1.htm or www.refresheverything.com/gamechangers), who received our intervention can report on their behavior
andwhichyouthcanexploreindependently,couldbepromis- against all students, and their lower rates of perpetration
ing. The accessibility of an effective building intervention (inclusive of acts they may or may not perpetrate against
requiringfewerresourcesintermsofteachertime,classtime, non-sixthandseventhgrade students) areanindicator ofa
andmaterialsmaybeparticularlyappealingtoschooldistricts successfuloutcome.Wearealsoencouragedbythefactthat
operating with constrained resources under duress to meet there was nothing in our focus groups with students and
challenging academic targets. Given the mixed findings interventionists (Taylor et al. 2011) that would suggest that
regarding the relative effectiveness of the building interven- thebuildinginterventionwouldhavetheeffectofincreasing
tionimplementedonitsownversusin combinationwiththe sexual harassment victimization. Finally, we might be see-
classroom curriculum, schools (districts) might want to con- ing a reporting effect. That is, the intervention may have
siderascaledprogram,initiatingabuildinginterventionandif sensitized students to recognizing that they are a victim or
resourcesallowworkingintheclassroomtocomplementthe perpetrator so they were more likely to report this on the
building-levelapproach.Agradual“rampingup”fromimple- survey,butthosewhoweretrulyvictimsorperpetratorsmay
menting just the building-only component and gradually haveexperienced theseeventsorperpetratedtheseactsless
introducing the classroom component may bethe most real- frequently. Under this interpretation, the treatment helped
isticandfeasibleapproachesformanymiddleschools. studentsrecognizetheseactsasviolenceorharassmentand
helped decrease their frequency. In sum, we believe that
Backfire/Iatrogenic Finding while iatrogenic results need to be carefully considered, on
balancetheonenegativedoesnotofferastrongcaseforan
Despite our mostly positive significant findings supporting alternative interpretation of the mostly positive/desirable
thebuildingandcombinedinterventions,theresultthatthat results associated with our interventions.
the building-only intervention increased the reporting of
sexual harassment victimization (prevalence) was contrary Timing and Follow-Up
to our expectations. This iatrogenic finding needs to be
considered carefully, as it could have major implications Ourstudywaslimitedtotwofollow-uppoints(immediately
for the interpretation of the rest of our results. While this followingtheinterventionandabout 6months later), andit
finding may be spurious, we cannot summarily dismiss the is unclear whether our findings would dissipate over a
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 73
longer follow-up period (Foshee et al. 2004) or hold up confidential self-report surveys have become an accepted
(Wolfe et al. 2009). Additionally, while we are suggesting modality for collecting youth violence data.
that middle schools are an important intervention point for Like others in this area, we measured DV/H by asking
implementing Shifting Boundaries, more work needs to be aboutspecificactsagainstapartnerorpeer,suchaspushing,
done to assess its potential value (perhaps in a modified kicking, hitting, etc. (or been the victim of these acts). The
form) in high school settings. A booster version of Shifting measures used did not capture intensity, motivations or
Boundaries might be useful for students that already circumstances surrounding violent acts, nor did the meas-
receivedtheinterventioninmiddleschool,buta“first-time” uresdistinguishbetweenactsofoffenseordefense(Wolfeet
version for high school might also have value and may not al. 2009). Also, because of sensitivity concerns raised by
be “toolate.” school personnel regarding explicit measurement of sexual
However, given rates of violence reported by middle violence in a middle school population, we were limited to
school students, our study also suggests that the field may twomainitems(“pushed,grabbed,shoved,orkickedyouin
need to work with even younger groups to invoke a true your private parts” and “made you touch their private parts
primary preventioneffort.While there isa field ofresearch or touched yours when you did not want them to”), similar
on preventing violence in elementary school ages (Clayton toother research (Foshee etal. 1998).
et al. 2001; Wilson et al. 2003), we are not aware of much Wedidnotaskparticipantsabouttheirsexualorientation,
workbeingdonewithelementaryschoolstudentsinthearea soitisnotpossibletodetermineifourfindingswouldbethe
of the primary prevention of youth dating relationship (or sameforgayandlesbianrelationships.Wewerenotableto
precursors to dating) violence. Since our intervention is measure some important covariates (e.g., violence in the
designed for middle school students, our material would homeorcommunity)whichmayhavepotentiallyinfluenced
have to be adapted to be developmentally appropriate for our findings. However, given our use of a randomized
elementaryschoolstudentsornewinterventionswouldhave experiment these unmeasured variables should have by de-
to be designed. Knowledge regarding developmental pat- sign been balanced across the treatment and control groups.
terns in dating violence is currently limited, but would The broad range of racial/ethnic groups represented in our
inform outcomes studies varying effects at different time studystandsincomparisontosimilarDV/Hstudieslimitedto
points. While developmental trajectories have been exam- mainly White youth (Wolfe et al. 2009) and mainly rural
inedforelementaryagechildren(Aberetal.2003),todate, White youth (Foshee et al. 1998). However, our study was
theTDVdevelopmentaltrajectoryliteraturereflectingmore also done in the largest U.S. school district (NYC) and our
frequent measurement reveals a small number of studies, resultsmayonlybeapplicabletosimilarschooldistricts.
including: one small (n0192), short-term (24-months) Webelievemoreworkisneededtobetterunderstandthe
Canadian study of 14–16 year-olds (Wolfe et al. 2003); a mechanisms by which the interventions were effective in
3-yearstudyof13–19year-olds(n0973)conductedinrural improving DV/H behavior. We focus on the efficacy of the
North Carolina modeling mean trajectories for each out- intervention in this paper. Further work is necessary to
come (Foshee et al. 2009); and a study of 181 high school examinehowtheinterventionswork,andifthecomponents
students(Nocentinietal.2010).SuchassessmentsofDV/H of the TRA are critical mechanisms. Further, phenomeno-
orTDVfromalife-coursetrajectoryapproach(Elder1998) logical interviews with students would allow researchers to
should examine not only elementary school experience and explore these mechanisms rigorously through highly sys-
violence but also whether these early experiences affect tematic qualitative methods for inquiry and analysis (Cres-
young adulthood relationships. well1998;Patton1990)andallowtheresearchertoenterthe
field of perception of the program participants to elucidate
Limitations whatessential programexperiences thestudentsfeltcaused
them to change or not change. In this context, a phenom-
First, we relied on self-report surveys which reflect the enological interviewing approach is especially warranted
general limitations of self-reports (e.g., recall problems, given the dearth of knowledge on what students learn or
telescopingofevents,deliberateunder-reportingorexagger- failtolearnintreatment;whattheyrespondorrelatetomost
ating of behavior) (Jackson et al. 2000). We recognize the about treatment; and non-treatmentfactorsthat may lead to
possibility that there may be an interaction between the change inbehaviors.
treatmentconditionandreporting.Forexample,perpetrators
in one of the treatment groups may under-report violent
behaviorduetoheightenedawarenessoftheunacceptability Conclusions
andconsequencesoftheirbehaviors.Victimsinatreatment
condition may also limit reports of their experiences so as Our study confirms the importance of working with middle
not to be labeled as “a victim.” Despite these concerns, schoolstudentsonrelationshipviolence.However,givenrates
74 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
ofviolencereportedbymiddleschoolstudents,ourstudyalso Aber, J. L., Brown, J. L., & Jones, S. M. (2003). Developmental
trajectoriestowardviolenceinmiddlechildhood:Course,demo-
suggeststhatthe field may needtowork with evenyounger
graphic differences, and response to school-based intervention.
groupstoinvokeatrueprimarypreventioneffort.Whilethere Developmental Psychology, 39, 324–348. doi:10.1037/0012-
is a field of research on preventing violence in elementary 1649-39.2.324.
schoolages(Claytonetal.2001;Wilsonetal.2003),weare Ajzen,I.,&Fishbein,M.(Eds.).(1980).Understandingattitudesand
predictingsocialbehavior.EnglewoodCliffs,NJ:Prentice-Hall.
notawareofmuchworkbeingdonewithelementaryschool
Armitage, P. (1996).The designand analysis for clinical trials. In S.
studentsintheareaoftheprimarypreventionofyouthdating
Ghosh&C.R.Rao(Eds.),Designandanalysisofexperiments:
relationship(orprecursorstodating)violence.Sinceourinter- Handbook of statistics (Vol. 13). Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
vention is designed for middle school students, our material Elsevier.
Astor,R. A.,Meyer,H.A., &Behre,W.J.(1999).Unownedplaces
wouldhavetobeadaptedtobedevelopmentallyappropriate
andtimes: Maps and interviews about violencein high schools.
for elementary school students or new interventions would AmericanEducationalResearchJournal,36,3–42.doi:10.2307/
havetobedesigned. 1163504.
Using an experimental design in NYC middle schools, Astor, R. A., Meyer, H. A., & Pitner, R. O. (2001). Elementary and
middle school students’ perceptions of violence-prone school
we haveprovidedscientific evidencethat indicatesthat our
subcontexts. Elementary School Journal, 101, 511–528.
building intervention and the combination of our building
doi:10.1086/499685.
and classroom interventions can be effective in reducing Basile,K.C.,Espelage,D.L.,Rivers,I.,McMahon,P.M.,&Simon,
some forms of youth violence. Practitioners from domestic T.R.(2009).Thetheoreticalandempiricallinksbetweenbullying
behaviorandmale sexualviolenceperpetration. Aggression and
violence and sexual assault centers consume much of their
ViolentBehavior,14,336–347.
time and resources in school classrooms focusing on vio-
Boruch,R.(1997).Randomizedexperimentsforplanningandevalua-
lence, yet they often work with materials and approaches tion:Apracticalguide.ThousandOaks,CA:Sage.
that have not been rigorously evaluated or evaluated at all. Callahan,M.R.,Tolman,R.M.,&Saunders,D.G.(2003).Adolescent
datingviolencevictimizationandpsychologicalwell-being.Jour-
Our study helps fill this void of evidence-based guidance
nal of Adolescent Research, 18, 664–681. doi:10.1177/
and approaches. These results are encouraging and offer
0743558403254784.
support to our contention that these multiple levels of les- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010). Understanding
sons,activitiesandpedagogycanbeeffectivewithstudents teen dating violence - fact sheet. Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/TeenDatingViolence_
in sixth and seventh grades. As a result of this and prior
2010-a.pdf.Accessed2Nov2011.
studies, a body of scientific data is emerging about the
Clarke,R.,&Weisburd,D.(1994).Diffusionofcrimecontrolbenefits:
beneficial effects of DV/H interventions targeted to middle Observations on the reverse of displacement. Crime Prevention
school students. The success of the building intervention
Studies,2,165–184.
Clayton,C.J.,Ballif-Spanvill,B.,&Hunsaker,M.D.(2001).Prevent-
alone is particularly intriguing, in terms of not only its
ing violence and teaching peace: A review of promising and
effectiveness but because it can be implemented with very
effective antiviolence, conflict-resolution, and peace programs
fewextracoststoschools.Interventionssuchasour“build-
forelementaryschoolchildren.Applied&PreventivePsychology,
ing-only” approach areofcritical importancetoschool dis- 10,1–35.doi:10.1016/s0962-1849(05)80030-7.
Cornelius, T. L., & Resseguie, N. (2007). Primary and secondary
tricts during the current economic climate, a time in which
prevention programs for dating violence: A review of the liter-
fewer resources are available to address problems such as ature. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 12, 364–375.
DV/H. However, the impact of an intervention delivered doi:10.1016/j.avb.2006.09.006.
directly to students in classrooms cannot be dismissed. Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosingamongfivetraditions.ThousandOaks,CA:Sage.
School districts might consider a scaled approach (growing
Eaton,D.K.,Kann,L.,Kinchen,S.,Shanklin,S.,Ross,J.,&Hawkins,
a program gradually from the building-level to the class-
J.(2010).Youthriskbehaviorsurveillance-UnitedStates,2009.
room)ifresourcesarelimited.Weencourageotherresearch- MorbidityandMortalityWeeklyReport,59,1–142.
ersandprogramdeveloperstoexpandonthisstudyasthey Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course and human development. In W.
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology
pursue efforts to interrupt the precursors to youth dating
(pp.939–991).NewYork:Wiley.
violence.
Espelage, D. L., & Holt, M. K. (2007). Dating violence & sexual
harassment across the bully-victim continuum among middle
andhighschoolstudents.JournalofYouthandAdolescence,36,
799–811.doi:10.1007/s10964-006-9109-7.
References Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1999). Gender and power issues of peer
sexual harassment among teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal
Violence,14,626–641.
AAUWEducationalFoundation.(1993).Hostilehallways:TheAAUW Fishbein,M.(1967).Readingsinattitudetheoryandmeasurement.InK.
survey on sexual harassment in America’s schools. Washington, Glanz,B.K.Rimer,&K.Viswanath(Eds.),Healthbehaviorand
DC:AAUWEducationalFoundation. healtheducation:Theory,research,andpractice(pp.477–492).San
AAUW Educational Foundation. (2001). Hostile hallways: Bullying, Francisco:Jossey-Bass.
teasing, and sexual harassment in school. Washington, DC: Foshee, V. A., & Reyes, H. L. M. (2009). Primary prevention of
AAUWEducationalFoundation. adolescent dating abuse: When to begin, whom to target, and
PrevSci(2013)14:64–76 75
how to do it. In J. Lutzker & D. Whitaker (Eds.), Preventing National Online Resource Center on Violence Against Women
partnerviolence(pp.141–168).Washington,DC:AmericanPsy- (http://new.vawnet.org/category/Main_Doc.php?docid01655).
chologicalAssociation. Macgowan,M.J.(1997).Anevaluationofadatingviolencepreven-
Foshee,V.A.,Bauman,K.E.,Arriaga,X.B.,Helms,R.W.,Koch,G. tion program for middle school students. Violence and Victims,
G., & Linder, G. F. (1998). An evaluation of Safe Dates, an 12,223–235.
adolescent dating violence prevention program. American Jour- McMaster,L.E.,Connolly,J.,Pepler,D.,&Craig,W.M.(2002).Peer
nalofPublicHealth,88,45–50. topeersexualharassmentinearlyadolescence:Adevelopmental
Foshee,V. A.,Bauman,K.E.,Greene, W.F.,Koch,G. G.,Linder, perspective.DevelopmentandPsychopathology,14,91–105.
G.F.,&MacDougall,J.E.(2000).TheSafeDatesprogram:1- Mulford,C.,&Giordano,P.C.(2008).Teendatingviolence:Acloser
yearfollow-upresults.AmericanJournalofPublicHealth,90, look at adolescent romantic relationships. Washington, DC:
1619–1622. NationalInstituteofJustice.
Foshee,V.A.,Bauman,K.E.,Ennett,S.T.,Linder,F.,Benefield,T.,& Nightingale,H.,&Morrissette,P.(1993).Datingviolence:Attitudes,
Suchindran,C.(2004).Assessingthelong-termeffectsoftheSafe myths, and preventive programs. Social Work in Education, 15,
Datesprogramandaboosterinpreventingandreducingadoles- 225–232.
cent dating violence victimization and perpetration. American Nocentini,A.,Menesini,E.,&Pastorelli,C.(2010).Physicaldating
JournalofPublicHealth,94,619–624. aggression growth during adolescence. Journal of Abnormal
Foshee,V.A.,Benefield,T.,Suchindran,C.,Ennett,S.T.,Bauman,K. Child Psychology, 38, 353–365. doi:10.1007/s10802-009-
E.,&Karriker-Jaffe,K.J.(2009).Thedevelopmentoffourtypes 9371-8.
of adolescent dating abuse and selected demographic correlates. Nunnally, J., & Bernstein, I. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd ed.).
JournalofResearchonAdolescence,19,380–400. NewYork:McGraw-Hill.
Froot, K. A. (1989). Consistent covariance-matrix estimation with O’Keefe,M.(1997).Predictorsofdatingviolenceamonghighschool
cross-sectional dependence and heteroskedasticity in financial students.JournalofInterpersonalViolence,12,546–568.
data. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 24, 333– Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods.
355.doi:10.2307/2330815. NewburyPark,CA:Sage.
Gelber,R.D.,&Zelen,M.(1986).Planningandreportingofclinical Rogers,W.H.(1993).Regressionstandarderrorsinclusteredsamples.
trials. In P. Calabresi, P. S. Schein, & S. A. Rosenberg (Eds.), StataTechnicalBulletin,3,88–94.
Medicaloncology(pp.406–425).NewYork:MacmillianPublish- Rosen, K. H., & Bezold, A. (1996). Dating violence prevention: A
ingCompany. didacticsupportgroupforyoungwomen.JournalofCounseling
Gómez,A.M.(2010).Testingthecycleofviolencehypothesis:Child andDevelopment,74,521–525.
abuse and adolescent dating violence as predictors of intimate Sears,H.A.,Byers,E.S.,&Price,E.L.(2007).Theco-occurrenceof
partner violence in young adulthood. Youth & Society. adolescentboys’andgirls’useofpsychological,physically,and
doi:10.1177/0044118x09358313. sexually abusive behaviorsin their dating relationships. Journal
Gruber,J.E.,&Fineran,S.(2008).Comparingtheimpactofbullying ofAdolescence,30,487–504.
and sexual harassment victimization on the mental and physical Streiner,D.,&Norman,G.(2003).Healthmeasurementscales,prac-
healthofadolescents.SexRoles,59,1–13. ticalguideto theirdevelopmentanduse(3rded.).Oxford, UK:
Halpern,C.T.,Spriggs,A.L.,Martin,S.L.,&Kupper,L.L.(2009). OxfordUniversityPress.
Patterns of intimate partner violence victimization from adoles- Taylor, B., Stein, N., Mack, A. R., Horwood, T. J., & Burden, F.
cence to young adulthood in anationally representative sample. (2008). Experimental evaluation of gender violence/harassment
Journal of Adolescent Health, 45, 508–516. doi:10.1016/ prevention programs in middle schools. Washington, DC:
j.jadohealth.2009.03.011. NationalInstituteofJustice.
Howard, D. E., Wang, M. Q., & Yan, F. (2007a). Prevalence and Taylor, B., Stein, N., & Burden, F. (2010a). The effects of gender
psychosocial correlates of forced sexual intercourse among US violence/harrassmentpreventionprogramminginmiddleschools:
highschooladolescents.Adolescence,42,629–643. Arandomizedexperimentalevaluation.ViolenceandVictims,25,
Howard,D.E.,Wang,M.Q.,&Yan,F.(2007b).Psychosocialfactors 202–223.
associated with reports of physical dating violence among US Taylor, B. G., Stein, N., & Burden, F. (2010b). Exploring gender
adolescentfemales.Adolescence,42,311–324. differences in dating violence/harassment prevention program-
Huber, P. J. (1967). The behavior of maximum likelihood estimates minginmiddleschools:Resultsfromarandomizedexperiment.
undernonstandardconditions.Paperpresented attheFifthBer- Journal of Experimental Criminology,6,419–445. doi:10.1007/
keley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, s11292-010-9103-7.
Berkeley,CA. Taylor, B., Stein, N. D., Woods, D., & Mumford, E. (2011).
Jackson, S. M., Cram, F., & Seymour, F. W. (2000). Violence and Shifting Boundaries: Final report on an experimental evalu-
sexual coercion in high school students’ dating relationships. ation of a youth dating violence prevention program in New
JournalofFamilyViolence,15,23–36. York City middle schools. Washington, DC: National Institute
Jaffe,P.G.,Sudermann,M.,Reitzel,D.,&Killips,S.M.(1992).An of Justice.
evaluationofasecondaryschoolprimarypreventionprogramon Ward,K.J.(2002).Makingtheinvisiblevisible:Afeministevaluation
violenceinrelationships.ViolenceandVictims,7,129–146. of an adolescent gender violence prevention program (Doctoral
Jaycox,L.H.,McCaffrey,D.,Eiseman,B.,Aronoff,J.,Shelley,G.A., dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
Collins,R.L.,&Marshall,G.N.(2006).Impactofaschool-based Database.(AAT3050449).
dating violence prevention program among Latino teens: Wekerle, C., & Wolfe, D. A. (1999). Dating violence in mid-
Randomizedcontrolledeffectivenesstrial.JournalofAdolescent adolescence: Theory, significance, and emerging prevention ini-
Health,39,694–704. tiatives.ClinicalPsychologyReview,19,435–456.
Jouriles,E.N.,Platt,C.,&McDonald,R.(2009).Violenceinadoles- Whitaker,D.J.,Morrison,S.,Lindquist,C.,Hawkins,S.R.,O’Neil,J.
centdatingrelationships.ThePreventionResearcher,16,3–7. A.,&Nesius,A.M.(2006).Acriticalreviewofinterventionsfor
Lonsway, K. A., Banyard, V. L., Berkowitz, A. D., Gidycz, C. A., the primary prevention of perpetration of partner violence.
Katz, J.T.,Koss, M.P., et al. (2009).Rape prevention and risk Aggression and Violent Behavior, 11, 151–166. doi:10.1016/
reduction: Review of the research literature for practitioners: j.avb.2005.07.007.
76 PrevSci(2013)14:64–76
White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance-matrix youth: A controlled outcome evaluation. Journal of Consulting
estimator and a direct test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica, and Clinical Psychology, 71, 279–291. doi:10.1037/0022-
48,817–838.doi:10.2307/1912934. 006x.71.2.279.
Williams, R. L. (2000). A note on robust variance estimation for Wolfe,D.A.,Crooks,C.,Jaffe,P.,Chiodo,D.,Hughes,R.,&Ellis,W.
cluster-correlated data. Biometrics, 56, 645–646. doi:10.1111/ (2009). A school-based program to prevent adolescent dating
j.0006-341X.2000.00645.x. violence a cluster randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics &
Wilson, S.J.,Lipsey,M. W.,& Derzon,J. H.(2003).Theeffectsof AdolescentMedicine,163,692–699.
school-based intervention programs on aggressive behavior: A Wolitzky-Taylor,K.B.,Ruggiero,M.,Danielson,C.K.,Resnick,H.S.,
meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, Hanson,R.F.,&Smith,D.W.(2008).Prevalenceandcorrelatesof
71,136–149.doi:10.1037/0022-006x.71.1.136. datingviolenceinanationalsampleofadolescents.Journalofthe
Wolfe,D.A.,Wekerle,C.,Scott,K.,Straatman,A.L.,Grasley,C.,& AmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescentPsychiatry,47,755–
Reitzel-Jaffe,D.(2003).Datingviolencepreventionwithat-risk 762.doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e318172ef5f.
