THE AMERICAN URNAL
JO
OF- PATHOLOGY
VOLUME XXVIII SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER, 1952 NuMER 5
THE PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS
A STUDY OF 12I CASES*
JEA LAPREsLE, M.D.,t MARTIN G.NETSKY, M.D., andH. M. ZiMMERMAN, M.D.
(From the Laboratory Division, Montefiore Hospital, New York 67, N.Y.)
Although thebiologic behavior of meningiomas is relatively uniform,
their histologic appearance is variable. Because of this, numerous
classifications1-7 of two fundamental types have been proposed for
them: embryologic and purely morphologic.
The embryologic approach, bestexemplified in the studyby Globus,'
aims at finding evidence of different stages of embryologic develop-
ment of themeninges in the different appearances of the tumor. There
are, however, several objections to this method. First, the origin of the
meninges in neuro-ectoderm or mesoderm is still uncertain. In fact
the importance of this origin probably has been over-emphasized. In
discussing the classification of tumors in general, Willis8 recently
stated: "The germ-layers, the status of which has of recent years
greatly declined even for the embryologist, are devoid of significance
for the pathologist." Secondly, the analogy between the neoplasm and
the developing meninges based on microscopic appearance is easy to
make but difficult to prove. Such an idea, therefore, must remain
merely an hypothesis. Lastly, the correlation between prognosis and
so-called histofunctional differentiation is so poor that classifications
based on embryogenetic concepts cannot be justified even on clinical
grounds.
In the morphologic approach an attempt is made to classify menin-
giomas by the histologic features considered most prominent. Such
classifications are valuable to the pathologist, but difficulties are en-
countered when the schemes become too complicated. This is fre-
quently the case since, as it is well known, meningiomas are extremely
polymorphic. Cushing and Eisenhardt,6 in their morphologic classi-
*Aided by a grant from the Sandy Schneider Memorial Fund.
Received forpublication, March 14, 1952.
tBoursier de la Direction Gn6rale de Relations Culturelles du Ministere des Affaires
ktrangires de France.
757
758 LAPRESLE, NETSKY, AND ZIMMERMAN
fication, thus achieved nine types subdivided into twenty variants,
although they admitted that "Fine architectural distinctions, while of
academic interest, are unimportant unless they can be shown to have
some bearing on clinical treatment and prognosis." The latter obvi-
ously is not true of the existing classifications.
Based on a study of I2I meningiomas, it is our intention to present
a new approach which affords a means for describing rather than
classifying these neoplasms and in so doing sets up diagnostic criteria.
The most important step in the understanding of these tumors was
made by Schmidt" in 1902, when he discovered that the cellular struc-
ture of meningiomas was comparable to cell clusters capping the
arachnoid villi and the cell nests included in the dura mater. This work
unfortunately was forgotten until Cushing,10 in 1922, re-emphasized
the finding and further showed that the location of such cell nests were
"favoured seats of origin" of meningiomas. The structural identity of
normal arachnoid villi and the meningioma is indeed striking and offers
the best criterion for recognition of the tumor. Such an origin explains
why meningiomas, although arachnoidal in origin, are frequently ad-
herent to the dura mater, but may occur in other regions such as the
ventricular system or Sylvian fissure, without attachment to pachy-
meninges.
With this in mind, the description of meningiomas may be consid-
ered. These neoplasms are composed of two parts: (i) the basic
cellular constituents which are meningocytic or fibroblastic cells organ-
ized at least in some places in a specific pattern known as a whorl;
(2) the secondary components made up of different forms of tissue
which may be absent, minimal, or prominent in the tumor. The
meningeal origin of the neoplasm can be established with certainty
only when some part of it contains meningocytic or fibroblastic cells
arranged in a whorl pattern. The secondary components are not
essential to the diagnosis although they are seen in recurrent patterns
which frequently are of aid to the pathologist. The meningiomas will
thus be considered using the following outline. It is emphasized that
this is viewed as a description rather than as a classification.
Basic celluilar constituent Secondary compotent
(fibrous
Iopsammomatous
Meningocytic angiomatous
Fibroblastic Meningioma with (or without) ha ~n ~~g ~~i ~o ~~b ~ll pa oms att oi usc components
or
Mixed J Mixed i cos hs oe no du rs ous
sarcomatous
PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS 759
Such a plan is flexible but precise and clear. Any meningioma can be
defined exactly, if necessary, by addition of new components. For
example, a tumor may be described as meningocytic meningioma with
prominent angiomatous component. This concept not only provides
rigid criteria for the diagnosis of the neoplasm but also enables the
problem of differential diagnosis of other neoplasms of the meninges
to be handled easily. As will be shown, these other tumors can repro-
duce the patterns of secondary components butdonot contain thebasic
cellular constituents.
MATERIAL
Location, Age, and Sex (Text-fig. i). Of the I21 meningiomas, 2I
were situated intraspinally and IOO intracranially. It is peculiar that
40f
35
30
25
10 -
0 20
am
Z Igr
.0 .\wF=> INTRASPINAL s.
.....~ IVMAL- N-.
L20-29
0 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79 80-89
AGEBY IO-YEARPERIODS
Text-figure x. Distribution of 121 meningiomas by age, sex, and location within the
cranial cavity andalong the vertebral canal. The age is that of the patient at the timeof
thefirst exploration, or at necropsy if not explored.
all the intraspinal tumors were located in the thoracic region except
one at the sixth cervical level.
The youngest patient was 24 years old, the oldest 8o. In I02 cases
(84 per cent), the tumors were encountered in patients between 40
76o LAPRESLE, NETSKY, AND ZIMMERMAN
and 69 years of age, confirming the well known fact that meningiomas
are seen most often in adults.
Of the ioo intracranial tumors, there were 67 in women and 33 in
men, a ratio of 2:I. The predominance in females was still more strik-
ing in thespinal tumors which were present in 20 women and only one
man. The peak of frequency was io years earlier in the males.
Duration of Symptoms. Duration is calculated as the time between
thefirstsymptomand discoveryatoperation. Twenty-two meningiomas
(i8 per cent) were discovered only at necropsy. Of the remainder,
52 (43 per cent) had a clinical duration of less than 2 years. The
longest duration was 15 years. There was no relation between sex and
duration.
Radiologic Signs. Only radiologic signs directly produced by the
tumor are considered here, omitting manifestations of increased intra-
cranial pressure or other diseases. Radiologic alterations were found
in 24 cases (20 per cent). Condensation and hypervascularization
were encountered more often than destruction of bone. These changes
were most frequent in three locations: sphenoid ridge, parasagittal
region, and on the convex surface of the brain.
PATHOLOGIC ANATOMY
Gross Appearance and Relationship to Brain and Its Envelopes
The meningiomas were extremely variable in size. They ranged
froma"pinhead" to an enormous tumor covering the entire base of the
right hemisphere. The largest tumor weighed 150 gm. The tumors
were well limited and generally, but not always, encapsulated. Their
external surface was often granular, berry-like, or lobulated. They
were gray, brown, or red; firm, soft, or mixed in consistency, and
rarely sandy or calcified. Numerous dilated vessels often were seen
on the surface or on the adjacent dura. Hemorrhagic or necrotic foci
in mixtures of different ages were encountered. Cystic cavities were
present infrequently.
Meningiomas were usually single tumors; multiple meningiomas
were encountered but four times. In one instance the tumor occurred
as a diffuse meningiomatosis associated with neurofibromatosis. The
possibility of multiple meningiomas must be kept in mind when con-
sidering the problem of recurrences.
Attachment to the dura mater, which is one of the best means of
identification of a tumor of this type at the operating table, was absent
in 2 cases. In onecase therewasacoarselylobulatednodule suspended
byabranch oftheleft middle cerebralarteryin thebaseof the Sylvian
PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS 76I
fissure near the midline. In the second case there was a lateral intra-
ventricular tumor.
In relation to the brain, meningiomas are generally well demarcated,
but they can send finger-like expansions into the neural parenchyma."'
In one unusual case, the tumor was large and flat, attached to the
dura mater, but covering the external surface of the right hemisphere
from the motor to the occipital region, forming a giant meningioma
"en plaque" but without alteration of bone (Fig. i). Frequently, the
brain adjacent to the tumor is compressed. As a result, in one case
the cerebral tissue which underwent cystic degeneration was removed
at the first exploration and diagnosed as cystic astrocytoma of the
temporal lobe. Two years later, a second craniotomy revealed a menin-
gioma of the middle fossa. It was realized then that compression by
the meningioma had produced the misleading cystic gliosis.
Basic CeUular Constituents
"Basic cellular constituents" designates the cells which resemble
arachnoid cells and are arranged in a pattern similar to the arachnoid
villi (Fig. 2). This appearance is the key to the histologic diagnosis of
meningioma. The cells belong to two chief types: meningocytic and
fibroblastic. These terms are employed because they are established
by usage and clear from a descriptive standpoint, though both desig-
nateelements which are arachnoidal inorigin. The cell of meningocytic
type is generally the larger. The nucleus is round or oval, clear, and
usually without a nucleolus. The cytoplasm is acidophilic, homoge-
neous or slightly granular, and frequently has ill defined boundaries
so that syncytial appearances are encountered. The cell of fibroblastic
type is elongated. The nucleus is slender and dark, the cytoplasm
reduced to aband arounditandprolonged by fibrous ends well demon-
strated by silver impregnation methods. Such an appearance must be
distinguished from the fibrous component (discussed later). These two
types and all their intermediate appearances may be encountered in
any meningioma. In addition, peculiar features sometimes are met:
foamy cells with laterally placed nuclei; abnormal nuclei which are
enormous, or pyknotic, or vacuolated, or contain one or two nucleoli.
The tumor cells are arranged in the specific pattern of the whorl.
This pattern is more or less obvious, sometimes involving the entire
tumor, in other instances being only suggested. It was present in each
of the 12I meningiomas of this study. The whorl may be found in
three chief forms: The first is what may be called the syncytial or
plasmodial whorl (Fig. 3). This is made up of meningocytic cells
762' LAPRESLE, NETSKY, AND ZIMMERMAN
forming either large syncytial areas or small plasmodial formations
resembling multinucleated cells. Often the whorl-like arrangement is
not obvious and generally is more easily visible at low magnification.
The second form of whorl may be called the loose-meshed whorl
(Fig. 4). It is made up of fibroblastic cells attached to each other by
their fibrous ends. The third form is a small concentric whorl (Fig. 5)
composed of cells surrounded by concentric fibrous, acellular rings.
This corresponds to the type II, variant 3 of Cushing and Eisenhardt.-
Whorls of this kind are much less frequent than those of the first two
types. Of course, all transitional forms are possible and they areoften
intermingled in a single neoplasm. The whorls usually are not formed
around blood vessels. Though the whorl is the best evidence of a
meningioma, it is not always morphologically prominent and other
patterns can be demonstrated.
The next important feature is the parallel arrangement. This is
made up of meningocytic or, much more frequently, of fibroblastic
cells disposed in straight or curved rows. The appearance, without
achieving the true palisading arrangement, can be close to that of the
neurofibroma. Because of this, the differential diagnosis on occasion
may be very difficult. This is especially true if it is not certain whether
the tumor has any attachment to the dura or nerve root. Whorls are
sometimes very rare and only suggested in a meningioma; foamy cells
and macrophages, so frequent in the neurofibroma, may occur in a
meningioma. There is a definite morphologic difference between the
parallel arrangement of cells in a meningioma and the palisading
arrangement in a neurofibroma. In the first, the cells are oval, dense,
and much more uniformly distributed (Fig. 6); while, in the second,
there are some areas either without cells or poorly cellular, alternating
with clusters of densely packed, dark cells (Fig. 7).
The pleomorphism of meningiomas is such that many other appear-
ances may be encountered, but these were infrequent in this series of
cases. Broad sheets of meningocytic cells forming a syncytium and
penetrated in places by foamy and fatty cells sometimes were seen
(Fig. 9). In a few cases there was a relative absence of organization,
the cells being disposed without any order in large areas (Figs 8 and
io). A "disposition stellaire" has been mentioned by Bertrand, Guil-
laume, and Olteanu12 to describe this lack of cellular arrangement.
Other frequently encountered cellular arrangements include small
clusters of syncytial meningocytic cells in the middle of parallel rows
of cells, and large syncytial formations surrounded by narrow strands
of fibroblastic cells. It is important to emphasize that no matter how
PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS 763
unusual the cellular pattern, the presence of a whorl establishes the
definitive diagnosis. In the only 2 cases in which this structure was
not found on initial examination, serial sections thereafter disclosed
typical whorls (Figs. 8, IO, 12, and 15).
The Secondary Components
The secondary components are responsible in large part for the
notable polymorphism of meningiomas. They may be absent, minimal,
or prominent, and are mixed in exceedingly diversified ways. The
presence of these components contributes also to the difficulty in
diagnosis. Other tumors arising in relation to meninges may reproduce
exactly the appearance of the secondary components, but do not con-
tain the basic cellular constituents in whorl pattern.
The Fibrous Component. The fibrous component appears generally
either as thick strands of fibrous tissue dividing the tumor into large
islands (Fig. ii) or as a delicate network (Fig. I3). A few slender,
dark cells sometimes are encountered in the fibrous tissue. In one case
(Figs. I2 and i5) this component was so striking that the tumor
appeared like a "fibroma" of the dura mater. The discovery of several
whorls in serial sections proved it was in reality a meningioma and
actually of arachnoidal origin. In 2 other cases a fibrous core was
surrounded by highly cellular tissue (Figs. I4 and i6). In two tumors
the fibrous component formed thick bands of fibrous tissue having the
form of whorls (Fig. I7). Some arachnoid cells remained in it and for
the most part it was homogeneous. The fibrous component should be
distinguished from what we have called the fibroblastic part of the
tumor.
The Psammomatous Component. The psammomatous component
is certainly one of the most suggestive findings, without being pathog-
nomonic. A vascular or cellular origin for this structure has been dis-
cussed frequently in the past. It is our feeling that psammoma bodies
more often have a cellular origin, being the result of transformation of
a whorl. The successive steps in this transformation (cellular, hyalin-
ized, incompletely calcified, and completely calcified whorls) are well
shown in Figure i8. It is possible also to find calcification in the wall
or the thrombosed lumen of a vessel or in the connective tissue strands
of both the dura and the fibrous component of a meningioma. But
such calcification is rarely seen and often is morphologically different
frompsammomas, being elongated and without the characteristic onion
bulb pattern. Calcific formations, when present, may be single or mod-
erately or extremely numerous, the tumor being sandy when cut or
764 LAPRESLE, NETSKY, AND ZIMMERMAN
casting a shadow in the roentgenogram. Psmmoma bodies may be
confluent and form calcified masses (Fig. 20). Finally, it must be
pointed out that psammoma bodies may be encountered in normal
meninges or choroid plexuses.
The Vascular Component. Two kinds of vascular component are
found: one frequent, the other rare. The first is called angiomatous
because it is characterized by well formed, mature vessels with thin
or thick walls and in places narrow or obliterated lumina (Fig. i9).
These vessels are often disposed in small clusters. The angioblastic
appearance is quite different and in this series was prominent only in
one case (Fig. 2I). The tumor contains many vascular spaces, tri-
angular or elongated, limited by several slender cells which fill the
spaces between the vessels. The appearance can mimic that of heman-
gioblastoma. Criteria have been given to distinguish these tumors: the
almost exclusive localization of hemangioblastoma in the posterior
fossa; presence of a capsule in a meningioma, but of a cyst in a
hemangioblastoma. The only reliable way to make the diagnosis of
meningioma, in our opinion, is to find in the tumor meningocytic or
fibroblastic cells arranged in whorls.
The Lipomatous Component. The simple presence of macrophages
filled with lipid material and generally found along connective tissue
does not constitute the lipomatous component (Fig. 22). This is com-
posed of adipose tissue whose cells are large and round or oval; they
are optically empty, presenting a small, dark, laterally placed nucleus
whichis limited byathin membrane. The fatty cells are located within
the neoplastic tissue itself (Fig. 23). The presence of true fat may
be confirmed by specific fat stains, since distention of the tissue by
edema or by young vascular spaces may present a similar appearance.
Suchatrue lipomatous component was foundonly three times, whereas
macrophages with lipid material are banal. The question of a lipoma
mayarise in these cases, until the discovery of typical meningiomatous
tissue establishes the true diagnosis.
The Osseous Component. The most frequent relation between
bone and meningioma is invasion of bone by neoplastic tissue filling
haversian canals (Fig. 24), the bone itself being either unaltered, or
destroyed, or excited to proliferation with osteoblasts appearing in
concentric lamellae. The tumor itself, however, may form osseous
tissue. This was found to be the case in one instance in which bone as
well as osteoblasts were present in the center of the meningioma.
The Chondrous Component. The chondrous component is a rarity.
In one case, a large cartilaginous formation was present (Fig. 25).
765
PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS
The Sarcomatous Component. Thephrase meningiomawith sarcom-
atous component is employed to emphasize that the tumor is a menin-
gioma as well as a sarcoma. This enables the pathologist to distinguish
other malignant tumors of the leptomeninges such as diffuse sarco-
matosis and melanosis which are sometimes confused with meningi-
omas. By "sarcomatous component" is meant the addition to typical
meningiomatous tissue of some features of malignancy such as mitotic
figures, abnormalnuclei, necrosis, and hemorrhages, indicatinga malig-
nant evolution, at least from the pathologic standpoint (Figs. 26 and
27). Indeed, the prognosis is not necessarily bad in these cases, and
the discordance between pathologic diagnosis and clinical experience
has been stressed by some authors.612 This discrepancy is the chief
reason for separating clearly a meningioma with sarcomatous com-
ponent from a sarcoma of the meninges, the prognosis of the latter
being considerably worse. Meningioma with sarcomatous component
was encountered three times, a fatal outcome having occurred after
6 months inonecase andafter io months in another. The third patient
is still living after 3 years.
Associated Diseases
Twocases withcurious coincidental neoplasms were found. The first
was a meningioma of the cerebral convexity discovered at necropsy in
a female, 45 years old, who died of carcinoma of the breast with mul-
tiple metastases to cerebral dura, cerebrum, and cerebellum, and to
the meningioma itself (Fig. 29). The second case was that of a menin-
giomaofthecerebellopontine anglemingledwithanependymomain the
same location.
The classical association between multiple meningiomas and von
Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis was encountered in one instance.
Small tumors of both types were numerous in this case and, peculiarly,
several neurinomas were found within the spinal cord. Still more inter-
esting in this case was the discovery of a third type of neoplastic
tissue made up of large cells with stippled protoplasm and one or
sometimes two lateral nuclei (Fig. 30). This tissue was intimately
mixed with the meningiomatous part of a tumor arising from the falx
and extending into the right cerebral hemisphere. This tissue had the
appearance of a myoblastoma. Such an appearance has been seen
before (Fig. 25, type I, variant4 of Cushing and Eisenhardt6). It has
been described as a muscular tumor by Abrikossoff3 although it may
occur in regions without muscle. Later, Leroux and Delarue14 con-
sidered it as made up of "cellules mesenchymateuses de type histio-
766 LAPRESLE, NETSKY, AND ZIMMERMAN
cytaire." From a study of 5I cases, Fust and Custer15 concluded that
it was a special type of neurofibroma, and recently Pearse1 inter-
preted it more especially as a perineural fibroblastoma. Our case is
interesting because it is another example of the association between
meningioma and neurofibroma, and furnishes an additional argument
in favor of the neurogenic origin of the so-called myoblastoma.
Histologic and Clinical Correlations
Three components were most common in the meningiomas: fibrous,
psammomatous, and angiomatous; the others were rare. There was
no correlation between histologic appearance and clinical duration
except for the sarcomatous component, which may be said in general
to be a more rapidly growing neoplasm than the usual meningioma.
The biologic behavior of meningiomas is, in fact, remarkably constant
despite their polymorphism.
There was, on the contrary, some correlation between morphologic
appearance and location of the neoplasm. Fibroblastic cells and paral-
lel arrangement were prominent in tumors of the posterior fossa, in
the psammomatous component in the spinal tumors, and in the menin-
giomas of the sphenoid ridge. Less frequently, a vascular component
was found in the tumors on the cerebral convexity and in the para-
sagittal region. It is of interest that radiologic and macroscopic
alterations of bone were most common also in those cases in which
the meningiomas were on the sphenoid ridge, cerebral convexity, and
in the parasagittal area.
Histologically, the important fact about these meningiomas, also
stressed by previous authors, is that they were extremely polymorphic,
a mixture of several of the various components having been seen in
some of the tumors. An association of two sharply different types of
tumor is seen in Figure 28. This demonstrates how discovery of a
single component may be related to the plane of the section. These
facts emphasize the difficulty in classifying meningiomas rigidly.
SUMMARY
A new approach to the interpretation of meningiomas is suggested,
based on a clinicopathologic study of 12I cases. The present concept is
that meningocytic or fibroblastic cells, alone or in .combination, are
the basic cellular constituents of these neoplasms. The diagnosis is
established by the finding of such cells in the characteristic whorl
pattern. There are thus meningocytic meningiomas, fibroblastic menin-
giomas, and mixed types. Secondary components (lipomatous, heman-
giomatous, psammomatous) may or may not be associated with these
PATHOLOGY OF MENINGIOMAS 767
cells. The secondary components are notessential for the diagnosis, but
fordescriptivepurposesmaybeincludedasin "fibroblastic meningioma
with mild psammomatous component." The flexibility of this scheme
permits adaptation of the diagnosis to the extreme polymorphism of
meningiomas. The tumor is strictly defined in morphologic terms and
can be described clearly and completely.
Mr. AntolHerskovitzprepared the photomicrographs.
REFERENCES
i. Oberling, C. Lestumeurs desmeninges. Bull. Assoc. franc. p. I'4tude du cancer,
I922, II,365-384.
2. Roussy, G., and Cornil, L. Les tumeurs meimngees. Ann. d'anat. path., I925,
2, 63-79.
3. Rio Hortega, P. Para elmejor conocimiento histologico de las meningoexoteli-
omas. Arch. espani. Oncol., I930, I, 477-570.
4. Bailey, P., andBucy, P. C. Theorigin andnature of meningeal tumors. Am. J.
Cancer, 193I, I5, I5-54.
5. Globus, J. H. Themeningiomas. A. Research Nerv. & Ment. Dis., Proc., I935,
I6, 2I0-265.
6. Cushing, H., and Eisenhardt, L. Meningiomas. Charles C Thomas, Springfield,
1938, 785 pp.
7. Courville, C. B., and Abbott, K. H. On the classification of meningiomas. A
surveyofninety-five casesinthelight of existing schemes. Bull.LosAngeles
Neurol. Soc., I94I, 6, 21-31.
8. Willis, R. A. Pathology of Tumours. Butterworth & Co., Ltd., London, I948,
992 pp-
9. Schmidt, M. B. Ueber die Pacchioni'schen Granulationen und ihr Verhaltniss
zu den Sarcomen und Psammomen der Dura mater. Virchows Arch. f. path.
Anat., I902, 170, 429-464.
I0. Cushing, H. The meningiomas (dural endotheliomas): Their source, and
favoured seats of origin. Brain, I922, 45, 282-3I6.
ii. Petit-Dutaillis, D., and Ectors, L. A propos de certaines formes anormales des
meningiomes; tumeurs multiples, tumeurs recidivantes, tumeurs infiltrantes.
Presse mid., I936, 44, 486-490.
I2. Bertrand, I., Guillaume, J., andOlteanu, I. ttude histologique de I30 meningi-
omes.Rev.neurol., I948, 8o, 8I-99.
I3. Abrikossoff, A. tYber Myome, ausgehend von der quergestreiften willkiurlichen
Muskulatur. Virchows Arch. f. path. Anat., I926, 260, 2I5-233. Weitere
Untersuchungen iuber Myoblastenmyome. Ibid., I93I, 280, 723-740.
I4. Leroux, R., and Delarue, J. Sur trois cas de tumeurs a cellules granuleuses de
la cavitebuccale. Bull. Assoc. franc. p. I'etude du cancer, I939, 28, 427-447.
i5. Fust, J. A., and Custer, R. P. On the neurogenesis of so-called granular cell
myoblastoma. Am. J. Clin. Path., I949, I9, 522-535.
i6. Pearse, A. G. E. Thehistogenesis ofgranular cellmyoblastoma (? granular-cell
perineuralfibroblastoma). J.Path. &Bact., I950, 62, 35I-362.
[Illustrationsfollow]
DESCRIPTION OF PLATES
Allphotomicrographs are of hematoxylin and eosin preparations except Figure I
whichwasstainedbytheNissltechnic.
PLATE io8
FIG. i. Giantmeningioma showninacoronalsection ofbrain, extending overdorsal
surfaceofbrainanddeepintothemedianfissure.
FIG. 2. Normal arachnoid villi in superior longitudinal sinus. X 230.
768
RF ¢:@ ..
i kR_
_-*- .' w' ^b._
_i f A
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE I08
es Ot7 f .it.i_St4X_S_
_r AS
C..8
_wX i t.X<.'
_*ss 'fXt#S
m_ Ft.* Nt
_r Gbx1x1
... sMM
F ftJ! _L...r ;$t *-7'': .5F rf - '-k3A Ll! c_
_W_. -
$i*4- t r 'iili; 2&-w>}
__
=i,. ^Wk
3
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology ofMeningiomas
769
PLATE I09
FIG. 3. Syncytialwhorls formedbymeningocytic cells. X 550.
FIG.4. Whorls of loose-meshed type. X 550.
770
AMERICAN JOURNTAL OF PATHOLOGY, \VOL. XXXVIII PLATE I09
;*wsv,'.*A
4.
;~,, .
|3k'1 Q
4
- _:~.
Lapresle, Netsky,. and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
77'
PLATE II0
FIG. 5. Whorls of concentric small type. X I50.
FIG. 6. Parallel arrangement formed by fibroblastic cells in a meningioma. X I50.
FIG. 7. Palisading arrangement in a neurofibroma. X I50.
772
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, V'OL. XXVIIIP PLATE IIO
5
s.. .w,.
7
6
Lapresle, Netskv, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
773
PLATE III
FIG. 8. Meningiomra of unusual type in which cells are without special organization
andthe tumorcannot easilybe identified as a meningioma. For comparisonwith
Figure Io. X I50.
FIG. 9. Broad sheets of meningocytic cells forming a syncvtium and penetrated in
places by foamy and fatty cells. Two psammoma bodies are visible. X 260.
774
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE III
8 9 ZM~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~L
S f<'0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~6
|_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~A
LaprsleNesy an Zimra PahlX of Meinioa
I
775
PLATE II2
FIG. io. A portion of the tumor shown in Figure 8, found in serial sections, demon-
strating two characteristic syncytial whorls. X 220.
FIG. ii. Thick strands of fibrous tissue divide the tumor cells into small islands.
X I50.
776
-66 - - k*; - s
_E
o. . ;_
1D 1 EPF}w;_SI;A
S +ei { | t.^ WJS
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE I12
M.F F#ht-s.<
^evo>..*Yl=.a..a *s ;<n
*_:!!t**9 ; irB 8
i s..>,5 ia;E a.1BStb
b_ ?s 6 4} xss y
K ss_E >oL;_
__. 4_
_e*_;_ew_<_;_
_ ;
__;^W
_
_r_
.);n1 \:w
__
!rq
ll
Lapresle, Netsl;y, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
777
PLATE II3
FIG. I2. Unusual type of fibrous component resembling a scar. The tumor cannot
be identified easily as a meningioma. For comparison with Figure I5. X I50.
FIG. I3. Delicate network of fibrous tissue with some fibroblastic cells and slight
admixture of meningocytic cells. This secondary fibrous component should not
be confused with the pure fibroblastic type seen in Figure 6. X I50.
778
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATIHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE II3
_"Iafr. -D0-
___ _w~0..=93
:gw ~~~~~~~~
12.;__ _r
13
Lapresle, Netskv, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
779
PLATE II4
FIG. I4. Higher magnification of the field shown in Figure i6, on the border of
the fibrous core. X I5o.
FiG. I5. Aportion of the tumor shown in Figure I2 found in serial sections. demon-
strating a characteristic whorl. X 0oo.
FIG. i6. Fibrous core in a cellular meningioma. X 22.
780
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE I1I4
VA;Fi; e .; E a
14 15
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
78I
PLATE II5
FIG. I7. Thick, homogeneous, fibrous component forming whorls. X I20.
FIG. I8. The various stages of formation of psammoma bodies are shown: cellular,
hyalinized, partially and completely calcified whorls. X 230.
782
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATIIOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE II5
17
I18
g44
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
783
PLATE ii6
FIG. I9. Angiomatous component in meningocytic meningioma. X I20.
FIG. 20. Fusion ofpsammoma bodies to form large calcified zones. X I35.
FIG. 2I. Angioblastic component formed by numerous immature vascular spaces.
X 225.
784
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE II6
19
IW!.&* '.',
iAMIft-N-0ft
.. ......*illl -,
s:'Will",
V, 1'01'..A.:-
APP,
I-AA
2
a..... ^...`!V--,lll0-
A
_P-V
a
Lapresle, Netskv, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
785
PLATE II7
FIG. 22. Lipid-laden macrophages and lymphocytes adjacent to meningocytic menin-
gioma. X I50.
FIG. 23. True,lipomatous component in meningocytic meningioma. X i ,o.
FIG. 24. Invasion of haversian canals by neoplasmwithout alteration of surrounding
bone. X II0.
FIG. 25. Chondrous component in a meningioma. X 235.
786
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE II7
3t +' X n t JE~~~~~~~
-2,6~.
22
23
-f. ..
24 25
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
787
PLATE II8
FIG. 26. Focus of necrosis in sarcomatous component of a fibroblastic meningioma.
Whorls andparallel arrangements of the basic cells are seen. X I50.
FIG. 27. Pseudo-palisading arrangement around another focus of necrosis in same
tumor as in Figure 26. X I5O.
788
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE II8
26
27
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
789
PLATE II9
FIG. 28. Two differenttypes ofmeningioma in the same tumor lie sharply separated
andattachedto durabelow.Thisillustrates howdiscovery ofa single component
maybeamatter of chance. X 30.
FIG. 29. Metastasis of carcinoma ofbreast to a meningioma. X 330.
FIG.30. Myoblastoma in association withfibroblastic meningioma. X 2IO.
790
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PATHOLOGY, VOL. XXVIII PLATE lII
28
-. _, ..
29 30
Lapresle, Netsky, and Zimmerman Pathology of Meningiomas
79I
