fective services
Conduct disorder
Contraception
Substance abuse
R&k
Suicide
Clinics
A major concern of health providers is outreach to
high-risk ppdations. er-ci adolescents con- models of health care de&e
From the Department of Psychiaty, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
Address reprint requests to: Arlene R. Sti@zan, Ph.D., The George
Warren &mu School of Socid Work, Washington University, Ei9zdetl
& Skinker Boulevards, St Louis, MO 63130.
Manuscriit accepted March 1 I, 1987.
8 society far Adolescent Medicine, 1986
published by Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., 3 Vanderbilt Ave., New York, NY loUi
ET AL. JOURNAL OF ADOLESCENT HEALTH CARE Vd. 9, No. 4
tmlkmal health programs in similar communities ‘E&a 1. Age, Sex, and Race Differences in Clinic
Populations (PI= 2,787)
(St. Louis, Buffalo, and New Orleans). The consol-
idated services are specifically designed to offer a Percent
full range of mental and physical health services to
Age (Yr)
adolescents. In contrast, the traditional health ser- 13-14 15
vices provide care based on medical needs such as 15-16 39
17-M 46
gynecology, pediatrics, and dentistry, and provide
SeX
care for all age ranges from child to adult.
Male 33
The two-wave design will allow evaluation of the Female 77
clinics’ awareness and treatment of the problems Race
reported by adolescents in the first wave, and of the Waite 22
Black 70
impact of these different types of health services on
Hispanic/other 8
their parents’ mental and physical th in the sec-
ond wave. This paper, based on data from the first
wave, reports patterns of health problems and help
9&iIIg.
toms. Those about mental health included depres-
sion, anxiety, suicide ideation, behavior problms,
The adolescents participating were selected for in-
terviews by the research team in the order that they
presented to the clinics for care. The adolescents
understood that these interviews were totally in-
dependent of their health care. Whenever possible, Psychiatric diagnoses were based on computer
interviews were completed on site immediately be- algorithms that combined symptoms according to
fore or after a clinic visit. Otherwise, an appointment in DSIvI-III (5). With the excep-
for a future interview was arranged. Postponed in- isorder, questions to elicit symp-
terviews were usually completed within a few days
of the clinic visit either on site or at a location mu-
tually convenient for i Studies of the reliability and va
From November 19 been conducted by comparing
cents between the ages 0 lay interviewers’ versus psychiatrists’ interviews in
&viewed. The number varied across cities from 131 clinical and general population addt samples (7,8).
tients depending on the number of undu- The modified version of the DIS used for our study
tient visits during the period. No attempt allows lifetime and current diagnoses of major
was made to stratify by age. The clinic patients were depression, dysthymia, and drug and/or alcohol
predominantly female (77%), black (70%), and age abuse and dependence. The DIS depression section
15 years or older (35%) (Table 1). Only 3.6% of the also provides information about swicide ideation and
adolescents selected for interviews refused to par- behavior. Youths whom we consider suicide idea-
ticipate; no reasons were specified. tors had one or more of the following symptoms:
frequent thoughts of death, 2 weeks or more of
wanting to die, thiig of committing suicide, or
a history of attempting suicide.
nt
The diagnosis of conduct disorder is based on
e interview asked about the youth’s social envi- questions from the Diagnostic Interview for Chil-
ronment, health, lifestyle, and help seeking. The dren and Adolescents (DICA). The DICA is a struc-
questions about the social environment concerned tured interview protocol designed to diagnose
household members, employment, school, and psychiatric disorders occurring in individuals under
StreSS events. Those about physical health con- the age of 18 years according to DSM-III criteria.
cerned chronic and acute illness, injuries, sexually Levels of parent-child agreement for the DICA have
transmitted diseases, pregnancy, and somatic symp- been established for individual symptoms and di-
l@InSo f Youths Clinic Use for Tar
Percent of these
Percent Percent of patients who
with prc3bIems patients witkp sougM or
ttis cond~~~~i n received cape
Physica heaItb problems
the last year within the Biast
Any cRronic ihess 23.4
(n = 2,787) year
Asthma 8.9
Injury in last year 4.2 Patients who met criteria for
SexuaIlya ctive 79.0 6.1 48.5
If female, if sexuatiy active, ever 24.3 31.3
&=gnant Patients witI3a dia
If SexuaIIya ctive, bad sexually conduct disorder 11.5 25.9
transmitted disease 6.5 Patients v&h substance
Mental health behavior Problems (Past year) 5.8 22.2
Thireeo r mom depressive symptoms 20.5 SexualBya ctive females
Jailed 5.6 (n = 2,149) 74.4 63.1
Drunk three or more times 7.7
“Care for birtIac ontrol needs.
Substance use 24.8
4.4
Phvsical fig& 25.7 nts had
oxicated
associated with sexual
patients being sexually ac-
tive, and 47% of the female patients having had a help were not requesting OF receiving It. By their
pregnancy. own admission, only 60% of %he sexually
Need for the care of mental health and behavioral youths ewer used birth control, kt alone u
a suicide attempt ir? the last year. P&m
quarter had engaged in physical fights, a
6% had been jailed in the last year. In the last year,
JOURNAL OF ADOLESCENT HEALTH CARE Vol. 9, No. 4
STiRMAN ET AL.
abuse increase the risk for homicide and accidental
as loss of appetite, fatigue, and sleep disturbance
death. These causes claim many more lives of
clustered together in time duri;\g the last year. Yet
less than half of these patients sought or received yomgsters than do physical illness or unwanted
help for their depression. pregnancy. It seems clear that the health clinics have
the opportunity to provide help for these problems
Suicide Iderotiona nd Be/&&r. tithough there is an because the frequency is high among theu patients.
association between depression and suicide, the However, our findings suggest that high-risk ado-
overlap is far from complete. Many depressed ad- lescents typically do not seek help for these prob-
olescents are not suicidal, and some, suicidal ado- lems. The highest rate of help seeking occurred for
lescents do not have symptoms of depression. Of the physical care needs of sexually active females,
youths who reported suicide idea- as securing a contraceptive, but even then it
tion, only i$% met the criteria for a diagnosis of ot exceed tie thirds. Thus, even in the current
major depression. national climate in which considerable attention is
One fourth of all patients reported having had being given to the prevention of adolescent preg-
suicide thoughts or behaviors within the last year. nancy, a substantial number of sexually active girls
Nevertheless, the treatment gap was substantial as who are in contact with a medical clinic are not ask-
only one third of the patients with suicide ideation ing for or being offered contraceptive help. Al-
or behavior had sought help during the year. though considerable variation in help seeking for the
other four mental health conditions was found, in
Conducr L&r&r. Eleven percent of the patients each case less ?han half of those identified by the
met criteria for a DSM-ILI diagnosis of a conduct interview as having a high-risk condition sought or
disorder within the last year. Nevertheless, only received help. The rates of care for suicide ideation,
26% of those conduct-disordered youths sought or conduct disorder, and substance abuse were partic-
received help for their behavior problems. Thus, less ularly low, with less than a third of those youths
than one in three of the patients displaying behav- identified by the research interview as having the
iors directly related to high community rates of mor- problem seeking or receiving help.
bidity and mortality received an intervention for These less than satisfactory rates of help seeking
those behaviors. are important, given that the sample youths had
already elected to visit a clinic for some type of help,
Substance Abuse or Dependency. Much of the mor- and at least some of them had had multiple clinic
bidity and mortality in inner-city communities contacts. This finding suggests that, during intake
may be associated with high rates of alcohol or procedures with adolescents, clinic staff may need
drug abuse and dependence. Although there was to increase the amount of probing or questioning,
a heavy use of alcohol and drugs (Table 2) in our particularly in the area of mental health problems,
population, the number of patients with alcohol which adolescents tend to perceive as inappropriate
or drug abuse or dependence (by DSM-III diag- oroblems to discuss with health care professionals
nostic criteria) tias too low for separate analyses. m this setting. It can be reasonably assumed that
The overlap was considerable. Only 61 youths nonpatients, or nonclinic attenders, may have even
had a diagnosis of alcohol abuti or dependence, lower rates of help seeking. The relatively low pro-
and only 11 had a diagnosis of substance abuse or portion of help seekers suggests that much work is
dependence. Therefore, the youths with a diagno- still needed in the arta of outreach to youths not
sis of alcdhol abuse/dependence and illicit drug using health services, as well as to youths who are
abuse/dependence were combined. Six percent of using health clinics but are not seeking care for the
the patients had substance abuse behavior in the types of conditions we examined. The predomi-
year, but only one in five sought or received help nance of females at our clinics further illustrates that
for their substana: &use. a major problem exists in attracting at-risk males.
The problems that we have singled out for discus-
sion are important because they put youth at a high This work was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foun-
dation (field work conducted by Survey Research Associates),
risk for death. Depression and suicide ideas increase
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Research sci-
the risk for suicide; conduct disorder and substance
entist Award (L.N.R.). MH-00334, and MH-17104.
July 1988 HEALTH SERVICE USE BY HIGH-RISKA DDLESCENTs 309
References nostic Interview Schedule: Its history, characteristics and va-
lidity. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1981;38381-9.
1. Compton AS. Health study of adolescents enrolled in the 7. Robins LN, Helter JE, Rat&if KS, et al. Valid&v of the di-
neighborhood youth corps. Public Health Rep 1%9;84585 agnostic interview schedule, version U: DSM-IB diagnoses.
96. Psycho1 Med 1982;12:855-70.
2. Roghmann KJ, Hoekelman RA, McInemy TK. The changing 8. Helzer JE, Robii LN, McEvoy LT, et al. A comparison of
pattern of primary pediatric care: Update for one community. &irai and dra8no;tic intem<ew s&&de diagnoses. Arch
Pediitxics 1984;73:363-74. Gen Psychiatry 198$&657-66.
3. Salisbury A], Berg RB. Health detects and need for treatment 9. Hejanic B, Reich W. Development of a structured psychiatric
of adolescents in low income families. Public Health Rep interview for children: Agreement between child and parent
1%9;84705-11. on individual symptoms. J Abnorm Cold Psycho1
4. Perkins MA, Valentine J, Lamb GA. Targeting health services: 1982:103307-24.
An approach to identifying excess risk in the inner city. Mass 10. Reich W, Herjanic B, Welner 2, et al. Development of a struc-
J Commun Health 1982;8-13. tured psychiatric interview for children: Agreement on di-
5. American Psychiatric Association. Dkgnosfic and statistical agnosis comparing child and parent interviews. J Abnorm
mmual of mental disorders( third edition), Washington, D.C., Child Psycho1 1982;10:325-36.
The American Psychiatric Association, 1980. 11. Weiner E, Reich W, Hejanic B. Washington University, De
6. Robins LN, Helzer JE, Croughan J, et al. The NIMH Diag- partment of Psychiatry, St. Louis, unpublished manuscript.
