VOL. 85-B, No. 4, MAY 2003
521
Outcome after reconstruction of the anterior 
cruciate ligament in athletic patients
A COMPARISON OF EARLY VERSUS DELAYED SURGERY
A. A. S. Meighan, J. F. Keating, E. Will
From the Royal Inﬁrmary of Edinburgh, Scotland
A. A. S. Meighan, FRCS (Trauma & Orth), Knee Fellow
J. F. Keating, FRCS (Trauma & Orth), Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
E. Will, MCSP, Research Physiotherapist
Department of Orthopaedic Trauma, Royal Inﬁrmary of Edinburgh, Lauris-
ton Place, Edinburgh EH3 9YW, UK.
Correspondence should be sent to Mr J. F. Keating.
©2003 British Editorial Society of Bone and Joint Surgery
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.85B4.13743 $2.00
e randomised 31 patients with acute tears of the 
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) to receive either 
early (within 2 weeks) or delayed (8 to 12 weeks) 
reconstruction using a quadruple hamstring graft in 
order to determine if there was any functional 
advantage to early reconstruction. Outcome measures 
included return of knee movement, muscle 
dynamometry, International Knee Documentation 
Committee (IKDC) scores and Tegner activity levels.
Two cases of symptomatic deep-venous thrombosis 
occurred in the early group. The mean range of 
movement was signiﬁcantly greater at two weeks in the 
delayed group. Quadriceps muscle power was 
signiﬁcantly better in the delayed group at 12 weeks (p < 
0.05). These trends were evident at later time points, but 
were not statistically signiﬁcant. One patient in each 
group had clinically signiﬁcant knee stiffness at 52 
weeks. IKDC scores and Tegner activity levels were not 
signiﬁcantly different at 52 weeks. We conclude that 
there is no functional advantage to be gained by early 
reconstruction of the ACL.
J Bone Joint Surg [Br]  2003;85-B:521-4.
Received 7 August 2002; Accepted after revision 30 January 2003
Postoperative stiffness of the knee is a well-recognised
complication of reconstruction of the anterior cruciate liga-
ment (ACL).1-3 In particular, early reconstruction after tears
of the ACL has been associated with an increased incidence
of stiffness and prolonged rehabilitation.4 A delay in surgi-
cal reconstruction also has a potential morbidity, such as
inability to return to employment or sporting activities, as
well as an increased risk of meniscal damage from further
W
injuries because of instability of the knee.5 Currently, many
surgeons prefer to treat injuries of the ACL with an initial
period of rehabilitation followed by reconstruction two
months or more after the injury.4,6
Previous studies have suggested that the risk of joint
stiffness is greatest if the surgery is carried out two to eight
weeks after injury.2 It has been proposed that early recon-
struction, within a week of injury, will minimise the risk of
stiffness. Immediate reconstruction in suitable patients may
have other advantages, such as a reduction in the overall
rehabilitation period and an earlier return to sporting and
occupational activities.7 On this basis many surgeons now
carry out an immediate reconstruction of the ACL on ath-
letic patients.5,8 Although modern methods of reconstruc-
tion with minimally invasive techniques and accelerated
rehabilitation appear to have reduced the risks associated
with early reconstruction, there is limited evidence in the lit-
erature to support this approach. Our aim in this prospec-
tive, randomised study therefore was to compare the
functional outcome of early and delayed reconstruction of
the ACL in order to determine whether there was an advan-
tage to early reconstruction. 
Patients and Methods
We randomised 31 patients with acute tears of the ACL by
selection of an envelope to either an early, within two weeks
(group I), or delayed reconstruction, between 8 and 12
weeks (group II). The inclusion criteria are given in Table I.
All patients were athletically active in a sport, which was
considered likely to cause symptomatic instability in a knee
which was ACL-deﬁcient. The activity rating of Tegner and
Table I.
The inclusion criteria
for 
entry 
into 
the 
study
comparing the outcome after
either 
early 
or 
delayed
reconstruction of the ACL
Acute ACL tear seen within 10 
days of injury
Athletically active
Less than 35 years of age
No associated injury to the 
medial collateral ligament
No previous ligament injury
No previous meniscal tear

522
A. A. S. MEIGHAN, J. F. KEATING, E. WILL
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
Lysholm9 is given in Table II. There were 28 men and three
women with a mean age of 21 years (15 to 35). Most rup-
tures had occurred while playing football (18 patients),
rugby (6 patients) and basketball (4 patients).
All the patients were seen at a specialist soft-tissue knee
injury clinic between October 1996 and May 2000. The
diagnosis was made on the basis of an acute haemarthrosis
associated with clinical signs of laxity of the ACL. Patients
with associated medial collateral ligament (MCL) sprains
were excluded. Group I (13 patients) had an early recon-
struction carried out within two weeks. Group II (18
patients) had preoperative physiotherapy to restore knee
movement and underwent reconstruction between eight and
12 weeks after injury.
We conﬁrmed the diagnosis at the time of surgery and
the ACL was reconstructed with a quadruple hamstring graft
inserted by an arthroscopically-assisted, single-incision
technique. On the femoral side an Endobutton secured the
graft and on the tibial side a soft-tissue interference screw.
The patients in both groups underwent an identical post-
operative programme of accelerated rehabilitation. This
concentrated particularly on the management of the soft-
tissue swelling, the recovery of full extension of the knee
and muscle control, and on proprioception exercises.
All patients were followed up for one year and none was
lost to follow-up. Clinical assessments were made before
operation and after surgery at two, six, 12, 24, and 52
weeks. Any postoperative complications were recorded. A
research physiotherapist (EW), blinded to the randomisa-
tion, carried out isokinetic muscle testing of the quadriceps
and hamstring muscles with a dynamometer (Biodex system
2; Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, New York) at 12, 24
and 52 weeks after operation. The range of knee movement
was measured with a long-arm goniometer. There was an
active warm-up period before each test, followed by meas-
urements of ﬂexion and extension at 180˚/second. The phys-
iotherapist repeated the tests ten times using standardised
commands. The values obtained in the injured limb were
compared with those of the uninjured side, which was con-
sidered to be normal for that patient. We expressed the
results for the injured knee as a percentage loss when com-
pared with the normal side. The IKDC score assessed func-
tional outcome.10,11
Statistical analysis. A comparison of means was carried
out by Student’s t-test. For non-parametric data we used the
Mann-Whitney U test for unpaired data and the Wilcoxon
test for paired comparisons.
Results
Early postoperative outcome. The mean tourniquet time
for group I was 67 minutes compared with 74 minutes for
group II (p = 0.3). Meniscal tears were identiﬁed in three
patients in group I and in four in group II. The presence of a
meniscal tear was not associated with a poorer outcome
during the period of study. The reconstruction failed in one
patient in group II shortly after the 12-week assessment. He
subsequently underwent a revision reconstruction and his
data are not included beyond the 12-week assessment. In
group I there was one superﬁcial wound infection and two
patients developed a symptomatic deep-vein thrombosis and
required anticoagulation. 
Range of movement. The range of ﬂexion was reduced in
group I for all measurements made in the ﬁrst 12 weeks
after surgery (Table III). This difference was signiﬁcant at
two weeks. The trend was evident throughout the period of
follow-up, although the differences were most apparent
during the ﬁrst three months (Fig. 1). There was no signiﬁ-
Table II.
The change in Tegner activity
rating of patients before injury and at the
52-week follow-up after reconstruction of
the ACL
Tegner 
activity 
level
Before injury
(number of 
patients)
At 52 weeks
(number of 
patients)
2
0
1
5
0
3
6
2
7
7
16
10
8
2
2
9
9
6
10
2
2
Table III.
Range of knee movement (degrees) for the
early (group I) and late (group II) groups, 12 weeks after
reconstruction of the ACL
Follow-up 
(weeks)
Group I
Group II
2
11 to 76*
8 to 93*
6
4 to 112
2 to 121
12
2 to 123
2 to 128
24
0 to 131
-1 to 131
52
-2 to 131
-2 to 131
* signiﬁcant, p <0.05
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2 week 
6 week 
3 month 
6 month 
1 year
Time
Loss of movement (%)
Early
Late
Fig. 1
Percentage loss of movement for early and late ACL-reconstructed knees
compared with the uninjured side. The range of knee movement was better
at all time points for those patients who underwent a delayed reconstruction
of the ACL.

OUTCOME AFTER RECONSTRUCTION OF THE ANTERIOR CRUCIATE LIGAMENT IN ATHLETIC PATIENTS
523
VOL. 85-B, No. 4, MAY 2003
cant difference in the loss of extension of the knee between
the two groups at any stage. At the ﬁnal follow-up (52
weeks) the mean range of movement in both groups was the
same. Clinically signiﬁcant residual stiffness (ﬁxed ﬂexion
deformity >5˚, ﬂexion <120˚) was present in one patient in
each group. The patient in group II subsequently underwent
a successful arthrolysis.
Muscle function. The mean quadriceps power and total
work were reduced in group I at all measurement intervals
(Table IV). This trend continued for 52 weeks but the differ-
ences were only signiﬁcant at 12 weeks (p < 0.03). Ham-
string power, torque and total work were reduced at 12
weeks in group I. The difference was not signiﬁcant. The
results after 12 weeks for the hamstrings were similar in
both groups.
Functional outcome. There were no differences in the
IKDC scores at 52 weeks. There were two abnormal results
in group I. One patient had a painful tibial ﬁxation screw
which impaired function at one year. This was subsequently
removed. The other had troublesome knee stiffness (range
of movement 10˚ to 122˚). He declined further surgical
treatment. In group II there were three abnormal results.
One patient had a signiﬁcant reinjury and ruptured the ACL
graft. Another complained of subjective instability although
the graft was intact. The third had persistent knee stiffness
(range of movement 5˚ to 120˚) and underwent an arthro-
lysis, which was successful in restoring movement.
The Tegner activity scores were reduced for the whole
study group when compared with their preinjury levels
(Table II; p < 0.002) with no differences between groups I
and II.
Discussion
We have found no evidence to suggest that an early recon-
struction is of beneﬁt to athletic individuals with an acute
rupture of the ACL. The movement returns more slowly and
the recovery of muscle function is delayed after an early
reconstruction. However, one year after surgery there was
no difference between early and delayed reconstruction in
terms of muscle function, range of movement and func-
tional outcome. There was an increased rate of complica-
tions in the early group with one patient having stiffness of
the knee and two having clinically signiﬁcant deep-vein
thromboses. There was no difference in the incidence of
meniscal tears between the two groups.
This is the ﬁrst randomised comparison of early and
delayed reconstruction of the ACL using objective outcome
assessments. The patients were carefully selected in order to
exclude patients with associated sprains of the medial col-
lateral ligament and previous problems in the knee. All
patients underwent identical surgical treatment and acceler-
ated postoperative rehabilitation and objective assessments
were undertaken by a research assistant who was blinded to
the randomisation. The main disadvantage of the study, the
small sample size, is mainly due to the pattern of presenta-
tion. Restrictions in access to acute orthopaedic services and
stringent inclusion criteria contributed to the difﬁculty of
recruiting larger numbers of patients.
Other studies have investigated the risks of immediate
or very early reconstruction of the ACL. Shelbourne and
Foulk12 found a delayed return of quadriceps strength in
patients who elected to have an early reconstruction and a
slower progress to sport-speciﬁc rehabilitation exercises.
An increased incidence of arthroﬁbrosis was also reported
if the reconstruction was carried out within one week of
injury.4 They therefore recommended that surgery be
delayed by at least three weeks, and suggested introducing
an accelerated postoperative rehabilitation programme to
reduce knee stiffness. Several authors have found similar
results, with an increase in arthroﬁbrosis and a decrease in
quadriceps strength after an acute reconstruction.2,13
These studies were retrospective, included a variety of lig-
ament injuries and surgical techniques, and had restrictive
postoperative rehabilitation regimes. Accelerated proto-
cols of knee rehabilitation with early knee movement after
reconstruction of the ACL are now common and not asso-
ciated with an increase in complications or morbidity.1
This has led to the widespread practice of early reconstruc-
tion on the basis that it may shorten rehabilitation and
allow an earlier return to the preinjury level of muscle
function and sporting activity, as well as an economic
advantage.7
Karlsson et al5 found that reconstruction between two
and 12 weeks after injury resulted in a higher activity level
for competitive athletes. There was also a decrease in
meniscal damage when compared with delayed surgery.
Other authors have found no differences in function or
strength tests relative to the timing of surgery.5,7,8 These
ﬁndings disagree with our results and those of Shelbourne et
al,4 in which recovery of muscle function was slower in the
early reconstruction group.
Table IV.
Total work deﬁcit, mean quadriceps power deﬁcit and peak torque deﬁcit of the
quadriceps, expressed as a percentage of the uninjured side. The results at 12 weeks were
signiﬁcantly better in those patients who had undergone a delayed reconstruction (p < 0.05)
Follow-up
(weeks)
Work
Power
Torque
Group I
Group II
Group I
Group II
Group I
Group II
12
36*
22*
36*
23*
35
24
24
16
9
13
7
19
11
52
11
4
10
4
13
4
*signiﬁcant, p <0.05

524
A. A. S. MEIGHAN, J. F. KEATING, E. WILL
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
We therefore conclude that there is no advantage in
early reconstruction for isolated tears of the ACL and that
this is associated with an increased rate of complications.
Delayed surgery is associated with a more rapid return of
movement and muscle function. In addition, a delay in sur-
gical intervention allows the surgeon time to assess more
carefully a patient’s suitability for reconstruction of the
ACL.
No beneﬁts in any form have been received or will be received from a com-
mercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.
References
1. Noyes FR, Mangine RE, Barber S. Early knee motion after open and
arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med
1987;15:149-60.
2. Mohtadi NGH, Webster-Bogaert S, Fowler PJ. Limitation of motion
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a case control study.
Am J Sports Med 1991;19:620-4.
3. Hughston JC. Complications of anterior cruciate ligament surgery.
Orthop Clin North Am 1985;16:237-40.
4. Shelbourne K, Wilckens JH, Mollabashy A, DeCarlo M. Arthro-
ﬁbrosis in acute anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the effect of
timing of reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med
1991;19:332-6.
5. Karlsson J, Kartus J, Magnusson L, et al. Subacute versus delayed
reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament in the competitive ath-
lete. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 1999;7:146-51.
6. Peterson W, Laperell H. Combined injuries of the medial collateral lig-
ament and the anterior cruciate ligament: early ACL reconstruction ver-
sus late ACL reconstruction. Arch Orth Tr Surg 1999;119:258-62.
7. Berbig R, Rillman P. Timing of the surgery of rupture of the anterior
cruciate ligament: effects of acute or delayed surgery on arthroﬁbrosis
rate and work disability. Unfallchirurg 2000;103:726-30.
8. Jarvela T, Nyyssonen M, Kannus P, Paakala T, Jarvinen M. Bone-
patellar tendon-bone reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament: a
long-term comparison of early and late repair. Int Orthop 1999;23:227-
31.
9. Tegner Y, Lysholm J. Rating systems in the evaluation of knee ligament
injuries. Clin Orthop 1985;198:43-9.
10. Hefti F, Muller W, Jakob RP, Staubli HU. Evaluation of knee ligament
injuries with the IKDC form. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
1993;1:226-34.
11. Risberg MA, Holm I, Steen H, Beynnon BD. Sensitivity to changes
over time for the IKDC form, the Lysholm score, and the Cincinnati
knee score: a prospective study of 120 ACL reconstructed patients with
a 2-year follow-up. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 1999;7:152-9.
12. Shelbourne KD, Foulk DA. Timing of surgery in acute anterior cruci-
ate ligament tears on the return of quadriceps muscle strength after
reconstruction using an autogenous patellar tendon grafts. Am J Sports
Med 1995;23:686-9.
13. Wasilewski SA, Covall DJ, Cohen S. Effect of surgical timing on
recovery and associated injuries after anterior cruciate ligament recon-
struction. Am J Sports Med 1993;21:338-42.

