JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Original Paper
Linguistic and Cultural Adaptation of a Computer-Based
Counseling Program (CARE+ Spanish) to Support HIV Treatment
Adherence and Risk Reduction for People Living With HIV/AIDS:
A Randomized Controlled Trial
Ann E Kurth1, CNM, MPH, PhD; Nok Chhun1, MS, MPH; Charles M Cleland2, PhD; Michele Crespo-Fierro2, RN,
AACRN, MS/MPH; José A Parés-Avila3, RN, MA, ANP-C, DNP, AAHIVS; John A Lizcano1, MPH; Robert G
Norman4†, PhD; Michele G Shedlin2, PhD; Barbara E Johnston5, MD; Victoria L Sharp6, MD
1Yale University School of Nursing, Orange, CT, United States
2New York University Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York, NY, United States
3University of Arizona College of Nursing, Tucson, AZ, United States
4New York University College of Dentistry, New York, NY, United States
5Lincoln Community Health Center, Durham, NC, United States
6St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, Center for Comprehensive Care, New York, NY, United States
†deceased
Corresponding Author:
Ann E Kurth, CNM, MPH, PhD
Yale University School of Nursing
400 West Campus Drive
Orange, CT, 06477
United States
Phone: 1 203 785 2393
Fax: 1 203 785 3554
Email: ann.kurth@yale.edu
Abstract
Background: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease in the United States disproportionately affects minorities, including
Latinos. Barriers including language are associated with lower antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence seen among Latinos, yet
ART and interventions for clinic visit adherence are rarely developed or delivered in Spanish.
Objective: The aim was to adapt a computer-based counseling tool, demonstrated to reduce HIV-1 viral load and sexual risk
transmission in a population of English-speaking adults, for use during routine clinical visits for an HIV-positive Spanish-speaking
population (CARE+ Spanish); the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) was the theoretical framework guiding program
development.
Methods: A longitudinal randomized controlled trial was conducted from June 4, 2010 to March 29, 2012. Participants were
recruited from a comprehensive HIV treatment center comprising three clinics in New York City. Eligibility criteria were (1)
adults (age ≥18 years), (2) Latino birth or ancestry, (3) speaks Spanish (mono- or multilingual), and (4) on antiretrovirals. Linear
and generalized mixed linear effects models were used to analyze primary outcomes, which included ART adherence, sexual
transmission risk behaviors, and HIV-1 viral loads. Exit interviews were offered to purposively selected intervention participants
to explore cultural acceptability of the tool among participants, and focus groups explored the acceptability and system efficiency
issues among clinic providers, using the TAM framework.
Results: A total of 494 Spanish-speaking HIV clinic attendees were enrolled and randomly assigned to the intervention (arm
A: n=253) or risk assessment-only control (arm B, n=241) group and followed up at 3-month intervals for one year. Gender
distribution was 296 (68.4%) male, 110 (25.4%) female, and 10 (2.3%) transgender. By study end, 433 of 494 (87.7%) participants
were retained. Although intervention participants had reduced viral loads, increased ART adherence and decreased sexual
transmission risk behaviors over time, these findings were not statistically significant. We also conducted 61 qualitative exit
interviews with participants and two focus groups with a total of 16 providers.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 1
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Conclusions: A computer-based counseling tool grounded in the TAM theoretical model and delivered in Spanish was acceptable
and feasible to implement in a high-volume HIV clinic setting. It was able to provide evidence-based, linguistically appropriate
ART adherence support without requiring additional staff time, bilingual status, or translation services. We found that language
preferences and cultural acceptability of a computer-based counseling tool exist on a continuum in our urban Spanish-speaking
population. Theoretical frameworks of technology’s usefulness for behavioral modification need further exploration in other
languages and cultures.
Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01013935; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01013935 (Archived by WebCite
at http://www.webcitation.org/6ikaD3MT7)
(J Med Internet Res 2016;18(7):e195) doi: 10.2196/jmir.5830
KEYWORDS
antiretroviral therapy adherence; computer-based counseling; cultural adaptation; HIV; linguistic adaptation; prevention with
positives; Technology Acceptance Model; viral load
women will be diagnosed with HIV at some point in their lives
Introduction
[1].
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease in the United In this manuscript, we describe the adaptation of the CARE+
States disproportionately affects minorities, including Latinos tool for a Spanish-speaking population (CARE+ Spanish; Figure
[1]. Barriers such as language are associated with lower 1). The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [10] was the
antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence among Latinos, yet ART conceptual framework that guided the Spanish adaptation of
and interventions for clinic visit adherence are rarely developed the computer-based counseling program. New information and
or delivered in Spanish. Although treatment of HIV has communication technologies (ICT) must be culturally acceptable
advanced tremendously with the development of ARTs, these if they are to be effective in daily clinical practice, rather than
medication regimens require lifelong adherence to achieve just in the context of a controlled trial. Acceptability is defined
therapeutic goals [2-5]. as the “degree to which a[n]...intervention or any one of the
attributes of the...intervention is perceived by the
The computer-based counseling tool known as the Computer
patient/consumer to be consonant with well-being” [11].
Assessment & Rx Education for HIV-positives (CARE+) is an
Acceptability centers on perception of an innovation (ie, ICT
evidence-based intervention for people living with HIV and
tool) as clusters of perceived attributes. These can be categorized
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) (PLHA) [6,7].
as follows, using ART as an example: (1) perceived inherent
The purpose of the program is to support users in achieving
attributes (eg, ART is effective or requires scheduling); (2)
medication adherence and reduce their risk of secondary HIV
perceived associational attributes (eg, ART demands periodic
infections (also known as “positive prevention”). This program,
clinic visits; is encouraged by medical personnel, but perhaps
when evaluated in a university-affiliated public HIV clinic and
not by others); and (3) perceived effects (eg, lifestyle and other
a community-based AIDS service organization in an
changes). Each perceived attribute has cultural meaning, and
English-speaking population in Seattle, was found to be effective
the individual continually weighs the positive and negative
in reducing HIV-1 viral load and sexual transmission risk
aspects of the attributes throughout treatment. The resulting
behaviors [6]. Technology tools such as CARE+ present
balancing act influences the acceptability of the intervention.
significant opportunities to bridge the gap in health promotion
Cultural and linguistic factors determine the perception of
delivery, especially if linguistically and culturally adapted for
relevancy of these attributes, as well as other factors, such as
often-neglected groups such as Latinos. In this paper, we use
age, life cycle stage, health status, motivation to be healthier,
the term Latino; however, in the literature, Latino and Hispanic
and perceptions of the source of the information and intervention
are used interchangeably, reflecting a lack of consensus as well
[11,12].
as the political and demographic implications of both terms [8].
The study aims were to (1) conduct usability testing of CARE+
Latinos make up approximately 17% of the US population, but
Spanish; (2) establish a real-world utility of CARE+ Spanish
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
by conducting a 12-month longitudinal randomized controlled
account for 23% of all new HIV infections reported in 2013 in
trial (RCT) to evaluate the impact of the CARE+ Spanish
the United States [9]. Furthermore, Latino men account for 85%
intervention on outcomes, which included ART adherence,
of all new infections among Latinos in the United States and
sexual transmission risk behaviors, and HIV-1 viral loads; and
81% acquired HIV infection through sexual contact with another
(3) to assess technology uptake factors, explore the cultural
male [9]. In contrast, in 2013, Latino women accounted for 15%
acceptability of the tool, and perceived technology
of all new infections among Latinos in the United States [9]. It
barriers/facilitators among participants and health care providers
is estimated that one in 36 Latino men and one in 106 Latino
using the TAM framework.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 2
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Figure 1. Screenshots of CARE+ Spanish.
or Spanish-dominant bilingual Latinos living with HIV, guided
Methods
the adaptation of the CARE+ tool for a Spanish-speaking
population.
The CARE+ program incorporates motivational interviewing
and principles of chronic HIV disease self-management to The recommended process for adaptation and translation from
enhance health-promoting behavior. Formative research to test English to a different language version is the forward-back
the usability and acceptability of the CARE+ computer-based translation method in order to ensure cultural and linguistic
counseling tool has been previously described [7], and the tool equivalence [13]. Given budgetary constraints, and the large
was shown in an English-speaking population to improve ART amount of software content, an expert panel review was utilized
adherence, viral suppression, and reduced secondary sexual in place of back translation of the CARE+ tool. The expert panel
transmission risk behavior [6]. Given that computer-based consisted of clinical experts who were bilingual and bicultural
counseling proved promising in an English-speaking population with ancestry from major Latino subgroups (ie, Mexican and
in Seattle, translation into practice and applicability to other Puerto Rican). For the forward translation, a translator with a
populations that could benefit, such as Spanish-speaking Latinos master’s degree experienced with HIV health-related materials
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 3
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
translated the CARE+ content into Spanish. Because the 2010, the study was moved to St Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital for
professional translator’s work had been used with predominantly the initiation of the RCT and remainder of the project.
Mexican-American populations, a member of our study team
Randomized Controlled Trial
(JAP), who is of Puerto Rican origin and has experience in
AIDS research with Mexican and Puerto Rican populations, Study participants for the RCT were recruited in the waiting
took on the role of assuring quality of translation and areas from three urban HIV clinic sites of St Luke’s-Roosevelt
applicability across Latino subgroups. Additionally, there was Hospital in New York City from June 4, 2010 to January 3,
a secondary reviewer, a health educator and curriculum writer 2011. Eligibility criteria were (1) adults (age ≥18 years), (2)
with a master of public health, who has done substantial Latino birth or ancestry, (3) speaks Spanish (mono- or
translation work for HIV interventions in California, Florida, multilingual), and (4) on antiretrovirals at any of the three clinic
Puerto Rico, and the Northeastern United States. She performed study sites.
final reviews of the translated software content.
Written informed consent was obtained from all RCT
Spanish-speaking actors of Mexican and Colombian heritage
participants. All study procedures were approved by St
recorded the narration, and text changes were also made if the
Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital, Center for Health Sciences,
two voice actors reading the script made recommendations.
Institutional Review Board (#10-068) and New York University
Then, a panel of bilingual HIV health care providers (two
School of Medicine’s Institutional Review Board (#09-0740).
physicians, a nurse practitioner, a nurse, and a health educator)
This RCT is reported according to the CONSORT checklist
reviewed the translation of the content independently to confirm
[16] and the CONSORT-EHEALTH extension [17] (Multimedia
the appropriateness of the terminology and the minimization of
Appendix 1). The RCT participants received a US $20
idiomatic regional expressions unique to their culture. After
MetroCard for their time and to reimburse their transportation
discussion to reach consensus, words identified as idiomatic
costs at the end of each study visit (five sessions total and an
were deleted and substituted with words that were not specific
additional US $20 MetroCard if they participated in the exit
to only one Latino subgroup. Furthermore, an additional local
interview).
expert advisory panel (composed of one Spanish-speaking
person living with HIV, and HIV providers from medicine, The RCT participants were enrolled by research assistants, some
nursing, and social work) was convened in New York City to of whom were part of the HIV-positive peer program at St
review the CARE+ Spanish tool content and shorten it for use Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital. Participants of the peer program
in a real-world high-volume HIV clinic setting. Once a were Spanish-speaking PLHA, who were also receiving care at
test-ready version of CARE+ Spanish was available, the program the St Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital HIV clinics. Peers in the
was tested with HIV-positive Spanish-speaking individuals to program were selected as study staff based on their language
explore acceptability and usability of the intervention. Feedback skills and experience working with other Spanish-speaking
from the usability testing was incorporated into the final version PLHA in the HIV clinics. All research assistants completed
of the CARE+ Spanish program used for the RCT. In addition, human subjects’protection certification, which included Health
we conducted exit interviews to explore cultural acceptability Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and
of the tool among purposively selected intervention participants, received training on the study protocol and procedures, and the
and focus groups among clinic providers to explore program use of the CARE+ Spanish program.
acceptability and system efficiency issues.
Focus Groups
Participants The health care providers who participated in the focus groups
were engaged in the care of participants (eg, prescribed
Usability Testing
antiretrovirals and/or supported ART adherence) and were
Participants for the usability portion of the study were recruited recruited from the same three urban HIV clinic sites of St
and verbally consented from St Vincent’s Catholic Medical Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital in New York City as the RCT
Center HIV clinic in New York City the last week of March participants. The two focus groups took place on February 21,
2010 (IRB #09-096). Because we were interested in the 2012 and February 28, 2012. Participants in the health care
participants’ opinions about CARE+ Spanish, and not its focus groups were a variety of psychological and medical
efficacy or effectiveness, participants were informed that they professionals who had provided care to PLHA for a wide range
could make up answers and skip questions to avoid disclosing of years.
personal health information. Using the “think aloud” method
[14,15], participants were observed as they completed the Intervention
CARE+ Spanish program. The observation was timed and The CARE+ Spanish computer-based counseling program was
careful notes were taken, paying attention to any difficulties delivered on touchscreen computers with content based on the
navigating the program or understanding the content. While following theoretical frameworks:
working with the program, the participant was encouraged to information-motivation-behavior [18], social cognitive role
“think aloud” and share thoughts in their own words as they modeling [19], and motivational interviewing [20]; and it was
worked through the various tasks. A series of structured evaluated in a prospective longitudinal two-arm RCT design.
questions and verbal prompts were also used to elicit Participants were automatically randomized by the software to
participants’reactions to the program. Participants were given the control or intervention arms following an anonymous study
a US $20 MetroCard for their time and to reimburse their log in by the user. All participants were guided through the
transportation costs. As a result of St Vincent’s closing in April
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 4
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
program with audio narration of all content. The intervention and travel. Two focus groups were conducted; the sessions
session lasted approximately 45 to 60 minutes; the control lasted approximately 2 hours. The focus groups were conducted
session lasted approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The control using a semistructured interview guide (Multimedia Appendix
group received only the computer-based audio-narrated risk 3), which outlined topics to be discussed along with suggested
assessment, which included questions about sexual risk probes. Topics included challenges that providers faced in
behaviors, substance use, mental health, social support, partner delivering care to HIV-positive patients, adherence-related
status and disclosure, ART regimen and adherence in last 7 and issues, and usefulness of the CARE+ Spanish computer-based
30 days, and side effects. In addition to the computer-based counseling tool. To improve attendance of the providers, the
audio-narrated risk assessment, the intervention group received focus groups were conducted before required staff meetings.
tailored feedback through the skill-building videos, health plan, Prior to the start of the focus group, the providers were given
and printout at the end of the session, within the CARE+ Spanish an opportunity to view the counseling program (tablet and
software program. The skill-building videos automatically headphones), as well as a sample session printout. Due to
launched; afterwards, participants could choose to watch scheduling issues, different teams of study staff conducted the
additional videos. Video topics included demonstration of two focus groups.
healthy behaviors, such as condom use and medication
Outcome Measures
adherence, and discussions about HIV and provider
relationships. In the final step, users developed a risk reduction The primary outcome was HIV-1 viral load collected from
plan related to either ART adherence or safer sex practices to medical chart reviews. This biomarker, along with adherence
prevent secondary HIV transmission. After the risk reduction to medications (measured by 30-day visual analog scale [VAS])
plan, participants could opt to watch more videos. At the and sexual transmission risk behaviors (defined as lack of
conclusion of the session, participants received a printout of condom use with either a main or other partner) identified
their tailored feedback and health promotion plan that they could through the CARE+ Spanish program, were the outcome
share with their health care provider. measures for the assessment of intervention effectiveness. These
outcome measures were collected at 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months.
Both study arms also received standard clinical care per
Although the outcome measures were not collected from every
Department of Health and Human Services HIV Guidelines [2].
participant at each time interval, a minimum of three data points
In addition, the computer-based tool identified participants who
were collected from all participants.
were experiencing severe depression as measured by the Patient
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9; score ≥20) [21], intimate partner Sample Size Determination
violence, or suicidal ideation. Per study protocol, case managers For the usability testing, sample sizes greater than five
were then notified for appropriate follow-up and referral. Each participants have been shown to have sufficient power to detect
group underwent five sessions total at 3-month intervals (at 0, the majority of usability problems [22]. For the RCT, sample
3, 6, 9, and 12 months). At the 12-month session, the control size was calculated based on the target intervention effect on
group was switched over to the intervention condition. Study the proportion of participants who are ART adherent, HIV viral
sessions were scheduled to coincide with clinic visits whenever load at log10 scale, and occurrence of unprotected sex with
possible. HIV-negative/unknown partner(s). All calculations control type
I error rate at 0.05. Considering a decrease of 0.5 log10 HIV
Exit Interviews
viral load as a meaningful reduction, with 200 retained
The purpose of the qualitative exit interview (Multimedia
participants in each group in a time point-specific post hoc test,
Appendix 2) was to explore the cultural acceptability of the tool
there was an expected >97% power to detect this difference
and assess perceived technology barriers and facilitators among
with a standard deviation of 1.25 (effect size=0.4).
participants. Exit interviews were offered to purposively selected
intervention participants using systematic sampling. At the Statistical Analysis
12-month session, every third eligible candidate was offered a Fisher exact and Wilcoxon rank sum tests assessed differences
face-to-face exit interview. We purposively sampled females between intervention and control groups in population study
and males, older (age ≥35 years) and younger (age ≤35 years), characteristics at the baseline assessment. Linear and generalized
and US- or foreign-born participants. Exit interviews were mixed linear effect models were used to longitudinally assess
performed using a semistructured interview guide by research differences between the intervention and control groups at all
assistants in either English or Spanish as requested by the available time points for sexual transmission risk behavior,
participant. The interview guide was developed to explore the medication adherence (30-day VAS), and viral load variables.
main concepts of TAM and other cultural factors known to These models accommodate missing data (equal numbers of
impact the Latino community, such as stigma related to HIV, measurements and time intervals between measurements were
language, health insurance coverage, and immigration status. not required) and, therefore, do not require deletion of
Notes were taken by research assistants in English and/or participants with incomplete data. A P ≤.05 was used as the
Spanish, including verbatim quotes to capture illustrative cutoff for significance. Primary outcomes included ART
comments from respondents. adherence, sexual transmission risk, and HIV-1 viral loads.
Baseline analyses were performed using SAS version 9.3 (SAS
Health Care Provider Focus Groups
Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA) and, for the longitudinal analysis,
Health care providers who participated in the focus groups gave
the lme4 package [23] of the R statistical computing
written informed consent and received US $50 for their time
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 5
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
environment [24]. Given that the control group received the Table 1illustrates participant characteristics at baseline by study
intervention at 12 months, data analysis was limited to four time arm. There were no significant differences between the treatment
periods (0, 3, 6, and 9 months). Effect sizes for undetectable and control groups at baseline except that the CARE+
viral load and sexual transmission risk were presented in the intervention group had a higher proportion of transgendered
odds ratio metric. For viral load and 30-day VAS, Cohen’s f2 individuals (4.0%, 9/225 vs 0.50%, 1/206; P=.05) and were
was calculated to convey effect sizes for group differences in younger than those in the control group (mean 46.8, SD 9.7 vs
change over time [25]. mean 48.9, SD 9.1; P=.02, respectively).
Interview Analysis Figure 3 shows the mean and 95% confidence intervals for
outcome means or proportions by time point and treatment
Data from the exit interviews were transcribed onto spreadsheets
condition. Although intervention participants had reduced viral
by two researchers from the study team (MGS and MCF), while
loads, increased ART adherence, and decreased sexual
the focus groups were recorded by a stenographer, with
transmission risk behaviors over time, patterns of change in the
transcripts provided from the two sessions. Data were analyzed
intervention group were not more favorable than in the control
using content analysis within a framework of technology transfer
group.
[10] to identify factors affecting acceptability, utilization, and
impact. The exit interview spreadsheets and the focus group Figure 4 summarizes main outcomes of interest at each
transcripts were analyzed by MS and MCF; emergent themes follow-up time point. Figure 4 A illustrates 95% confidence
and issues were categorized by each. Saturation of themes was intervals for log10 viral load mean differences and change at
determined after 61 participant exit interviews and the two each different time point as well as overall change in the control
provider focus groups. Inconsistencies in the themes were versus the CARE+ intervention group. Although there was a
discussed between MS and MCF until consensus was reached; decrease in viral loads among participants with a detectable
selected quotations were agreed on as salient examples of load at baseline (greater in the intervention vs control group),
themes. this difference in change was not statistically significant. In
addition, among those with detectable viral loads at baseline,
Results the CARE+ intervention group had higher odds of being
undetectable at the 9-month follow-up when compared to
Usability Testing controls (Figure 4 B), but this difference was not statistically
Software usability testing was conducted with eight significant. Figure 4C shows 95% confidence intervals for VAS
Spanish-speaking PLHA (6 male, 2 female). Five of six males differences at each follow-up time point; although ART
identified their language preference as bilingual and one as adherence was higher in the CARE+ intervention group vs
English-dominant; one female identified as bilingual and the control in the total sample overall and among participants with
other as English-dominant. All usability participants reported detectable viral loads at baseline, no differences in change or
the program was easy to use and navigate; questions were clear, at any follow-up point were statistically significant. Finally,
specific, and understandable. All participants who identified as although sexual transmission risk behaviors decreased over
bilingual (6/8) reported that the Spanish used was basic and time, when intervention and control groups were compared, no
easy to understand. The two English-dominant participants differences in change or at any follow-up point were statistically
reported there were some “big (high-register) words,” but they significant.
were able to navigate the program and follow instructions
Differences between the CARE+ intervention group and the
without any major problems. All participants agreed that the
control group in change on viral load were small both for the
counseling tool supported privacy and confidentiality, especially
total sample (f2=0.0003) and for those with detectable viral load
for people who are more quiet and reserved about their HIV
at baseline (f2=0.006). Similarly, group differences in change
status. They agreed when using this counseling tool, one can
be more open and honest about responses because of the feeling on VAS were small for both the total sample (f2=0.002) and for
of not being judged. Seven of eight reported that they would those with detectable viral load at baseline (f2=0.005). Figures
prefer to use this tool rather than counseling with a person. 4 B and 4D show effect sizes for the sexual transmission risk
Overall, the counseling tool met with everyone’s expectations; and undetectable viral load outcomes in the odds ratio metric.
on average, it was rated a nine out of 10. It was described as Differences in undetectable viral load between the CARE+
user friendly and self-explanatory. intervention group and the control group were consistently small
at baseline and across follow-ups. Differences in sexual
Randomized Controlled Trial
transmission risk were small at baseline and became even
We approached 1224 individuals at three study sites; 556 smaller with each follow-up.
consented (45.42% acceptance), 494 were randomized and
completed baseline assessments, and 86.2% (426/494) were
retained for the 12-month study duration (Figure 2).
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 6
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of CARE+ Spanish intervention and control groups (N=433).
Variable CARE+ Spanish (n=226) Control (n=207) Pa
Sex, n (%)
Male 153 (68.0) 143 (69.4) .05
Female 56 (24.9) 54 (26.2)
Transgender 9 (4.0) 1 (0.5)
Unknown 7 (3.1) 8 (3.8)
Age (years), mean (SD) 46.8 (9.7) 48.9 (9.1) .02
Ethnicity, n (%)
Latino 218 (96.9) 191 (92.7) .20
Race, n (%)
American Indian or Alaska Native 12 (5.3) 13 (6.4) .33
Asian 2 (0.8) 0 (0.0)
Black or African American 13 (5.8) 19 (9.2)
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 2 (0.8) 3 (1.5)
White 38 (16.8) 42 (20.4)
Other race 151 (66.8) 118 (57.3)
Multiple race 3 (1.3) 5 (2.4)
Unknown 5 (2.2) 7 (3.4)
Education, n (%)
No high school diploma/GED 79 (35.0) 72 (34.8) .13
High school diploma/GED only 65 (28.8) 75 (36.2)
More than high school 75 (33.2) 56 (27.1)
Unknown 7 (3.1) 4 (1.9)
Substance use behavior, n (%)
Ever injecting drug use 12 (5.3) 10 (4.8) .55
Alcohol abuse 44 (19.6) 41 (19.8) >.99
Methamphetamine use 12 (5.5) 12 (6.1) .84
Crack/cocaine use 24 (11.2) 25 (12.6) .76
Intimate partner violence, n (%) 16 (7.2) — —
Sexual behavior, n (%)
Any sex past 3 months 139 (63.8) 124 (62.3) .76
Risky sexb 35 (25.9) 26 (21.7) .46
Condom use with problems 47 (33.8) 36 (29.0) .43
Any sex without condoms or with condom problems 69 (50.7) 56 (46.3) .53
Discordant sex with main partner 8 (3.7) 7 (3.5) >.99
Discordant sex with other partner 11 (5.1) 6 (3.1) .46
ART Adherence
Adherence VAS, mean (SD) 87.0 (22.4) 89.6 (19.5) .20
VAS Scale ≥95%, n (%) 135 (59.7) 122 (58.9) .92
Missed doses, mean (SD) 1.5 (8.0) 1.6 (8.2) .86
1 or more missed doses past 7 days, n (%) 74 (37.2) 64 (35.2) .75
2 or more missed doses past 7 days, n (%) 41 (20.6) 36 (19.8) .90
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 7
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Variable CARE+ Spanish (n=226) Control (n=207) Pa
> VAS 95% + no missed doses, n (%) 93 (44.1) 89 (44.9) .92
Log10 HIV-1 viral load, mean (SD) 1.2 (1.8) 1.2 (1.6) .93
Detectable viral load, n (%) 78 (34.5) 76 (36.7) .69
Ever told resistant virus, n (%) 30 (13.8) 32 (15.9) .67
Years since HIV diagnosis, mean (SD) 12.6 (6.9) 13.4 (7.3) .23
Depression (PHQ-9), n (%) 35 (15.6) 39 (18.8) .38
aComparisons by Fisher exact test or Wilcoxon rank sum test; All categorical tests performed without the unknown category.
bDid not use a condom with either main partner or other partner.
Figure 2. Participant flowchart of the CARE+ Spanish computer-based counseling intervention trial, five sessions over 12 months.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 8
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Figure 3. Adjusted mean values or proportions by time and treatment condition of the total sample and those with detectable viral loads at baseline
(BL) for (a) log10 viral load, (b) undetectable viral load, (c) visual analog scale for ART adherence, and (d) sexual transmission risk. Whiskers represent
95% confidence intervals.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 9
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Figure 4. Mean differences or odds ratios contrasting CARE+ and control conditions at each follow-up time point, and baseline (BL) and final time
points within each condition, for (a) log10 viral load, (b) undetectable viral load, (c) visual analog scale for ART adherence, and (d) sexual transmission
risk. Whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals.
Characteristics of exit interview participants (N=61) are
Exit Interviews
summarized. In all, 37 (61%) men, 21 (34%) women, and 3
The open-ended exit interview identified a range of HIV-related (5%) transgendered persons participated in the interviews.
concerns, lack of confidence in providers, multiple sources for Participant ages ranged from 21 to 69 years, with a mean age
HIV-related information, and experiences using the CARE+ of 48.0 (SD 12.0) years. The participants included those born
Spanish computer-based counseling program. in the United States and Puerto Rico, and immigrants from
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 10
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, anything.” Others knew that medications lessen viral loads,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Panama, with a range of 4 increase CD counts avoid creating resistance, reduce infections,
4 ,
to 50 years residing in the United States. and maintain overall health. One participant added, “It is a
marriage with the medications.” Some participants were
Concerns Related to Human Immunodeficiency Virus
motivated to have these discussions about taking the medications
In total, 95% (58/61) had disclosed their HIV status to someone.
because they reported needing to be there for their children and
The main issues affecting the interviewed participants included
to maintain their quality of life.
insurance/benefits-related issues, side effects from medications
(both antiretrovirals and other medications), being able to work, For some participants, any discussion of sexual behavior was
immigration documentation, and housing issues. The majority one they were not comfortable having with their providers. A
of participants did not feel that their issues related to medications few reported giving up on relationships and sex after receiving
or the virus were any different because they were Latino. their HIV diagnosis. Overall, there was a clear awareness that
However, some did feel there was a difference if the issue(s) condoms should be used to protect themselves and their partners
related to documentation (ie, “having papers”). One participant from HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.
noted, “illegal status, it leaves us without options.” Another Communication was discussed as another way to enhance
participant shared additional comments regarding obstacles protection. One of the participants stated that he did not use
faced by their undocumented status: “Of course, because we condoms with his wife who was also HIV-positive. Another
are immigrants and we don’t have legal papers to get around or discussed using withdrawal when his viral load is undetectable.
anything.” Some noted that English-speaking/non-Latinos have A few participants stated that their providers did not discuss
more information and receive different care. Other participants this topic with them. The participants’ answers were similar
discussed the problems Latinos face that keep them from when discussing modes of reducing transmission (ie, condom
focusing on their illness, fears of engaging in care, not trusting use and open discussions with partners). They added abstinence
to reveal their diagnosis, parents not teaching their children and masturbation as ways to practice safer sex. Medicines were
about safer sex, and fears relating to stigma and discrimination: also seen as helping reduce transmission to infants.
“Spanish people appear stronger around other(s) and don’t share
For the most part, the majority of participants were comfortable
their weakness” and “Latinos have machista behavior in not
discussing medications and sex with their providers. Some noted
taking care of themselves...” Language barriers were a concern
that they initiated discussions on medications and sex, whereas
in accessing information, understanding, and being understood
for others it was their providers. Some stated that they had
by providers and navigating the health care system.
“confidence” in their providers, whereas others felt it was
Multiple Sources of Information Related to Human necessary for their own well-being to take the initiative: “After
receiving treatment with the same doctor for so long, this person
Immunodeficiency Virus
becomes part of your family.” A salient finding was that some
Participants reported a range of resources for obtaining
participants did not discuss medications with their providers
HIV-related and general health information. Overwhelmingly,
because they felt they had other resources for information.
doctors and clinic staff were reported to be reliable sources of
Regarding sex, some reported preferring to speak with a provider
information because they were said to have studied and practiced
of the same sex or same sexual orientation. A few did not have
HIV care for some time: “I put my health in her hands, because
any discussions regarding medications or sex with their
she knows what is good and what isn’t for me.” (Note that
providers: “They don’t have the time.” Another participant
participants may be referring to their prescribing providers as
summed up her sexual situation and the need to discuss it as
“doctors” whether they are medical doctors, nurse practitioners,
follows: “There’s not much to say, my status was so traumatic
or physician assistants.)
that I don’t believe in love.”
Some participants purposefully seek out other sources for HIV
CARE+ Spanish Computer-Based Counseling Program
and general health information. The Internet, because “broader
The majority of participants reported a positive experience with
information (is) available,” and the Centers for Disease Control
using the tablet computer. They thought it was “interesting,”
and Prevention “made the first concrete studies on managing
“easier to talk to than a person,” “it was like having another
care” were more trusted sources for some clients. Others cited
doctor,” “better than having a piece of paper,” “the computer
support groups and peers at AIDS service organizations and
doesn’t judge,” and “I educated myself and came out of such
clinics as expert voices for comparison of experiences. The
ignorance.” On the other hand, some had some issues with the
media (radio, television, and print) were identified as potential
questions being repetitive and the structure of the sentences.
sources of information for the general public. Lastly, families,
Participants reported learning more about HIV, their
friends, and spiritual leaders were seen as another source of
medications, and things they would not think of asking the
information for some.
provider.
A majority of participants reported that they did receive
“Likes” of the computer included the ease of use, the
messages from their providers regarding the importance of
touchscreen, the videos, the confidentiality (through the
taking their medications regularly, having a sexual life with
headphones), and the information provided about medications,
HIV/AIDS, and measures to prevent the transmission of HIV
safer sex, the narrators, and avatars. “Dislikes” of the computer
to others. Some participants reported not receiving medication
were the long sessions, computer problems such as taking a
information from their providers: “They have never told me
long time to reboot, the videos, the headphones, not knowing
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 11
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
how to silence the program, and not having an option for from 14 to 29 years and years in HIV care ranged from 11 to
English. Some participants were not comfortable with the 14 years. There were three bilingual providers present. Providers
directness of the language and some of the topics (drugs, sexual represented all three study sites and time at their respective sites
abuse). One participant noted, “Some questions were very ranged from 5 months to 16 years.
strong, too direct, and a bit long.” The most salient objection,
Providers expressed frustration in continuing to confront the
however, was the perceived redundancy of the content.
same adherence obstacles over time (eg, lack of consistent safer
All the participants reported a sense of privacy and sex practices). However, this was a general finding and not
confidentiality while using the computer. Some were concerned specific to Latino patients. One provider reported that not using
about this at the beginning of the study and this was noted to condoms makes the patient feel “normal” (eg, “I don’t feel sick
be one of the reasons for some anxiety when first using the with HIV when I don’t use a condom”). Other adherence
computer. Other reasons for anxiety at the start of the study obstacles that are in agreement with findings from the RCT exit
were being unfamiliar with computers and unsure of Spanish interviews include substance abuse, lack of documentation,
language proficiency. Participants spoke of becoming familiar stigma, and trauma. According to one provider, trauma is a
with the format of the program and having the peers to help “huge, huge factor” because it affects people, their belief in
them get used to it. The availability of the peers was viewed as their right to protect themselves, and their expectations that
an overwhelmingly positive aspect of the program. intimate encounters are at least safe for both parties. Overall,
providers were in agreement that “like a hydra head,” when one
Although the majority of those interviewed preferred the
issue gets addressed, another comes up.
program in Spanish, some would have preferred to have an
English version available and some thought having both Regarding the usefulness of the CARE+ Spanish tool, providers
languages would work best for them. (This is important to note agreed that multiple approaches are important (eg “more
for any replication in an urban environment where the population education is always good”) and that patients may feel more
is likely to include acculturated and bilingual individuals.) empowered to have a resource (eg “an education tool” and “a
Nearly all participants stated that they would use the program health enhancement tool”) they can access without help.
again to pass the time while waiting in the clinic, and when new However, they felt that there are no substitutes for the
information could be provided. Some would use it at every visit, provider-patient relationship, personalism in Latino culture, and
whereas most opted for a few times a year. A few participants loyalty to a provider: “...technology might not have the same
were clear in not wanting to use the computer program again; impact.” Although intervention participants had the option to
one person disliked the voice of the narrator and the other was share their health promotion plan printout and discuss their
uncomfortable with the computer. One participant stated that study participation with their provider, the providers reported
the program might be good for new clients at the clinic or newly that none of the participants did. Therefore, a significant
diagnosed people. limitation on provider feedback about the CARE+ Spanish
program was their lack of familiarity with the tool.
Overall, the CARE+ Spanish program was viewed positively.
Most participants used it to improve their health, learn their
Discussion
medications (eg “Showed me how much I know, tested me on
what I knew, allowed me to be honest with myself”), and change
Principal Results
some behavior (eg “I loved it! I learned so much and because
The CARE+ computer-based counseling tool adapted for a
of this I slowed down my sex life and am more careful”).
Spanish-speaking population (CARE+ Spanish) was acceptable
Although some participants saw the program as an important
and feasible to implement in an urban clinic setting. Participants
part of their care by asking questions of their providers, others
liked the ease of use and the sense of privacy and confidentiality
did not, seeing it as not relevant to their lives (eg “the long
that the computer-based counseling tool provided. The health
explanations of topics that were not relevant to me”). The
care providers agreed that multiple approaches are needed and
spectrum of responses received in the exit interview reflects the
that the counseling tool can be an additional resource for HIV
diversity of the study population, Latinos living in New York
care and support. The CARE+ Spanish program demonstrated
City.
trends in positive impact in reducing viral loads, increasing
Health Care Provider Focus Groups ART adherence and decreasing risky sexual behaviors in three
The first focus group was conducted on February 21, 2012 with comprehensive care clinics in New York City. In the CARE+
seven participants. Participants included three psychologists, Spanish trial, differences between arms were not statistically
three psychiatric nurse practitioners, and one psychiatrist. Years significant. In contrast, the CARE+ computer-based counseling
in health care ranged from 4 to 23 years and years in HIV care tool, when evaluated in a university-affiliated public HIV clinic
ranged from 1.5 to 20 years. There were three bilingual and a community-based AIDS service organization in Seattle,
providers present. Providers represented all three study sites; was found to be efficacious in reducing HIV-1 viral load and
time at their respective sites ranged from 1.5 to 15 years. sexual transmission risk behaviors [6]. These two randomized
clinical trials highlight the importance of targeting the right
The second focus group was conducted on February 28, 2012
populations when adapting technology tools to support patient
with nine participants, but only eight participants provided their
treatment engagement. Although other computer-based
demographic information. Participants included five medical
behavioral interventions delivered in a clinic setting have been
doctors and three nurse practitioners. Years in health care ranged
found to improve self-reported antiretroviral adherence [26]
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 12
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
and reduce risky sexual behaviors [27,28], to the best of our use to initiate conversation with their provider about adherence
knowledge, CARE+ Spanish is the first non-English language support and risk reduction. Instead, providers were unfamiliar
computer-based counseling program to provide medication with the CARE+ Spanish program and reported that participants
adherence support and promote positive prevention in a did not share the health plan printouts with them. Although not
HIV-positive minority population. Another version of the a specific outcome measure, the lack of familiarity with the
counseling tool, CARE+ Kenya, linguistically and culturally specifics of the program and the session printout, from the
adapted for use in clinic settings in Kenya (ClinicalTrials.gov: providers, may highlight that the participants were not engaging
NCT01015989), may provide additional insights regarding the their providers on this aspect of their self-care, and this may
efficacy of computer-based counseling interventions across have been a factor in reducing the effect of the intervention.
different populations. Potential improvement of this counseling intervention may be
developing a mobile cloud-based platform to support users in
Limitations and Strengths
self-motivated behavioral change for better health. Additionally,
We draw from the qualitative data to provide potential targeting the intervention to individuals with adherence and/or
explanation of the statistical lack of effect noted from this sexual transmission risk problems may be another way of
intervention in this population and setting. Exit interviews from improving the program’s effectiveness.
intervention participants and focus groups with providers
An innovative strength of our study is the use of peers to support
highlight the efficacy of computer-based counseling tools in
ICT use in a clinic setting for an important and often-neglected
overcoming adherence challenges experienced by culturally
population that is disproportionately affected by HIV disease
and linguistically diverse communities, especially stigma. A
burden. Peer involvement in programs designed to impact
study that explored an intervention to engage PLHA to initiate
attitudes and behaviors have been shown to be effective [31,32].
ART, found that by sampling participants primarily from a clinic
setting, they were encountering individuals who had already Conclusion
overcome many of the barriers to initiating and adhering to
A computer-based counseling tool grounded in the TAM
ARTs [29]. It is possible, although this was not explored, that
theoretical model and delivered in Spanish was acceptable and
our participants were also further along in the HIV treatment
feasible to implement in a high-volume HIV clinic setting. It
cascade [30], and this may have been a factor in reducing the
can provide evidence-based, linguistically appropriate ART
effect of the CARE+ Spanish intervention. The computer-based
adherence support without requiring additional staff time,
audio-narrated risk assessment that both groups received at
bilingual status, or translation services. We found that language
baseline may have been enough to support the maintenance of
preferences and cultural acceptability of a computer-based
adherence in both groups, and the positive trend noted in the
counseling tool exist on a continuum in our urban
treatment group explained by the impact of the full intervention.
Spanish-speaking population. Theoretical frameworks of
Additionally, health provider acceptability is important for any
technology’s usefulness in behavioral modification needs further
ICT tool that aims to be incorporated into real-world practice.
exploration in other languages and cultures to determine where
Therefore, although the CARE+ Spanish intervention was
on the HIV care and treatment continuum these interventions
developed as a stand-alone computer-based counseling tool,
may have the greatest impact.
participants did receive a printout of their session that they could
Acknowledgments
We thank the following deeply for their contributions and support: Jim Larkin, David Larkin, Carter Wickstrom, David Thomas,
and Andrew Choi of Resources Online (www.ronline.com/care); Danielle Beiling and Zachariah Hennessey at St Luke’s-Roosevelt
Hospital; staff members at the Center for Comprehensive Care; our research assistants; and the study participants.
The project described was supported by Award Number RC1MH088307 from the National Institute of Mental Health. The content
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Mental
Health or the National Institutes of Health. We thank our project officer Cynthia Grossman. Initial adaptation of CARE+
computer-based counseling tool for a Spanish-speaking population was made possible by a grant to Ann Kurth (principal
investigator) and José Parés-Avila (co-investigator) from the University of Washington’s Institute of Translational Health Sciences
(ITHS). ITHS is funded by Grant Number 1UL1RR025014-01 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a
component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research.
Authors' Contributions
AEK conceived of the study and study design. AEK, NC, JAP, MCF, JAL, and CMC drafted the manuscript. MCF, MGS, RGN,
and CMC were responsible for data analysis. JAP conducted the formative research that guided the adaptation of the CARE+
tool for a Spanish-speaking population. JAL managed the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 13
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Multimedia Appendix 1
Consort-Ehealth Checklist.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 630KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
CARE+ Spanish Participant Interview.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 484KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
Multimedia Appendix 3
CARE+ Spanish Topic Guide: Clinic Staff Focus Group.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 437KB-Multimedia Appendix 3]
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact sheet: HIV among Hispanics/Latinos in the United States and dependent
areas. 2013 Nov. URL: http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk_latino.pdf[accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP5vqXwU]
2. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in
HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents. 2016 Jan 28. URL: https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/
adultandadolescentgl.pdf[accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP6RTnoE]
3. World Health Organization. Adherence to Long Term Therapies: Evidence for Action. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2003. URL: http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/adherence_full_report.pdf[accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite
Cache ID 6gP6a4rK7]
4. Simoni JM, Pearson CR, Pantalone DW, Marks G, Crepaz N. Efficacy of interventions in improving highly active
antiretroviral therapy adherence and HIV-1 RNA viral load. A meta-analytic review of randomized controlled trials. J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2006 Dec 1;43 Suppl 1:S23-S35 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1097/01.qai.0000248342.05438.52]
[Medline: 17133201]
5. Rueda S, Park-Wyllie LY, Bayoumi AM, Tynan AM, Antoniou TA, Rourke SB, et al. Patient support and education for
promoting adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy for HIV/AIDS. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006(3):CD001442.
[doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001442.pub2] [Medline: 16855968]
6. Kurth AE, Spielberg F, Cleland CM, Lambdin B, Bangsberg DR, Frick PA, et al. Computerized counseling reduces HIV-1
viral load and sexual transmission risk: findings from a randomized controlled trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2014
Apr 15;65(5):611-620 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000100] [Medline: 24384803]
7. Skeels MM, Kurth A, Clausen M, Severynen A, Garcia-Smith H. CARE+ user study: usability and attitudes towards a
tablet pc computer counseling tool for HIV+ men and women. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2006:729-733 [FREE Full text]
[Medline: 17238437]
8. Hayes-Bautista DE, Chapa J. Latino terminology: conceptual bases for standardized terminology. Am J Public Health 1987
Jan;77(1):61-68. [Medline: 3789240]
9. Centers for Disease Control. 2013. HIV among Hispanics/Latinos URL: http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/group/racialethnic/
hispaniclatinos[accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP6igE5k]
10. Lai T, Larson EL, Rockoff ML, Bakken S. User acceptance of HIV TIDES--Tailored Interventions for Management of
Depressive Symptoms in persons living with HIV/AIDS. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2008;15(2):217-226 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2481] [Medline: 18096915]
11. Polgar S, Marshall J. The search for culturally acceptable fertility regulating methods. In: Marshall J, Polgar S, editors.
Culture, Natality and Family Planning (Monograph 21). Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, University of North
Carolina; 1976:204-218.
12. World Health Organization. Task Force on Acceptability of Fertility Regulating Methods. Doc. ATF-G(2/73). Geneva:
World Health Organization; Feb 1973.
13. Vincent D, McEwen MM, Pasvogel A. The validity and reliability of a Spanish version of the summary of diabetes self-care
activities questionnaire. Nurs Res 2008;57(2):101-106. [doi: 10.1097/01.NNR.0000313484.18670.ab] [Medline: 18347481]
14. Jaja C, Pares-Avila J, Wolpin S, Berry D. Usability evaluation of the interactive Personal Patient Profile-Prostate decision
support system with African American men. J Natl Med Assoc 2010 Apr;102(4):290-297 [FREE Full text] [Medline:
20437736]
15. Fonteyn ME, Kuipers B, Grobe SJ. A description of think aloud method and protocol analysis. Qual Health Res 1993 Nov
01;3(4):430-441. [doi: 10.1177/104973239300300403]
16. Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D. CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomized
trials. Ann Intern Med 2010 Jun 1;152(11):726-732. [doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-152-11-201006010-00232] [Medline:
20335313]
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 14
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
17. Eysenbach G, CONSORT-EHEALTH Group. CONSORT-EHEALTH: improving and standardizing evaluation reports of
Web-based and mobile health interventions. J Med Internet Res 2011 Dec;13(4):e126 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2196/jmir.1923] [Medline: 22209829]
18. Fisher JD, Fisher WA, Amico KR, Harman JJ. An information-motivation-behavioral skills model of adherence to
antiretroviral therapy. Health Psychol 2006 Jul;25(4):462-473. [doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.25.4.462] [Medline: 16846321]
19. Bandura A. Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health Educ Behav 2004 Apr;31(2):143-164. [doi:
10.1177/1090198104263660] [Medline: 15090118]
20. Tober G. Motivational interviewing: helping people change. Alcohol Alcoholism 2013 Feb 18;48(3):376-377. [doi:
10.1093/alcalc/agt010]
21. Thibault JM, Steiner RW. Efficient identification of adults with depression and dementia. Am Fam Physician 2004 Sep
15;70(6):1101-1110 [FREE Full text] [Medline: 15456119]
22. Faulkner L. Beyond the five-user assumption: benefits of increased sample sizes in usability testing. Behav Res Methods
Instrum Comput 2003 Aug;35(3):379-383. [Medline: 14587545]
23. Bates D, Mächler M, Bolker B, Walker S. Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. J Stat Soft 2015;67(1):1-48.
[doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01]
24. R Development Core Team. R-A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for
Statistical Computing URL: https://www.r-project.org/[accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP7YVTUL]
25. Selya AS, Rose JS, Dierker LC, Hedeker D, Mermelstein RJ. A practical guide to calculating Cohen's f(2), a measure of
local effect size, from PROC MIXED. Front Psychol 2012;3:111 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00111]
[Medline: 22529829]
26. Fisher JD, Amico KR, Fisher WA, Cornman DH, Shuper PA, Trayling C, LifeWindows Team. Computer-based intervention
in HIV clinical care setting improves antiretroviral adherence: the LifeWindows Project. AIDS Behav 2011
Nov;15(8):1635-1646. [doi: 10.1007/s10461-011-9926-x] [Medline: 21452051]
27. Grimley DM, Hook EW. A 15-minute interactive, computerized condom use intervention with biological endpoints. Sex
Transm Dis 2009 Feb;36(2):73-78. [doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0b013e31818eea81] [Medline: 19125141]
28. Lightfoot M, Rotheram-Borus MJ, Comulada WS, Reddy VS, Duan N. Efficacy of brief interventions in clinical care
settings for persons living with HIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2010 Mar;53(3):348-356. [doi:
10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181c429b3] [Medline: 19996978]
29. Gwadz M, Cleland CM, Applegate E, Belkin M, Gandhi M, Salomon N, Heart to Heart Collaborative Research Team.
Behavioral intervention improves treatment outcomes among HIV-infected individuals who have delayed, declined, or
discontinued antiretroviral therapy: a randomized controlled trial of a novel intervention. AIDS Behav 2015
Oct;19(10):1801-1817. [doi: 10.1007/s10461-015-1054-6] [Medline: 25835462]
30. Gardner EM, McLees MP, Steiner JF, Del RC, Burman WJ. The spectrum of engagement in HIV care and its relevance to
test-and-treat strategies for prevention of HIV infection. Clin Infect Dis 2011 Mar 15;52(6):793-800 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1093/cid/ciq243] [Medline: 21367734]
31. Chapman DJ, Damio G, Young S, Pérez-Escamilla R. Effectiveness of breastfeeding peer counseling in a low-income,
predominantly Latina population: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004 Sep;158(9):897-902. [doi:
10.1001/archpedi.158.9.897] [Medline: 15351756]
32. Kelly JA, St Lawrence JS, Diaz YE, Stevenson LY, Hauth AC, Brasfield TL, et al. HIV risk behavior reduction following
intervention with key opinion leaders of population: an experimental analysis. Am J Public Health 1991 Feb;81(2):168-171.
[Medline: 1990853]
Abbreviations
AIDS: acquired immune deficiency syndrome
ART: antiretroviral therapy
CARE+: Computer Assessment & Rx Education for HIV-positives
HIV: human immunodeficiency virus
ICT: information and communication technology
PLHA: people living with HIV/AIDS
RCT: randomized controlled trial
TAM: Technology Acceptance Model
VAS: visual analog scale
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 15
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH Kurth et al
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 04.04.16; peer-reviewed by N Abdala, K Claborn; comments to author 08.06.16; revised version
received 22.06.16; accepted 23.06.16; published 13.07.16
Please cite as:
Kurth AE, Chhun N, Cleland CM, Crespo-Fierro M, Parés-Avila JA, Lizcano JA, Norman RG, Shedlin MG, Johnston BE, Sharp VL
Linguistic and Cultural Adaptation of a Computer-Based Counseling Program (CARE+ Spanish) to Support HIV Treatment Adherence
and Risk Reduction for People Living With HIV/AIDS: A Randomized Controlled Trial
J Med Internet Res 2016;18(7):e195
URL: http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/
doi: 10.2196/jmir.5830
PMID: 27417531
©Ann E Kurth, Nok Chhun, Charles M Cleland, Michele Crespo-Fierro, José A Parés-Avila, John A Lizcano, Robert G Norman,
Michele G Shedlin, Barbara E Johnston, Victoria L Sharp. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(http://www.jmir.org), 13.07.2016. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research, is properly cited. The complete
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://www.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license information
must be included.
http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 16
XSL FO (page number not for citation purposes)
•
RenderX
