Development and Evaluation of a Mobile Intervention for Heavy 
Drinking and Smoking among College Students
Katie Witkiewitz1, Sruti A. Desai2, Sarah Bowen2, Barbara C. Leigh3, Megan Kirouac1, and 
Mary E. Larimer2
1University of New Mexico
2Center for the Study of Health and Risk Behavior University of Washington
3Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute University of Washington
Abstract
Nearly all college student smokers also drink alcohol, and smoking and heavy-episodic drinking 
(HED) commonly co-occur. However, few studies have examined the factors that concurrently 
influence smoking and HED among college students and, to date, no interventions have been 
developed that target both HED and smoking in this population. The objective of the current study 
was to develop and evaluate a mobile feedback intervention that targeted HED and smoking. 
Participants (n = 94) were non-treatment seeking college students (mean age = 20.5, SD=1.7) who 
engaged in at least one HED episode in the past two weeks and reported concurrent smoking and 
drinking at least once a week. Participants were randomized to either receive the mobile 
intervention for 14 days, complete mobile assessments (without intervention) for 14 days, or 
complete minimal assessments (without intervention or mobile assessments). At a 1-month follow-
up, in comparison to the minimal assessment condition we observed significant reductions in the 
number of cigarettes per smoking day in both the mobile intervention (d=0.55) and mobile 
assessment conditions (d=0.45). Among those randomized to the mobile intervention, receiving 
more modules of the intervention was significantly associated with a lower likelihood of any 
drinking during the 14-day assessment period and significant reductions in smoking at 1-month 
follow-up. The mobile intervention did not result in significant reductions in HED or concurrent 
smoking and drinking. Future research should continue to examine ways of using technology and 
the real-time environment to improve interventions for HED and smoking.
Keywords
heavy drinking; smoking; college students; ecological momentary assessment; mobile 
intervention; Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention for College Students (BASICS)
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Katie Witkiewitz, University of New Mexico, 2650 Yale Blvd SE, 
Albuquerque NM 87106. katiew@unm.edu.
Katie Witkiewitz and Megan Kirouac are in the Department of Psychology and the Center on Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and 
Addictions at the University of New Mexico. Sruti Desai, Sarah Bowen, and Mary Larimer are at the Center for the Study of Health 
and Risk Behaviors in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the University of Washington. Barbara C. Leigh is at 
the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute at the University of Washington.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Psychol Addict Behav. 2014 September ; 28(3): 639–650. doi:10.1037/a0034747.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

More than 80% of college students report consuming alcohol annually, with 44% reporting 
heavy episodic drinking (HED; 5/4 drinks per occasion for men/women) at least once in the 
past 2 weeks (Henry Wechsler et al., 2002). Excessive drinking is associated with damaged 
property, academic problems, hangovers, trouble with authorities, injuries, fatalities, risky 
sexual behavior, sexual assault, depression, and eating disorders (Hingson, Zha, & 
Weitzman, 2009; Larimer & Cronce, 2007). The prevalence of smoking among college 
students is also high. One national US survey found 46% of college students had used 
tobacco in the past year and approximately 28% were current smokers (Rigotti, Lee, & 
Wechsler, 2000). Although these data were reported over a decade ago, more recent research 
suggests tobacco use prevalence rates among young adults have remained fairly consistent 
(e.g. Welte, Barnes, Tidwell, & Hoffman, 2011). Moreover, individuals who never smoked 
prior to college are likely to experiment with smoking during college, and those who smoked 
occasionally in high school often became heavier smokers in college (Wechsler, Rigotti, 
Gledhill-Hoyt, & Lee, 1998). One study found 87% of daily smokers and 50% of occasional 
smokers reported continued tobacco use after four years of college (Wetter et al., 2004). 
Wetter and colleagues (2004) also found substantial individual variability in rates of 
smoking across the college years with many college students transitioning between varying 
levels of smoking more readily than adults, suggesting that college students “may be 
particularly receptive to interventions.” (p. 176).
The co-occurrence of smoking and drinking among college students has been demonstrated 
in several studies (Dierker et al., 2006; Reed, Wang, Shillington, Clapp, & Lange, 2007; 
Weitzman & Chen, 2005). Weitzman and Chen (2005) found 98% of student smokers drank 
alcohol and 44–59% of drinkers smoked cigarettes, with co-occurrence risk highest among 
students who reported greater alcohol consumption, having a drinking problem, or using 
drinking to cope with their problems. Among drinkers, the odds of “drinking to get drunk” 
were more than 2.7 times greater for smokers vs. nonsmokers (Weitzman & Chen, 2005). 
College student smokers drink significantly more per occasion, more frequently, and have 
significantly more alcohol-related problems than non-smoking college student drinkers 
(Reed et al., 2007; Wetter et al., 2004). In addition, frequent drinking (40+ times in the past 
year) among non-smoking college students is a significant risk factor for becoming a smoker 
within a year (Reed et al., 2007). Thus, the combination of college student HED and tobacco 
use presents a significant public health problem. Furthermore, research suggests that current 
heavy drinkers are less likely to attempt to quit smoking and less successful if they do 
attempt to quit (Duffy et al., 2006). Consequently, there is a need to address these problems 
simultaneously; yet, to our knowledge, no interventions have been developed that 
specifically target both smoking and HED among college students.
Interventions for Harmful Alcohol Use and Smoking in College Students
Alcohol programs.
Prevention and treatment interventions for college student drinking incorporating 
motivational interviewing, cognitive-behavioral skills (e.g., alcohol related skills training), 
and personalized normative feedback have received considerable empirical support for 
efficacy among college students and are more efficacious than purely educational 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 2
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

interventions or no intervention (Carey, Scott-Sheldon, Carey, & DeMartini, 2007; Larimer 
& Cronce, 2007; Walters & Neighbors, 2005). Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention for 
College Students (BASICS; (Dimeff, Baer, Kivlahan, & Marlatt, 1999; Marlatt et al., 1998), 
a widely implemented and empirically-supported intervention for college student HED (see 
meta-analysis by Fachini, Aliane, Martinez, & Furtado, 2012), is a brief intervention 
incorporating personalized feedback about drinking behavior with components of cognitive 
behavioral treatment, including education regarding the effects of alcohol on the brain and 
behavior, skills training, risk awareness, expectancy information, and suggestions for less 
risky drinking habits, as well as brainstorming alternatives to heavy drinking (Marlatt et al., 
1998). The BASICS program has been shown to reduce alcohol consumption and negative 
consequences associated with drinking (Baer, Kivlahan, Blume, McKnight, & Marlatt, 2001; 
Larimer et al., 2001; Marlatt et al., 1998).
Smoking Programs.
Approximately 70–80% of college student smokers report a desire to quit smoking (Everett 
et al., 1999), yet few effective programs have been developed to target college student 
smoking. A study (n=35) evaluating “Kick It!,” a web-based intervention including graphics, 
quizzes and other features (Escoffery, McCormick, & Bateman, 2004) provided initial 
support for its acceptability and feasibility. While 6-month follow-up quit rate was 25.7%, 
nearly equal to the self-quit rate of 24.8%, 94.1% reported they would consider future 
participation in web-based programs, supporting feasibility of this modality of intervention. 
Obermayer and colleagues (Obermayer, Riley, Asif, & Jean-Mary, 2004) developed a 
smoking cessation program combining web assessment with individually tailored smoking 
cessation messages delivered via text messaging to the participant’s cell phone. Among 
those who completed the study (n=29) the 6-week quit rate was 28%, and there was a 
significant reduction in cigarettes smoked per week among those who did not quit. Bowen 
and Marlatt (2009) examined the effects of a brief (11 minute) mindfulness-based 
intervention to manage cravings among non-treatment-seeking college student smokers. 
Participants in the treatment condition reported significantly lower point-prevalence smoking 
rates one week following the intervention.
While results of these interventions are somewhat encouraging, none of the college student 
smoking cessation intervention studies described above addressed the issue of HED and 
smoking in combination. Considering that nearly all college student smokers drink alcohol 
(Wechsler et al., 2002), it could be helpful to develop an intervention that targets health 
behavior more broadly, perhaps as part of an intervention program for college student 
drinking.
The Promise of Mobile Interventions
With advances in computing technology, a number of researchers have developed 
interventions that can be administered on electronic devices (Rizvi, Dimeff, Skutch, Carroll, 
& Linehan, 2011; Stoner & Hendershot, 2012; Watts et al., 2013). There are many 
advantages of computerized interventions, including 24-hour availability, anonymity, 
portability, increased compliance, and accurate data recording (Heron & Smyth, 2010). 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 3
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Computer-delivered and web-based interventions have been found to be efficacious for 
reducing quantity and frequency of drinking among college students (Carey, Scott-Sheldon, 
Elliott, Bolles, & Carey, 2009; Walters & Neighbors, 2011). The anonymity of computerized 
intervention may be particularly suited for providing assessment and feedback about 
excessive alcohol use and other risky and/or illegal behavior. For example, 74% of 
participants in a computerized alcohol screening and feedback study reported a preference 
for the computer printout instead of personalized feedback from staff (Karlsson & Bendtsen, 
2005). Additionally, electronically delivered interventions have demonstrated comparable 
efficacy to other intervention modalities such as printed feedback (Elliott, Carey, & Bolles, 
2008). Attempts to target multiple risk behaviors using individualized interventions have had 
some success (Prochaska et al., 2004), although to our knowledge no studies have attempted 
to target both high risk drinking and smoking among college students.
To date, only one locatable study has used a daily intervention in combination with 
ecological momentary assessment (EMA) to target alcohol use in college student drinkers 
(Weitzel, Bernhardt, Usdan, Mays, & Glanz, 2007). College students (n=40) who reported 
drinking at least weekly were randomized to receive either EMA-only or EMA with text 
messaging during a two-week reporting period. The EMA+text group received one text 
message per day tailored to drinking and consequences. The EMA+text group reported 
greater reductions in drinks per drinking day as compared to the EMA-only group during the 
reporting period. The study was limited by a small sample size and experimenter/technical 
error resulting in some students failing to receive messages daily. Despite these limitations, 
the authors demonstrated the feasibility of this type of intervention with college students and 
initial support of its efficacy for reducing drinking in a college student population. More 
recently, Suffoletto and colleagues (2012) found weekly text-messaging-based feedback 
interventions delivered over a 12-week period was associated with significant reductions in 
frequency of heavy drinking and quantity of drinks per drinking day in a sample of young 
adults (aged 18 to 24) recruited from emergency departments (82% were enrolled in 
college).
Riley and colleagues (Riley, Obermayer, & Jean-Mary, 2008) recently developed and 
implemented an intervention program combining internet and text-message smoking 
cessation for college students who wanted to quit smoking (n = 31). Participants received 
personalized text-messages 1 to 3 times per day. At a six-week follow-up, the authors found 
significant decreases in smoking rates and dependence, as well as significant increases in the 
number of days abstinent from smoking. These findings provide further support for the use 
of daily mobile interventions for changing college student health behavior.
Current Study
The current study was designed to develop and implement a mobile intervention that 
incorporated components from a brief alcohol intervention and a brief smoking intervention. 
The alcohol intervention components were largely derived from the Brief Alcohol Screening 
and Intervention for College Students program (BASICS; Dimeff et al., 1999), a widely 
implemented and empirically-supported intervention for college student HED that 
incorporates personalized feedback about drinking behavior with components of cognitive 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 4
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

behavioral treatment (Marlatt et al., 1998). The complete BASICS curriculum was not 
adapted to be a mobile intervention; rather alcohol intervention components included in the 
mobile intervention were based on BASICS feedback materials. The smoking intervention 
consisted of feedback about smoking and “urge-surfing,” a mindfulness-based approach to 
help people recognize and allow urges to occur and pass without needing to reactively 
engage in smoking or drinking, drawn from relapse prevention (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) 
and mindfulness-based relapse prevention (Bowen, Chawla, & Marlatt, 2010). Urge-surfing 
has been shown to effectively reduce smoking rates among non-treatment seeking college 
student smokers (Bowen & Marlatt, 2009).
Interventions incorporating computerized BASICS have demonstrated efficacy in reducing 
drinking and related consequences in college student samples (Butler & Correia, 2009). The 
primary goal of this research was to integrate components of BASICS with smoking 
feedback and urge-surfing elements using assessment and intervention delivered via mobile 
phone in real-time. The intervention, called the Brief Alcohol and Smoking Intervention for 
College Students (BASICS-Mobile), was embedded within the web-based assessment. We 
hypothesized that providing a personalized, real-time intervention would result in significant 
reductions in the frequency of smoking and heavy drinking relative to mobile assessment-
only and a minimal assessment control group.
Methods
Participants and Procedures
Participants (n = 94) were non-treatment seeking college students enrolled at a large public 
university who engaged in at least one episode of heavy drinking (5/4 drinks per occasion 
for men/women) in the past two weeks and reported concurrent smoking and drinking at 
least once a week. Participants were recruited through flyers posted on campus (in 
dormitories, cafeterias, student centers, etc.) as well as print and online advertisements in 
student newspapers and on Craigslist and Facebook. Ads included basic information about 
the study as well as study contact information. After contacting the study office, interested 
individuals were emailed a link to a 10–15 minute online screening survey, which assessed 
demographics and alcohol and cigarette use. Students who completed the survey were 
entered into a drawing for one of four $50 gift certificates.
Individuals who met the screening criteria were immediately linked to a 40–45 minute 
online baseline survey, which included measures of drinking and smoking norms, 
expectancies, motives, consequences, family history and protective behavioral strategies. 
Students received $20 for participating in the baseline survey. After completing the baseline 
survey, participants were randomized to one of three conditions (see Figure 1): BASICS-
Mobile (n=32), daily monitoring only via mobile assessment (n=33), or minimal assessment 
control (n=29). Individuals in the BASICS-Mobile and daily monitoring only conditions 
each completed 14 days of EMA via web-enabled phone, a brief online assessment 
immediately following the monitoring period, and an online follow-up assessment 1-month 
after the monitoring period. Individuals in the minimal assessment condition completed only 
the initial screening and baseline assessments and the 1-month follow-up. All participants 
received $30 for completing the 1-month follow-up assessment.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 5
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The EMA portion of the study consisted of three randomly prompted mobile assessments 
per day and instruction to complete a user-initiated mobile assessment at the beginning and 
end of each drinking occasion for 14 days. The 14-day time frame was chosen to capture 
data from two weekends (when more drinking occurs), and because the in-person BASICS 
program often consists of two sessions over a two-week period. Those participating in EMA 
were asked to attend a 30-minute in-person training session with a research assistant to learn 
how to complete the random and user-initiated assessments via a web-enabled phone. 
Participants with web-enabled phones were allowed to use their own phones, and 
participants who did not have web-enabled phones were provided with a Blackberry® smart 
phone (Model #s 8330, 8700, 8900) with a data-only plan (i.e., no voice plan was included 
with the phone). The majority of participants used either a Blackberry® (approximately 
46%), an iPhone® (approximately 31%), or an Android® phone (approximately 23%).
Random prompts were sent daily via text messages during 3 different blocks of time. A 
morning prompt was sent between 10am and 1pm, an afternoon prompt was sent between 
2pm and 5pm, and an evening prompt was sent between 6pm and 9pm. Each mobile 
assessment was 3–5 minutes long. Participants were allowed up to 2 hours from the time of 
the prompt to log in and complete the survey. Students received $3 for each random 
assessment plus a $21 bonus for every week they completed at least two of three random 
assessments per day, for a possible total of $168. Participants were not provided with any 
incentive for the user-initiated (i.e., event contingent) assessments during drinking 
occasions.
Individuals in the BASICS-Mobile condition also received an intervention module after 
completing each mobile assessment (including randomly prompted assessments and event-
contingent assessments). We administered up to 31 different modules during the 
intervention. Each module was 1 to 3 pages (sized for a mobile phone screen) and targeted 
one of the following topics: normative feedback (13.7% of modules delivered), general or 
health information about drinking and smoking (26.4% of modules delivered), protective 
behavioral strategies for drinking and smoking (28.9% of modules delivered), alternative 
activities to drinking and smoking (6% of modules delivered), urge-surfing (16.5% of 
modules delivered), or decisional balance for drinking and smoking (8.5% of modules 
delivered). Two example modules (the Smoking Assumptions & Actual Smoking Module 
and Standard Drinks Module), each with two pages, are provided in Figure 2. To assess 
participant interaction with the module we required a participant response for each module. 
For example, on page 1 of the Standard Drinks Module (Figure 2) we asked participants to 
respond to “How many standard drinks do you think are in each of their drinks?” The 
intervention modules were personalized in two ways. First, participant answers from the 
baseline assessment were incorporated into the intervention in real-time to make the 
intervention more personalized to the individual user. Second, BASICS-Mobile was 
programmed to administer urge-surfing interventions if an individual reported an urge to 
smoke at the time of the current assessment.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 6
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Baseline Measures
Daily Drinking Questionnaire (DDQ).—Participants’ alcohol consumption for each day 
of a typical drinking week in the past month was assessed via the Daily Drinking 
Questionnaire (DDQ; Collins, Parks, & Marlatt, 1985). The DDQ measures typical alcohol 
quantity (i.e. number of standard drinks per drinking day), frequency (i.e. the number of 
drinking days per week), and total consumption. Participants were provided with a standard 
drink definition for reference. The internal consistency reliability of the DDQ was α = 0.83 
in the current sample, and the DDQ has demonstrated high reliability in previous research 
(Baer et al., 1992).
Daily Smoking Questionnaire (DSQ).—Participants’ smoking for each day was 
assessed via an adapted version of the DDQ that inquired about cigarettes smoked per day. 
The internal consistency reliability of the DSQ was α = 0.97 in the current sample.
Young Adult Alcohol Problems Screening Test (YAAPST).—Alcohol-related 
problems were measured via the 14-item Young Adult Alcohol Problem Screening Test 
(YAAPST; Hurlbut & Sher, 1992), assessing the frequency of occurrence of drinking 
consequences over the past year. The YAAPST has demonstrated good test-retest reliability 
and good internal consistency (Hulbut & Sher, 1992). In the current sample, the internal 
consistency reliability of the YAAPST was α = 0.79.
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) Measures.
Questions adapted from prior EMA studies (Muraven, Collins, Shiffman, & Paty, 2005) and 
existing questionnaires of smoking urges, (Cox, Tiffany, & Christen, 2001), affective states 
(Clark & Watson, 1991), and contextual questions (Witkiewitz et al., 2012) were used to 
collect real time data at three randomly-prompted time points during each of the 14-days of 
the study. At each momentary assessment, the students were asked to record the number of 
drinking occasions since the prior assessment (date/time of prior assessment was shown to 
the student), how many standard drinks they consumed per occasion (with number of drinks 
per occasion since prior report assessed for each individual occasion), how many cigarettes 
they smoked since the prior assessment, and whether they smoked cigarettes while drinking. 
Participants were provided with a standard drink definition for reference when answering 
questions about alcohol use. Measures of smoking urge, affect, self-regulation, and context 
were also included in each assessment. Sample EMA items from each domain include: urges 
- “I have a strong urge for a cigarette right now” (rated on a scale from 0 = “not at all” to 4 = 
“very much”); affect - “How tense/anxious are you right now?” (rated on a scale from 0 = 
“not at all” to 4 = “very much”); self-regulation – “How much do you feel you need to 
control or fix your mood” (rated on a scale from 0 = “not at all” to 4 = “very much”); and 
contextual – “Where are you right now?” (with response options “at home,” “at a bar,” “at a 
party,” etc.). For the event-contingent EMA, participants were instructed to complete one 
EMA at the beginning and end of each drinking occasion. The urge, affect, self-regulation, 
and contextual questions from the random assessments were included, as well as items about 
current drinking and smoking (e.g., “How many drinks did you consume prior to starting 
this interview?”). We constructed the data such that randomly prompted and event-
contingent assessments were not double-counted, in other words, the same drinking episode 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 7
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(reported first at an event contingent assessment and again at the next random prompt) was 
not counted as two distinct drinking episodes.
Statistical Analyses
Drinking and smoking during EMA.—Generalized linear mixed models with fixed 
effects of intervention condition and random effects of time were used to examine 
differences in drinking, smoking, and occasions of concurrent drinking and smoking 
between daily monitoring and BASICS-Mobile over the course of the 14-day EMA 
monitoring period. Given that number of drinks per occasion and number of cigarettes 
smoked since last prompt were both count outcomes with a zero count as the modal outcome 
we used a negative binomial hurdle model1 (Atkins, Baldwin, Zheng, Gallop, & Neighbors, 
2012). The hurdle model simultaneously estimates the count outcome as a logistic (e.g., 
drinking vs. not drinking and smoking vs. not smoking, with the logistic portion predicting 
“no drinking” and “no smoking”) and as a truncated count regression (e.g., # of drinks 
among those who drank and # of cigarettes among those who smoked). For the concurrent 
smoking and drinking outcome (which was characterized as 0=no occasions, 1=concurrent 
smoking and drinking), we used a logistic model.
For each outcome measure (drinks per occasion since prior prompt, cigarettes smoked since 
prior prompt, and concurrent drinking and smoking since prior prompt), we included 
drinking/smoking, weekend (Friday to Sunday), and time as level 1 covariates (group-mean 
centered) and treatment condition, gender, baseline cigarettes per smoking day, baseline 
drinks per drinking day, and average drinking/smoking during the EMA period as level 2 
covariates (grand-mean centered). Weekend was included as a covariate because prior 
studies have found that college students drink more alcohol on weekend days (e.g., 
Witkiewitz et al., 2012), and preliminary analyses showed that individuals in the current 
study drank twice as much on weekend days, compared to weekdays. Drinking/smoking 
were included on both level 1 and level 2, which allowed us to partition the effects of 
drinking and smoking into a within-person effect (e.g., effect of an individual’s drinking on 
number of cigarettes) and a between-person effect (e.g., effect of an individual’s average 
level of drinking across the 14 days on number of cigarettes). Thus, when predicting number 
of drinks at each assessment, we controlled for the concurrent number of cigarettes reported 
at the same assessment (within-person effect) and average level of smoking and drinking 
across the EMA period (between-person effect). Likewise, when predicting number of 
cigarettes smoked at each assessment, we controlled for the concurrent number of drinks 
reported at the same assessment (within-person effect) and average level of smoking and 
drinking across the EMA period (between-person effect). Baseline cigarettes per smoking 
day and drinks per drinking day were also included as level 2 covariates. The associations 
between baseline smoking/drinking and average levels of smoking/drinking across the EMA 
period were r = 0.73 (p < 0.001) for smoking and r = 0.49 (p < 0.001) for drinking, thus 
there was strong correspondence between the baseline retrospective reports and actual 
Alternative model specifications were also tested, including a zero inflated negative binomial, negative binomial without zero 
inflation, and Poisson models. Results indicated that the hurdle model provided the best fit to the data, yielded the least amount of 
dispersion, and smallest standard errors. See Atkins, Baldwin, Zheng, Gallop, & Neighbors (in press) for a detailed description of 
these different model specifications for longitudinal substance use data.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 8
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

smoking/drinking during EMA, particularly for smoking. Finally, we also examined cross-
level interactions for the association between drinking and smoking, regressed on treatment 
condition and the other level 2 covariates.
To evaluate the effectiveness of modules within the BASICS-Mobile condition, we also 
tested generalized linear mixed models with a fixed effect for the total number of modules 
received. The level 1 covariates included drinking/smoking, weekend, and time (group-mean 
centered), and we included number of modules received over the 14-day intervention, 
gender, baseline cigarettes per smoking day, baseline drinks per drinking day, and average 
drinking/smoking during the EMA period as level 2 covariates (grand-mean centered).
Drinking and smoking at 1-month follow-up.—The general linear model was used for 
the analysis of mean differences in outcomes across groups at the 1-month follow-up using 
an intent-to-treat approach. For count outcomes (e.g., number of cigarettes smoked, days of 
heavy drinking) we used negative binomial models with a log link function. For ordered 
categorical outcomes (e.g., “How often do you typically drink alcohol and smoke at the 
same time”) we used a multinomial distribution with a cumulative logit link function. For 
binary outcomes (e.g., occasions of concurrent drinking and smoking) we used the binomial 
distribution with a logit link function. Finally, for continuous outcomes (e.g., cigarettes per 
smoking day, drinks per drinking day, and drinking consequences on the YAAPST) we used 
the normal distribution with the identity link function. Cigarettes per smoking day was 
square root transformed prior to analyses to reduce positive skew. Covariates for all analyses 
included the baseline levels of all outcomes, gender, age, and treatment condition. 
Continuous covariates were mean-centered and categorical covariates were coded using 
effect coding (−0.5 and 0.5) to facilitate interpretation (Kraemer & Blasey, 2004).
Missing data.—Across all conditions, 89.4% completed the 1-month follow-up 
assessment (see Figure 1). Individuals who did not complete the 1-month follow-up 
assessment smoked significantly more cigarettes per smoking day at baseline (t (92) = 
−4.13, p < 0.001), as compared to those who completed the 1-month follow-up assessment. 
There was an interaction between attrition from the study and treatment assignment in the 
prediction of baseline smoking (F (2,88) = 8.38, p < 0.001), such that individuals who did 
not complete the follow-up assessments smoked significantly more cigarettes per smoking 
day at baseline if they were assigned to daily monitoring (Mean = 13.11, SD = 6.64) or 
BASICS-Mobile (Mean = 9.79, SD = 8.18), as compared to those assigned to minimal 
assessment (Mean = 2.91, SD = 1.81). Given these differences, we ran all analyses with 
cigarettes per smoking day at baseline as a covariate. We also conducted analyses with the 
baseline values of cigarettes per smoking day imputed as the follow-up cigarettes per 
smoking day for those with missing data at follow-up. There were no other significant 
differences between those who completed the 1-month assessment and those who did not 
complete the assessment on any other measures at baseline.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 9
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Results
Descriptive Findings
The mean age of the sample was 20.5 (SD=1.7) and 27.7% were female. The sample was 
71.3% White, 21.3% Asian, 3.2% American Indian/Alaskan Native, 3.2% African 
American, 1% Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, and 2.1% of the sample identified as 
Hispanic or Latino. The rates of concurrent drinking and smoking were consistent with the 
screening criteria, with 7.4% (n=7) engaging in concurrent drinking and smoking every day, 
61.7% (n=58) at least a few times per week, and 30.9% (n=29) at least once per week. At 
baseline, the average drinks per drinking day was 6.16 (SD = 3.01) with an average of 4.05 
(SD = 1.62) drinking days per week, average cigarettes per smoking day was 4.52 (3.69), 
and 39.4% of the participants were daily smokers. The means and standard deviations of 
primary outcome measures by treatment group, as well as within-group effect sizes from 
baseline to the 1-month follow-up are provided in Table 1.
Feedback from Daily Monitoring and BASICS-Mobile Conditions
At the end of the 14-day EMA monitoring period, we administered a satisfaction 
questionnaire to participants in the BASICS-Mobile and daily monitoring conditions to 
assess acceptability, feasibility, perceived utility, and overall satisfaction. There were no 
significant differences between groups on any of the satisfaction questionnaire items. The 
majority of participants in both conditions found the EMA “very easy” (66.1%) or “easy” 
(20.3%) to navigate, felt that completing the daily assessments was “very easy” (40.7%) or 
“easy” (32.2%), found the overall length of the assessments to be “about right” (77.1%), and 
felt that completing the EMA had little to no interference in their daily lives (86.2%). 
Participants also endorsed learning new information about smoking (20.0% in daily 
monitoring and 43.3% in BASICS-Mobile) and alcohol (24.1% in daily monitoring and 
43.3% in BASICS-Mobile).
Participants in both conditions reported that, after completing the study, they “developed a 
goal to change my smoking habits” (χ (1) = 0.15, p = 0.70; 51.6% in daily monitoring and 
46.6% in BASICS-Mobile) and “drinking habits” (χ (1) = 0.01, p = 0.94; 24.1% in daily 
monitoring and 23.3% in BASICS-Mobile). They also reported “learning new information 
about smoking” (χ (1) = 3.46, p = 0.06; 20.7% in daily monitoring and 43.3% in BASICS-
Mobile) and alcohol (χ (1) = 2.43, p = 0.12; 24.1% in daily monitoring and 43.3% in 
BASICS-Mobile). Individuals in the BASICS-Mobile condition indicated that the tips they 
received from the mobile phones “motivated me to change my smoking” (36.7%) and 
“alcohol use” (20.1%). Over 65% of participants across both conditions provided qualitative 
feedback that participating in the study was beneficial in increasing awareness of their 
drinking and/or smoking. Likewise, over 90% of participants in both conditions stated they 
would recommend participation in the research study to a friend, with 60.5% endorsing that 
they would recommend it to a friend because the study provided greater awareness and/or 
could help a friend reduce their drinking and/or smoking. Conversely, four individuals in the 
BASICS-Mobile condition (13.3%) and two individuals in the daily monitoring condition 
(6.8%) reported participating in the study and completing the surveys made them want to 
drink or smoke more.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 10
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Drinking and Smoking during EMA
Daily Monitoring and BASICS-Mobile.—Over the 14 days of EMA for the daily 
monitoring and BASICS-Mobile conditions, 83.5% of random assessments (2105 out of 
2520) were obtained and 40 participants (66.7% of the sample; n=22 of those in Daily 
Monitoring and n=18 of those in BASICS-Mobile) also completed 236 participant-initiated 
assessments at times of drinking only (120 assessments) or drinking and smoking (116 
assessments). Preliminary analyses revealed no significant differences in drinking/smoking 
rates or other variables of interest across random and event (i.e., participant initiated) 
assessments, thus data from random and event assessments were combined for all analyses. 
Also, the effects of prompt-type (random or event assessment) and the prompt-type by 
intervention group interaction were not significant predictors of drinking and/or smoking 
during EMA. The total number of assessments was 2341, including 664 occasions of 
drinking (28.4% of assessments), 1199 occasions of smoking (51.2% of assessments), and 
365 occasions of concurrent drinking and smoking (15.6% of assessments). Across 
participants, the average number of drinks when drinking-only was 2.79 (SD = 2.88) and the 
average number of cigarettes when smoking-only was 2.49 (SD = 2.02). During occasions of 
concurrent drinking and smoking, the average number of drinks increased to 4.99 (SD = 
3.79) and average number of cigarettes increased to 3.67 (SD = 3.16).
As seen in Table 2, intervention condition was not a significant predictor of drinking or 
smoking outcomes during the EMA period, and the cross-level interactions between level 1 
drinking and smoking regressed on intervention condition were also not significant. 
However, results from the mixed models indicate that level 1 smoking significantly predicted 
level 1 drinking (and vice versa), but that average level of smoking (on level 2) over the 14 
days did not predict level 1 drinking (and vice versa). In other words, an individual’s 
drinking and smoking on each occasion (level 1) was significantly associated with smoking 
and drinking, respectively, at each occasion (level 1), whereas the average amount that each 
individual drank or smoke over the 14-day EMA period (level 2) did not predict how much 
an individual smoke or drank, respectively, at each occasion (level 1). The average amount 
that each individual drank or smoked over the 14 days (estimated on level 2) did 
significantly predict occasions of concurrent drinking and smoking (estimated at level 1). 
Odds ratios for these predictors indicated that at the average level of the other covariates, for 
each additional drink an individual had over the 14 days that same individual had nearly 
twice the odds (odds ratio = 1.99) of engaging in concurrent drinking and smoking at a given 
occasion. For each additional cigarette that was smoked over the 14 days, the odds were 1.32 
times greater that the same individual would engage in concurrent drinking and smoking at a 
given occasion.
BASICS-Mobile.—Next we examined the association between number of modules 
received and each of the drinking and smoking outcomes described above using generalized 
linear mixed models. The average number of modules received was 23.05 (SD = 6.78), with 
a range of 0 to 35 and a mode of 27 modules per person. Only one person in the BASICS-
Mobile condition received 0 modules. The results from the analysis of the number of 
modules received in the BASICS-Mobile condition indicated that receiving more modules 
across the 14 days significantly reduced the probability of any drinking on a given occasion 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 11
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(B (SE) = −0.04 (0.01), p = 0.001), with each additional module received associated with a 
4% decrease in the probability of any drinking. Number of modules received was not related 
to any smoking or number of cigarettes smoked (all p > 0.50) and did not predict the 
probability of concurrent drinking and smoking (B (SE) = 0.01 (0.02), p = 0.63).
Drinking and Smoking at 1-Month Follow-Up
Drinking (drinks per drinking day, days of heavy drinking), concurrent drinking and 
smoking, and drinking-related problems at the 1-month follow-up did not significantly differ 
across conditions (results shown in Table 3). There was one significant effect of condition in 
the prediction of outcomes: individuals assigned to minimal assessment were smoking 
significantly more cigarettes per smoking day at the 1-month follow-up than individuals 
assigned to either BASICS-Mobile or daily monitoring (partial η2 = 0.09). These results 
were consistent when controlling for baseline levels of cigarettes per smoking day (Wald 
χ2(2) = 8.34, p = 0.015), and when we imputed the baseline cigarettes per smoking day for 
those with missing data at the follow-up (Wald χ2(2) = 9.09, p = 0.011). Specifically, using 
the original untransformed scale of cigarettes per smoking day at the average level of the 
other predictors, being in the minimal assessment condition was associated with an average 
increase of 2.04 cigarettes per smoking day as compared to BASICS-Mobile (B (SE) =2.04 
(0.66), p = 0.002; d = 0.55) and an average increase of 1.59 cigarettes per smoking day as 
compared to daily monitoring (B (SE) = 1.59 (0.66), p = 0.02; d = 0.45). An inspection of 
smoking quit rates at baseline and the 1-month follow-up indicated that among those who 
had no quit attempts at baseline (total N=40), 5 individuals in the BASICS-Mobile condition 
(38.5% of the 13 people with no quit attempts at baseline), 1 individual in daily monitoring 
(7.7% of the 13 people with no quit attempts at baseline), and 2 individuals in the minimal 
assessment condition (14.3% of 14 people with no quit attempts) had at least one quit 
attempt by the 1-month follow-up. Overall, including those with quit attempts at baseline, 
the differences in quit attempt rates across groups at follow-up were not statistically 
significant (χ2 (2) = 5.38, p = 0.07); however, the odds of attempting to quit were 2.55 times 
greater in BASICS-Mobile (66.7% had attempted to quit) as compared to minimal 
assessment (44% attempted to quit) and 3.28 times greater in BASICS-Mobile than in the 
daily monitoring condition (37.9% attempted to quit).
Likewise, for those who received BASICS-Mobile, the number of modules received during 
the 14-day EMA period significantly predicted cigarettes per smoking day at the 1-month 
follow-up (Wald χ2(1) = 7.88; B (SE) = −0.04 (0.02), p = 0.005). Again, using the original 
untransformed scale of cigarettes per smoking day at the average level of the other 
predictors, there was an 8% decrease in cigarettes per smoking day for each additional 
module received. On average, individuals (n=19) who received fewer than 24 modules, 
which was the median number of modules received, were smoking an average of 4.30 
cigarettes per smoking day (SD = 3.58), and those who received more than 24 modules 
(n=9) were smoking an average of 1.25 cigarettes per smoking day (SD=1.69). Individuals 
who received more than 24 modules also had significantly fewer cigarettes per smoking day 
than individuals in the minimal assessment (Mean (SD) = 4.55 (4.07)) and daily monitoring 
conditions (Mean (SD) = 2.71 (2.86; Wald χ2(1) = 8.47; B (SE) = −0.94 (0.32), p = 0.004). 
Furthermore, looking at the frequency of smoking, receiving more modules was associated 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 12
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with significantly fewer days of smoking over the past 14 days (Wald χ2(1) = 9.20; B (SE) = 
−0.31 (0.10), p = 0.002). Of those who received fewer than 24 modules, the average days of 
smoking over the past 14 days was 10.26 (SD = 4.99). Of those who received more than 24 
modules, the average days of smoking over the past 14 days was 4.33 days (SD = 6.08). The 
average days of smoking over the past 14 days in the minimal assessment condition was 7.38 
(SD = 4.91) and in the daily monitoring condition was 7.10 (SD = 5.20). Finally, number of 
modules received predicted any smoking (Wald χ2(1) = 10.12; B (SE) = −2.66 (0.83), p = 
0.001). Of those who received more than 24 modules, 55.6% of individuals had no smoking 
days, whereas among those in BASICS-Mobile who had fewer than 24 modules only 5.3% 
of individuals had zero smoking days. In the minimal assessment condition, 11.5% had zero 
smoking days and in the daily monitoring condition 10.3% had zero smoking days.
Discussion
In this study, we developed and empirically evaluated a brief mobile intervention designed to 
target alcohol use and smoking among non-treatment seeking heavy drinking college student 
smokers. Results provided initial evidence that mobile assessment and intervention could be 
an effective strategy for reducing smoking among college students. There were significant 
reductions in cigarettes per smoking day among those who were randomized to complete the 
mobile assessments or mobile assessments with mobile intervention, as compared to a 
minimal assessment control group. Furthermore, a greater “dose” of the intervention 
(defined as the number of feedback modules received) was associated with significantly 
greater reductions in smoking. These findings are consistent with the recent study by Riley 
and colleagues (2008), who found that mobile text messaging up to 3 times per day 
predicted significant decreases in smoking rates and increases in abstinent days among 
college student smokers who were interested in quitting smoking.
Compared to the minimal assessment condition, individuals in the mobile assessment and 
BASICS-Mobile intervention did not report significant reductions in drinks per drinking day, 
days of heavy episodic drinking (HED), alcohol related problems, or rates of concurrent 
drinking and smoking. Likewise, the dose of the BASICS-Mobile intervention did not 
predict greater reductions in drinking, HED, or rates of concurrent drinking and smoking. As 
compared to the average levels of drinking and smoking at the baseline assessment, all three 
conditions reported reductions in drinking, HED, and drinking related problems (see effect 
sizes in Table 1), but there were no time-by-condition interactions for any of these outcomes. 
Given the rapid development of intervention applications for mobile devices, it is imperative 
that future research continue to examine whether these applications are actually effective in 
reducing HED and related problems (Cohn, Hunter-Reel, Hagman, & Mitchell, 2011).
The current study also provides initial data supporting the feasibility and acceptability of the 
BASICS-Mobile intervention. Overall, the majority of participants in both the daily 
monitoring mobile assessment and BASICS-Mobile conditions reported that participation in 
the study and completing the mobile assessments was “easy” to “very easy.” Likewise, over 
90% of individuals would recommend participating in this type of study to their friends. 
Many participants reported that they learned something new about alcohol or smoking, 
especially in the BASICS-Mobile condition, and one-quarter to one-half of participants 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 13
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

reported that participation in the study helped them develop a goal to change their smoking 
and/or drinking habits.
It should also be noted that a small percentage of participants (13.3% of BASICS-Mobile 
and 6.8% of daily monitoring) reported in their qualitative feedback that participation in the 
study made them want to smoke or drink more than usual. For example, one participant 
reported, “I feel that I actually smoked more often. Usually, I don’t buy packs of cigarettes 
very often and this limits my smoking. I felt the need to have a pack on hand at all times 
during the study.” Two other participants reported, “I think that filling out a survey about 
smoking three times a day made me want to smoke more often,” and “Sometimes when the 
survey would pop up, I would read about smoking cigarettes and start to think I want a 
cigarette.” These qualitative reports suggest that reactivity to repeated assessment may be an 
issue for mobile interventions. Yet analysis of the smoking and drinking behavior of the 
individuals (n=5) who reported in the qualitative feedback that the surveys caused increased 
desire or tendency to smoke or drink indicated that these individuals reported similar 
reductions in drinking and smoking as those who did not provide this feedback. These 
results are consistent with prior research that has found minimal evidence of EMA reactivity 
(Shiffman, 2009).
There were several limitations of the current study. First, the small sample size limited our 
ability to detect the small effects of the BASICS-Mobile intervention on drinks per drinking 
day (d = 0.07) and days of concurrent drinking and smoking (d = 0.27). Second, the 
intervention length (14 days) may have been too brief to elicit change in drinking among the 
heavy episodic drinkers enrolled in our study. The finding that the dose of the intervention 
predicted better outcomes would suggest that receiving more of the modules may have been 
associated with greater changes in smoking and potentially an effect on drinking, suggesting 
that a longer intervention period may be beneficial. For example, Suffoleto and colleagues 
(2012) found significant reductions in frequency of heavy drinking and drinks per drinking 
day after 12 weeks of a text-based intervention.
A related limitation is that we do not have an objective measure of the degree to which 
participants engaged with the intervention content. As noted above, participants were asked 
to respond to the module content by answering questions to proceed to the next screen. 
However, there was no measure of whether they paid attention to the intervention content or 
answered the questions embedded within the intervention modules randomly. Future 
research may consider additional ways of measuring engagement with intervention content. 
For example, including a quiz following each intervention could provide a way of 
approximating engagement with the intervention content. We did not explicitly incentivize 
module completion, and future studies might consider providing bonuses for receiving more 
modules. It is also important to note that individuals in the current study were not seeking 
any form of treatment and therefore might have lacked motivation to read the intervention 
content as a means for changing their drinking or smoking behavior.
The assessments used in the current study were also a limiting factor. All assessment was 
self-report, and it is unclear to what extent the self-reported drinking and smoking matched 
the actual drinking and smoking among participants. Interestingly, the rates of smoking and 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 14
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

drinking during the EMA period were somewhat lower than the rates reported at baseline, 
which could be explained by a number of factors, including the effect of self-monitoring. 
Second, the compliance with event-contingent participant-initiated assessments was quite 
low and numerous occasions of drinking that were not reported at the time of drinking were 
reported at random prompts. One explanation for poor compliance was the fact that we did 
not incentivize for completing participant-initiated assessments.
Another major limitation was that the 1-month follow-up period was possibly too brief to 
evaluate whether the BASICS-Mobile intervention and daily monitoring would have lasting 
effects on smoking behavior. Additionally, we did not include a measure of social 
desirability. Thus, it is unclear to what extent the reports of drinking and smoking were due 
to a social desirability bias, which has been shown to predict greater changes in college 
student drinking (Carey, Borsari, Carey, & Maisto, 2006). It may also be the case that 
regression to the mean was an issue in the current study (Cunningham, 2006). We explicitly 
recruited participants with above average heavy episodic drinking, and even the minimal 
assessment condition showed small-to-medium effect sizes decreases in drinking behavior 
from baseline to the 1-month follow-up.
A final limitation was in the development of the intervention itself. We had hoped to develop 
a fully dynamic and individualized mobile intervention that would respond to multiple 
factors in an individual’s environment (as reported at the random or event assessment), such 
that the intervention would be highly tailored to each individual’s experience in real-time. 
All modules were personalized based on the participant’s baseline data and the urge-surfing 
module was provided when an individual endorsed an urge to smoke in real-time, but the 
intervention did not respond to multiple interacting factors in the environment. A more 
specific and thorough tailoring could have been more effective.
Given the success of BASICS in reducing college student drinking (see Larimer & Cronce, 
2007), it is unclear why the BASICS-Mobile intervention was not more successful at 
changing drinking behavior than daily monitoring or minimal assessment. First, BASICS-
Mobile was not the full BASICS program (Dimeff et al 1999) adapted to be a mobile 
intervention; rather, we incorporated aspects of BASICS into a mobile platform. Future 
research should attempt to more closely adapt the BASICS program into a mobile format 
that targets heavy alcohol use and alcohol-related problems. We anticipate that a mobile 
intervention that exclusively targeted alcohol use would be more effective than the current 
BASICS-Mobile intervention, which targeted both drinking and smoking. It would also be 
interesting to compare a closely adapted BASICS program to the BASICS-Mobile 
intervention developed for the current study.
It is also important to examine whether interventions that target multiple risk behaviors (i.e., 
smoking and heavy drinking) are less efficacious or more efficacious than interventions that 
target only one risk behavior. Numerous recent studies have found that multiple component 
brief interventions that target more than one behavior are not as effective as single 
component brief interventions targeting a single behavior (e.g., Dermen & Thomas, 2011; 
Kypri & McAnally, 2005; Lostutter, 2010). For example, Kypri and colleagues (2004) found 
a brief intervention targeting alcohol was efficacious in reducing alcohol consumption and 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 15
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

related consequences, but the same investigators found the same brief feedback alcohol 
intervention with components added to address smoking and exercise had no effects on 
alcohol, smoking, or exercise behavior (Kypri & McAnally, 2005).
Despite these limitations, the robust effects of 14 days of daily monitoring via a mobile 
device on smoking behavior among non-treatment seeking college students is worthy of 
further study. It may be the case that daily monitoring and the BASICS-Mobile intervention 
were more effective in reducing smoking behavior because smoking behavior among college 
students may be more mutable (Wetter et al., 2004). Within the context of the current study, 
it will be important to assess the mechanisms of these behavioral changes. According to the 
qualitative feedback, it appears that participating in daily monitoring and the BASICS-
Mobile intervention increased awareness of behavior and provided more information about 
alcohol use and smoking. Greater awareness of behavior and knowledge about its potential 
harms could explain both the increased desire to change the behaviors and subsequent 
behavior change.
Numerous questions remain about whether certain modules of the BASICS-Mobile 
intervention were more or less effective and whether the timing and sequencing of modules 
is important. Further analyses of the individual modules received and the subsequent 
drinking and smoking after receiving each module may elucidate the active ingredients of 
the BASICS-Mobile intervention and could help to further refine the intervention. Finally, 
given the significant effects on smoking behavior, it is important to extend this research to 
non-college student smokers and to individuals who are seeking smoking cessation 
treatment.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (AA018336). 
Special thanks are due to Kim Hodge for her invaluable assistance in executing the procedures of this research.
References
Atkins DC, Baldwin SA, Zheng C, Gallop RJ, & Neighbors C (2012). A Tutorial on Count Regression 
and Zero-Altered Count Models for Longitudinal Substance Use Data. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors. doi:10.1037/a0029508
Baer JS, Marlatt GA, Kivlahan DR, Fromme K, Larimer ME, & Williams E (1992). An experimental 
test of three methods of alcohol risk reduction with young adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 60, 974–979. doi: 10.1037//0022-006X.60.6.974 [PubMed: 1460160] 
Baer JS, Kivlahan DR, Blume a W., McKnight P, & Marlatt G. a. (2001). Brief intervention for heavy-
drinking college students: 4-year follow-up and natural history. American Journal of Public Health, 
91(8), 1310–6. [PubMed: 11499124] 
Bien TH, & Burge R (1990). Smoking and drinking: A review of the literature. International Journal 
Of The Addictions, 25(12), 1429–1454. doi: 10.3109/10826089009056229 [PubMed: 2094682] 
Bowen S, Chawla N, & Marlatt GA (2010). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for addictive 
behaviors: A clinician’s guide (p. 179). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Bowen S, & Marlatt A (2009). Surfing the urge: brief mindfulness-based intervention for college 
student smokers. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 23(4), 666–71. doi:10.1037/a0017127 
[PubMed: 20025372] 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 16
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Butler LH, & Correia CJ (2009). Brief alcohol intervention with college student drinkers: face-to-face 
versus computerized feedback. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 23(1), 163–7. doi:10.1037/
a0014892 [PubMed: 19290702] 
Carey KB, Borsari B, Carey MP, & Maisto SA (2006). Patterns and importance of self-other 
differences in college drinking norms. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 20, 385–393. doi: 
10.1037/0893-164X.20.4.385 [PubMed: 17176173] 
Carey KB, Scott-Sheldon LAJ, Carey MP, & DeMartini KS (2007). Individual-level interventions to 
reduce college student drinking: a meta-analytic review. Addictive Behaviors, 32(11), 2469–94. doi:
10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.05.004 [PubMed: 17590277] 
Carey KB, Scott-Sheldon LAJ, Elliott JC, Bolles JR, & Carey MP (2009). Computer-delivered 
interventions to reduce college student drinking: a meta-analysis. Addiction, 104(11), 1807–19. 
doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2009.02691.x [PubMed: 19744139] 
Clark LA, & Watson D (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: psychometric evidence and 
taxonomic implications. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100(3), 316–36. Retrieved from http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1918611 [PubMed: 1918611] 
Cohn AM, Hunter-Reel D, Hagman BT, & Mitchell J (2011). Promoting behavior change from alcohol 
use through mobile technology: the future of ecological momentary assessment. Alcoholism: 
Clinical and Experimental Research, 35(12), 2209–15. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2011.01571.x
Collins RL, Parks GA, & Marlatt GA (1985). Social determinants of alcohol consumption: the effects 
of social interaction and model status on the self-administration of alcohol. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 53(2), 189–200. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
3998247 [PubMed: 3998247] 
Cox LS, Tiffany ST, & Christen AG (2001). Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges 
(QSU-brief) in laboratory and clinical settings. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 3(1), 7–16. doi:
10.1080/14622200020032051 [PubMed: 11260806] 
Cunningham JA (2006). Regression to the mean: What does it mean? Alcohol and Alcoholism, 41, 
580. doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agl039. [PubMed: 16751218] 
Dermen KH, & Thomas SN (2011). Randomized controlled trial of brief interventions to reduce 
college students’ drinking and risky sex. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 25, 583–594. doi: 
10.1037/a0025472 [PubMed: 21928866] 
Dierker L, Lloyd-Richardson E, Stolar M, Flay B, Tiffany S, Collins L, Bailey S, et al. (2006). The 
proximal association between smoking and alcohol use among first year college students. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence, 81(1), 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.05.012 [PubMed: 16006056] 
Dimeff LA, Baer JS, Kivlahan DR, & Marlatt GA (1999). Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention 
for 648 College Students (BASICS): a harm reduction approach. (pp. 1929–1945). New York, NY, 
US: Guilford Press.
Duffy SA, Ronis DL, Valenstein M, Lambert MT, Fowler KE, Gregory L, Bishop C, et al. (2006). A 
tailored smoking, alcohol, and depression intervention for head and neck cancer patients. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 15, 2203. doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0880 [PubMed: 17119047] 
Elliott JC, Carey KB, & Bolles JR (2008). Computer-based interventions for college drinking: A 
qualitative review. Addictive Behaviors, 33(8), 994–1005. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2008.03.006 
[PubMed: 18538484] 
Escoffery C, McCormick L, & Bateman K (2004). Development and process evaluation of a web-
based smoking cessation program for college smokers: innovative tool for education. Patient 
Education and Counseling, 53(2), 217–25. doi:10.1016/S0738-3991(03)00163-0 [PubMed: 
15140462] 
Everett SA, Husten CG, Kann L, Warren CW, Sharp D, & Crossett L (1999). Smoking initiation and 
smoking patterns among US college students. Journal of American College Health, 48(2), 55–60. 
doi:10.1080/07448489909595674 [PubMed: 10500367] 
Fachini A, Aliane PP, Martinez EZ, & Furtado EF (2012). Efficacy of brief alcohol screening 
intervention for college students (BASICS): a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 7(40), 2–10. doi: 10.1186/1747-597X-7-40
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 17
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Heron KE, & Smyth JM (2010). Ecological momentary interventions: incorporating mobile 
technology into psychosocial and health behaviour treatments. British Journal of Health 
Psychology, 15(Pt 1), 1–39. doi:10.1348/135910709X466063 [PubMed: 19646331] 
Hingson RW, Zha W, & Weitzman ER (2009). Magnitude of and trends in alcohol-related mortality 
and morbidity among U.S. college students ages 18-24, 1998–2005. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
and Drugs, (16), 12–20. Retrieved from http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=2701090&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract
Hurlbut SC, & Sher KJ (1992). Assessing alcohol problems in college students. Journal of American 
College Health, 41(2), 49–58. doi:10.1080/07448481.1992.10392818 [PubMed: 1460173] 
Karlsson A, & Bendtsen P (2005). Acceptability of a computerized alcohol screening and advice 
routine in an emergency department setting--a patient perspective. Addictive Behaviors, 30(4), 
767–76. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.08.022 [PubMed: 15833580] 
Kraemer HC, & Blasey CM (2004). Centring in regression analyses: a strategy to prevent errors in 
statistical inference. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 13(3), 141–51. 
[PubMed: 15297898] 
Kypri K, & McAnally HM (2005). Randomized controlled trial of a web-based primary care 
intervention for multiple health risk behaviors. Prevention Medicine, 41, 761–766. doi: 10.1016/
j.ypmed.2005.07.010
Kypri K, Saunders JB, Williams SM, McGee RO, Langley JD, Cashell-Smith ML, et al., 2004 Web-
based screening and brief intervention for hazardous drinking: a double-blind randomised 
controlled trial. Addiction 99, 1410–1417. [PubMed: 15500594] 
Larimer ME, Turner AP, Anderson BK, Fader JS, Kilmer JR, Palmer RS, & Cronce JM (2001). 
Evaluating a brief alcohol intervention with fraternities. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62(3), 370–
80. [PubMed: 11414347] 
Larimer ME, & Cronce JM (2007). Identification, prevention, and treatment revisited: individual-
focused college drinking prevention strategies 1999–2006. Addictive Behaviors, 32(11), 2439–68. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.05.006 [PubMed: 17604915] 
Lostutter TW (2010, May). BUI-Betting Under the Influence: Using a motivational approach to 
address alcohol and gambling among college students. Presentation at the College Coalition for 
Substance Abuse Prevention Annual Conference and Professional Development Meeting, 
University of Puget Sound, Tacoma, Washington.
Marlatt G. a, Baer JS, Kivlahan DR, Dimeff L. a, Larimer ME, Quigley L. a, Somers JM, et al. (1998). 
Screening and brief intervention for high-risk college student drinkers: results from a 2-year 
follow-up assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(4), 604–615. [PubMed: 
9735576] 
Muraven M, Collins RL, Shiffman S, & Paty JA (2005). Daily fluctuations in self-control demands and 
alcohol intake. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 19(2), 140–7. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.
19.2.140 [PubMed: 16011384] 
Obermayer JL, Riley WT, Asif O, & Jean-Mary J (2004). College smoking-cessation using cell phone 
text messaging. Journal of American College Health, 53(2), 71–8. doi:10.3200/JACH.53.2.71-78 
[PubMed: 15495883] 
Prochaska JO, Velicer WF, Rossi JS, Redding CA, Greene GW, Rossi SR, … Plummer BA (2004). 
Multiple risk expert systems interventions: Impact of simultaneous stage-matched expert system 
interventions for smoking, high-fat diet, and sun exposure in a population of parents. Health 
Psychology, 23, 503–516. [PubMed: 15367070] 
Reed MB, Wang R, Shillington AM, Clapp JD, & Lange JE (2007). The relationship between alcohol 
use and cigarette smoking in a sample of undergraduate college students. Addictive Behaviors, 
32(3), 449–64. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2006.05.016 [PubMed: 16844313] 
Rigotti NA, Lee JE, & Wechsler H (2000). US college students’ use of tobacco products: results of a 
national survey. JAMA, 284(6), 699–705. [PubMed: 10927777] 
Riley W, Obermayer J, & Jean-Mary J (2008). Internet and mobile phone text messaging intervention 
for college smokers. Journal of American College Health, 57(2), 245–8. doi:10.3200/JACH.
57.2.245-248 [PubMed: 18809542] 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 18
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Rizvi SL, Dimeff LA, Skutch J, Carroll D, & Linehan MM (2011). A pilot study of the DBT coach: an 
interactive mobile phone application for individuals with borderline personality disorder and 
substance use disorder. Behavior Therapy, 42(4), 589–600. doi:10.1016/j.beth.2011.01.003 
[PubMed: 22035988] 
Shiffman S (2009). Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) in studies of substance use. 
Psychological Assessment, 21(4), 486–97. doi:10.1037/a0017074 [PubMed: 19947783] 
Stoner SA, & Hendershot CS (2012). A randomized trial evaluating an mHealth system to monitor and 
enhance adherence to pharmacotherapy for alcohol use disorders. Addiction Science & Clinical 
Practice, 7(1), 9. doi:10.1186/1940-0640-7-9 [PubMed: 23186301] 
Suffoletto B, Callaway C, Kristan J, Kraemer K, & Clark DB (2012). Text-message-based drinking 
assessments and brief intervention for young adults discharged from the emergency department. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 36, 552–560. doi: 10.1111/j.
1530-0277.2011.01646.x
Walters ST, & Neighbors C (2005). Feedback interventions for college alcohol misuse: what, why and 
for whom? Addictive Behaviors, 30(6), 1168–82. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.12.005 [PubMed: 
15925126] 
Walters ST, & Neighbors C (2011). College prevention: A view of present (and future) web-based 
approaches. Alcohol Research & Health, 34, 222–224. [PubMed: 22330221] 
Watts S, Mackenzie A, Thomas C, Griskaitis A, Mewton L, Williams A, & Andrews G (2013). CBT 
for depression: a pilot RCT comparing mobile phone vs. computer. BMC psychiatry, 13, 49. doi:
10.1186/1471-244X-13-49 [PubMed: 23391304] 
Wechsler H, Rigotti NA, Gledhill-Hoyt J, & Lee H (1998). Increased levels of cigarette use among 
college students: a cause for national concern. JAMA, 280(19), 1673–8. Retrieved from http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9831998 [PubMed: 9831998] 
Wechsler Henry, Lee JE, Kuo M, Seibring M, Nelson TF, & Lee H (2002). Trends in college binge 
drinking during a period of increased prevention efforts. Findings from 4 Harvard School of Public 
Health College Alcohol Study surveys: 1993–2001. Journal of American College Health, 50(5), 
203–17. doi:10.1080/07448480209595713 [PubMed: 11990979] 
Weitzel JA, Bernhardt JM, Usdan S, Mays D, & Glanz K (2007). Using wireless handheld computers 
and tailored text messaging to reduce negative consequences of drinking alcohol. Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 68(4), 534–7. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17568957 [PubMed: 17568957] 
Weitzman ER, & Chen Y-Y (2005). The co-occurrence of smoking and drinking among young adults 
in college: national survey results from the United States. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 80(3), 
377–86. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.05.008 [PubMed: 16009507] 
Wetter DW, Kenford SL, Welsch SK, Smith SS, Fouladi RT, Fiore MC, & Baker TB (2004). 
Prevalence and predictors of transitions in smoking behavior among college students. Health 
Psychology, 23(2), 168–77. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.23.2.168 [PubMed: 15008662] 
Witkiewitz K, Desai SA, Steckler G, Jackson KM, Bowen S, Leigh BC, & Larimer ME (2012). 
Concurrent drinking and smoking among college students: An event-level analysis. Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors, 26(3), 649–54. doi:10.1037/a0025363 [PubMed: 21895348] 
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 19
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
CONSORT diagram of participant flow into the study.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 20
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Sample intervention modules for smoking normative feedback (left two panels) and standard 
drink calculation (right two panels). The shaded boxes indicate participant input or 
individualized information based on prior assessment.
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 21
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 22
Table 1.
Means for Primary Outcomes from Baseline to Follow-Up by Treatment Group.
Pre-Post Within Group Difference (Cohen’s d)
Outcome
Minimal assessment
Daily Monitoring
BASICS-Mobile
Minimal assessment
Daily Monitoring
BASICS-Mobile
DDD baseline
7.46 (3.46)
5.58 (2.45)
5.57 (2.81)
0.44
0.41
0.27
DDD follow-up
6.05 (2.88)
4.56 (2.65)
4.83 (2.59)
Heavy days baseline
2.86 (1.41)
2.45 (1.44)
2.31 (1.53)
0.40
0.50
0.15
Heavy days follow-up
2.31 (1.35)
1.76 (1.33)
2.07 (1.70)
YAAPST baseline
1.36 (0.46)
1.38 (0.84)
1.27 (0.53)
0.20
0.53
0.13
YAAPST follow-up
1.25 (0.62)
0.99 (0.63)
1.19 (0.71)
CSD Baseline
3.76 (2.15)
4.78 (4.83)
4.93 (3.43)
0.24
0.51
0.49
CSD Follow-up
4.55 (4.07)
2.71 (2.86)
3.28 (3.35)
Drink+smoke baseline
2.66 (0.48)
2.82 (0.64)
2.81 (0.59)
0.64
0.98
0.96
Drink+smoke follow-up
1.76 (0.83)
2.07 (0.88)
1.97 (1.09)
Note. DDD = drinks per drinking day, YAAPST = Young Adult Alcohol Problem Screening Test, CSD = Cigarettes per smoking day; Drink+Smoke = days of drinking and smoking per week.
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 23
Table 2
Unstandardized Estimates (Standard Errors) from Mixed Models predicting Drinking and Smoking Behavior during EMA.
Predictors
No drinking
# of drinks
No smoking
# of cigarettes
Concurrent drinking and smoking
Level 1
Time
0.009 (0.005)
0.002 (0.002)
0.006 (0.005)
0.004 (0.002)
−0.01 (0.01)
Any drinking
--
--
−0.22 (0.28)
0.15 (0.12)
--
Number of drinks
--
--
−0.27 (0.06)*
0.10 (0.01)*
--
Any smoking
−0.87 (0.24)*
0.16 (0.09)
--
--
--
Number of cigarettes
−0.32 (0.08)*
0.14 (0.02)*
--
--
--
Weekday/weekend
−0.63 (0.11)*
0.17 (0.06)*
0.09 (0.13)
−0.03 (0.05)
0.67 (0.14)*
Cross-Level - Slope of drinking/smoking, concurrent drinking and smoking on smoking/drinking
Treatment Condition
0.15 (0.11)
0.02 (0.02)
0.06 (0.09)
0.004 (0.02)
−0.29 (0.22) on drinking
−0.27 (0.31) on smoking
Level 2
Treatment Condition
−0.15 (0.37)
−0.02 (0.09)
−0.05 (0.19)
0.02 (0.09)
−0.08 (0.17)
Gender (Female =+0.5)
−0.17 (0.15)
−0.09 (0.11)
−0.03 (0.21)
−0.20 (0.10)
0.12 (0.19)
Baseline DDD
0.15 (0.04)*
0.09 (0.03)*
0.04 (0.04)
−0.01 (0.02)
−0.06 (0.05)
Baseline CSD
−0.03 (0.03)
0.00 (0.02)
−0.03 (0.03)
−0.002 (0.01)
−0.01 (0.03)
Average # of drinks
−0.96 (0.14)*
0.21 (0.08)*
0.07 (0.16)
−0.02 (0.06)
0.69 (0.13)*
Average # of cigarettes
0.17 (0.09)
−0.04 (0.08)
−1.36 (0.19)*
0.40 (0.05)*
0.28 (0.11)*
Note.
*p < 0.01; CSD = Cigarettes per smoking day; DDD = drinks per drinking day. Condition – BASICS-Mobile coded +0.5.
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Witkiewitz et al.
Page 24
Table 3.
Adjusted Means* for Primary Outcomes from Baseline to Follow-Up.
Follow-up Means (SD) by group
Outcome
Total baseline M (SD)
Minimal assessment
Daily Monitoring
BASICS-Mobile
Wald χ2 (df), p-value
Drinks/drinking days
6.16 (3.01)
5.22 (2.88)
5.04 (2.65)
5.09 (2.59)
χ2 (2,76) = 0.12 (p = 0.94)
Heavy drinking days
2.53 (1.46)
1.78 (1.35)
1.65 (1.33)
1.86 (1.70)
χ2 (2,76) = 0.09 (p = 0.91)
Raw cigarettes/smoking day
4.62 (3.67)
4.74 (4.06)
3.14 (2.97)
2.69 (3.35)
χ2 (2,74) = 10.40 (p = 0.006)
YAAPST binary sum
18.54 (8.86)
17.54 (8.63)
13.31 (8.62)
16.41 (10.05)
χ2 (2,75) = 4.05 (p = 0.13)
Days of drink+smoke
1.23 (0.57)
2.24 (0.93)
1.93 (0.88)
2.03 (1.10)
χ2 (2,75) = 1.96 (p = 0.38)
Note.
*Follow-up means are marginal means covarying gender, race, age, baseline drinks per drinking day, and baseline cigarettes per smoking day.
Psychol Addict Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 18.

