



1. Opitz A, Paulus W, Will S, Antunes A, Thielscher A. Determinants of the 
electric ﬁeld during transcranial direct current stimulation. NeuroImage. 
2015;109:140-50. 
2. Yeo BT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Lashkari D, Hollinshead M, 
et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic 
functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol. 2011;106(3):1125-65. 
3. Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed 
with 
reviews. 
resonance 
2007;8(9):700-11. 
4. Rufﬁni G, Fox MD, Ripolles O, Miranda PC, Pascual-Leone A. Optimization 
of multifocal transcranial current stimulation for weighted cortical pattern 
targeting from realistic modeling of electric ﬁelds. NeuroImage. 
2014;89:216-25. 
5. Miranda PC, Mekonnen A, Salvador R, Rufﬁni G. The electric ﬁeld in the 
cortex during transcranial current stimulation. NeuroImage. 2013;70:48- 
58. 

Fig. 1. SCR for tDCS during a ﬁrst CS+ (black) and tDCS during a second CS+ (grey) for 
extinction and recall trials. 
Experiment 2: Results revealed that Veterans who received tDCS during extinction 
consolidation showed borderline signiﬁcant lower SCR (p¼0.08, Cohen’s d’¼ 0.38) to 
previously extinguished stimuli during early recall compared to Veterans who 
received tDCS during extinction training, see Fig. 2. 
PROCEEDINGS #4. AUGMENTING SAFETY LEARNING AND MEMORY 
WITH TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION: EFFECTS OF 
STIMULATION TIMING ON EXTINCTION AND RECALL 
Mascha van ’t Wout*1,2, Madhavi K. Reddy 1,2, Noah S. Philip 1,2, Benjamin 
D. Greenberg 1,2. 1 Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown 
University, United States; 2 Providence VA Medical Center, United States 


Fig. 2. SCR for tDCS during extinction of CS+ (grey) and during extinction consolida- 
tion of CS+ (black) for extinction and recall trials separately. 
Exposure-based therapy for anxiety and stress disorders such as post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) parallels extinction of conditioned fear 
[1]. Successful extinction e the generation of a novel safety memory that 
competes with the original fear memory e has been associated with top- 
down ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) modulation [2]. Abnor- 
malities in fear extinction and recall of extinction are core components of 
PTSD [1]. 
Facilitating endogenous vmPFC activity using transcranial direct cur- 
rent stimulation (tDCS) to augment extinction learning and/or the 
consolidation of labile safety memories paves the way for the appli- 
cation of tDCS during exposure-based treatments for PTSD and anxiety 
disorders. 
In two different studies we explored whether 1) tDCS during extinction 
training improves subsequent extinction and extinction recall in healthy 
volunteers, and 2) tDCS during extinction learning versus during consoli- 
dation of extinction learning may improve extinction recall in Veterans 
with warzone-related PTSD. 


Participants in both experiments completed a 2-day Pavlovian fear conditioning 
paradigm [3] and received one 10-minute session of 2 mA anodal tDCS over 
AF3, 
In Experiment 1: 26 healthy participants 
received tDCS during extinction of a ﬁrst conditioned stimulus (CS+), and 18 
healthy participants received tDCS during extinction of a second CS+. 
In 
Experiment 2: 14 Veterans with PTSD received tDCS starting simultaneously 
with extinction learning onset of two CS+, and 14 Veterans with PTSD received 
tDCS during extinction consolidation, immediately after extinction. Normalized 
skin conductance reactivity (SCR) was the primary outcome measure in both 
experiments. 
The results of these two studies provide initial data that tDCS may in- 
ﬂuence extinction learning and memory processes in healthy volunteers 
as well as Veterans with PTSD. Additionally, tDCS appears to have a 
time-dependent effect in relation to extinction and recall. Namely, tDCS 
during initial extinction learning may inﬂuence subsequent extinction, 
but tDCS during extinction consolidation, i.e. after extinction learning, 
may enhance memory for extinction. This is relevant for designing 
clinical tDCS applications aimed to reduce anxiety and stress-based 
symptomatology. 

[1] VanElzakker MB, Dahlgren MK, Davis FC, Dubois S, Shin LM. From 
Pavlov to PTSD: The extinction of conditioned fear in rodents, humans, and 
anxiety disorders. Neurobiol Learn Mem 2014;113:3-18 
[2] Milad MR, Wright CI, Orr SP, Pitman RK, Quirk GJ, Rauch SL. 
Recall of fear extinction in humans activates the ventromedial pre- 
frontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Biol Psychiatry 2007;62: 
446-54 
[3] Milad MR, Orr SP, Pitman RK, Rauch SL. Context modulation of memory 
for fear extinction in humans. Psychophysiology 2005;42:456-64. 
PROCEEDINGS #5. A PILOT STUDY OF COGNITIVE TRAINING WITH OR 
WITHOUT TDCS FOR COGNITIVE DEFICITS IN OLDER PERSONS WITH 
HIV 

Erick Mejia 1, Amarilis 
Raymond 
Acevedo 2. 1 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, Nova 
Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA; 2 College of Psychology, 
Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA 




Experiment 1: Results showed a signiﬁcant interaction between timing of tDCS 
during extinction blocks and changes in SCR over late extinction trials (p¼0.03), see 
Fig. 1. These data indicate that tDCS was associated with accelerated late extinction 
learning of a second conditioned stimulus after tDCS was combined with extinction 
learning of a previous conditioned stimulus. 
Background: HIV infection is associated with cognitive impairments even 
when otherwise effectively treated. This study explored the usefulness of 
cognitive training with and without transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS) in older persons with HIV. 


Method: Eleven individuals with HIV-related mild neurocognitive disorder 
were randomly assigned to receive computer-based cognitive training 
with or without anodal tDCS at 1.5 mA X 20 minutes to the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex. Those not receiving active tDCS received sham treat- 
ment. Participants completed a battery of cognitive tests and self-report 
measures before and after training. 
Results: Cognitive test data suggest that persons receiving tDCS improved 
on measures of learning and working memory to a greater extent that 
those who did not. Those receiving tDCS reported improved mood and 
fewer cognitive problems after training. Participants stated that they 
enjoyed training. 
Conclusion: Cognitive training with tDCS may be useful in addressing HIV- 
related cognitive dysfunction. 

In spite of advances in treatment that make it a manageable chronic 
condition, HIV infection is associated with the development of cognitive 
deﬁcits [1]. These deﬁcits in cognition are associated with problems in self- 
care skills and reduced quality of life [2]. Further, these problems may 
combine with age-related changes in cognitive function as individuals 
with HIV age [3]. 
Computer-delivered cognitive training and transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS) have both shown promise in enhancing cognition [4, 5]. 
While training with programs speciﬁcally developed to target cognitive 
deﬁcits in older persons has shown promise in persons with HIV infection, 
the long-term viability of this approach is unclear given the limited 
availability of the software and its low level of inherent interest. Others 
have suggested that widely available computer games may be effective in 
improving cognition in older persons [6]. Popular computer games have 
high levels of inherent interest and thus may be more likely to engage 
users. 
No readily identiﬁable study has investigated the effectiveness of com- 
puter games to address cognition in persons with HIV, nor has any study 
investigated the effects of tDCS combined with cognitive training in HIV. 
The purpose of this study was thus to investigate the feasibility and po- 
tential effectiveness of cognitive training with and without tDCS in persons 
with HIV-related cognitive deﬁcits. 

We recruited 14 individuals meeting criteria for HIV-related mild neurocognitive 
disorder (report of cognitive difﬁculties and below average performance on cogni- 
tive testing in two domains). Individuals were excluded if they were left handed or 
were taking medications that might affect tDCS, such as psychotropics [7]. After 
eligibility determination, participants completed a battery of neuropsychological 
measures and self-reports of cognitive function and mood. They then completed six 
20-minute cognitive training sessions over two weeks after random assignment to 
treatment condition, active tDCS (1.5 mA X 20 minutes over the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex) or sham (1.5 mA ramping up for 30s and then discontinued). 
Training consisted of a car racing game that emphasized attention and cognitive 
speed. After training, participants completed the same assessment battery. tDCS was 
provided in a single-blind approach, with baseline and follow-up evaluations and 
interviews completed by an assessor blind to assignment. 

Success of the blinding procedure was evaluated at study conclusion. We also 
interviewed participants about their reactions to the training, 
including their 
perception of its efﬁcacy and whether they would participate in a similar study in 
the future. 
All participants provided written informed consent for their participation. This 
study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02647645). 

Eleven participants completed all study procedures; their mean age was 51.5 years, 
two were women and two were white, with the other African American. Two par- 
ticipants withdrew prior to randomization as they believed our training site was too 
distant from their home after they completed eligibility determination. The other 
participant withdrew because of hospitalization for a health condition not related to 
study participation. All participants stated that they believed that they had been 
assigned to the active tDCS condition. 
Results were evaluated in analysis of covariance models (ANCOVA) models control- 
ling for age, gender, education, and immune status, examining effect sizes and di- 
rection for the interaction of assessment occasion (before and after training) by group. 
Because of our small sample size and low statistical power, evaluation focused on 
effect sizes rather than tests of signiﬁcance. Of 14 effects evaluated, 13 were positive 
in suggesting an effect of tDCS, with sizes ranging from moderate to large by con- 
ventional interpretive guidelines [8], from 0.73 to 2.66 (Table 1). Results for a measure 
of working memory (Digit Span Backwards) are presented in Fig. 1. Inspection of the 
Figure suggests that persons receiving active tDCS improved on this measure rela- 
tively more at the second testing compared to individuals receiving sham. Partici- 
pants’ mood and report of cognitive difﬁculties also improved (effect sizes in Table 1). 
Nine participants indicated they believed the training with tDCS was valuable; the 
two participants who did not had been assigned to the sham condition. All indicated 
they would participate in a similar study in the future and many spontaneously 
expressed that they enjoyed the training. Several asked about how they could obtain 
the game. 

While limited by our small sample size, participants’ interviews suggest 
that game-based cognitive training with or without tDCS was acceptable 
and even enjoyable to older persons with HIV infection. Results of cogni- 
tive testing before and after training suggest that tDCS may enhance the 
effects of cognitive training in this population, similar to ﬁndings in other 
populations. They also provide preliminary estimates of effect size for use 
in future research. Objective results were mirrored in participants’ self- 
report of cognitive difﬁculties, and their self-report of mood also suggested 
improvement over training sessions. 
Participants reported enjoying the intervention drawing on a car racing 
game, and all stated that they would participate in a similar study in the 
future. This pilot study thus shows that game-based cognitive training may 
be useful in addressing HIV-related cognitive deﬁcits. Given the impor- 
tance of cognitive deﬁcits in individuals with HIV and the lack of effective 
Table 1 
Effect sizes for the interaction of group by pre- and post-test results. Results 
expressed as eta-squared and Cohen’s d. 
DS Forward 
DS Backward 
Sequencing 
Learning 
Memory 
Trails A 
Trails B 
Pegs Dom 
PAOF 
CESD 

0.116 
0.431 
0.552 
0.163 
0.824 
0.638 
0.151 
0.122 
0.361 
0.221 

0.73 
1.74 
2.22 
0.88 
2.58 
-2.66b 
0.84 
0.75 
1.50 
1.07 
aDS Forward ¼ Digit Span Forward; DS Back ¼ Digit Span Backwards; Sequencing ¼ 
Digit Span Sequencing; Learning ¼ Hopkins Verbal Learning TestdRevised total 
recall; Memory ¼ Hopkins Verbal Learning TestdRevised delayed recall; Recogni- 
tion ¼ Hopkins Verbal Learning TestdRevised recognition memory; Trails A, Trails B 
¼ Trail Making Test, Parts A and B; Pegs Dom ¼ Grooved Pegboard, Dominant Hand 
Time; PAOF ¼ Patient Assessment of Own Functioning total; CESD ¼ Center for 
Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale. 
b Effect size is in the opposite direction to all others, suggesting better performance 
in the control condition. 


treatments for them, results of this pilot suggest that further study is 
warranted. 

Although advances in antiretroviral treatment strategies have made HIV a 
manageable disease, infection with HIV continues to be associated with 
the development of cognitive deﬁcits in areas such as psychomotor speed 
and memory [1]. Cognitive deﬁcits are important because of their effects 
individuals’ ability to care for themselves, remember to take medications 
and cope with a complex medical condition [2]. These deﬁcits may have 
even greater impact on older individuals who may experience both HIV- 
and aging-related cognitive decline [3]. 
Treatment strategies for HIV and aging-related cognitive deﬁcits are 
limited. Researchers have suggested that computer-based cognitive 
training may be helpful in aging-related cognitive decline [4], while 
multiple studies have shown that transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS) may enhance the effect of cognitive training in healthy in- 
dividuals as well as those with neurological disorders. We are engaged 
in continuing study of the effectiveness of cognitive training with and 
without active tDCS to address cognitive deﬁcits in older individuals 
with HIV infection. 
A key problem in assessing the effectiveness of tDCS has been how best 
to control for the possibly confounding effects of extraneous factors in 
clinical studies. Factors such as patient and research expectations of 
effect, attention paid to participants, and the experience of discomfort 
or side effects can inﬂuence participant perceptions of intervention 
effectiveness and objective study outcomes. The purpose of the ana- 
lyses presented here was to evaluate the impact of subjective 
discomfort on treatment effect size in participants who all stated that 
they believed they had received active tDCS. As the sample is small, we 
have evaluated possible treatment effects based on estimated of effect 
size. In these analyses, we assessed the impact of subjective discomfort 
on treatment effect size to assess its impact on observed treatment 
effects. 

Fourteen individuals meeting criteria for HIV-related mild neurocognitive disorder, 
including subjective cognitive complaints and neuropsychological test results at 
least one standard deviation below the mean in two domains, were recruited for this 
study. Exclusion criteria included left-handedness and presence of another neuro- 
logical or psychiatric disorder that might be affected by tDCS. Individuals using 
psychotropic medications whose function might affect tDCS were also included. 
Eleven participants completed all study procedures and provided data for the ana- 
lyses presented here. 
After their eligibility was established, participants completed a battery of neuro- 
psychological tests as well as two self-report measures focused on cognitive difﬁ- 
culties and depressive symptoms. They were then randomly assigned to receive 
computer-based cognitive training with active or sham tDCS. Persons in the active 
group received anodal tDCS to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex at 1.5 mA for 20 
minutes during training, while those receiving sham received a 30 s ramp-up after 
which the tDCS device was turned off and the current ramped down over a similar 
interval. 

[1] Heaton RK, Clifford DB, Franklin DR, Jr. et al. HIV-associated neuro- 
cognitive disorders persist in the era of potent antiretroviral therapy: 
CHARTER Study. Neurology 2010;75:2087-2096. 
[2] Gorman AA, Foley JM, Ettenhofer ML, Hinkin CH, van Gorp WG. Func- 
tional consequences of HIV-associated neuropsychological impairment. 
Neuropsychol Rev 2009;19:186-203. 
[3] Wendelken LA, Valcour V. Impact of HIV and aging on neuropsycho- 
logical function. J Neurovirol 2012;18:256-263. 
[4] Smith GE, Housen P, Yaffe K et al. A cognitive training program based on 
principles of brain plasticity: Results from the Improvement in Memory 
with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT) study. J Amer 
Geriatr Soc 2009;57:594-603. 
[5] Coffman BA, Clark VP, Parasuraman R. Battery powered thought: 
enhancement of attention, learning, and memory in healthy adults using 
transcranial direct current stimulation. Neuroimage 2014;85 Pt 3:895- 
908. 
[6] Zelinski EM, Reyes R. Cognitive beneﬁts of computer games for older 
adults. Gerontechnology 2009;8:220-235. 
[7] Medeiros LF, de Souza IC, Vidor LP et al. Neurobio-logical effects 
of 
transcranial direct current stimulation. Front Psychiatry 2012: 
3;110. 
[8] Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). 
New York: Routledge, 1988. 
PROCEEDINGS #6. RELATION OF PERCEIVED DISCOMFORT TO 
TREATMENT EFFECT IN A BLINDED STUDY OF TDCS IN OLDER ADULTS 
WITH HIV 

Erick Mejia 1, Amarilis 
Raymond 
Acevedo 2. 1 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, Nova 
Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA; 2 College of Psychology, 
Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA 



Background: Development of appropriate control conditions for tDCS is 
essential to evaluate the effect of tDCS as distinct from other factors that 
affect outcomes in clinical studies, such as attention or perception of 
active treatment. In this pilot study, we assessed the effect of subjective 
discomfort on treatment effect size in a study of tDCS in older in- 
dividuals with HIV to determine whether it was a factor in treatment 
effect even when participants could not predict the treatment they 
received. 
Method: We asked participants in a blinded study of cognitive training 
with (n ¼ 6) and without (n ¼ 5) active tDCS to report their level of 
discomfort after each of six 20-minute training session completed over 
two weeks. At study conclusion, a blinded interviewer asked participants 
their impression of treatment group assignment. All participants believed 
they had received active treatment. We then assessed the impact of par- 
ticipants’ report of subjective discomfort during training on size of treat- 
ment effect. 
Results: On 13 of 14 measures, tDCS showed a positive effect size on 
cognitive and self-report measures, with effect sizes ranging from 0.73 to 
-2.66. Group differences in rating of discomfort were found in analyses 
that took age, gender, education, and immune status into account. When 
statistical models included average discomfort over sessions, ﬁve effect 
sizes increased in magnitude, six decreased, and one stayed the same. 
Conclusion: In this small study, subjective experience of discomfort in an 
otherwise successfully blinded study had a little impact on treatment ef- 
fect size. Subjective discomfort may not have an important effect on study 
outcomes when participants’ perceptions of treatment assignment are 
successfully blinded. 
