RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
The effect of changing movement and posture
using motion-sensor biofeedback, versus
guidelines-based care, on the clinical outcomes of
people with sub-acute or chronic low back pain-a
multicentre, cluster-randomised, placebo-controlled,
pilot trial
Peter Kent1,2*, Robert Laird3 and Terry Haines3,4
Abstract
Background: The aims of this pilot trial were to (i) test the hypothesis that modifying patterns of painful lumbo-pelvic
movement using motion-sensor biofeedback in people with low back pain would lead to reduced pain and activity
limitation compared with guidelines-based care, and (ii) facilitate sample size calculations for a fully powered trial.
Methods: A multicentre (8 clinics), cluster-randomised, placebo-controlled pilot trial compared two groups of
patients seeking medical or physiotherapy primary care for sub-acute and chronic back pain. It was powered for
longitudinal analysis, but not for adjusted single-time point comparisons. The intervention group (n = 58) received
modification of movement patterns augmented by motion-sensor movement biofeedback (ViMove, dorsaVi.com)
plus guidelines-based medical or physiotherapy care. The control group (n = 54) received a placebo (wearing the
motion-sensors without biofeedback) plus guidelines-based medical or physiotherapy care.
Primary outcomes were self-reported pain intensity (VAS) and activity limitation (Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire
(RMDQ), Patient Specific Functional Scale (PSFS)), all on 0–100 scales. Both groups received 6–8 treatment sessions.
Outcomes were measured seven times during 10-weeks of treatment and at 12, 26 and 52 week follow-up, with
17.0 % dropout. Patients were not informed of group allocation or the study hypothesis.
Results: Across one-year, there were significant between-group differences favouring the intervention group
[generalized linear model coefficient (95 % CI): group effect RMDQ −7.1 (95 % CI–12.6;–1.6), PSFS −10.3 (−16.6; −3.9),
QVAS −7.7 (−13.0; −2.4); and group by time effect differences (per 100 days) RMDQ −3.5 (−5.2; −2.2), PSFS −4.7
(−7.0; −2.5), QVAS −4.8 (−6.1; −3.5)], all p < 0.001. Risk ratios between groups of probability of improving by >30 %
at 12-months = RMDQ 2.4 (95 % CI 1.5; 4.1), PSFS 2.5 (1.5; 4.0), QVAS 3.3 (1.8; 5.9).
The only device-related side-effects involved transient skin irritation from tape used to mount motion sensors.
(Continued on next page)
* Correspondence: pkent@health.sdu.dk
1Institute of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern
Denmark, Campusvej 55, Odense M, 5230, Denmark
2Research Department, Spine Centre of Southern Denmark, Hospital
Lillebaelt, Institute of Regional Health Services Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Middelfart, Denmark
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Kent et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
DOI 10.1186/s12891-015-0591-5

(Continued from previous page)
Conclusions: Individualised movement retraining using motion-sensor biofeedback resulted in significant and
sustained improvements in pain and activity limitation that persisted after treatment finished. This pilot trial also
refined the procedures and sample size requirements for a fully powered RCT.
This trial (Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry NCT01572779) was equally funded by dorsaVi P/L and the
Victorian State Government.
Keywords: Low back pain, Rehabilitation, Movement, Posture, Clinical trial, Technology
Background
Low back pain (LBP) is highly prevalent and globally is
the leading cause of disability, ahead of ischaemic heart
disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, major de-
pressive illness, and other musculoskeletal disorders, in-
cluding osteoarthritis [1]. It is also costly, both at a personal
and societal level, with estimates of direct and indirect costs
ranging from 0.4 % to 1.7 % of GDP, depending on the
country and the econometric model used [2, 3].
Approximately 1 % of LBP in primary care is caused
by serious pathology (cancer, spinal osteomyelitis, frac-
ture, spinal stenosis, cauda equine syndrome, ankylosing
spondylitis, visceral-referred pain) and approximately
20 % is due to nerve root irritation caused by disc dis-
ease or other forms of stenosis [4–6]. However, the
majority of LBP seen in primary care is labelled ‘non-
specific’ LBP, due to uncertainty about the accuracy and
validity of other patho-anatomical diagnoses or descrip-
tive labels, such as ‘facet syndrome’, ‘contained disc le-
sion’ or ‘instability’ [7].
Compared with placebo or no treatment, most non-
surgical treatments for non-specific LBP show small to
moderate effects, with one treatment showing little
superiority over another [8]. In addition, short-term
treatment effects typically reduce over the subsequent
12 months [9–11].
One explanation for this lack of demonstrated effect is
that non-specific LBP is not one condition and that the
wide heterogeneity of treatment response reflects clinic-
ally important subgroups with different treatment needs
[12]. Therefore, mean differences in trials may conceal im-
portant effects in subgroups of patients [13]. This has re-
sulted in considerable clinical and research interest in
identifying such subgroups and better targeting of care for
individual patients [14–17].
One of the approaches to individualised care is to target
pain-related, dysfunctional movement patterns (muscle
activation, lumbo-pelvic kinematic or postural patterns).
Movement pattern aberrations reported in people with
persistent LBP include increased trunk stiffness [18, 19],
poor proprioception [20–22], postural dysfunction [23–
25], and altered patterns of abdominal [26, 27] and ex-
tensor muscle activation [28–30]. Advice to stay active
and exercise therapy are common key recommendations
in LBP treatment guidelines [31–33] and their positive ef-
fects may be due to adaptive movement countering the
potential for dysfunctional patterns to become habituated
[34]. In addition, excessive loading is repeatedly implicated
as a risk factor for back pain and this may occur for a var-
iety of reasons, including protective movement patterns
adopted during functional activity. For example, spend-
ing >5 % of the working day in >60 % of lumbar spine
flexion is a risk factor for incident LBP (risk ratio 1.5)
[35]. As a result, many intervention approaches are de-
signed to target movement pattern aberrations associated
with episodic and persistent LBP [36, 26, 37, 38, 16].
Translating kinematic and biomechanical findings from
the laboratory to routine clinical practice is challenging
and more complicated when the targeted movement pat-
terns are diverse and subtle. It likely that such interven-
tions would be facilitated by the use of technology but
there have been limitations in the available non-invasive
technology for measuring and monitoring movement pat-
terns of individual patients in the clinic, especially during
their normal activities of daily living. Similarly, there have
been limitations to clinicians’ ability to provide accurate
real-time feedback to people with LBP on the way they
move during daily activities of work, rest and play. These
limitations were constraining because there is evidence
that such biofeedback can help people develop greater
awareness of their activity and increase their voluntary
control over otherwise involuntary processes [39].
Recently, new technology has resulted in wearable wire-
less motion-sensors that can quantify and analyse kine-
matic musculoskeletal function. This technology can assist
in the evaluation of lumbopelvic movement patterns and
postures, both in the clinic and in the patient’s daily func-
tional activity (dorsaVi Ltd, Melbourne, Australia). These
devices can also be easily programmed to provide indivi-
dualised biofeedback to people with back pain to reinforce
clinician-determined rehabilitation strategies in their every-
day vocational, social and recreational activities, where
changes to habituated movement behaviours most need to
be reinforced. No previous clinical trials have investigated
the effect of such technology-assisted approaches to the re-
habilitation of lumbopelvic movement patterns.
Randomised controlled trials are the gold standard
method for studying the effects of treatment and one
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 2 of 19

type of trial design, cluster-randomised controlled trials,
has some advantages in certain situations. Cluster-
randomised trials, where randomisation occurs at the
level of clinicians, practices, hospitals or geographic lo-
cations, instead of at the level of participating patients,
have the advantage of better controlling for ‘contamin-
ation’ across clinicians or patients, where changing the
behaviour or treatment of one person being studied may
affect the behaviour or treatment of another [40]. Another
advantage is that cluster trials typically focus on effective-
ness, studying interventions in settings that more closely
approximate their use in routine care. However, compared
with individually randomised controlled trials, cluster tri-
als need more participants to have the same statistical
power and require more complex designs and methods of
analysis [41, 42]. During the planning phase of a cluster
trial, one of the requirements for determining the required
sample size is to have an estimate of the statistical inter-
dependence between individuals in the same cluster
(intracluster/interclass correlation). Usually the best way
to estimate this Intraclass Coefficient Correlation is to
conduct a pilot study.
Therefore, the hypothesis investigated in this study
was that ‘changing patterns of lumbo-pelvic movement
and/or posture using motion-sensor biofeedback in people
with LBP would lead to reduced pain and activity limita-
tion, when compared with Guidelines-based medical or
physiotherapy care and placebo. The aims of this cluster-
randomised pilot clinical trial were to: (i) estimate the ef-
fect size and its variability, (ii) test the study protocol and
procedures, and (iii) provide data to calculate sample size
requirements that would allow adjusted individual time-
point comparisons in a fully powered cluster-randomised
clinical trial.
Methods
Trial design
This study was a multicentre, cluster-randomised, placebo-
controlled, pilot clinical trial, with one-to-one allocation to
intervention (Movement Biofeedback) and control (Guide-
lines-based Care) groups. The key elements of the proto-
col, including the primary outcome measures, were
registered in the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials
Registry (NCT01572779) prior to the study commen-
cing. The full trial protocol for this proof-of-concept
study has not been published but is available on request
from the first author (PK). As one function of a pilot
study is to determine what to do when unforeseeable
situations occur, we anticipated that protocol amend-
ments would be required. Therefore, our strategy for
managing them was to document every amendment,
seek the approval of the relevant ethics committees for
these changes, have independent external researchers pro-
vide project oversight, and have an independent external
party audit the whole trial after it was completed, includ-
ing adherence to the protocol.
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Patients were recruited by their treating clinicians. The
inclusion criteria were any adult person aged between 18
and 65 years, presenting with a primary complaint of LBP
(or back-related leg pain) with an average pain intensity of
3 or more on a 0–10 scale, and a LBP episode duration that
was either sub-acute (3–12 weeks) or chronic (>12 weeks).
Exclusion criteria were low back surgery or other inva-
sive procedure within the previous 12 months, current
pregnancy, severe hearing impairment, implanted elec-
trical medical device, known allergic skin reaction to
tapes and plasters, neoplasm, infection, inflammatory or
neurological disorder, fracture or other joint or medically-
related disorders.
Potential participants were informed about the study
and given the option of providing written informed con-
sent at the index consultation, or taking time to consider
the decision and telling their clinician at the next con-
sultation. All participants were advised that the purpose
of the trial was to test if wearing the device would assist
in the management of back pain but were not informed
of the directional hypothesis being investigated.
Settings and locations where the data were collected and
treated
The clinical sites where the trial was conducted were eight
hospitals or outpatient primary care clinics in the State of
Victoria in Australia. The Movement Biofeedback Group
sites were: Austin Hospital – Heidelberg, Bounce Health
Group – Ringwood, Olympic Park Sports Medicine
Centre – Melbourne, The Clinic Werribee – Werribee.
The Guidelines-based Care Group sites were: Epworth
Hospital Richmond – Richmond, Stanlake Specialist
Centre – Footscray, Myers Street Family Medical –
Geelong, Peak Musculoskeletal – Hampton. The partici-
pating clinicians were two physicians, four GPs and
three physiotherapists, all with a special interest in mus-
culoskeletal conditions. The medical practitioners had
an average of 25.8 years (SD6.9) post-graduate experi-
ence and the physiotherapists 19.0 years (SD 7.9).
Clinics and clinicians were recruited by staff administer-
ing the trial.
Randomisation
Randomisation level
In this cluster trial, randomisation only occurred at the
level of clinics (clusters). As a result, clinicians at each
clinic delivered only one type of treatment. Patient re-
cruitment occurred from each clinician’s usual patient
flow and clinicians were not blind to treatment.
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 3 of 19

Sequence generation
The random allocation of clusters (clinics) occurred in
the following manner. Each of the three physiotherapy
clinics was randomly paired with one of the medical
clinics to form three pairs, and the remaining two med-
ical clinics formed a fourth and final pair. Each pair was
arbitrarily given a number from 1 to 4, and each pair
contained an arbitrary Clinic A and Clinic B. These four
numbered and paired codes, without clinic identification
(blinded), were given to a researcher (TH) who gener-
ated a random number between 0.0 and 1.0 for Clinic A
in each of the four pairs using Excel (Microsoft Corp,
Redmond WA, USA). If the number was >0.5, Clinic A
was assigned to be a Movement Biofeedback Group clinic
and its paired Clinic B to be a Guidelines-based Care
Group clinic. If the number was <0.5, the assignment dir-
ection was the reverse. This procedure resulted in one
physician, one GP and two physiotherapists being rando-
mised to the intervention (movement biofeedback) group
and one physician, two GPs and one physiotherapist being
randomised to the control (guidelines-based care) group.
Ethics
Ethics approval was obtained from three ethics commit-
tees: the Royal Australian College of General Practice (ap-
proval number NREEC 08/005, 11 February, 2009), Austin
Health (H2009/03544, 25 August, 2011), and Epworth
HealthCare (53111, 23 September, 2011). All recruited pa-
tients gave written informed consent.
Funding
Funding for this study was equally provided by (i) a grant
from the Department of Business and Innovation (Market
Validation Program), Victorian Government, Australia,
and (ii) dorsaVi P/L (the Australian company who man-
ufactures the ViMove motion-sensor system used in this
study). The Department of Business and Innovation
helped in the governance of the trial. DorsaVi supplied
the motion-sensor equipment and coordinated the trial,
assisted by a contract research organisation (Kendle P/L,
Oakleigh, Victoria, Australia). All data and trial-related
documentation were independently audited by Paul L
Clark and Associates (Beaumaris Victoria, Australia). The
authors analysed the results and wrote this paper inde-
pendently of both funders, and neither funder had any in-
fluence over how these data were presented and the
conclusions reached.
Interventions
Both groups
All participants in both groups were assessed at baseline
and attended a total of 6 (sub-acute episode duration
patients) to 8 (chronic episode duration patients) consulta-
tions over a 10-week treatment period. They also received
advice on staying active and general self-management of
back pain. This advice was based on the 2003 Australian
National Health and Medical Research Council guidelines
for the management of Acute LBP [43], and European
guidelines for the management of chronic non-specific
LBP [44] in the absence of similar Australian guidelines
for chronic LBP. The participants could also have received
whatever usual medical and physiotherapy care was
deemed essential by their clinicians, and such guidelines-
based [44, 43] co-interventions were noted.
All participants wore the ViMove motion-sensor sys-
tem (dorsaVi.com) for 4 to 10 hours in their activities of
daily living, during and after each treatment session (6
to 8 times) over the 10-week treatment period. This
system consists of: (i) two wireless motion-sensors that
measure three-dimensional movement, movement vel-
ocity and acceleration, and orientation to gravity, (ii) two
wireless surface electromyography (EMG) sensors that
measure paraspinal muscle activation, (iii) a wireless re-
cording device (approximately the size of a cigarette
packet) that captures the sensor data, has a button that
patients can push when an event occurs (such as an onset
or increase in pain), an audio and vibration function that
can be programmed to provide patient-specific biofeed-
back alerts, and (iv) a charging dock for these wireless
devices. The system also has a comprehensive computer
software application that clinicians use to observe move-
ment characteristics in real-time, to download movement
data from the recording device captured during activities
of daily living, to analyse these data with the use of
graphics-rich reports, and to compare an individual’s
movement pattern with their previous assessments or with
reference values. Using gyroscopes built into the two
motion-sensors, the system also records whether the pa-
tient is sitting, standing, walking or lying down, at every
time point during measurement. One motion-sensor is
mounted on the thoraco-lumbar junction using a hypo-
allergenic, disposable adhesive pad and the other motion-
sensor is mounted on the upper sacrum. This positioning
allows isolation of the lumbar spine and pelvic compo-
nents of three-dimensional lumbo-pelvic movement. The
ViMove system has displayed good inter-tester (ICC
(2,1) > 0.86) and intra-tester reliability (ICC(2,1) > 0.89)
for lumbar movements [45] and excellent accuracy/con-
current validity with standard errors of measurement of
0.9° (95 % CI = ±1.8°) for the sagittal and 1.8° (3.6°) cor-
onal planes [46] relative to the reference standard of the
Optotrak 3D-motion tracking system (NaturalPoint Inc.
Corvallis, Oregon USA) Fig. 1.
Movement Biofeedback Group
Patients in the Movement Biofeedback Group had an
individualised assessment to determine whether, in their
clinician’s judgement, there was a relationship between
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 4 of 19

their movement or posture and their pain. This judge-
ment was determined from the case history, the physical
examination and the detailed kinematic information sup-
plied by the ViMove system, worn both in the clinic and
during the patient’s activities of daily living. Typically,
this judgement involved the clinician identifying a dys-
functional movement pattern, changing the patient’s
movement behaviour or posture and assessing whether
there had been a change in pain.
The movement dysfunctions identified were diverse,
but broadly could be classified into three potentially over-
lapping categories. Firstly, excessive end-range postural
positions or repeated end-range movements, which may
have occurred in sitting, standing, walking, or bending in
any anatomical plane or combination of planes. For ex-
ample, a person who performed sustained end range
flexion by habitually sitting fully slumped, whose pain
was relieved by assuming a more neutral sitting posture.
Secondly, reduced muscle activation resulting in re-
duced load or stiffness control. For example, a person
with inadequate hip and trunk muscle contribution dur-
ing repetitive occupational bend and lifting. Thirdly,
over-active muscle activation resulting in excessive load
or stiffness control. For example a person whose lumbar
flexion was restricted by excessive activity or guarding
from superficial thoracolumbar extensor muscles, due
to habituated fear of lumbar movement. These approaches
to movement classification have been previously described
in diverse subgrouping systems [47, 37, 48, 49, 38, 16].
The clinician then devised a patient-specific rehabilita-
tion strategy designed to address any identified deficits
in the patient’s pattern of lumbo-pelvic movement and/
or posture. That strategy included up to three modes of
intervention. Firstly, ‘live training’ in the clinic, where pa-
tients were instructed in how to alter their movement pat-
tern (s) or posture using real-time on-screen biofeedback,
while wearing the ViMove device. For example, using
simple graphical feedback on a computer screen, patients
could see in real-time their movement in the sagittal and
frontal planes, the relative contributions of their lumbar
spine and pelvic movement, and their habituated pos-
tural starting position. They could also be trained to
perform movement in ways determined by the clinician
to be more optimal. In this way, patients could gain a
greater understanding of their own spinal kinematics
and rehearse rehabilitation exercises that the clinician
believed to be useful.
Secondly, using the ViMove software, clinicians could
easily program motion-sensor biofeedback alerts (audio
‘beeps’ and/or vibration of the wireless recording device)
that would occur during the 4- to 10- hours periods of
the activities of daily living in which they wore the device.
This biofeedback would prompt the patient when they
‘broke a rule’ that the clinician had programmed. For ex-
ample, in the case of a patient who demonstrated painful
slumped sitting posture, an alert would sound when seated
lumbo-pelvic flexion exceeded a pre-determined angle for
a sustained pre-determined period of time. Alternatively,
and at clinician discretion, these alerts could have been
triggered for a variety of other reasons, such as prompts
to: (i) move following a prolonged period of postural in-
activity, (ii) reduce the amount of end-range repeated or
static loading, or (iii) perform recommended rehabilita-
tion exercises.
Thirdly, specific exercises that supplemented the patient-
specific movement biofeedback. For example, a patient
whose habituated posture involved painful excessive
lumbar spine extension (near end-range extension in a
hyper-lordotic standing posture) would have been taught
posterior pelvic tilt exercises and been encouraged to
practise a less lordotic standing posture.
The intervention and the real-time movement biofeed-
back were recalibrated at each treatment session in re-
sponse to the patient’s pain, clinical presentation and the
Fig. 1 ViMove wearable motion-sensor system (this image has no copyright restrictions)
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 5 of 19

movement information provided by the ViMove device.
Therefore, the specific characteristics of the movement/
posture targeted in the rehabilitation would change over
time in response to the patient’s progress.
Guidelines-based Care Group
In addition to guidelines-based medical or physiotherapy
care, the only other procedure undertaken by patients in
the Guidelines-based Care Group was the wearing of the
ViMove device 6 to 8 times over the 10-week treatment
period. Their clinicians were blind to any motion-sensor/
EMG information as the software reports were blocked via
a software lock during the trial, with no capacity to pro-
gram biofeedback for their patients. However, the ViMove
system automatically uploaded the movement data to a
central server so that it could be used by the researchers to
compare to the movement characteristics of the Movement
Biofeedback Group. Patients in the Guidelines-based Care
Group were informed that the ViMove system was a meas-
urement device.
The Movement Biofeedback Group and Guidelines-
based Care Group treatments were similar to the extent
that they both received guidelines-based care and they
wore the motion sensing equipment. Where they differed
was that only the Movement Biofeedback Group had indi-
vidualised movement pattern/postural rehabilitation, bio-
feedback and exercises based on the information measured
by the motion sensing equipment.
Training of participating clinicians
All clinicians participated in a 2-hour technical work-
shop on how to set up the ViMove system and attach it
to a patient. Clinicians in both groups received a laptop
loaded with the basic ViMove software, one ViMove sen-
sor unit, and were able to receive additional training in
the technical set up and attachment of the ViMove device,
if they requested it. In total, this occurred on seven occa-
sions, for four clinicians who were distributed approxi-
mately evenly between the Movement Biofeedback and
Guidelines-based Care Groups.
The Movement Biofeedback Group clinicians also re-
ceived the ViMove biofeedback software and an additional
4 hours of training in identifying movement or postural dys-
functions, understanding the software reports, conducting
the live training and programming the biofeedback. Two
Movement Biofeedback Group clinicians also requested
and received some additional training in the technical as-
pects of live training and programming the biofeedback.
Outcomes
Outcomes were measured at baseline (Week 0), during
the 10-week treatment period (Weeks 1, 3, 6, 8, 10) and
during the follow-up period 12 months after baseline
(Weeks 12, 26 and 52). All outcomes were measured at
every time period, except patient-reported Global Impres-
sion of Change, which was measured only at 12 months.
Outcomes during the follow-up period were measured via
postal questionnaires.
Primary outcomes
There were three primary outcomes that were measured
via patient self-report questionnaires: activity limitation
assessed in two ways and pain intensity.
Pain-related activity limitation was measured using both
the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) and
the Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS). The 23-item
version [50] of the RMDQ (RMDQ-23) was used to
measure condition-specific activity limitation, this ver-
sion being able to accommodate back-related leg pain.
The RMDQ-23 is the most commonly used question-
naire for measuring this construct in people with LBP
[51], and has demonstrated a reliability, responsiveness
and validity comparable to the available alternative
questionnaires [52–54]. Using proportional recalculation,
RMDQ-23 scores were transformed into a 0–100 scale
(0 = no activity limitation, 100 = maximum activity limita-
tion) [55].
Using the PSFS, patients nominated three functional
activities that were important to them and with which
they were experiencing some activity limitation (original
metric: a 0–10 scale for each item, where 0 = unable to
perform activity, 10 = able to perform activity at the same
level as before injury or problem). Raw scores were propor-
tionally recalculated and reversed to create a 0–100 scale
(0 = no activity limitation, 100 = maximum activity limita-
tion), comparable to the other primary outcome measures.
The PSFS has been shown to be valid for group-level
change comparisons, between-group discrimination [56]
and it is more responsive than the RMDQ-23 for people
with low levels of activity limitation [57].
Pain intensity was measured using the average score (0
to 100 scale) of the Quadruple pain Visual Analogue
Scale (QVAS), which consisted of four questions (a)
‘What is your back pain intensity right now?’, (b) ‘What
was your typical or average pain?’, (c) ‘What was your
pain level at its best?’, and (d) ‘What was your pain level
at its worst?’. The reference time periods for the last
three questions at baseline was ‘over the last 6 months’
and was ‘since your last visit’ at all other assessment time
points. The anchors for all four questions were 0 = ‘No
pain’ and 100 = ‘Worst possible pain’. Visual analogue
scales have been shown to have good reliability [58] and
validity for measuring pain intensity [59, 60].
Secondary outcomes
There were eight secondary outcome measures that were
patient-reported on daily diary cards during the treat-
ment period: (i) daily pain score, (ii) LBP analgaesic use,
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 6 of 19

(iii) number of pain-free and medication-free days, (iv)
LBP recurrence, (v) time away from work or usual daily
activity, (vi) care seeking for LBP outside of the treat-
ment in the trial, (vii) fear of movement, and (viii) pa-
tient global impression of change. Change in range of
movement over the treatment period was an additional
secondary outcome measure, recorded by the ViMove
motion-sensor system.
Participating patients completed a diary card at the
end of each day that included a number of questions
and this diary card was reviewed by their participating
clinician at each consultation. One of these questions
was a daily pain score ‘Considering the day overall, on a
scale of 0 to 10, how would you rate your low back
pain?’ (0 = no pain, 10 = very severe pain). LBP analgae-
sic use was assessed by two questions on the daily diary
card ‘Did you take any pain medication today?’ (yes/no),
and ‘How many different pain products did you take
today?’ (patients’ wrote the number). Number of pain
and medication free days was calculated from patients’
responses to the daily pain score and analgaesic use
questions on their daily diary card. Recurrence of LBP
was assessed by the daily diary card question ‘Have you
re-injured your back today or had a recurrence of your
pain?’ (yes/no). Recurrence was defined as ‘a period of in-
creased pain lasting at least 24 hours’ [61]. Time away from
work or usual daily activity was self-reported by patients as
the number of days off work or of non-participation in
their usual social role due to LBP (a health economic out-
come). Care seeking for LBP was self-reported by patients
as the number of health practitioner visits in which they
sought care for LBP after the treatment period (also a
health economic outcome).
Fear of movement was measured using the Fear
Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire physical activity sub-
scale (FABQpa, 0 to 24 scale) [62]. The FABQpa is a
widely used outcome measure, with high internal
consistency, construct and predictive validity [63, 64].
Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) was
measured on a seven-point ordinal Likert scale at the
12-month time-point only (Very much improved, Much
improved, Minimally improved, No change, Minimally
worse, Much worse, Very much worse). PGIC has shown
high reliability [65] and construct validity [66].
Lumbopelvic range of motion (measured in degrees)
was recorded in the upright standing and sitting posi-
tions for sagittal (flexion and extension) and coronal
(lateral flexion) plane movements using the ViMove de-
vice. In the Movement Biofeedback Group, this was
assessed during treatment sessions, to inform treat-
ment decisions. In all patients, at baseline and each
outcome measurement time point, the ViMove device
measured lumbopelvic range of motion in activities of
daily living, as an outcome measure.
Sample size
This study was powered for longitudinal analysis, but
not for adjusted single-time point comparisons. A sam-
ple size calculation indicated that a total sample of 64
participants would have provided 80 % power to detect an
effect size of 0.4 given eight site-level clusters, a mean of
eight participants per cluster, a two-tailed alpha of 0.05,
one baseline assessment, eight follow-up assessments, a
correlation between follow-up assessments within partici-
pants of 0.5 and an ICC at site level of 0.01. However, this
calculation assumed no missing data within participants,
no participant withdrawal and equal numbers of partici-
pants at each site. Therefore, a 20 % inflation factor was
included to accommodate missing data, withdrawals, an
imbalance in cluster sizes, resulting in a total sample size
requirement of 98 patients.
Blinding
During data analysis, the statistician was blind to group
allocation by the use of mock codes for group allocation
(0,1). Clinicians were not blind to treatment allocation
but clinicians in the Guidelines-based Care Group clus-
ters were blind to the information within the ViMove
system, and therefore could not modify their treatment
based on this movement sensor technology. Patients were
blind to treatment allocation and the directionality of the
hypothesis being investigated.
Statistical methods
Data were initially described in a comparison of baseline
scores (mean scores, standard deviations) that also tested
differences between groups using linear regression (ad-
justed for clusters). If data were not normally distributed,
comparison was made using ordered logit regression, clus-
tered by site.
Next, mixed-effects, multi-level, generalized linear model
analysis was performed, adjusted for (fixed effects) baseline
scores for the outcome of interest, age, gender, duration of
back pain, time since baseline consultation, and (random
effects) cluster, clinician and individual patient. For each
outcome measure, longitudinal models were created to de-
termine the group effect and the time-by-group interaction
effect. Each model was tested to determine if three as-
sumptions about the random errors were met: (i) normal
distribution, (ii) constant variance (homoscedasticity),
and (iii) zero mean (unbiased). Beta coefficients and
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients were reported for
each outcome, along with their 95 % confidence inter-
vals (95 % CI) and p-value.
Change in range of motion was calculated using the
same multi-level regression analysis, from the standard
deviations of the range of motion for the sagittal (flexion
and extension) and coronal (lateral flexion) planes re-
corded during each patient’s wearing of the ViMove device
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 7 of 19

in their activities of daily living. The standard deviation of
the range of motion was used to more accurately capture
the variation of movements performed during their nor-
mal functional activities, under the assumption that par-
ticipants would show higher variation (and thus higher
standard deviation of movements) as their activity limi-
tation improved. To account for movement variability
in standing and sitting positions, we computed separate
standard deviations for each of these postural positions.
As the Patient Global Impression of Change outcome
was only assessed at 12-months, these data were re-
ported descriptively and the (unadjusted for clustering)
number needed to treat was calculated using the dichot-
omised score threshold of those ‘very much improved’
and ‘much improved’ versus all other responses.
The primary outcomes at the 3- and 12-month time
points were also reported for both groups (point esti-
mates of the mean, mean improvement from baseline,
percentage improvement from baseline, number of pa-
tients who improved by >30 % of their baseline score)
[67], and also across the groups (difference between group
means, difference in percentage improvement, and com-
parison between groups of probability of improving by
>30 % of baseline score (expressed as a risk ratio)). How-
ever, as this pilot study was not powered for adjusted
comparisons of single time-point outcomes, these results
were only reported for descriptive purposes and were not
tested for statistical significance. Similarly, the confidence
intervals for the crude risk ratios should be interpreted
with caution, as they are not adjusted for any baseline im-
balances or clustering effects.
All statistical analyses were performed using Stata
version 12.1 (Stata Corp, College Station, Texas, USA).
Graphs were created using Excel 2011 (Microsoft Corp,
Redmond, Washington, USA) or Adobe Indesign CS6
(Adobe Systems, San Jose, California, USA).
Results
Participant flow
The participant flow chart is shown in Fig. 2. Of the 112
patients recruited, 58 participants (52 %) were enrolled
in the Movement Biofeedback Group and 54 participants
(48 %) in the Guidelines-based Care Group. Eighty per-
cent had an episode duration greater than 12 weeks, and
therefore most patients had eight consultations over the
10-week treatment period. No data were available detail-
ing how many eligible patients were not invited by the
recruiting clinicians, the number or characteristics of pa-
tients who declined participation, nor the reasons for
drop-out or loss to follow-up.
Recruitment
Patients were recruited between November 2009 and
September 2012, and the follow-up assessments were
conducted up until June 2013. Almost all patients pro-
vided written informed consent at the initial consult-
ation, and trial-specific treatment commenced at that
time, including the initial wearing of the motion-sensor
device. For the remaining few patients, these occurred at
the second consultation, which became the index consult-
ation for the trial. They wore the ViMove motion-sensor
system for 4 hours or more in almost all the measurement
sessions of their activities of daily living (Movement Bio-
feedback Group 94 % of all sessions, Guidelines-based
Care Group 93 %). The trial ended when the required
sample size had been exceeded and all their 12-month
follow-up data had been measured.
Baseline data
The baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of
both groups are shown in Table 1. The groups differed
from each other on age (on average, participants in the
Movement Biofeedback Group were 9 years younger than
in the Guidelines-based Care Group) and age was adjusted
for in all longitudinal analyses.
Co-interventions administered
The co-interventions received in addition to advice on
staying active and general self-management of back pain
(both groups), and the technology-assisted movement/
postural re-education received by the Movement Bio-
feedback Group, are summarised in Table 2.
Numbers analysed
To adhere to the intention-to-treat principle, all recruited
patients contributed all their measured data regardless of
drop out (longitudinal analysis manages missing data
well), and analysis was by original assigned group. As pa-
tients could have had six to eight treatment sessions, and
as treatments could have varied on which week they oc-
curred, these data are somewhat statistically unbalanced.
This did not affect the statistical integrity of the longitu-
dinal analyses, but did create some arbitrariness regarding
the allocation of data in the visual figures that diagram-
matically represent the clinical course of the two groups,
as individual patient consultations were simply allocated
to the closest descriptive week.
Outcomes and estimation
Primary outcomes
The estimated effects of the Movement Biofeedback inter-
vention are shown numerically in Table 3 for the primary
outcome measures and in Table 4 for the secondary out-
come measures. Results for the primary outcome measures
at all time-points are also summarised visually in Figs. 3,
4 and 5. All of the primary outcomes were similar at
baseline but over time favoured the clinical course of the
Movement Biofeedback Group at a statistically significant
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 8 of 19

Fig. 2 Trial flow diagram
Table 1 Baseline characteristics
Movement Biofeedback Groupn = 58
Guidelines-based Care Groupn = 54
p-value
Age (years, mean)
39 (SD 12)
48 (SD 12)
0.013
Gender (women, proportion)
30 (52 %)
31 (57 %)
0.729
Pain episode duration (weeks, median)*
52 (IQR 17, 52)
52 (IQR 16, 312)
0.184
Activity limitation (RMDQ-23) (0–100 scale, mean)
51.1 % (SD 38.1)
49.1 % (SD 30.1)
0.758
Activity limitation (PSFS) (0–100 scale, mean)
60.2 (SD 10.1)
57.9 (SD 34.8)
0.660
Pain intensity (QVAS) (0–100 scale, mean)
60.0 (SD 23.6)
61.0 (SD 6.6)
0.758
Fear of movement (FABQpa) (0–24 scale, mean)
13.8 (SD 6.8)
14.4 (SD 8.0)
0.674
RMDQ-23 = Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (23 item version) where low scores are better
PSFS = Patient Specific Functional Scale, converted to a 0–100 scale where low scores are better
QVAS = Average of four pain intensity VAS scales, where low scores are better
FABQpa = Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire (physical activity subscale)
*Data presented are median (IQR) due to skew in data, group comparison undertaken using ordered logit regression clustered by site
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 9 of 19

level. Of note is that the differences present at the end of
the treatment period persisted over the follow-up period,
and at the 12-month period, appeared to have continued
to grow.
The main effect of group, indicating the average differ-
ence between the groups across treatment and outcome
time points, significantly favoured the Movement Bio-
feedback Group on all the primary outcomes, being 7.1
RMDQ points, 10.3 PSFS points and 7.7 QVAS points in
size (confidence intervals reported in Table 3). The time-
by-group interaction effect, indicating the average differ-
ence between the groups in the rate of change over time,
also significantly favoured the Movement Biofeedback
Group on all the primary outcomes, being 3.5 RMDQ
points, 4.7 PSFS points and 4.8 QVAS points in size, for
every 100 days since the baseline consultation. In addition,
the unadjusted risk ratios for the proportion of patients
who improved by a clinically important amount (>30 % of
baseline scores) [67], all significantly favoured the Move-
ment Biofeedback Group and ranged from 1.4 to 2.6 at
3 months and from 2.4 to 3.3 at 12-months.
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients were also reported
in Tables 2 for each primary outcome, which provide an
estimate of the lack of statistical independence between
individuals in the same cluster.
Secondary outcomes
In the mixed-effects, multi-level, generalized linear model
analysis, there were statistically significant group effects
on two of the eight secondary outcome measures and
significant group-by-time effects on three of these second-
ary outcomes, all favouring the Movement Biofeedback
Group. There were no significant group or group-by-time
effects for the following five secondary outcome mea-
sures: LBP recurrence, fear of movement, time away
from work or usual daily activity, care seeking for LBP,
and range of movement.
There were significant group and group-by-time effects
on the daily pain score. The pain reduction, averaged over
the 72-day treatment period, was 0.62 points more for the
Movement Biofeedback Group than for the Guidelines-
based Care Group. Similarly, for every 10 days in the
treatment period, the daily pain score reduced by 0.051
more in the Movement Biofeedback Group than in the
Guidelines-based Care Group.
For LBP analgaesic use, there was a significant
group-by-time effect. For every 10 days in the 72-day
treatment period, the proportion of days reported tak-
ing analgaesics reduced by 0.007 more in the Move-
ment Biofeedback Group, than in the Guidelines-based
Care Group.
There were significant group and group-by-time effects
on the number of pain and medication free days. The pro-
portion of pain and analgaesic medication free days over
the 72-day treatment period was 0.042 more in the Move-
ment Biofeedback Group than in the Guidelines-based
Care Group. Also, for every 10 days in the treatment
period, the proportion of days reported as not having pain
or taking any analgaesics increased by 0.004 more in the
Movement Biofeedback Group than in the Guidelines-
based Care Group.
Global impression of change was analysed separately
using the unadjusted number needed to treat. A larger
proportion of participants in the Movement Biofeedback
Group reported that they were very much or much im-
proved than in the Guidelines-based Care Group (num-
ber needed to treat = 2.8 (95 % CI: 1.9 to 5.8)).
Harms
Across the 629 total consultations in which the ViMove
devices were worn by the patients, there were 17 in-
stances (2.7 %) of device-related side effects. All involved
some form of transient skin irritation from the hypo-
allergenic tape used to mount a motion-sensor. These
occurred in six Movement Biofeedback Group patients
and 11 Guidelines-based Care Group patients but did
not preclude wearing the device at the next scheduled
outcome measurement time-point.
Table 2 Co-interventions received during treatment period
Movement Biofeedback Group
Guidelines-based Care Group
Intervention Type
Number of patients receiving
each intervention type
Mean number of
treatments per patient
Number of patients receiving
each intervention type
Mean number of
treatments per patient
Advice or education
18 (31.0 %)
0.58 (SD 1.02)
19 (35.2 %)
1.48 (SD 2.62)
Exercise
32 (55.2 %)
1.40 (SD 1.77)
40 (74.1 %)
4.78 (SD 3.25)
Imaging
3 (5.2 %)
0.07 (SD 0.32)
8 (14.8 %)
0.13 (SD 0.34)
Manual Therapy
36 (62.1 %)
1.89 (SD 1.98)
30 (55.6 %)
1.26 (SD1.73)
Medication
6 (10.3 %)
0.16 (SD 0.53)
36 (66.7 %)
2.91 (SD2.96)
Other
15 (25.9 %)
0.35 (SD 0.74)
8 (14.8 %)
0.20 (SD0.56)
Taping or Bracing
1 (1.7 %)
0.02 (SD 0.13)
2 (3.7 %)
0.02 (SD 0.14)
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 10 of 19

Table 3 Results for primary outcome measures
Activity limitation
(RMDQ23: 0 to 100 scale)
Activity limitation
(PSFS: 0 to 100 scale)
Pain intensity
(QVAS: 0 to 100 scale)
Preplanned analysis - Clinical course*
Movement Biofeedback Group effect#
Beta coefficient (95 % CI)
−7.1(−12.6 to −1.6) p < 0.014
−10.3(−16.6 to −3.9) p = 0.001
−7.7(−13.0 to −2.4) p < 0.004
Group effect Intraclass Correlation Coefficients
Clinics
0.00
0.04
0.00
Clinicians
0.00
0.00
0.00
Patients
0.50
0.37
0.55
Movement Biofeedback Group-by-time
(per 100 days) effect#
Beta coefficient (95 % CI)
−3.5(−5.2 to −2.2) p < 0.001
−4.7(−7.0 to −2.5) p < 0.001
−4.8(−6.1 to −3.5) p < 0.001
Group-by-time effect Intraclass Correlation
Coefficients
Clinics
0.00
0.00
0.00
Clinicians
0.00
0.00
0.00
Patients
0.51
0.38
0.59
Analysis n=
Sites = 8
Sites = 8
Sites = 8
Clinicians = 8
Clinicians = 8
Clinicians = 8
Participants = 106
Participants = 96
Participants = 106
Assessments = 644
Assessments = 524
Assessments = 650
Additional analysis - Unadjusted comparison
at individual time points**
3-month outcomes
Movement Biofeedback Group
Mean (95 % CI)
40.1 (20.7 to 59.5)
40.0 (24.0 to 56.0)
39.5 (21.4 to 55.7)
Mean improvement from baseline (95 % CI)
11.4 (7.3 to 15.5)
18.9 (6.1 to 31.7)
22.1 (13.6 to 30.5)
n (%) of patients who improved by ≥30 % of
baseline score
15 (43 %)
16 (55 %)
17 (49 %)
Analysis n=
35
29
35
Guidelines-based Care Group
Mean (95 % CI)
53.7 (31.8 to 75.6)
58.0 (34.0 to 82.0)
54.5 (41.1 to 67.8)
Mean improvement from baseline (95 % CI)
−1.6 (−8.4, 5.2)
1.3 (−8.7, 11.4)
9-4 (2.4 to 16.3)
n (%) of patients who improved by ≥30 % of
baseline score
6 (16 %)
12 (40 %)
12 (32 %)
Analysis n=
37
30
37
Difference between group means#
−13.0 (−18.5 to 7.5)
−17.6 (−28.9 to −6.3)
−12.7 (−20.2 to −5.1)
Comparison between groups of probability of
improving by ≥30 % = risk ratio (95 % CI)†
2.6 (1.2 to 6.0)
1.4 (0.8 to 2.4)
1.5 (0.8 to 2.7)
12 month outcomes
Movement Biofeedback Group
Mean (95 % CI)
31.3 (8.9 to 53.7)
31.0 (22.0 to 41.0)
33.1 (17.7 to 48.6)
Mean improvement from baseline (95 % CI)
19.7 (15.4 to 24.0)
28.1 (20.4 to 35.9)
27.5 (21.7 to 33.3)
n (%) of patients who improved baseline score
by ≥30 % of baseline score
26 (60 %)
31 (78 %)
30 (68 %)
Analysis n=
43
40
44
Guidelines-based Care Group
Mean (95 % CI)
47.7 (36.2 to 59.2)
54.0 (42.0 to 64.0)
56.2 (52.4 to 60.1)
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 11 of 19

Discussion
This cluster-randomised pilot trial investigated whether
changing patterns of lumbo-pelvic movement and/or pos-
ture using motion-sensor biofeedback in people with LBP
would lead to reduced pain and activity limitation, when
compared with guidelines-based medical or physiotherapy
care. It aimed to: (i) estimate the effect size and its vari-
ability, (ii) test the study protocol and procedures, and
(iii) provide data (ICCs) to calculate sample size require-
ments that would allow adjusted individual time-point
comparisons in a fully powered cluster-randomised clin-
ical trial. All three aims were achieved; there were sig-
nificant treatment effects favouring the intervention
group on all primary outcomes, insights were gained
about refining a protocol for a fully powered trial and
ICCs were calculated.
Treatment effect
Patients in the Movement Biofeedback Group showed
significant improvements in the primary outcome mea-
sures of activity limitation and pain intensity, compared
with those in the Guidelines-based Care Group, as seen
by the group effects and group-by-time interaction ef-
fects all favouring the Movement Biofeedback Group.
The group effect indicates the average difference between
the groups across treatment and outcome time points,
and the time-by-group interaction effect indicates the aver-
age difference between the groups in the rate of change
over time. Furthermore, across all these outcome mea-
sures, the additional (unadjusted) percentage improve-
ment in the Movement Biofeedback Group ranged from
15 % to 27 % at 3 months and 35 % to 47 % at 12 months,
which were all above the threshold for clinically important
difference (>30 % of baseline scores) [67]. Similarly, the
unadjusted risk ratios all significantly favoured the Move-
ment Biofeedback Group, indicating that the probability
of the Movement Biofeedback Group patients improv-
ing by a clinically important amount at 3 months was
from 1.4 to 2.6 times more likely than the Guidelines-
based Care Group patients, and from 2.4 to 3.3 times
more likely at 12 months. These results are unusual and
encouraging because they show moderate to large ef-
fects at the end of the 10-week treatment period that
remained or increased at the 12 month follow-up, in a
health condition where interventions typically show small
to moderate effects [8] that are not sustained 12 months
later [9–11]. Our results suggest that where a relationship
between movement and pain can be identified, movement
retraining using biofeedback is capable of resulting in sus-
tained improvements in pain and activity limitation, even
after treatment finishes, and indicate that a fully powered
trial is warranted.
In addition, there was no difference in fear of move-
ment over time between the treatment groups. This is
reassuring, as it indicates that the focus in the Movement
Biofeedback Group on retraining movement patterns/pos-
ture and having six to eight sessions of biofeedback did
not increase participants’ fear of movement.
The only other clinical trial of similar individualised
movement rehabilitation for persistent LBP, of which we
are aware, was recently published by Vibe Fersum et al.
[17]. It included movement and postural re-education as
part of a comprehensive biopsychosocial approach (Cog-
nitive Functional Therapy). Although it did not use tech-
nology to assist in the assessment and management of
LBP, and included physiotherapists but not GPs as clini-
cians, it similarly showed moderate to large effect sizes
that persisted over the follow-up period. This similarity of
promising results in these two studies in primary care sug-
gests that individualised movement rehabilitation should
be further studied, as many aspects of these results remain
unaddressed. For example, it is unclear from our study
Table 3 Results for primary outcome measures (Continued)
Mean improvement from baseline (95 % CI)
1.5 (−4.2 to 7.2)
3.2 (−8.6 to 15.0)
5.4 (3.3 to 7.4)
n (%) of patients who improved baseline score
by ≥30 % of baseline score
12 (25 %)
12 (32 %)
10 (21 %)
Analysis n=
47
38
48
Difference between group means##
−18.2 (−23.1 to −13.2)
−24.9 (−34.7 to −15.2)
−22.2 (−26.4 to −17.9)
Comparison between groups of probability of
improving by ≥30 % = risk ratio (95 % CI)†
2.4 (1.4 to 4.1)
2.5 (1.5 to 4.0)
3.3 (1.8 to 5.9)
*Calculated by use of multilevel mixed-effects linear regression adjusted for baseline value of the outcome measure, age, gender, and duration of back pain
episode (fixed effects) and treatment site, clinician and individual patient (random effects)
**This pilot cluster trial was not powered for individual time point comparisons and therefore these unadjusted descriptive results were not tested for
statistical difference
#The main effect of group indicates the average difference between the groups across treatment and outcome time points. The time-by-group interaction effect
indicates the average difference between the groups in the rate of change over time
##Difference between group means = Guidelines-based Care Group minus Movement Biofeedback Group. Analyses adjusted for clustering by site and robust 95 %
confidence intervals used
†Crude risk ratio = Movement Biofeedback Group / Guidelines-based Care Group. These unadjusted confidence intervals should be cautiously interpreted, as they
do not account for any baseline imbalances or clustering effects
RMDQ-23 = Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (23 item version) where low scores are better, PSFS = Patient Specific Functional Scale converted to a 0–100
scale where low scores are better, QVAS = Average of four pain intensity VAS scales where low scores are better
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 12 of 19

what relative contributions to the results came from the
movement rehabilitation and those that came from the
use of motion-sensor technology. Theoretically, this tech-
nology may provide greater precision of assessment, more
specificity in movement re-education, and enhanced de-
habituation of dysfunctional movement via biofeedback in
daily functional activities. However, this needs to be inves-
tigated. It is also not clear what might mediate that treat-
ment effect, such as cognitive, motivational or movement
awareness aspects resulting from wearing the motion-
sensors. In addition, evidence of a relationship between
modifiable movement aberrations and reductions in pain
Table 4 Results for secondary outcome measures
Analysis n=
Movement Biofeedback
Movement Biofeedback
End of treatment period
Group effect#
Group by time effect#
Mean (SD)
Beta coefficient
(95 % CI)
Beta coefficient (per 10
days in the treatment
period) (95 % CI)
Daily pain score
Sites = 8
−0.62 (−1.25 to 0.01)
−0.051 (−0.075 to −0.026)
Movement Biofeedback Group
(0 to 10 scale)
Clinicians = 8
Participants = 98
p = 0.053
p < 0.001
Assessments = 6,036
4.26 (3.44 to 4.99)
Guidelines-based Care Group
4.54 (3.88 to 5.19)
LBP recurrence (difference in
proportions of days with
reported recurrence)
Sites = 8
−0.018 (−0.129 to 0.093)
0.003 (−0.002 to 0.008)
Movement Biofeedback Group
Clinicians = 8
Participants = 100
p = 0.752
p = 0.263
Assessments = 5,999
0.230 (0.098 to 0.362)
Guidelines-based Care Group
0.173 (0.070 to 0.276)
Analgesic use
Sites = 8
0.056 (−0.099 to 0.211)
−0.007 (−0.013 to −0.002)
Movement Biofeedback Group
(difference in proportion of
days with reported taking
of analgesics)
Clinicians = 8
Participants = 98
p = 0.483
p = 0.008
0.288 (0.137 to 0.440)
Assessments = 5,815
Guidelines-based Care Group
0.360 (0.109 to 0.612)
Number of pain and
Sites = 8
0.054 (0.003 to 0.107)
0.004 (0.002 to 0.007)
Movement Biofeedback Group
medication free days
Clinicians = 8
0.064 (−0.034 to 0.163)
Guidelines-based Care Group
0.036 (−0.006 to 0.077)
#The main effect of group indicates the average difference between the groups across treatment and outcome time points. The time-by-group interaction effect
indicates the average difference between the groups in the rate of change over time. Both calculated by use of multilevel mixed-effects linear regression adjusted
for baseline value of the outcome measure, age, gender, and duration of back pain episode (fixed effects) and treatment site, clinician and individual patient
(random effects)
FABQpa = Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire (physical activity subscale) where low scores are better
Statistically significant p-values are bolded
Fig. 3 Mean outcomes for activity limitation (Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire scores)
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 13 of 19

and activity limitation would still leave unaddressed ques-
tions about whether movement aberrations precede the
onset of pain and involve some causative mechanisms, or
whether they are secondary to the onset of pain, or both.
Clinicians participating in the trial conducted by Vibe
Fersum et al. [17] had an average of more than 100 hours
training in Cognitive Functional Therapy. In our pilot trial,
clinicians in the Movement Biofeedback Group had an ave-
rage of approximately 6 hours training in the use of the
device. While the amount of previous exposure to principles
of movement rehabilitation in the clinicians in both trials is
unknown, it is possible that the precision of patient-specific
kinematic information available to clinicians using motion-
sensor technology allows some degree of ‘learning by doing’
and this aspect should be investigated.
In previous studies, the effectiveness of movement in-
terventions for LBP, such as exercise, has been modest.
It has also not been consistently associated with any par-
ticular form of movement intervention [68–75], regard-
less of whether it involves whole body movements such
as aerobic exercise, Pilates, and yoga, or targets the activity
of specific muscles such as Transversus Abdominus [76,
26]. One possible explanation for this is that generic ‘one
size fits all’ approaches poorly target any movement aber-
rations that may be present at an individual patient level.
However, highly individualised exercise programs that aim
to alter lumbo-pelvic kinematics or postural patterns, such
as those based on the Alexander Technique [77, 78], the
Feldenkrais Method [77] or Pilates [79], have also shown
modest and inconsistent effects. One explanation could
be that these approaches are too narrow to adequately
cover the range of movement dysfunctions seen in a
LBP care-seeking population. Another possibility is that
some movement dysfunctions are too subtle to be rou-
tinely detected outside of laboratory settings by non-expert
clinicians, unless assisted by technology such as motion-
sensors. A further possibility is that changing movement
patterns in people’s habituated daily activities requires
measurement and biofeedback during those activities, es-
pecially since there is evidence that practice with feedback
distributed across time is more effective for learning than
concentrated feedback at one time point [80].
Fig. 4 Mean outcomes for activity limitation (Patient-Specific Functional Scale scores)
Fig. 5 Mean outcomes for pain intensity (Quadruple Visual Analogue Scale scores)
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 14 of 19

Of note is that there were no statistically significant dif-
ferences between the groups in the variability in range of
movement displayed by participating patients during their
normal functional activities. This may reflect the finding in
the trial conducted by Vibe Fersum et al. [17], that there
were no differences between their groups in total range of
movement, despite large differences in the primary out-
comes. However, the experience of this pilot study taught
us that the movement parameters that were classified by
clinicians as requiring modification were diverse and indi-
vidualised, with some people already moving excessively
and requiring some aspect of their range of motion to be
restricted. Therefore, metrics based on total range of vari-
ability in movement may not capture improvements in
movement patterns that are associated with less pain dur-
ing activity. There may be better ways to capture the kine-
matic characteristics that are important at an individual
patient level and determine whether these were improved
more in one group than another. One method to do so
would be to capture data on which movement characteris-
tics each clinician judged should be targeted in each pa-
tient (by monitoring what movements were programed for
biofeedback). This would allow the motion-sensor technol-
ogy to be used to measure the extent to which those move-
ment re-education goals were achieved. We did not collect
the data to analyse this in our pilot study but it would be
ideal to collect these in a fully powered trial.
Study protocol and procedures
The study protocol and a number of the procedures
evolved during this pilot trial. These included a refinement
of the treatment approach and software, as well as greater
clarity about how to measure appropriate outcomes. As
this pilot study investigated the application of new tech-
nology, it was inevitable that the experience would teach
us better ways of presenting information to clinicians and
better ways of clinicians using that information. Testing
those ways within this pilot study was a component of
preparing for a fully powered study.
Based on the experience and results of this study, there
are a number of features that would be ideal to incorporate
in the protocol of a fully powered trial. For example, it
would be pragmatic to add to the inclusion criteria the
need
for
all
participants
to
display
some
form
of
movement-related pain [17] (pain aggravated or relieved by
movement). That is because the intervention is designed to
target movement-related pain and patients without this
characteristic are likely to dilute the treatment effect size.
It would also be sensible to use the more detailed treat-
ment protocol and software that evolved throughout this
study, as these show face validity for providing greater
specificity for targeting abnormal movement/posture. In
addition, adjusted statistical comparisons of multiple indi-
vidual
time-point
outcomes
would
provide
greater
certainty about the results and allow more direct compari-
sons with other trials.
It would also be useful to collect data identifying each
patient’s progress towards attaining the ‘more optimal
movements/postures’ that were targeted in their particu-
lar case, as this would allow examination of a ‘dose-re-
sponse’ relationship between improvement in movement
and improvement in pain and activity limitation. Perhaps
this could be formalised by the creation of a ‘Patient-
Specific Movement Scale’.
It would also be ideal if recruitment were not per-
formed by the treating clinicians, as in the context of a
cluster-randomised controlled trial, this can introduce
the potential for selection bias. One way that this could
be done would be for potential participants to answer
recruitment advertisements and then be randomised to
clusters, however this would introduce the artificiality of
participants not having sought care from the clinician of
their choice. In addition, it would be helpful to measure
whether patients guessed which group they were allo-
cated to, as an estimate of patient unblinding.
Data to calculate sample size requirements
The statistical power of a clustered sample, in which par-
ticipants are randomised at a group level but analysed at
an individual level, is a function of (i) the relatedness of
clustered data (Intraclass Correlation Coefficient), (ii) the
sample size of the clusters, and (iii) the total sample size
(the number of patients per cluster times the number of
clusters) [40]. The Intraclass Correlation Coefficients in
the results of this trial greatly facilitate precision in sample
size requirement calculations for subsequent trials in simi-
lar settings.
For example, we could now plan for a cluster-
randomised trial to detect a 0.5 standardised effect size
for the Roland Morris Disability Index primary outcome
at a single time point. If we used only a single 12-month
follow-up measure, had 12 clinics/clusters, employed a
two-tailed alpha of 0.05, we could conservatively use a 0.01
ICC value for the clinic level ICC value based on our pilot
study finding of 0.00 (Table 3) to estimate that each cluster
would need to have 12 month data from approximately
11.5 participants to have 80 % power. Knowing that we
experienced approximately 20 % attrition between re-
cruitment and 12-month follow-up in our pilot study
would mean we would aim to recruit 14 participants per
cluster, with a total sample size requirement of 168
patients.
Limitations
The study had a number of limitations. This pilot trial
involved co-funding and participation by the device
manufacturer. This was necessary to secure the external
funding that made this study possible and was very
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 15 of 19

useful in the training/supporting of clinicians with this
new technology and in the refining of the software/treat-
ment protocol. This industry involvement can raise con-
cerns
that
the
study
objectivity
might
have
been
compromised. However, it was the role of the authors to
ensure that all analysis was performed per protocol and
not by a company representative, and that the interpret-
ation of the findings was completely independent of
both the industry and governmental sponsors. Once the
trial protocol was approved by the ethics committees,
there were no changes to the primary outcome measures
or statistical analysis protocol. Neither sponsor was sent,
or requested, any version of this paper prior to publica-
tion. In addition we, and the involved ethics committees,
the Trial Steering and Data Monitoring Committee and
the independent external auditor, all provided governance
functions designed to safeguard that the trial maintained
its scientific rigour. The independent external audit in-
cluded verification that every measurement of every pa-
tient recruited into the trial was analysed and contributed
to the results.
Over the 12-month follow-up period, the Guidelines-
based Care Group improved minimally (RMDQ-23 3.1 %,
PSFS 5.5 %, QVAS 8.9 %), whereas it is typical for similar
LBP control groups to improve by 10 % or more, regardless
of treatment [17]. One explanation for this may be that the
lack of clinician blinding resulted in Guidelines-based Care
Group clinicians not delivering their intervention with the
same enthusiasm as clinicians in the Movement Biofeed-
back Group (performance bias). It is also possible that
there was some selection bias, although the only significant
difference measured between the groups was on age and as
the longitudinal analyses were adjusted for this baseline
imbalance, it may not have affected the estimates of effect.
We cannot know whether either a performance or selec-
tion bias was present or not.
In addition, there was a difference in the reference
time period for QVAS at baseline compared with the ref-
erence period used at the follow-up time-points, which
potentially may have biased the results. However as the
size of the QVAS effect was very similar to that for the
RMDQ-23, any impact was likely to have been minimal.
We had intended to measure range of motion in the
horizontal plane (rotation) but technical limitations of
the ViMove motion-sensors resulted in this being im-
practical. As rotation has a smaller range of movement
in the lumbar spine than movement in the other two
planes, and as no measured movements in those planes
was significantly different between the groups, this limita-
tion was likely to have been of no practical consequence.
The generalisability of these results is enhanced by the
trial’s cluster randomised design, as this directly adjusts
for the influences of clinician and site, and by the inclu-
sion of eight sites, albeit that all sites were within one
metropolitan area. However, the applicability of the re-
sults outside of the research context is constrained by
the need for clinicians to be trained in the use of the
ViMove system and have access to it, and to be familiar
with movement re-education approaches.
Conclusions
This cluster-randomised pilot clinical trial found evidence
that changing patterns of lumbo-pelvic movement and/or
posture using motion-sensor biofeedback in people with
low back pain leads to reduced pain and activity limitation,
when compared with guidelines-based medical or physio-
therapy care and placebo. These treatment effects were
moderate to large at the end of the 10-week treatment
period and were sustained or increased at the 12-month
follow-up. Retraining movement patterns/posture using
movement biofeedback did not increase participants’ fear
of movement. The study protocol and procedures also
evolved during this pilot trial, including the treatment ap-
proach and software used with wearable motion-sensors.
These insights will allow greater precision of treatment tar-
geting in a fully powered trial and the measurement of
additional appropriate outcomes. The results provided use-
ful data to calculate sample size requirements that would
allow adjusted individual time-point comparisons in a fully
powered cluster randomised clinical trial. Collectively,
these results indicate that motion-sensor biofeedback may
have a role in treating people with back pain and thus, a
fully powered trial is warranted.
Availability of Supporting Data
Supporting data is available on request from the first
author.
Abbreviations
FABQpa: Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire physical activity subscale;
LBP: Low back pain; PSFS: Patient-Specific Functional Scale; PGIC: Patient
Global Impression of Change; QVAS: Quadruple pain Visual Analogue Scale;
RMDQ-23: 23-item version of the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire.
Competing interests
All three authors were paid from the funding provided by the Victorian State
Government and dorsaVi, a market-rate consulting fee for participating in
various phases of the study: PK, RL, TH - project design, RL - data collection,
TH - data analysis. The authors analysed the results and wrote the manuscript
independently of both funders, and neither funder had any influence
over how these data were presented and the conclusions reached.
PK and TH have no other financial links, directly or indirectly, with dorsaVi,
except PK received a market-rate consulting fee for assistance in designing a
subsequent RCT protocol based on the results of this pilot trial.
RL has received a market-rate consulting fee for participating in other clinical and
research aspects of dorsaVi’s product development, and has been reimbursed for
travel/conference expenses related to the dorsaVi motion-sensor technology. He
has no other financial links, directly or indirectly, with dorsaVi.
The participating clinicians were paid a market rate fee to reimburse them
for their time consulting patients. All patients received up to 40 Australian
dollars to reimburse them for their parking and travel expenses, and to
assist with courier return of the ViMove device.
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 16 of 19

Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to the study design, analysis and interpretation of
the data, drafting of the manuscript and approved the final version of the
paper. PK wrote the initial draft of the manuscript, TH performed most
statistical analysis, and RL trained the participating clinicians and participated
in data collection.
PK takes responsibility for the writing, TH for the data analysis and all three
authors for the interpretation.
Trial investigators
Clinicians: Ms Leanne Scown, Mr Jayce Gilbert, Mr Rob Laird and Dr Steve de
Graaff, Dr Joe Garra, Dr Steve Jensen, Dr Adrian Jurey, Dr David Vivian and
Dr Peter Braun.
Trial Steering and Data Monitoring Committee (independent members):
Dr Anne Daly, Dr Catherine Said, Dr John Fergusson
Acknowledgements
The authors warmly thank the patients who participated in this project.
Author details
1Institute of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern
Denmark, Campusvej 55, Odense M, 5230, Denmark. 2Research Department,
Spine Centre of Southern Denmark, Hospital Lillebaelt, Institute of Regional
Health Services Research, University of Southern Denmark, Middelfart,
Denmark. 3Department of Physiotherapy, Monash University, Frankston,
Victoria, Australia. 4Allied Health Research Unit, Monash Health, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.
Received: 8 December 2014 Accepted: 18 May 2015
References
1.
Vos T, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, Lozano R, Michaud C, Ezzati M, et al. Years
lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries
1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2163–96. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(12)61729-2.
2.
Luo X, Pietrobon R, Sun SX, Liu GG, Hey L. Estimates and patterns of direct
health care expenditures among individuals with back pain in the United
States. Spine. 2004;29(1):79–86. doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000105527.13866.0f.
3.
Maniadakis N, Gray A. The economic burden of back pain in the UK. Pain.
2000;84(1):95–103.
4.
Deyo R, Rainville J, Kent D. What can the history and physical examination
tell us about low back pain? JAMA. 1992;268(6):760–5.
5.
Henschke N, Maher CG, Refshauge KM, Herbert RD, Cumming RG, Bleasel J,
et al. Prevalence of and screening for serious spinal pathology in patients
presenting to primary care settings with acute low back pain. Arthritis
Rheum. 2009;60(10):3072–80. doi:10.1002/art.24853.
6.
Spengler DM, David DP. Industrial low back pain: A practical approach. In:
Wiesel SW, editor. Industrial low back pain: A comprehensive approach.
Charlottesville, VA, USA: The Michie Company; 1985. p. 869–71.
7.
Kent PM, Keating JL. Classification in non-specific low back pain - what
methods do primary care clinicians currently use? Spine. 2005;30:1433–40.
8.
Keller A, Hayden J, Bombardier C, van Tulder M. Effect sizes of non-surgical
treatments of non-specific low-back pain. Eur Spine J. 2007;16(11):1776–88.
doi:10.1007/s00586-007-0379-x.
9.
Hayden JA, van Tulder MW, Malmivaara A, Koes BW. Exercise therapy for
treatment of non-specific low back pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2005;3, CD000335. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000335.pub2.
10.
Rubinstein SM, van Middelkoop M, Assendelft WJ, de Boer MR, van Tulder
MW. Spinal manipulative therapy for chronic low-back pain: an update
of a Cochrane review. Spine. 2011;36(13):E825–46. doi:10.1097/BRS.
0b013e3182197fe1.
11.
Walker BF, French SD, Grant W, Green S. Combined chiropractic
interventions for low-back pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;4,
CD005427. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005427.pub2.
12.
Artus M, van der Windt D. Small effects of treatments for non-specific low
back pain: how can we improve patients’ outcomes? Rheumatology.
2009;48(5):464–5. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kep048.
13.
Kent P, Mjøsund HL, Petersen DH. Does targeting manual therapy and/or
exercise improve patient outcomes in nonspecific low back pain? – A
systematic review. BMC Med. 2010;8:22. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-22.
14.
Childs JD, Fritz JM, Flynn TW, Irrgang JJ, Johnson KK, Majkowski GR, et al. A
clinical prediction rule to identify patients with low back pain most likely to
benefit from spinal manipulation: A validation study. Ann Intern Med.
2004;141(12):920–8.
15.
Hill JC, Whitehurst DG, Lewis M, Bryan S, Dunn K, Foster NE, et al.
Comparison of stratified primary care management for low back pain with
current best practice (STarT Back): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2011;378(9802):1560–71. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60937-9..
16.
Van Dillen LR, Sahrmann SA, Norton BJ, Caldwell CA, McDonnell MK, Bloom
N. The effect of modifying patient-preferred spinal movement and
alignment during symptom testing in patients with low back pain: A
preliminary report. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84(3 Suppl 1):22–313.
17.
Vibe Fersum K, O’Sullivan P, Skouen JS, Smith A, Kvåle A. Efficacy of
classification-based cognitive functional therapy in patients with
non-specific chronic low back pain: A randomized controlled trial. Eur J
Pain. 2012;17(6):916–28. doi:10.1002/j.1532-2149.2012.00252.x.
18.
Hodges P, van den Hoorn W, Dawson A, Cholewicki J. Changes in the
mechanical properties of the trunk in low back pain may be associated with
recurrence. J Biomech. 2009;42(1):61–6. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.10.001.
19.
Van Daele U, Hagman F, Truijen S, Vorlat P, Van Gheluwe B, Vaes P.
Decrease in postural sway and trunk stiffness during cognitive dual-task
in nonspecific chronic low back pain patients, performance compared
to healthy control subjects. Spine. 2010;35(5):583–9. doi:10.1097/
BRS.0b013e3181b4fe4d.
20.
Brumagne S, Cordo P, Lysens R, Verschueren S, Swinnen S. The role of
paraspinal muscle spindles in lumbosacral position sense in individuals with
and without low back pain. Spine. 2000;25(8):989–94.
21.
Descarreaux M, Blouin JS, Teasdale N. Repositioning accuracy and
movement parameters in low back pain subjects and healthy control
subjects. Eur Spine J. 2005;14(2):185–91. doi:10.1007/s00586-004-0833-y.
22.
Sheeran L, Sparkes V, Caterson B, Busse-Morris M, van Deursen R. Spinal
position sense and trunk muscle activity during sitting and standing in
nonspecific chronic low back pain: classification analysis. Spine.
2012;37(8):E486–95. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e31823b00ce.
23.
Dunk NM, Callaghan JP. Lumbar spine movement patterns during
prolonged sitting differentiate low back pain developers from matched
asymptomatic controls. Work. 2010;35(1):3–14. doi:10.3233/wor-2010-0953.
24.
Gregory DE, Callaghan JP. Prolonged standing as a precursor for
the development of low back discomfort: an investigation of
possible mechanisms. Gait Posture. 2008;28(1):86–92. doi:10.1016/
j.gaitpost.2007.10.005.
25.
Williams MM, Hawley JA, McKenzie RA, van Wijmen PM. A comparison of
the effects of two sitting postures on back referred pain. Spine.
1991;16(10):1185–91.
26.
Hodges P, Richardson C. Inefficient muscular stabilisation of the lumbar
spine associated with low back pain - a motor control evaluation of
transversus abdominis. Spine. 1996;21(22):2640–50.
27.
Silfies SP, Mehta R, Smith SS, Karduna AR. Differences in feedforward trunk
muscle activity in subgroups of patients with mechanical low back pain.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90(7):1159–69. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2008.10.033.
28.
Hides J, Gilmore C, Stanton W, Bohlscheid E. Multifidus size and symmetry
among chronic LBP and healthy asymptomatic subjects. Man Ther.
2008;13(1):43–9. doi:10.1016/j.math.2006.07.017.
29.
Hides JA, Jull GA, Richardson CA. Long-term effects of specific stabilizing
exercises for first-episode low back pain. Spine. 2001;26(11):E243–8.
30.
Wallwork TL, Stanton WR, Freke M, Hides JA. The effect of chronic low back
pain on size and contraction of the lumbar multifidus muscle. Man Ther.
2009;14(5):496–500. doi:10.1016/j.math.2008.09.006.
31.
de Jager JP, Ahern MJ. Improved evidence-based management of acute
musculoskeletal pain: guidelines from the National Health and Medical
Research Council are now available. Med J Aust.
2004;181(10):527–8.
32.
Savigny P, Kuntze S, Watson P, Underwood M, Ritchie G, Cotterell M, et al.
Low back pain - Early management of persistent non-specific low back pain.
London: National Collaborating Centre for Primary Care and Royal College
of General Practitioners; 2009.
33.
van Tulder M, Becker A, Bekkering T, Breen A, del Real MT, Hutchinson A,
et al. European guidelines for the management of acute nonspecific low
back pain in primary care. Eur Spine J. 2006;15 Suppl 2:S169–91.
34.
Hodges PW, Cholewicki J. Functional control of the spine, in movement,
stability & lumbopelvic pain. In: Vleeming A, Mooney V, Stoeckart R,
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 17 of 19

editors. Movement, Stability & Lumbopelvic Pain - Integration of Research
and Therapy. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2007.
35.
Hoogendoorn W, Bongers P, de Vet H, Douwes M, Koes B, Miedema M,
et al. Flexion and rotation of the trunk and lifting at work are risk factors for
low back pain. Spine. 2000;25(23):3087–92.
36.
Bryan M, Hawson S. The benefits of Pilates exercise in orthopaedic
rehabilitation. Tech Orthop. 2003;18(1):126–9.
37.
McKenzie R, May S. Lumbar Spine, Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd
ed. Waikanae, New Zealand: Spinal Publications Ltd; 2003.
38.
Richardson C, Jull G, Hodges P, Hides J. Therapeutic exercise for spinal
segmental stabilization in low back pain: scientific basis and clinical
approach. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1999.
39.
Dursun N, Dursun E, Kilic Z. Electromyographic biofeedback-controlled
exercise versus conservative care for patellofemoral pain syndrome. Arch
Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82(12):1692–5.
40.
Killip S, Mahfoud Z, Pearce K. What is an intracluster correlation coefficient?
Crucial concepts for primary care researchers. Ann Fam Med. 2004;2(3):204–8.
41.
Mazor KM, Sabin JE, Boudreau D, Goodman MJ, Gurwitz JH, Herrinton LJ.
Cluster randomized trials: opportunities and barriers identified by leaders
of eight health plans. Med Care. 2007;45(10 Supl 2)):S29–37. doi:10.1097/
MLR.0b013e31806728c4.
42.
Murray DM, Varnell SP, Blitstein JL. Design and analysis of group-
randomized trials: a review of recent methodological developments. Am J
Public Health. 2004;94(3):423–32.
43.
Group AAMPG. Chapter 4: Acute low back pain. Evidence-based management
of acute musculoskeletal pain. Bowen Hills, Queensland: Australian Academic
Press; 2003.
44.
Airaksinen O, Brox JI, Cedraschi C, Hildebrandt J, Klaber-Moffett J, Kovacs F.
Chapter 4. European guidelines for the management of chronic nonspecific
low back pain. Eur Spine J. 2006;15 Suppl 2:S192–300. doi:10.1007/s00586-
006-1072-1.
45.
Ronchi AJ, Lech M, Taylor NF, Cosic I, editors. A reliability study of the new Back
Strain Monitor based on clinical trials. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc.
2008;2008:693-6. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649247.
46.
Charry E, Umer M, Taylor S, editors. Design and validation of an
ambulatory inertial system for 3-D measurements of low back movements.
Proceedings of Seventh International Conference on Intelligent
Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP 2011);
2011. IEEE Conference Publications (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org)
DOI: 10.1109/ISSNIP.2011.6146618
47.
Ikeda DM, McGill SM. Can altering motions, postures, and loads provide
immediate low back pain relief: a study of 4 cases investigating spine load,
posture, and stability. Spine. 2012;37(23):E1469–75. doi:10.1097/
BRS.0b013e31826c97e5.
48.
O’Sullivan P. Diagnosis and classification of chronic low backpain disorders:
Maladaptive movement and motor control impairments as underlying
mechanism. Man Ther. 2005;10:242–55.
49.
O’Sullivan PB, Beales DJ. Diagnosis and classification of pelvic girdle pain
disorders—Part 1: A mechanism based approach within a biopsychosocial
framework. Man Ther. 2007;12:86–97.
50.
Patrick D, Deyo R, Atlas S, Singer D, Chapin A, Keller R. Assessing health
related quality of life in patients with sciatica. Spine. 1995;20(17):1899–908.
51.
Froud R, Eldridge S, Underwood M. Reporting methods in back pain trials.
Part I: Outcome measures. Palma de Mallorca: Palma de Mallorca
International Forum IX Primary Care Research On Low Back Pain; 2007.
52.
Davidson M, Keating JL. A comparison of five low back disability
questionnaires: reliability and responsiveness. Phys Ther. 2002;82(1):8–24.
53.
Davies C, Nitz A. Psychometric properties of the Roland-Morris Disability
Questionnaire ccompared to the Oswestry Disability Index: a systematic
review. Phys Ther Rev. 2009;14(6):399–408.
54.
Lauridsen HH, Hartvigsen J, Manniche C, Korsholm L, Grunnet-Nilsson N.
Danish version of the Oswestry Disability Index for patients with low back
pain. Part 1: Cross-cultural adaptation, reliability and validity in two different
populations. Eur Spine J. 2006;15:1705–16.
55.
Kent P, Lauridsen HH. Managing missing scores on the Roland Morris
Disability Questionnaire. Spine. 2011;36:1878–84.
56.
Abbott JH, Schmitt JS. The Patient-Specific Functional Scale was valid for
group-level change comparisons and between-group discrimination. J Clin
Epidemiol. 2014. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.11.002.
57.
Hall AM, Maher CG, Latimer J, Ferreira ML, Costa LO. The patient-specific
functional scale is more responsive than the Roland Morris disability
questionnaire when activity limitation is low. Eur Spine J. 2011;20(1):79–86.
doi:10.1007/s00586-010-1521-8.
58.
Zusman M. The Absolute Visual Analogue Scale (AVAS) as a measure of pain
intensity. Aust J Physiother. 1986;32:244–6.
59.
Gatchel RJ, Polatin PB, Kinney RK. Predicting outcome of chronic back pain
using clinical predictors of psychopathology: a prospective analysis. Health
Psychol. 1995;14(5):415–20.
60.
Ohnhaus EE, Adler R. Methodological problems in the measurement of
pain: a comparison between the verbal rating scale and the visual analogue
scale. Pain. 1975;1(4):379–84.
61.
de Vet HC, Heymans MW, Dunn KM, Pope DP, van der Beek AJ, Macfarlane
GJ, et al. Episodes of low back pain: a proposal for uniform definitions
to be used in research. Spine. 2002;27(21):2409–16. doi:10.1097/01.brs.
0000030307.34002.be.
62.
Waddell G, Newton M, Henderson I, Somerville D, Main CJ. A Fear-Avoidance
Beliefs Questionnaire (FABQ) and the role of fear-avoidance beliefs in chronic
low back pain and disability. Pain. 1993;52(2):157–68.
63.
Cleland JA, Fritz JM, Brennan GP. Predictive validity of initial fear avoidance
beliefs in patients with low back pain receiving physical therapy: is the
FABQ a useful screening tool for identifying patients at risk for a poor
recovery? Eur Spine J. 2008;17(1):70–9. doi:10.1007/s00586-007-0511-y.
64.
McCracken LM, Gross RT, Aikens J, Carnrike Jr CL. The assessment of anxiety
and fear in persons with chronic pain: a comparison of instruments. Behav
Res Ther. 1996;34(11–12):927–33.
65.
Costa LO, Maher CG, Latimer J, Ferreira PH, Ferreira ML, Pozzi GC, et al.
Clinimetric testing of three self-report outcome measures for low back pain
patients in Brazil: which one is the best? Spine. 2008;33(22):2459–63.
doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181849dbe.
66.
Farrar JT, Young Jr JP, LaMoreaux L, Werth JL, Poole RM. Clinical importance
of changes in chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical
pain rating scale. Pain. 2001;94(2):149–58.
67.
Ostelo RW, Deyo RA, Stratford P, Waddell G, Croft P, Von Korff M, et al.
Interpreting change scores for pain and functional status in low back pain
towards international consensus regarding minimal important change.
Spine. 2008;33(1):90–4.
68.
Ferreira PH, Ferreira ML, Maher CG, Herbert RD, Refshauge K. Specific
stabilisation exercise for spinal and pelvic pain: a systematic review. Aust J
Physiother. 2006;52(2):79–88.
69.
Hauggaard A, Persson AL. Specific spinal stabilisation exercises in patients
with low back pain - a systematic review. Phys Ther Rev. 2007;12:233–48.
70.
Macedo LG, Maher CG, Latimer J, McAuley JH. Motor control exercise for
persistent, nonspecific low back pain: a systematic review. Phys Ther.
2009;89(1):9–25. doi:10.2522/ptj.20080103.
71.
May S, Johnson R. Stabilisation exercises for low back pain: a systematic
review. Physiotherapy. 2008;94:179–89.
72.
Rackwitz B, de Bie R, Limm H, von Garnier K, Ewert T, Stucki G. Segmental
stabilizing exercises and low back pain. What is the evidence? A
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Clin Rehabil.
2006;20(7):553–67.
73.
Slade SC, Keating JL. Trunk-strengthening exercises for chronic low back
pain: a systematic review. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2006;29(2):163–73.
doi:10.1016/j.jmpt.2005.12.011.
74.
Slade SC, Keating JL. Unloaded movement facilitation exercise compared to
no exercise or alternative therapy on outcomes for people with nonspecific
chronic low back pain: a systematic review. J Manipulative Physiol Ther.
2007;30(4):301–11. doi:10.1016/j.jmpt.2007.03.010.
75.
van Middelkoop M, Rubinstein SM, Verhagen AP, Ostelo RW, Koes BW,
van Tulder MW. Exercise therapy for chronic nonspecific low-back
pain. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2010;24(2):193–204. doi:10.1016/
j.berh.2010.01.002.
76.
Ferreira PH, Ferreira ML, Hodges PW. Changes in recruitment of the
abdominal muscles in people with low back pain ultrasound measurement
of muscle activity. Spine. 2004;29(2):2560–6.
77.
Ernst E, Canter PH. The Alexander technique: a systematic review of
controlled clinical trials. Forschende Komplementarmedizin und klassische
Naturheilkunde. Research in complementary and natural classical medicine.
2003;10(6):9–325. 75886.
78.
Little P, Lewith G, Webley F, Evans M, Beattie A, Middleton K, et al.
Randomised controlled trial of Alexander technique lessons, exercise, and
massage (ATEAM) for chronic and recurrent back pain. Br J Sports Med.
2008;42(12):965–8.
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 18 of 19

79.
Lim EC, Poh RL, Low AY, Wong WP. Effects of Pilates-based exercises on
pain and disability in individuals with persistent nonspecific low back pain:
a systematic review with meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther.
2011;41(2):70–80. doi:10.2519/jospt.2011.3393.
80.
Donovan JJ, Radosevich DJ. A meta-analytic review of the distribution of
practice effect: Now you see it, now you don’t. J App Psychol.
1999;84(5):795–805.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Kent et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  (2015) 16:131 
Page 19 of 19

