


Can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart 
disease? 

In a prospective, randomised, controlled trial to 
determine whether comprehensive lifestyle 
changes affect coronary atherosclerosis after 1 
year, 28 patients were assigned to an experimental 
group (low-fat vegetarian diet, stopping smoking, 
stress management training, and moderate 
exercise) and 20 to a usual-care control group. 195 
coronary artery lesions were analysed by 
quantitative coronary angiography. The average 
percentage diameter stenosis regressed from 40&middot;0 
(SD 16&middot;9)% to 37&middot;8 (16&middot;5)% in the experimental 
group yet progressed from 42&middot;7 (15&middot;5)% to 46&middot;1 
(18&middot;5)% in the control group. When only lesions 
greater than 50% stenosed were analysed, the 
average percentage diameter stenosis regressed 
from 61&middot;1 
in the 
experimental group and progressed from 61&middot;7 
(16&middot;3)% in the control group. 
(9&middot;5)% to 64&middot;4 
Overall, 82% of experimental-group patients had 
an average change towards regression. 
Comprehensive lifestyle changes may be able to 
bring about regression of even severe coronary 
atherosclerosis after only 1 year, without use of 
lipid-lowering drugs. 




The Lifestyle Heart Trial is the first randomised, controlled 
clinical trial to determine whether patients outside hospital 
can be motivated to make and sustain comprehensive 
lifestyle changes and, if so, whether regression of coronary 
atherosclerosis can occur as a result of lifestyle changes 
alone. Over twenty clinical trials are being carried out to 
determine whether the progression of coronary 
atherosclerosis can be modified, in all of these, cholesterol- 
lowering drugs, plasmapheresis, or partial ileal bypass 
surgery are the primary interventions.1 


We carried out trials in 1977 and 1980 to assess the 
short-term effects of lifestyle changes on coronary heart 
disease 
measures 
(improvements in cardiac risk factors, functional status, 
myocardial perfusion,2 and left ventricular function3). 
However, the subjects of those studies were not living in the 
community during the trial, and we did not use angiography 
to assess changes in coronary atherosclerosis. 


Patients with angiographically documented coronary artery disease 
were randomly assigned to an experimental group or to a usual-care 
control group. Experimental-group patients were prescribed a 
lifestyle programme that included a low-fat vegetarian diet, 
moderate aerobic exercise, stress management training, stopping 
smoking, and group support. Control-group patients were not 
asked to make lifestyle changes, although they were free to do so. 
Progression or regression of coronary artery lesions was assessed in 
both groups by quantitative coronary angiography at baseline and 
after about a year. 
ADDRESSES: Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center, Preventive 
Medicine Research Institute, and Departments of Medicine 
and Psychology, University of California San Francisco School 
of Medicine (D. Ornish, MD, S E. Brown, MD, J. H. Billings, PhD); 
UCSF School of Dental Public Health and Hygiene (L. W. 
Scherwitz, PhD); Cardiac Catheterisation Laboratories, Pacific 
Presbyterian Medical Center (W. T. 
Armstrong, MD); 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, UCSF School of Medicine 
(T. A Ports, MD); Integral Health Services, Inc, Richmond, 
Virginia (S. M. McLanahan, MD); Center for Cardiovascular and 
Imaging Research, University of Texas Medical School (R. L. 
Kirkeeide, PhD, Prof K. L. Gould, MD); and Department of 
Biomedical and Environmental Heath Science, University of 
California School of Public Health, Berkeley, California, USA 
(Prof R. J. Brand, PhD). Correspondence to Dr D. Ornish, Preventive 
Medicine Research Institute, 1001 Bridgeway Box 305, Sausalito, 
California 94965, USA. 

Patients were recruited from Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center 
(PPMC) and from Moffitt Hospital of the UCSF School of 
Medicine according to the following criteria: age 35-75 years, male 
or female; residence in the greater San Francisco area; no other 
life-threatening illnesses; no myocardial infarction during the 
preceding 6 weeks, and no history of receiving streptokinase or 
alteplase; not currently receiving lipid-lowering drugs; one, two, or 
three vessel coronary artery disease (defined as any measurable 
coronary atherosclerosis in a non-dilated or non-bypassed coronary 
artery); left ventricular ejection fraction greater than 25%; not 
scheduled to have coronary artery bypass grafting; and permission 
granted by patient’s cardiologist and primary care physician. We 
screened and recruited only patients who were having angiograms 
for clinical reasons unrelated to this study so that only one additional 
angiogram was needed for research purposes. 
A total of 193 patients who met the first five entry criteria 
underwent quantitative coronary arteriography at UCSF and 
PPMC. 94 of these patients (49%) met the remaining entry criteria. 
Of the 94 eligible patients, 53 were randomly assigned to the 
experimental group and 43 to the control group; 28 (53%) and 20 
(42%), respectively, agreed to take part. All patients who were 
eligible and volunteered were accepted into the study. These 
patients represented a cross-section of age, gender, race, ethnic 
group, socioeconomic status, and educational level. Each gave fully 
informed written consent and the study was approved by the 
relevant ethical committees. 
Follow-up angiographic data were not available for 7 patients: 1 
control-group patient underwent emergency, non-quantitative 
angiography in another hospital; and of the 6 experimental-group 
patients, 1 died while greatly exceeding exercise recommendations 
in an unsupervised gym, 1 could not be tested owing to a large 
unpaid hospital bill, 1 was a previously undiagnosed alcoholic who 
dropped out, 1 patient’s preintervention angiogram was lost in 
transit to Houston for quantitative analysis, and 2 patients’ 
angiographic views before and after intervention did not match 
adequately owing to technical difficulties. 
Selective coronary angiography was done by the percutaneous 
femoral technique. The two laboratories were calibrated at baseline 
and every 6 months thereafter. Orthogonal views were obtained, 
and the angle, skew, rotation, table height, and type of catheter were 
recorded during the baseline angiogram to allow these 
measurements to be reproduced during angiography about a year 
(15 [SD 3] months) later. Baseline and follow-up measures were 
identical in the view angles, their sequence, type of contrast dye, the 
angiographer, and the cine arteriographic equipment. Catheter tips 
were saved and used as reference measures for quantitative analyses 
of films. Cine arteriograms made in San Francisco were sent to the 
University of Texas Medical School at Houston for quantitative 
analyses by a protocol described elsewhere in detail.’ 4 
Blood samples for measurement of serum lipids were drawn 
(after a 14 h fast) at baseline, after 6 months, and after a year. Total 
cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and triglyceride concentrations were 
measured by ’Astra’ enzymic assays (Beckman Instruments, Brea, 
California). LDL was calculated as total cholesterol minus 
HDL-cholesterol plus 0-16 x triglycerides. Apolipoproteins A-I 
and B were measured by disc gel electrophoresis and by isoelectric 
focusing.6 
To check adherence to the programme patients completed a 
3-day diet diary at baseline and after a year to assess nutrient intake 
and dietary adherence.7 These diaries were analysed by means of the 
CBORD diet analyser based upon the USDA database (CBORD 
Group Inc, Ithaca, New York, USA). Patients were asked to 
complete a questionnaire describing the type, frequency, and 
duration of exercise and of each stress management technique. 
Patients who said they had stopped smoking underwent random 
tests of plasma cotinine.8 Information from the adherence 
questionnaires was quantified by a formula determined before the 
study. A total score of 1 indicated 100% adherence to the 
recommended lifestyle change programme, and 0 indicated no 
adherence. Patients who did more than we recommended achieved 
a score greater than 1. 
TABLE I-BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS OF EXPERIMENTAL 
AND CONTROL GROUPS 
out all medical tests remained unaware of both patient group 
assignment and the order of the tests. Different people provided the 
lifestyle intervention, carried out the tests, analysed the results, and 
carried out statistical analyses. Coronary arteriograms were 
analysed without knowledge of sequence or of group assignment. 
The intervention began with a week-long residential retreat at a 
hotel to teach the lifestyle intervention to the experimental-group 
patients. Patients then attended regular group support meetings (4 h 
twice a week). 
Experimental-group patients were asked to eat a low-fat 
vegetarian diet for at least a year. The diet included fruits, 
vegetables, grains, legumes, and soybean products without caloric 
restriction. Some take-home meals were provided for those who 
wanted them. No animal products were allowed except egg white 
and one cup per day of non-fat milk or yoghurt. The diet contained 
approximately 10% of calories as fat (polyunsaturated/saturated 
ratio greater than 1), 15-20% protein, and 70-75% predominantly 
complex carbohydrates. Cholesterol intake was limited to 5 mg/day 
or less. Salt was restricted only for hypertensive patients. Caffeine 
was eliminated, and alcohol was limited to no more than 2 units per 
day (alcohol was excluded for anyone with a history of alcoholism, 
and no one was encouraged to drink). The diet was nutritionally 
adequate and met the recommended daily allowances for all 
nutrients except vitamin B12’ which was supplemented. 
The stress management techniques included stretching exercises, 
breathing techniques, meditation, progressive relaxation, and 
imagery.3,9-12 The purpose of each technique was to increase the 
patient’s sense of relaxation, concentration, and awareness. Patients 
were asked to practise these stress management techniques for at 
least 1 h per day and were given a 1 h audiocassette tape to assist 
them. 


Patients were individually prescribed exercise levels (typically 
walking) according to their baseline treadmill test results. Patients 
were asked to reach a target training heart rate of 50-80% of the 
heart rate at which 1 mm ST depression occurred during baseline 
treadmill testing or, if not ischaemic, to 50-80% of their 
age-adjusted maximum heart rate based on level of conditioning. 
Patients were also trained to identify exertional levels by means of 
the Borg rate of perceived exertion scale.13 Patients were asked to 
exercise for a minimum of 3 h per week and to spend a minimum of 
30 min per session exercising within their target heart rates. A 
defibrillator and emergency drugs were available at all times. 
The twice-weekly group discussions provided social support to 
help patients adhere to the lifestyle change programme.’" The 

To reduce the possibility that knowledge of group assignment 
might bias the outcome measurements, the investigators carrying 






sessions were led by a clinical psychologist who facilitated 
discussions of strategies for maintaining adherence to the 
programme, communication skills, and expression of feelings about 
relationships at work and at home. 
Differences in baseline characteristics of the two groups were 
tested for statistical significance by conventional t 
tests. 
Comparisons of the two study groups’ baseline coronary artery 
lesion characteristics (measured by quantitative coronary 
angiography) and changes in lesion characteristics after intervention 
were examined by a mixed-model analysis of variance.1S These 
analyses used lesion-specific data but allowed for the possibility that 
lesion data in a given subject could be statistically dependent. Mean 
changes in other endpoint measures were analysed for statistical 
significance by repeated-measures analysis of variance. 
Results 
At baseline, there were no significant differences between 
the experimental and control groups in demographic 
characteristics (table 1), diet and lifestyle characteristics, 
functional status, cardiac history, or risk factors in the 41 
subjects who completed angiography before and after the 
intervention. The control group had significantly higher 
levels of HDL-cholesterol (1-33 [SD 052] vs 1-02 [031] 
mmol/1; p=0029) and apolipoprotein A-1 (156 (36) vs 133 
(21) mg/dl; p = 0-0155) than the experimental group, but the 
ratios of total/HDL cholesterol and LDL/HDL cholesterol 
did not differ significantly between the groups at baseline. 
The experimental and control groups did not differ 
significantly in disease severity at baseline. The mean values 
in table n do not fully reflect the severity of coronary 
atherosclerosis in these patients for the following reasons: 
quantitative analyses of coronary arteriograms tend to assess 
stenoses as being less severe than do qualitative assessments; 
we analysed all detectable lesions, including minor ones; and 
we excluded from analysis 33 lesions that were 100% 
occluded at baseline. 
Adherence to the diet, exercise, and stress management 
components of the lifestyle programme in the experimental 
group was excellent (table ill). Patients in the control group 
made more moderate changes in lifestyle consistent with 
more conventional recommendations. 
Table IV summarises changes in risk factors during the 
intervention period. In the experimental group, total 
cholesterol fell by 24-3% and LDL-cholesterol by 37-4%. 
These falls occurred even though patients had already 
reduced fat consumption to 31 5% of calories and 



Correlation of overall adherence score and changes in 
percentage diameter stenosis in experimental group only (A) 
and in whole study group (B). 
A=7 subjects in each tertile; B = 13, 14. 13. 
cholesterol intake to 213 mg/day on average before baseline 
testing. HDL-cholesterol did not change significantly in 
either group. Apolipoprotein B fell substantially in the 
experimental group but it did not change in the control 
group. Neither group had significant changes in 
apolipoprotein A-1. 
Patients in the experimental group reported a 91 % 
reduction in the frequency of angina, a 42% reduction in 
duration of angina, and a 28% reduction in the severity of 
angina. In contrast, control-group patients reported a 165 % 
rise in frequency, a 95% rise in duration, and a 39% rise in 
severity of angina (table v). In previous studies,2,3 we found 
that similar improvements in functional status occurred in 
only 1 month, which suggests that improvements in angina 
may precede regression of coronary atherosclerosis, perhaps 
by changing platelet-endothelial interactions, vasomotor 
tone, or other dynamic characteristics of stenoses. 
All 195 detectable lesions were included in the 
quantitative analysis. The average percentage diameter 
stenosis decreased from 40-0 (SD 16-9)% to 37-8 (16-5)% in 
the experimental group yet progressed from 42.7 (15 5)% to 
46.1 1 (18-5)% in the control group (p = 0-001, two-tailed). 
When only lesions greater than 50% stenosed were 
analysed, the average percentage diameter stenosis regressed 
from 61-1 (8-8)% to 55-8 (11 -0)% in the experimental group 
but progressed from 61-7 (9-5)% to 64-4 (163)% in the 
control group (p = 0-03, two-tailed). 
The average lesion change scores (% diameter stenosis 
after intervention minus before intervention) in the 
experimental group were in the direction of regression of 
coronary atherosclerosis in 18 of the 22 patients (82%) 
including the 1 woman, in the direction of slight progression 
in 3 patients, and in the direction of substantial progression 
in 1 patient with poor adherence. In contrast, in the control 
group the average lesion change scores were in the direction 
of progression of coronary atherosclerosis in 10 of 19 (53%), 
in the direction of regression (including all 4 women) in 8, 
and 1 showed no change. 
In the experimental group and in the whole study group, 
overall adherence to the lifestyle changes was strongly 
related to changes in lesions in a "dose-response" manner, 
suggesting that the relation was causal. The differences in 
overall adherence are sufficient to explain the observed 
differences in percentage diameter stenosis. To assess 
whether programme adherence was related to lesion 
changes, the experimental group and the combined study 
group were divided into tertiles based on overall adherence 
score. Degree of adherence was directly correlated with 
changes in percentage diameter stenosis (see accompanying 
figure). 

This clinical trial has shown that a heterogeneous group of 
patients with coronary heart disease can be motivated to 
make comprehensive changes in lifestyle for at least a year 
outside hospital. The changes in serum lipid levels are 
similar to those seen with cholesterol-lowering drugs. The 
lifestyle intervention seems safe and compatible with other 
treatments of coronary heart disease. 
After a year, patients in the experimental group showed 
significant overall regression of coronary atherosclerosis as 
measured by quantitative coronary arteriography. Since 
coronary atherosclerosis occurs over a period of decades, one 
would not expect to find larger changes in only a year. 
Perfusion is a fourth-power function of coronary artery 
diameter, so even a small amount of regression in a critically 
stenosed artery has a large effect on myocardial perfusion 
and thus on functional status. In contrast, patients in the 
usual-care control group who were making less 
comprehensive changes in lifestyle showed significant 
overall progression of coronary atherosclerosis. This finding 
suggests that conventional recommendations for patients 
with coronary heart disease (such as a 30% fat diet) are not 
sufficient to bring about regression in many patients. 
The strong relation between programme adherence and 
lesion changes showed that most patients needed to follow 
the lifestyle programme as prescribed to show regression. 
Those who made the greatest changes showed the biggest 
improvement. Since degree of stenosis change was 
correlated with extent of lifestyle change across its whole 
range, small changes in lifestyle may slow the progression of 
atherosclerosis, whereas substantial changes in lifestyle may 
be required to halt or reverse coronary atherosclerosis. 
The 5 women in our study (1 experimental group, 4 
control group) were the notable exceptions. All 5 made only 
moderate lifestyle changes, yet all showed overall regression. 
All 5 were postmenopausal, and none was taking exogenous 
oestrogens. The 4 women in the control group showed more 
regression than any of the men in that group, even though 
some men made greater lifestyle changes. Although the 
numbers are small, these findings suggest the possibility that 
gender may affect progression and regression of 
atherosclerosis. Futher studies may determine whether 
women can reverse coronary atherosclerosis with more 
moderate lifestyle changes than men. 
5 men in the control group showed very slight regression 
of atherosclerosis. These patients exercised more often, for 
longer periods, and consumed fewer calories and less 
cholesterol than the control-group patients who showed 
progression of atherosclerosis. 
We found that the severely stenosed lesions showed the 
greatest improvement. Although the opposite of what we 
expected, the finding is important since more severely 
stenosed lesions are the most important clinically. More 
work is needed to determine the extent to which the relation 
between change and initial site of lesions is affected by the 
phenomenon of regression to the mean. 
Increasing evidence supports the roles of diet, exercise, 
emotional stress, and smoking in the pathogenesis of 
coronary heart disease,16-18 but until lately evidence for 
regression of coronary atherosclerosis was limited or 
anecdotal. There are case-reports of regression involving 
femoral’9 and renal arteries,z&deg; and one case-report of 
spontaneous regression in a coronary artery.21 However, 
several studies have found that regression of coronary 
atherosclerosis can occur spontaneously in the absence of 
lifestyle changes or treatment with drugs,22-24 thereby 
making it necessary for intervention trials to be controlled. 
Only two other randomised, controlled trials showing 
regression of coronary atherosclerosis have been 
reported ’222325 and both used cholesterol-lowering drugs as 
the primary interventions. 
Some important questions remain unanswered. Can 
these comprehensive lifestyle changes be sustained in larger 
populations of patients with coronary heart disease? The 
point of our study was to determine what is true, not what is 
practicable. The adherence measures and the angiographic 
findings suggest that adherence to this lifestyle programme 
needs to be very good for overall regresion to occur, 
although more moderate changes have some beneficial 
effects. Further research will be necessary to determine the 
relative contribution of each component of the lifestyle 
programme and the mechanisms of changes in coronary 
atherosclerosis. It would be interesting to examine the 
effects of lifestyle changes in a larger sample of 
postmenopausal women with coronary atherosclerosis. 
Also, direct comparison of intensive lifestyle changes with 
pharmacological or surgical interventions would be 
interesting. Our trial suggests that comprehensive lifestyle 
changes may begin to reverse coronary atherosclerosis in 
only a year. 
This study was supported by grants from the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health (ROl HL42554), the 
Department of Health Services of the State of California (no 1256SC-01), 
Gerald D. Hines Interests, Houston Endowment Inc, the Henry J. Kaiser 
Family Foundation. the John E. Fetzer Institute, Continental Airlines, the 
Enron Foundation, the Nathan Cummings Foundation, the Pritzker 
Foundation, the First Boston Corporation, Quaker Oats Co., Texas 
Commerce Bank, Corrine and David Gould, Pacific Presbyterian Medical 
Center Foundation, General Growth Companies, Arthur Andersen and Co., 
and others. 
Investigators who took part in the trial include: administrator, Myma 
Melling; counsellors, Pamela Lea Byrne, Carol Naber; stress management 
instructor, Mary Dale Scheller; exercise instructors, Terri Merrit, Lawrence 
Spann, Sarah Spann; chefs, Celeste Burwell, Mary Carroll, Carol Connell, 
Jean-Marc Fullsack, Mark Hall, Jules Stenzel; quantitative angiography 

analysers, Dale Jones, Yvonne Stuart; head angiography nurses, LaVeta 
Luce, Geogie Hesse; angiographers, Craig Brandman, Bruce Brent, Ralph 
Clark, Keith Cohn, James Cullen, Richard Francoz, Gabriel Gregoratos, 
Lester Jacobsen, Roy Meyer, Gene Shafton, Brian Strunk, Anne Thorson; 
radiologists Robert Bernstein, Myron Marx, Gerald Needleman, John Wack; 
lipid laboratory directors, Washington Bums, John Kane, Steve Kunitake; 
medical liaison, Patricia McKenna; research assistants, Patricia Chung, 
Stephen Sparier; secretaries, Claire Finn, Kathy Rainbird. 

1. Arntzenius AC. Regression of atherosclerosis. Presented at the Second 
International Conference on Preventive Cardiology, Washington, DC, 
June, 1989. 
2. Ornish DM, Gotto AM, Miller RR, et al. Effects of a vegetarian diet and 
selected yoga techniques in the treatment of coronary heart disease. Clin 
Res 1979; 27: : 720A. 
3. Ornish DM, Scherwitz LW, Doody RS, et al. Effects of stress 
management training and dietary changes in treating ischemic heart 
disease. JAMA 1983; 249: 54-59. 
4. Gould KL. Identifying and measuring severity of coronary artery 
stenosis. Quantitative coronary arteriography and positron emission 
tomography. Circulation 1988; 78: 237-45. 
5. Current status of blood cholesterol measurement in clinical laboratories in 
the US: a report from the Laboratory Standardization Panel of the 
National Cholesterol Education Program. Clin Chem 1988; 34: 193. 
6. Kane JP, Sata T, Hamilton RK, Havel RJ. Apoprotein composition of 
very low density lipoproteins of human serum. J Clin Invest 1975; 56: 
1622-34. 




9. Ornish DM. Reversing heart disease. New York: Random House, 1990. 
10. Patel C, North WR. Randomised controlled trial of yoga and bio- 
feedback in management of hypertension. Lancet 1975; ii: 93-95. 
11. Patel C, Marmot MG, Terry DJ, Carruthers M, Hunt B, Patel M. Trial 
of relaxation in reducing coronary risk: four year follow up. Br Med J 
1985; 290: 1103-06. 
12. Benson H, Rosner BA, Marzetta BR, Klemchuk HM. Decreased blood 
pressure in pharmacologically treated hypertensive patients who 
regularly elicited the relaxation response. Lancet 1974; i: 289-91. 
13. American College of Sports Medicine. Guidelines for exercise testing and 

14. Orth-Gomer K, Unden AL, Edwards ME. Social isolation and mortality 
in ischemic heart disease. Acta Med Scand 1988; 224: 205-15. 
15. Dixon WS, ed, et al. BMDP3V statistical software, 1983 printing with 

16. Kornitzer M, DeBacker G, Dramaix M, et al. Belgian heart disease 
prevention project: incidence and mortality results. Lancet 1983; i: 
1066-70. 
17. Kaplan JR, Manuck SB, Clarkson TB, et al. Social stress and 
atherosclerosis in normocholesterolemic monkeys. Science 1983; 220: 
733-35. 
18. US Department of Health and Human Services. Reducing the health 
consequences of smoking: 25 years of progress. A report of the Surgeon 
General. Washington DC: DHHS Publication # (CDC) 89-8411, 
1989. 

19. Barndt R, Blankenhorn DH, Crawford DW, et al. Regression and 
femoral 
progression 
treated 
hyperlipoproteinemic patients. Ann Intern Med 1977; 86: 139-46. 
20. Basta LL, Williams C, Kioschos JM. Regression of atherosclerotic 
stenosing lesions of the renal arteries and spontaneous cure of systemic 
hypertension through control of hyperlipidemia. Am J Med 1976; 61: 
420-23. 


21. Roth D, Kostuk WJ. Noninvasive and invasive demonstration of 
spontaneous regression of coronary artery disease. Circulation 1980; 62: 
888-96. 
22. Blankenhom DH, Nessim SA, Johnson RL, et al. Beneficial effects of 
combined colestipol-niacin therapy on coronary atherosclerosis and 
coronary venous bypass grafts. JAMA 1987; 257: 3233-40. 
23. Brown BG, Lin JT, Schaefer SM, et al. Niacin or lovastatin, combined 
with colestipol, regress coronary atherosclerosis and prevent clinical 
events in men with elevated apolipoprotein B. Circulation 1989; 80: 
II-266. 
24. Brown BG, Bolson EL, Dodge HT Arteriographic assessment of 
coronary atherosclerosis. Review of current methods, their limitations, 
and clinical applications. Arteriosclerosis 1982; 2: 2-15. 
25. Blankenhom DH, Johnson RL, El Zein HA, et al. Dietary fat influences 
human coronary lesion formation. Circulation 1988; 78 (suppl II): 11. 
