Preventing violence against refugee 
adolescent girls: findings from a cluster 
randomised controlled trial in Ethiopia 
Lindsay Stark,1,2 Khudejha Asghar,1 Ilana Seff,1 Gary Yu,1,3 
Teame Tesfay Gessesse,4 Leora Ward,5 Asham Assazenew Baysa,5 Amy Neiman,5 
Kathryn L Falb5 
To cite: Stark L, Asghar K, 
Seff I, et al. Preventing violence 
against refugee adolescent 
girls: findings from a cluster 
randomised controlled trial 
in Ethiopia. BMJ Glob Health 
2018;3:e000825. doi:10.1136/ 
bmjgh-2018-000825 

 ► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// dx. doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
bmjgh- 2018- 000825). 
Received 13 March 2018 
Revised 30 July 2018 
Accepted 3 August 2018 
 ► https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
bmjgh- 2018- 000824 
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2018. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ. 
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article. 
Correspondence to 
Dr Lindsay Stark; 
ls2302@cumc. columbia. edu 
 
AbsTrACT 
Introduction Interpersonal violence is a critical public 
health concern in humanitarian contexts, but evidence 
of effective violence prevention programmes targeting 
adolescent girls is lacking. We investigated the efficacy 
of a life skills and safe spaces programme to reduce 
adolescent girls’ experiences of interpersonal violence in a 
refugee setting. 
Methods In this two-arm, single-blinded, cluster 
randomised controlled trial, we recruited 919 Sudanese 
and South Sudanese girls ages 13–19 years residing 
in refugee camps in Ethiopia. Girls were divided into 31 
clusters, with 457 and 462 participants assigned to the 
intervention and control arms, respectively. Intervention 
clusters received 30 life skills sessions delivered in safe 
spaces and 8 complementary sessions for caregivers. 
The primary outcome was exposure to sexual violence in 
the previous 12 months. Secondary outcomes included 
disaggregated forms of sexual violence, physical violence, 
emotional violence, transactional sex, child marriage, 
feelings of safety, attitudes around rites of passage and 
perceptions of social support. Intent-to-treat analysis was 
used. 
results At 12-month follow-up, the intervention was 
not significantly associated with reduction in exposure to 
sexual violence (adjusted OR =0.96, 95% CI 0.59 to 1.57), 
other forms of violence, transactional sex or feelings of 
safety. The intervention was associated with improvements 
in attitudes around rites of passage and identified social 
supports. Additionally, the intervention showed a decrease 
in reported child marriage among girls who were married 
at baseline. 
Conclusion While the intervention impacted key markers 
along the causal pathway to violence reduction, further 
research and programmatic adaptations are needed to 
prevent violence towards adolescents in humanitarian 
contexts. 
Trial registration NCT02506543. 
InTroduCTIon 
Throughout 
individuals 
adolescence, 
face unique and critical threats to health, 
well-being and security.1 Globally, adoles- 
cence marks the period of greatest risk of 


interpersonal 
for 
girls.2 3 Girls reaching reproductive age are 
vulnerable to multiple forms of violence, 
including child maltreatment, 
intimate 
partner violence (IPV), child marriage, sexual 
abuse and exploitation and female genital 
mutilation/cutting.4 5 Additionally, adoles- 
cent girls’ low position in many societies may 
exacerbate risks of victimisation and impede 
service access and utilisation. These risks may 
be amplified by frequently occurring political 
and social upheaval during emergencies.6 7 

child- 
hood and adolescence can disrupt develop- 
ment trajectories, with greater impact than 





What is already known? 
 ► While life skills programming has been identified as 
a promising intervention strategy to prevent gen- 
der-based violence in low-income and middle-in- 
come countries, it is currently unknown whether 
this strategy’s potential extends to humanitarian 
settings. 

What are the new findings? 
 ► While we found no evidence that the Creating 
Opportunities 
Parental 
Involvement, and Safe Spaces intervention re- 
duced girls’ exposure to sexual violence within the 
12-month timeframe measured, findings indicate 
positive impact of the intervention on attitudes 
around rites of passage and social support indicators. 
 ► Findings also showed a decrease in reports of child 
marriage among girls in the intervention who report- 
ed being married or living with a man at baseline. 
What do the new findings imply? 
 ► Given the complexities of running randomised con- 
trolled trials in humanitarian contexts, outcome 
measures may need to be tailored to align with re- 
alistic timelines and the realities of programming in 
emergency settings. 
 
exposure at other periods in the life course.8–10 Indeed, 
multiple forms of gender-based violence (GBV) expe- 
rienced during childhood and adolescence are associ- 
ated with long-term health consequences for females, 
including poor sexual and reproductive health, increased 
risk of HIV, physical injury and disability, poor mental 
well-being and suicidal ideation.11–15 Given that suicide 
and depressive disorders are the leading global causes 
of mortality and years lost to disability, respectively, for 
adolescent girls ages 15–19 years, reducing exposure 
to violence and promoting positive development may 
decrease the burden of mental ill-health and improve 
general health and well-being for adolescent girls.16 17 
Life skills and education interventions have demon- 
strated promising changes in adolescent girls’ violence-re- 
lated attitudes and behaviours in developing settings.18 19 
These interventions have identified social norms related 
to gender and violence, adolescent girl empowerment 
and social networks, as pathways for reducing risk of 
GBV. Interventions have included safe spaces and combi- 
nations of life skills training, awareness-raising around 
girls’ rights and violence and social network building.20 
A few interventions have also included influential adults 
in girls’ lives, such as caregivers, or facilitated access to a 
young female mentor.19 21 
To date, programming to prevent violence against 
adolescent girls in humanitarian settings has been 
limited. A recent systematic review of approaches to 
reducing GBV against adolescent girls in humanitarian 
settings found only three evaluations in the academic 
literature, all of which used weak pretest and post-test 
designs.22 Additionally, none of the 38 adolescent IPV 
prevention interventions identified in a recent Cochrane 
review were implemented in humanitarian settings.23 As 
suggested by these reviews, significant knowledge gaps 
persist around effective strategies for reducing experi- 
ences of violence and promoting positive development 
for adolescent girls in humanitarian settings. 
To address this gap in evidence and practice, Columbia 
University and the International Rescue Committee 
(IRC) investigated the efficacy of the Creating Oppor- 
tunities through Mentorship, Parental Involvement, 
and Safe Spaces (COMPASS) adolescent life skills and 
safe spaces programme for refugee adolescent girls. To 
our knowledge, this study contributes the first rigorous 
scientific learning of an intervention to reduce GBV and 
support empowerment of adolescent girls in a humani- 
tarian setting. This study presents the results of a cluster 
randomised controlled trial to determine the impact of 
the COMPASS programme on experiencing interper- 
sonal violence, social support and psychosocial outcomes 
for refugee adolescent girls living in Ethiopia. 
MeTHods 
study design and participants 
COMPASS is a programme implemented with refu- 
gees living in camps on the Sudan/Ethiopia border, 

conflict-affected communities in eastern Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC) and displaced populations 
in northeast Pakistan. Columbia University evaluated 
COMPASS in all three locations, each of which had a 
different research objective and design. In Ethiopia, the 
impact evaluation studied whether the core programme 
components had an impact on girls’ experiences of 
violence and social outcomes. The DRC study measured 
the incremental impact of a caregiver curriculum on girls’ 
experiences of violence and social outcomes, along with 
attitudes and characteristics of participating caregivers. In 
Pakistan, the evaluation assessed the acceptability of the 
programme to adolescent girls and parents/caregivers in 
their context and measured changes in girls’ social and 
health outcomes over the course of the programme.24 
This article presents findings from the evaluation imple- 
mented in Ethiopia. 
In this wait-list, cluster randomised controlled trial 
(see online supplementary file – CONSORT cluster trials 
checklist), adolescent girls ages 13–19 years were recruited 
from three refugee camps in the Benishangul-Gumuz 
regional state of Ethiopia. Ethiopia is a top asylum desti- 
nation for refugees fleeing protracted conflicts in nearby 
countries, and Benishangul-Gumuz camps host tens of 
thousands of refugees from Sudan and South Sudan. 
Adolescent refugees from Sudan have been repeatedly 
found to exhibit elevated rates of depression, anxiety and 
post-traumatic stress.25 Additionally, a recent study from 
other Ethiopian refugee camps revealed that adolescent 
refugee girls are at risk of physical, emotional and sexual 
violence victimisation in this setting.26 
Adolescents who met inclusion criteria were enrolled 
in the study from 29 July 2015 to 4 September 2016. Girls 
were excluded if they lacked verbal proficiency in Funj, 
Regarig, Engesena, or Maban. Language exclusion criteria 
were based on the primary languages spoken by girls in 
the research camps and data collectors’ language abili- 
ties. Individuals with significant cognitive impairments 
or physical disabilities that would prevent independent 
completion of interviews using Audio Computer-Assisted 
Self-Interview (ACASI) were excluded for ethical reasons. 
All study procedures were approved by the Institutional 
Review Board of the Columbia University Medical Center 
(Protocol #AAAP6855; see online supplementary file 
– IRB protocol), the Administration for Refugee and 
Returnee Affairs in Ethiopia and the IRC’s internal 
review board (Protocol # WPE 1.00.003). 
study procedures 
IRC staff introduced the intervention to adolescent 
girls and their caregivers through home visits and 
existing programming at IRC’s Women and Girls Well- 
ness Centers. Girls who registered for the intervention 
were invited to participate in the study by data collec- 
tors who were not affiliated with the IRC programme 
and who were managed by Columbia University. Data 
collection trainers were all affiliated with the Care and 
Protection of Children Learning Network, and training 


included special attention to data collection with young 
people derived from a series of guidance materials.27–29 
All research staff participated in a training focused on 
ensuring privacy and confidentiality and understanding 
the basic elements of GBV as outlined in the WHO’s 
guidelines on violence against women research. Data 
collectors signed confidentiality agreements and devel- 
oped protocols for data breaches.30 In accordance with 
ethical protocols for research in non-written languages, 
data collectors obtained verbal consent in confiden- 
tial spaces from guardians, adolescent girls over age 18 
years, and married girls below age 18 years, and assent for 
unmarried girls age 13–17 years. Adolescents self-admin- 
istered the survey, using ACASI programming in a private 
location.30 31 Data collectors remained outside confiden- 
tial spaces to respond to questions and to troubleshoot 
any technological difficulties. Following the interview, 
participants were provided with information on how to 
access violence and psychosocial support services, and 
referrals were made to service providers as needed. 
Given that girls received the COMPASS intervention 
in small programme groups, we used these groups to 
cluster treatment assignments. Following completion of 
baseline data collection, adolescents were divided into 62 
programme clusters of 10–20 girls based on household 
proximity, age (13–14 years or 15–19 years) and primary 
language. Columbia University randomised clusters to 
the treatment or wait-list control arm using a uniform 
distribution in R. To reduce contamination potential, 
siblings were randomised to the same treatment arm. 
Given the nature of programming received in the inter- 
vention arm, randomisation was blinded to data collec- 
tors but not blinded for participants. 
Participants in both treatment arms were tracked and 
retained through strategies such as brief home visits 
occurring 6 months after baseline data collection and 
a visit 1 month prior to endline survey administration. 
To ensure the girls completing the endline surveys were 
the same as those from baseline, identifying information 
was first checked against a master list from baseline. Girls 
were then asked a series of questions about their baseline 
interview, such as what materials were used and where 
interviews were held. Adolescents completed the endline 
survey approximately 1 year after completion of the base- 
line survey (July–September 2016). Nested qualitative 
data were also collected and are presented elsewhere.32 33 
All data collection took place in empty classrooms in local 
schools. 
CoMPAss intervention 
Previous IRC learning on programming for children and 
adolescent girls informed intervention development. 
Intervention components included weekly adolescent 
girl life skills sessions in safe spaces, with 45–60 min of 
facilitated content and 30 min of unstructured time. 
Adolescents in clusters randomised to the treatment 
arm received a total of 30 in-person group sessions. 
Each girl’s life skills session focused on topics related to 
improving key skills such as communication, friendship 
building, and awareness of GBV and sexual and repro- 
ductive health (see online supplementary appendix A. 
Girls’ sessions were delivered by trained female refugee 
mentors aged 18–30 years, who spoke the same languages 
as participants. Groups were led by either one mentor or 
a team of two or three mentors. 
The intervention also included 8 monthly discussion 
groups for enrolled girls’ caregivers, which covered 
topics such as communication skills, supporting adoles- 
cent girls and understanding violence and abuse. Care- 
giver content was delivered by IRC staff with assistance 
from translators. Safe spaces were accessible to all women 
and girls living in the camps for unstructured activities in 
between COMPASS sessions.30 
The COMPASS theory of change hypothesised that 
weekly discussion sessions for adolescent girls, access 
to a trusted female mentor and provision of safe single- 
gender space would increase girls’ human, social, physical 
and financial assets to protect themselves from a range 
of potential risks, including IPV, community violence 
and transactional sex, as well as respond to threats or 
incidents of such violence (see figure 1). Building on 
previous experience with the Parents Make a Difference 
programme with younger children, it was also theorised 
that including caregivers could increase their protective 
role in girls’ lives both within and outside the home, 
by raising their awareness about the risks of GBV faced 
by adolescent girls in their care and the importance of 
connecting girls with GBV response and health services.28 
Measures 
Primary outcomes 
The primary outcome of interest was a binary composite 
representing any form of sexual violence in the previous 
12 months, which included self-reported forced sex, 
unwanted sexual touching or coerced sex. 
Secondary outcomes 
Secondary outcomes 
included binary self-reported 
12-month exposure to forced sex (having sex unwill- 
ingly), unwanted sexual touching and coerced sex in 
the previous 12 months. These measures are the disag- 
gregated components of the primary outcome and were 
adapted from previously validated questionnaires.34 
Other secondary outcomes included binary self-reported 
12-month exposure to physical violence, emotional 
violence, transactional sex, child marriage and feelings 
of safety. Physical violence was operationalised as being 
hit or beaten. Emotional violence was defined as being 
screamed at loudly or aggressively. Engagement in trans- 
actional sex was operationalised as exchanging sex for 
money, food or gifts. Child marriage was defined as 
marrying or living with someone as if married prior to 
18 years of age. Adolescents similarly provided binary 
responses on their feelings of safety in their homes, 
schools, friend’s homes and neighbour’s homes. Each of 
these variables on self-reported safety was operationalised 




as answering ‘yes’ to questions such as ‘Do you feel safe at 
home?’ and ‘Do you feel safe at school?’ and in a range of 
other settings where the IRC thought feelings of safety 
might be increased as a result of programming. 
Key causal pathway markers 
Key markers thought to influence girls’ risk of experi- 
encing interpersonal violence included social support 
and attitudes regarding rites of passage. Perceived social 
support was captured through dichotomous self-report of 
having female friends of a similar age outside the family 
and reports of having a trusted non-family female adult 
in whom they could confide. Rites of passage included 
adolescents’ beliefs about the highest grade girls should 
complete in school, acceptability for girls to work outside 
the home after marriage, appropriate age of marriage 
and appropriate age of having one’s first child. Contin- 
uous measures for appropriate age of marriage and age 
of first child were dichotomised as either under age 18 
years or age 18 years and above. Adolescents also self-re- 
ported access to a safe place to spend time with other 
girls. 
Demographic variables 
Age and years of completed education were continuous 
variables. Cohabitation with biological parents was oper- 
ationalised as a categorical variable: presence of only the 
father, only the mother, both parents, or neither parent 
in the home. Cohabitation with an intimate partner was 
defined as living with a husband or living with someone 
as if married. 
statistical analysis 
The target sample size was originally calculated assuming 
20 girls in each cluster; however, programme realities in 
the field led to fewer girls being assigned to each group 
and thus necessitated a recalculation of our sample size. 
We assumed 30% incidence of past-year sexual violence 
among the population at baseline and that this incidence 
was likely to remain constant among the control group. 
To calculate the target sample size, we assumed statistical 
power of 80% and a two-sided alpha of 0.05 to detect 
a 35% reduction in the incidence of past-year sexual 
violence in the intervention arm compared with the wait- 
list arm. We estimated that each cluster would comprise 
approximately 15 girls. We assumed an intraclass correla- 
tion coefficient (ICC) of 0.06 to account for clustering. 
We could not find a previous study that measured sexual 
violence among female adolescents in a sub-Saharan 
African site. However, a study that assessed IPV perpe- 
trated against females ages 15–49 years across multiple 
sites, including Ethiopia, reported all ICCs were less than 
0.06.35 We required 62 clusters, 31 groups in each treat- 
ment arm. We expected a 10% loss to follow-up, necessi- 
tating a final sample size of at least 896 girls. 
Ranges, frequencies, means and SD were assessed for 
all predictors and outcomes (see online supplementary 



file – statistical analysis plan). t-Tests and Pearson χ2 
tests were used to examine the independence of contin- 
uous and dichotomous baseline characteristics, respec- 
tively, between treatment arms and between those who 
were and were not lost to follow-up. Intent-to-treat anal- 
ysis was conducted on all individuals surveyed at base- 
line. Per-protocol analysis is not presented due to the 
fact that more than 95% of girls and 91% of caregivers 
followed protocol, defined as attending at least 75% 
of programme sessions. The intervention’s effects on 
binary primary and secondary outcomes at endline were 
assessed through mixed effects logistic regressions with 
random intercepts to account for clustering; the inter- 
vention’s effect on a continuous secondary outcome was 
assessed using a linear mixed model. After estimating the 
first-order effect of the intervention on these outcomes, 
models were adjusted for baseline age, previous engage- 
ment in a romantic relationship and presence of mother, 
father or both parents in the home. These demographic 
characteristics were previously found to be associated 
with experiences of violence in baseline results of this 
study sample.36 
Given attrition between baseline and follow-up and the 
self-reported and sensitive nature of many of the ques- 
tions, outcomes were missing for approximately 10%–20% 
of girls. Pearson χ2 tests were used to assess whether miss- 
ingness was associated with treatment assignment. We 
also carried out a sensitivity analysis by performing the 
analysis described above on imputed data. To account for 
the missing predictors and outcomes, we used a multiple 
imputation approach. A set of five imputations was gener- 
ated in Stata with ‘mi impute’, after which the average 
values represented a close estimate of a full dataset. All 
analyses were completed using Stata V.14. 
resulTs 
Of the 986 adolescent girls approached between 29 
July 2015 and 4 September 2015, 919 girls completed 
the baseline survey (see figure 2). Adolescents were 
divided into clusters based on age, common language 
and geographic location, with an average of 15 girls per 
cluster. Thirty-one clusters were randomised to the inter- 
vention (n=457) and 31 clusters were randomised to the 
waitlist arm (n=462). Of these, 812 (88·36%) participants 
completed the endline survey between 25 July 2016 and 2 
September 2016, and all 62 clusters were included in the 
analysis. The most frequently cited reason for non-com- 
pletion of an endline survey was relocation out of the 
camps (n=37). Additionally, 34 girls from the control 
group mistakenly joined the intervention and, due to 
an error in the field, endline data were not collected for 
these girls. 
The average participant was approximately 14.5 years 
and had 2 years of schooling. At baseline, adolescents in 
the intervention group were more likely to live with their 
mother but not father and less likely to live with neither 
parent at baseline, as compared with the control group 
(table 1). Information on perpetrators of violence at 
baseline has been reported separately.36 The proportion 





of adolescents speaking the four different languages also 
differed between the intervention and control groups, 
which was an expected effect of randomising siblings to 
the same treatment condition. Adolescents in the inter- 
vention and control groups did not differ on any other 
measured demographic characteristics or primary or 
secondary violence outcomes. 
Baseline data revealed high levels of exposure to any 
form of past-year sexual violence: 28% of girls in the 
intervention arm and 30% of girls in the control arm 
reported experiencing any form of sexual violence in 
the past year. Table 2 summarises primary and secondary 
outcomes by treatment arm and time period of data 
collection and treatment. There were no differences in 
primary or secondary outcomes between the treatment 
and wait-list control groups at baseline. Additionally, girls 
were no more or less likely to have missing outcome data 
at endline based on treatment arm. 

to unforeseen challenges associated with 
the 
programme adaptation and 
COMPASS intervention roll-out was delayed, and the 
reference period for the primary outcome thus extends to 
the beginning of the programme. As such, the secondary 
outcomes presented may be more relevant and appro- 
priate, given the condensed timeline. While a third 

round of data collection was sought to assess longer term 
changes in violence reduction, this additional round of 
data collection was ultimately not possible due to funding 
limitations. 
Analyses showed no significant effect of the inter- 
vention on reports of sexual violence (adjusted OR 
(aOR)=0.96, 95% CI 0.59 to 1.57) in the previous 12 
months, when adjusting for other covariates (see table 3). 
The ICC for sexual violence in our sample was 0.009. 
Analyses also showed no significant effect of the inter- 
vention on reports of specific forms of sexual violence, 
physical violence, emotional violence or transactional 
sex in the previous 12 months, as well as no effect on 
perceived feelings of safety (see table 3). While there was 
no difference in child marriage across treatment arms at 
endline, exploratory analyses revealed the intervention 
had an effect on child marriage for the subgroup of girls 
already married at baseline; among those married or 
living with someone as if married at baseline, girls in the 
treatment arm had lower odds (OR 0.57; 95% CI 0.34 to 
0.95), p=0.032) of being married at endline as compared 
with those in the control arm (results not presented in 
table 3). 
Adolescents in the intervention reported that they 
believed girls should complete one additional year of 





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Father only 
 
Both parents 
 
Ever had a boyfriend 
 
 
 
Married, not living with husband 
 





















Years of schooling 
 






 
 
 



 
 
 

 


 
 
 

 


 
 
 

 
 
 

 


Parents in household 
 
 

Mother only 
 
 

 


Neither parent 
 
 

 


Relationship status 
 
 

Married, living with husband 
 
 

 


Living with man as if married 
 
 

 


 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

schooling as compared with those in the control group 
(β=1.08, 95% CI 0.44 to 1.761), p=0.001). Girls in 
the treatment arm also had greater odds than girls in 
the control arm of believing a girl should get married 
(aOR=1.88, 95% CI 1.07 to 3.28, p=0.027), and have 
her first child after age 18 (aOR=2.04, 95% CI 1.25 to 
3.34, p=0.005). Finally, girls in the intervention had 1.71 
greater odds (95% CI (1.18 to 2.49, p=0.005) of reporting 
having friends their own age and 1.997 greater odds (95% 
CI 1.44 to 2.76, p<0.001) of having a trusted non-family 
female adult in their life, when adjusting for other covari- 
ates. All findings are robust to sensitivity analyses (see 
online supplementary appendix B). 
dIsCussIon 
The COMPASS intervention’s theory of change, built on 
learnings from The Parents Make a Difference programme 
and other studies, hypothesised that increasing girls’ knowl- 
edge of violence risk factors, reshaping attitudes about 
gender roles, expanding social networks and improving 
decision-making and negotiation skills would ultimately 
equip girls to protect themselves against and respond to 
violence.30 While self-reported exposure to the primary 
outcome of sexual violence did decrease in both the 
control and intervention groups, we find no evidence that 
this decline was due to the intervention. However, although 
the programme did not impact girls’ likelihood of expe- 
riencing sexual, physical or emotional violence, or trans- 
actional sex within the timeframe measured, our results 
suggest that the intervention did affect changes in gender 
attitudes and social support networks, which lie earlier 
along the causal pathway. 
These results may reflect a need for a longer period of 
follow-up to document changes in violence, or may reflect 
a limited ability of the intervention to impact violence 
outcomes. It may be unreasonable to expect these stand- 
alone interventions to impact outcomes at every stage of 
the causal pathway, especially in a 12-month period, when 
there are many other structural factors that influence a 
girl’s risk of experiencing violence. Leveraging opportu- 
nities for policy change through work with local leaders 
and other implementing organisations may expand the 





Control 
(n=462) Missing 

Coerced sex, last 12 months 
 
Physical violence, last 12 months 
 
Transactional sex, last 12 months 
 







Perceived feelings of safety 
 
 
 
Neighbour's house 
 




Attitudes around rites of passage 
 
Age of marriage, at least 18 
 
Working outside home after marriage 
 





Hasfriends 
 
Hastrusted non-family female adult 
 
288 (69) 
231 (57) 
269 (64) 
239 (58) 






81 
98 














303 (75) 
231 (60) 
243 (64) 
166 (440 







137 
155 


Intervention 
(n=457) 
Intervention 
(n=457) 
Control 
(n=462) 

Any form of sexual violence, last 12 months 
 
 






Unwanted sexual touching, last 12 months 
 
 






Forced sex, last 12 months 
 
 






Emotional violence, last 12 months 
 
 






Child marriage, last 12 months 
 
 






 
 
 

 






Friend's house 
 
 

 






Have safe place to spend time with other girls 
 
 

 






Grade to complete in school 
 
 

 




Age of first child, at least 18 
 
 

 






Social supports 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
No allowance for multiplicity was made in the analyses. Adjusted models control for having ever had a boyfriend, a four-level 
categorical variable indicating biological parents living in the home and age. All results are ORs or aORs, except for ‘grade to complete 
in school’. ORs are statistically significant.at *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001. 
aOR, adjusted OR. 
intervention’s effectiveness.29 Since caregivers and girls’ 
intimate partners are frequent perpetrators of violence, 
including gender-transformative programming 
that 
targets these two groups may also improve reach of the 
intervention. Indeed, research indicates positive effects of 
community-level advocacy and social norms interventions 
on preventing IPV among women and parenting inter- 
ventions targeting fathers on violence against children; 
similar programme adaptations and expansions for adoles- 
cent girls may strengthen positive outcomes of life skills 
programming like COMPASS.37–39 Furthermore, given that 
the inclusion of activities to target broader social norms 
in the community may promote positive and sustainable 
outcomes for girls and families, future evaluations of such 
programme should consider including measures of change 
at the community level, rather than just at the level of the 
girl participants. 
Additionally, future programme might benefit from 
targeting social norms and behaviours among men in 
the community. Qualitative research activities conducted 
at baseline, including a participatory mapping exercise 
in which female adolescents were asked to draw their 
communities and identify ‘safe’ and ‘unsafe’ spaces, 
revealed the perceived threat of spaces that are dominated 
by male presence.32 Furthermore, girls agreed that most 
places are not inherently dangerous, but rather they pose a 
threat to girls’ safety when occupied by men. However, this 
activity masked the incidence of caregiver and domestic 
violence in the private sphere as revealed through quan- 
titative data collection, speaking to the importance of 
mixed methods in understanding the complexities of girls’ 
experiences in these settings.40 Similar qualitative research 
should be conducted ahead of future programme in order 
to elucidate a topology of unsafe spaces as well as girls’ 
perceived and real risks. Qualitative scenarios delivered 
through in-depth interviews are also recommended.33 
Additional exploratory analyses of these data showed 
that the intervention was associated with a reduction in 
child marriage among girls who were married or living 
with someone as if married prior to age 18 years at base- 
line. These findings may indicate actual changes in adoles- 
cent girls’ marital status due to increased awareness about 
the harms of child marriage or that social desirability bias 
made girls less likely to report being married at endline. 







Coerced sex 
 
Physical violence 
 
Transactional sex 
 
Perceived feelings of safety 
 
 
 
Neighbour's house 
 
Attitudes around rites of passage 
 










Age of marriage 
 
Working outside the home after marriage 
 
Have friends 
 










































Any form of sexual violence 
 
 






Unwanted sexual touching 
 
 






Forced sex 
 
 






Emotional violence 
 
 






Child marriage 
 
 






 
 
 

 






Friend's house 
 
 

 






Safe place to spend time with other girls 
 
 

 






Grade to complete in school (β (95% CI)) 
 
 

 






Age of first child 
 
 

 






Social supports 
 
 
Have trusted non-family female adult 
 
 

 






 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
Anecdotal validation from IRC staff confirmed that many 
girls who were living with partners as if married left these 
relationships over the course of the intervention period, 
underscoring that programme like COMPASS may offer 
greater benefits to some girls than others and such subgroup 
analyses are important in recognition that adolescent girls’ 
experiences in humanitarian settings are not uniform. 
A previous Lancet review of interventions to reduce 
violence against women and girls found insufficient 
evidence to advocate for empowerment interventions 
similar to COMPASS in high-income countries; however, 
the review found these strategies to be promising in 
low-income and middle-income countries.31 Our findings 
suggest that additional investigation is needed to explore 
the evidence for these strategies in humanitarian settings. 
Further research into the moderating and mediating role 
of prior exposure to outcome variables at baseline may illu- 
minate mixed results on programme impact for girls with 
different vulnerabilities. Additionally, future analyses may 
consider factors associated with positive outcomes, such 
as improvements in social support, to discern associations 
between prior exposure to violence and feelings of social 
support after programme participation. Finally, previous 
research posits that a range of safety and coping strategies 
may support girls’ adaptive resilience in settings where 
violence remains a salient threat.30 More realistic targets, 
given the theory of change, might have included reducing 
the frequency of violence victimisation or addressing girls’ 
resilience in the face of violence, rather than primary 
prevention outright. 
Despite the lack of evidence supporting the intervention’s 
impact on violence outcome for girls, the programme’s 
effects on other aspects of well-being and the high rates 
of programme adherence demonstrate the potential for 
implementing similar programme in humanitarian settings. 
Although there were few competing activities providing 
support for adolescent girls in the refugee camps, diligent 
outreach activities by programme staff contributed to nearly 
all girl and caregiver participants attending at least 75% 
of programme sessions. Additionally, future programme 
in these settings might consider adopting COMPASS’ 
strategic approach to programme scheduling in order to 
maximise participation. For example, in the study setting, 
school sessions are divided, with approximately half of girls 
attending school in the morning and half attending in the 
afternoon; COMPASS staff worked with women and girls to 
ensure programme sessions and safe spaces were accessible 
at convenient times. 
This study has a few limitations worth noting. First, all 
outcomes are self-reported and thus subject to disclosure 
bias. For example, we observe inconsistencies in reports of 
ever having had consensual or non-consensual sex between 
baseline and endline. However, these inconsistencies 
were not associated with treatment status and thus we do 
not believe they biased estimates of programme impacts. 
Contextual insights provided by COMPASS programme 
staff suggest presence of maturity bias, as willingness to 
share intimate details decreases as girls age in this setting. 
While we acknowledge potential bias in reporting on the 
study’s outcomes, we believe utilisation of ACASI, which 
has been shown to increase the disclosure of responses to 
questions on sexual behaviours and violence, helped to 
minimise such biases.41 42 Second, as mentioned above, real- 
ities in the field associated with implementing an RCT in a 
humanitarian setting led to programme delays, resulting 
in overlap between the reference period for the primary 
outcome and the period of intervention delivery. A longer 
follow-up period may more clearly illuminate any changes 
in violence reduction. Third, although we measure severity 
of sexual violence by assessing various types of violence 
from sexual touching to forced sex, a measure of frequency 
would have been useful in evaluating the programme’s 
impact in line with the theory of change. Finally, while 
groups were randomised in separate geographic zones 
of three camps, we cannot completely rule out potential 
spillover or contamination between treatment and control 
girls. Such contamination may partially explain the overall 
decline in self-reported past-year sexual violence in the full 
sample, and, if contamination did produce these reduc- 
tions, it may have masked the overall effectiveness of the 
intervention. Despite these limitations, this study demon- 
strates that programming and rigorous research can 
successfully be conducted with adolescent girls in a refugee 
setting, particularly given the limited attrition rate, and 
contributes to the limited evidence base for adolescent girls 
in humanitarian settings. 
ConClusIon 
To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess the impact 
of a life skills and safe spaces intervention for adolescent 
girls in a refugee setting, where physical, sexual, and 
emotional violence, transactional sex and child marriage 
are salient threats to well-being. Experiencing these events 
during adolescence disrupts physical and mental develop- 
ment and contributes to long-term health problems, and 
intervention at this stage in the life course remains crit- 
ical.8 11 Findings suggest life skills programming can influ- 
ence secondary outcomes that promote healthy transitions 
to adulthood, while further research and programmatic 
adaptations may be needed to fully realise changes in risk 
of violence. 
Author affiliations 
1Department of Population and Family Health, Columbia University Mailman School 
of Public Health, New York City, New York, USA 
2Brown School at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, United States 
3New York University Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York City, New York, USA 
4Independent Consultant, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 
5International Rescue Committee, New York City, New York, USA 
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the adolescent girls who 
participated in the study, for their willingness to share their time and experiences 
with us. 
Contributors LS is principal investigator and led manuscript development. KA led 
data analysis, supported manuscript development and data collection. IS supported 
data analysis, interpretation and manuscript development. Coinvestigators KF and 
LW supported conceptual development and study implementation. TTG managed 
oversight of data collection. AN and LW are responsible for assisting in tool 



adaptation and study implementation. All authors reviewed and approved the final 
manuscript prior to submission. 
Funding The study was funded by the UK Department for International 
Development (grant #40080602). The funders played no role in the study design; 
in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; 
and in the decision to submit the article for publication. All authors had full access 
to all of the data (including statistical reports and tables) in the study and can take 
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. 
The sponsor of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, 
data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full 
access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to 
submit for publication. 


ethics approval Columbia University Medical Center IRB; Administration for 
Refugee and Returnee Affairs in Ethiopia; International Rescue Committee Internal 
Review Board. 

data sharing statement Due to legal restrictions, data cannot be made publicly 
available. Data are owned by the International Rescue Committee (IRC). For more 
information about IRC data, please visit the following URL: . For data related 
inquiries please contact Kathryn Falb ( Kathryn. Falb@ rescue. org). 
open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the 
use is non-commercial. See: http:// creativecommons. org/ licenses/ by- nc/ 4.0 
ReFeRenCes 
 1. Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Ross DA, et al. From advocacy to action in 




Research LSoHaTM,South African Medical Research Council. Global 
and regional estimates of violence against women: p revalence and 
health effects of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual 
violence. Italy: World Health Organization, 2013. 



a global review of intersections of violence against women and 
violence against children. Glob Health Action 2016;9:31516. 
 6. Stark L, Wessells M. Sexual violence as a weapon of war. JAMA 

 7. Catani C, Jacob N, Schauer E, et al. Family violence, war, and 
natural disasters: a study of the effect of extreme stress on 
children's mental health in Sri Lanka. BMC Psychiatry 2008;8:33. 
 8. Macmillan R. Violence and the life course: The consequences of 
victimization for personal and social development. Annu Rev Sociol 
2001;27:1–22. 

the varying impact of childhood and adolescent maltreatment on 
multiple problem outcomes. Dev Psychopathol 2001;13:957–79. 
10. Johnson MK, Crosnoe R, Elder GH. Insights on adolescence from a 
life course perspective. J Res Adolesc 2011;21:273–80. 
11. Olofsson N, Lindqvist K, Shaw BA, et al. Long-term health 
consequences of violence exposure in adolescence: a 26-year 
prospective study. BMC Public Health 2012;12:411. 

mental health consequences of childhood physical abuse: results 
from a large population-based sample of men and women. Child 
Abuse Negl 2007;31:517–30. 

transmitted disease/HIV testing and diagnosis among adolescent 
females. Pediatrics 2005;116:e272–e6. 
14. Hughes K, Lowey H, Quigg Z, et al. Relationships between adverse 
childhood experiences and adult mental well-being: results from an 
english national household survey. BMC Public Health 2016;16:222. 


and associated health-risk behaviors among adolescent girls. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2001;155:1238–42. 



diseases, injuries, and risk factors for young people's health during 
1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2013. Lancet 2016;387:2383–401. 
18. Sarnquist C, Omondi B, Sinclair J, et al. Rape prevention through 
empowerment of adolescent girls. Pediatrics 2014;133:e1226–32. 
19. Brady M, Assaad R, Ibrahim B, et al. Providing new opportunities to 
adolescent girls in socially conservative settings: The Ishraq program 
in rural Upper Egypt. New York, NY: The Population Council, 2007. 

against women and girls. Evidence review of interventions to prevent 
violence against women and girls. Pretoria: Medical Research 
Council, 2014. 

to support married adolescent girls in rural ethiopia. Afr J Reprod 
Health 2014;18:68. 
22. Noble E, Ward L, French S, et al. State of the evidence: a systematic 
review of approaches to reduce gender-based violence and support 
the empowerment of adolescent girls in humanitarian settings. 
Trauma Violence Abuse, . 2017;1524838017699601:1524838017699 
601. Violence, & Abuse. 

based interventions for preventing relationship and dating violence 
in adolescents and young adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013;6:CD004534. 

girls' well-being in pakistan: a mixed-methods study of change over 
time, feasibility, and acceptability, of the compass program. Prev Sci 
2018:1–13. 

psychosocial wellbeing of Sudanese refugees: a literature review. 
Transcult Psychiatry 2009;46:300–15. 
26. Schulte J, Rizvi Z. In Search of safety and solutions: somali refugee 
adolescent girls at sheder and aw barre camps, ethiopia. New York: 
Women's Refugee Commission, 2012. 

physical and emotional punishment of children. Bangkok, Thailand: 
International Save the Children Alliance, 2004. 
28. Save the Children. Practice standards in children’s participation. 
London, UK: International Save the Children Alliance, 2005. 
29. Schenk K, Williamson J. Ethical approaches to gathering information 
from children and adolescents in international settings: guidelines 
and resources. Washington, DC: Population Council, 2005. 
30. Falb KL, Tanner S, Ward L, et al. Creating opportunities through 
mentorship, parental involvement, and safe spaces (COMPASS) 
program: multi-country study protocol to protect girls from violence 
in humanitarian settings. BMC Public Health 2016;16:231. 
31. Falb K, Tanner S, Asghar K, et al. Implementation of audio- 
computer assisted self-interview (acasi) among adolescent girls in 
humanitarian settings: feasibility, acceptability, and lessons learned. 
Confl Health 2016;10:32. 
32. Sommer M, Munoz-Laboy M, Wilkinson Salamea E, et al. How 
narratives of fear shape girls' participation in community life 
in two conflict-affected populations. Violence Against Women 
2018;24:565–85. 
33. Sommer M, Muñoz-Laboy M, Williams A, et al. How gender norms 
are reinforced through violence against adolescent girls in two 
conflict-affected populations. Child Abuse Negl 2018;79:154–63. 
34. Runyan DK, Dunne MP, Zolotor AJ, et al. The development and 
piloting of the ispcan child abuse screening tool-parent version 
(ICAST-P). Child Abuse Negl 2009;33:826–32. 

associated with recent intimate partner violence? findings from the 
WHO multi-country study on women's health and domestic violence. 
BMC Public Health 2011;11:109. 

factors of violence against conflict-affected female adolescents: a 
multi-country, cross-sectional study. J Glob Health 2017;7:010416. 

integrated intimate partner violence and HIV prevention intervention 
in Rakai, Uganda: analysis of an intervention in an existing cluster 
randomised cohort. Lancet Glob Health 2015;3:e23–e33. 
38. Ashburn K, Kerner B, Ojamuge D, et al. Evaluation of the 
responsible, engaged, and loving (real) fathers initiative on physical 
child punishment and intimate partner violence in northern uganda. 
Prevention Science 2016:1–11. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39. Abramsky T, Devries KM, Michau L, et al. Ecological pathways to 
prevention: How does the SASA! community mobilisation model 
work to prevent physical intimate partner violence against women? 
BMC Public Health 2016;16:339. 
40.Stark L, Sommer M, Davis K, et al. Disclosure bias for group 
 
versus individual reporting of violence amongst conflict- 
affected adolescent girls in DRC and Ethiopia. PLoS One 
2017;12:e0174741. 

STI/HIV status among adolescents in rural Malawi: an evaluation 
of the effect of interview mode on reporting. Stud Fam Plann 
2008;39:321–34. 

assisted self-interview (ACASI) useful in risk behaviour assessment 
of female and male sex workers, Mombasa, Kenya? PLoS One 
2009;4:e5340. 



 
 
 
