J Exp Criminol (2010) 6:419–445 
DOI 10.1007/s11292-010-9103-7 
Exploring gender differences in dating 
violence/harassment prevention programming in middle 
schools: results from a randomized experiment 

Published online: 24 July 2010 
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010 
Abstract In this study, we randomly assigned 123 sixth and seventh grade 
classrooms from seven middle schools in the greater Cleveland area to one of two 
five-session curricula addressing gender violence/sexual harassment (GV/SH) or to a 
no-treatment control group. A baseline survey and two follow-up surveys were 
administered immediately after the treatment (Wave 2) and about six months post- 
treatment (Wave 3). In an earlier paper, we demonstrated the effectiveness of two 
approaches to youth GV/SH prevention programming (a fact-based, law and justice 
curriculum and an interaction-based curriculum). In this paper, we explored whether 
these largely positive findings remain for both girls and boys, including whether 
girls experience higher levels of GV/SH than boys. Most of our statistical models 
proved to be non-statistically significant. However, in 2 of our 48 victimization/ 
perpetration (any violence, sexual violence and non-sexual violence) models (across 
two post-intervention follow-up points), we observed that the interventions reduced 
peer (male or female, non-dating partner) sexual violence victimization and reduced 
peer perpetration, but another outcome model 
the interventions 
increased dating perpetration. These mixed findings will need to be explored further 
in future research. Regarding our primary research question, we observed no 

This project was supported by Grant No. 2005–WT–BX–0002 awarded by the National Institute of 
Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Points of view in this document are those 
of the author and do not necessarily represent the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of 
Justice or any other organization. The authors wish to acknowledge the substantial contributions of Dr. 
Amy R. Mack, ICF International, and Mr. Thomas Horwood, ICF International, for their roles in the 
research project. 
B. G. Taylor (*) 
National Opinion Research Center (NORC), University of Chicago, 4350 East West Highway, 
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA 
e-mail: Taylor-Bruce@norc.uchicago.edu 
N. Stein 
Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA 
F. F. Burden 
Ad Hoc Analytics, Washington, DC, USA 


statistically significant differences for the treatment multiplied by gender interaction 
terms for any of the perpetration or victimization outcome models, suggesting that 
the treatment had similar effects on girls and boys. However, we did observe that 
boys are more involved in violence than girls: both as victims and perpetrators. Boys 
experienced significantly more of three types of victimization from peers and dating 
partners compared to what girls experienced at the hands of their peers and dating 
partners. As perpetrators, boys committed more sexual victimization against peers 
(immediately post-intervention only) and more sexual victimization against dating 
partners than girls. The implications of these results are discussed. 
Keywords Teen dating violence . Gender . Middle schools . Prevention curricula . 
Randomized experiment 

Teen dating1 violence is no longer a problem only recognized by sexual assault 
and domestic violence centers, as it was nearly 30 years ago. Now it 
is 
acknowledged as a major problem; its frequency is surveyed, suggesting that it 
is experienced by as many as 40–60% of teenagers (Foshee et al. 1996; Hickman 
et al. 2004; Jouriles et al. 2009); and interventions have been created to reduce its 
severity or prevent its inception by a coalition of stakeholders, including policy 
makers, criminologists, educators, psychologists, and medical personnel (Mulford 
and Giordano 2008). School-based programs to prevent and reduce the precursors 
the most popular modes of 
to teen dating violence have become one of 
intervention to disrupt the normalcy of teen dating violence. 
In our research project funded by the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) in seven 
middle schools in the greater Cleveland area, students in 123 sixth and seventh grade 
classrooms were randomly assigned to one of two five-session curricula addressing 
gender violence/sexual harassment (GV/SH) or to a no-treatment control. Three- 
student surveys were administered over a six-month period. In an earlier paper 
(Taylor et al. 2010), students in one of the treatments (law and justice), compared to 
the control group, had significantly improved outcomes in awareness of their 
abusive behaviors, attitudes toward GV/SH and personal space, and knowledge. 
Students in the second treatment (Interaction-focused) experienced lower rates of 
victimization, increased awareness of abusive behaviors, and improved attitudes 
towards personal space. Neither curricula affected perpetration or victimization of 
sexual harassment. While the interventions appeared to reduce peer violence 
victimization and perpetration, a conflicting finding emerged: the intervention may 
have increased dating violence perpetration (or at least the reporting of it) but not 
dating violence victimization. In this article, we will explore whether these effects of 
our interventions vary for boys compared to girls. 
1 We defined “dating” in the following manner: “girls or boys you are going with, dating, going steady 
with, or have gone out with, dated, or gone steady with for at least one week. This group includes anyone 
who is or was your boyfriend/girlfriend for at least one week.” 




Our primary research question relates to whether there is a difference in the effects of 
the interventions by gender. That is, do the interventions help girls more than boys or 
vice versa? This is an important question to address for there is a considerable 
amount of evidence that girls have different rates of victimization and perpetration 
than boys and experience violence differently (see “Literature review”). Given these 
findings, 
is critical for researchers to assess if universal primary prevention 
interventions (like the interventions we tested) are able to help both girls and boys. If 
there are differential effects, future research can assess whether changes are needed 
in the interventions. This leads to our second question about whether there are 
differences in the levels of violence experienced by girls compared to boys (as 
victims or perpetrators). Our third question is whether our earlier reported findings 
regarding the effects of our two treatment groups (Taylor et al. 2010) remain the 
same when controlling for possible gender effects. Our paper is one of the few to 
examine gender difference in terms of the effects of prevention programming. We 
focus on the issue of gender because it has often not received due attention in 
attempts to address dating violence and is a central feature of dating violence (Lesko 
2000; Stein 1995).2 


GV/SH among teenagers has serious health consequences, including significantly 
poorer mental and physical health, and more trauma symptoms (Howard et al. 
2007a, 2007b; Molidor and Tolman 1998). Prevalence rates vary, but research on 
teen dating violence suggests that as many as 40–60% of teenagers experience 
dating violence, including sexual, physical, and psychological abuse (Foshee et al. 
1996; Hickman et al. 2004; Jouriles et al. 2009). 
The most consistent, standardized source for examining differences in rates of 
sexual and physical teen dating violence for girls compared to boys can be found 
in the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS), a comprehensive nationally 
representative survey about youth behaviors administered by the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention in conjunction with state departments of public 
health. Unfortunately, the administration of this survey is limited to students in 
grades 9–12, with some states or locales recently gathering data from eighth 
graders. Nonetheless, the national results from 2007 YRBS showed that for the 
2 While there are other potential demographic variables to examine (e.g., ethnicity), we focus on the topic 
of gender differences. Gender and the greater physical strength of males over females is a key aspect of 
dating violence (Stein 1995) and can be used by boys to control young girls. We believe the topic of 
gender is too complex to present with other demographic variables and would interfere with our goal of a 
parsimonious presentation. Given our use of a RCT design, we found that we have a balance across our 
treatment/control groups on the issue of ethnicity and other demographic variables. Given this balance, we 
are able to assess the independent effects of gender without simultaneously examining other demographic 
variables. 


question “hit, slapped or physically hurt on purpose by their boyfriend or 
girlfriend during the last 12 months” the frequency was 8.8% for girls and 11.0% 
for boys (victimization), and for the second of the two questions on TDV, “ever 
physically forced to have sexual intercourse in the past 12 months,” frequency 
was 11.3% of the girls, and 4.5% of the boys (however, this question does not 
acknowledge the relationship or age of 
(see www.cdc.gov/ 
HealthyYouth/yrbs/pdf/yrbs07_us_disparity_sex.pdf). Results from Ohio (the state 
of our research project) for the same questions in 2007 (whether your boyfriend or 
girlfriend hit, slapped or physically hurt you on purpose during the past 12 months) 
revealed a rate of 9.8% for males, and 9.7% for females; and for the question, 
“Have you ever been physically forced to have sexual intercourse when you did 
not want to” was 7.2% for the males and 13.0% for the females (see www.odh. 
ohio.gov/odhPrograms/chss/ad_hlth/YouthRsk/youthrsk1.aspx). 

One dimension of teen dating violence that is not captured by the YRBS is the 
factor of fear of being hit by one’s partner, and the injury that might occur. Girls are 
more likely than boys to report more fear related to GV/SH (Foshee 1996; O’Keefe 
and Treister 1998; Molidor et al. 2000). By the same token, girls are more likely to 
be injured by their male dating partner than boys are likely to be injured by their 
female dating partner (Bennett and Fineran 1998; Sugarman and Hotaling 1989; 
Wolfe et al. 2009). 
It is also useful to look at data about peer sexual harassment which is more 
ubiquitous and widespread than dating violence. Victims of sexual harassment, in 
addition to suffering from poorer mental and physical health, also exhibit greater 
school avoidance than those not sexually harassed (Fineran and Gruber 2004; 
Gruber and Fineran 2008; Larkin 1994). In comparison with boys who reported 
harassment, studies have found that girls fare consistently worse on such measures 
(Fineran and Gruber 2004; Gruber and Fineran 2008; AAUW 1993, 2001). Data 
from the most recent national study of 2,064 students in grades 8–11 indicate that 
83% of females experience sexual harassment from their male peers while male 
students also reveal high levels of sexual harassment in school (60–79%) (AAUW 
2001). 
the male students charge their male counterparts with 
perpetrating the majority of verbal harassment (AAUW 1993, 2001; Tolman et al. 
2003). Findings from the females suggest that the onset of their sexual harassment 
began in grade 6. Prevalence rates for sexual harassment suggest that it increases 
throughout middle school, indicating a need for early intervention (McMaster et al. 
2002; Pellegrini 2001). 

While girls and boys both experience high rates of GV/SH, they experience, think 
of, and react to GV/SH differently (O’Keefe and Treister 1998; Gruber and Fineran 
2008). First, girls are more likely than boys to be sexually victimized (Foshee 1996; 
Molidor et al. 2000; Wolitzky-Taylor et al. 2008), and sustain more relationship 
violence-related injuries than their male counterparts (Howard et al. 2007a, 2007b; 
Jackson et al. 2000; Makepeace 1987; Molidor and Tolman 1998; O’Keefe 1997). 
These studies have also revealed that, while males and females both perpetrate GV/ 
SH at high levels, the motivations (O’Keefe 1997; Mulford and Giordano 2008), 
attitudes (Jackson et al. 2000; LeJeune and Follette 1994) and consequences 
(Molidor and Tolman 1998; Wolitzky-Taylor et al. 2008) are often very different, 
with girls faring consistently worse on a number of physical (Foshee 1996; Malik 


et al. 1997; O’Keefe 1997; Watson et al. 2001; Fineran and Gruber 2004; Gruber and 
Fineran 2008; AAUW 1993, 2001) and emotional outcomes (Foshee 1996; O’Keefe 
and Treister 1998; Molidor et al. 2000). Teenage girls are more often killed by male 
dating partners (or ex-partners) than the reverse (Sousa 1999); data from the 
American Bar Association between 1993 and 1999 found that 22% of all homicides 
against females aged 16–19 were committed by an intimate partner (Blow 2009). 
Moreover, sexual risk behaviors, pregnancy, and suicidality are also associated with 
victimization in girls (Silverman et al. 2001; 2004). 

Prevention efforts in most school districts focus on violence in general terms (e.g., 
the gendered nature of school 
largely neglect 
gangs, delinquency, drugs) but 
violence (Stein 1995). Studies on teen GV/SH have focused on students in the 
eighth grade and higher (Foshee et al. 1996, 1998, 2000, 2001, 2005, 2007, 2008; 
Jaycox et al. 20063). While there have been numerous studies on risk factors for 
GV/SH perpetration over the past 20 years (see Mulford and Giordano 2008), GV/ 
SH data on sixth and seventh grades are sparse, with few teen GV/SH interventions 
having been evaluated rigorously (CDC 1998; Chalk and King 1998; Cornelius 
and Resseguie 2006; Hickman et al. 2004; Meyer and Stein 2004; Taylor et al. 
2010; Whitaker et al. 2006). Of these, most document at least a short-term positive 
change in knowledge and/or attitudes related to gender violence (Foshee et al. 
1996, 1998; 2000; Avery-Leaf et al. 1997; Lavoie et al. 1995; Macgowan 1997; 
Jaffe et al. 1992; Wolfe et al. 2009), while others show longer-term positive 
program effects (Foshee et al. 2004a, b, 2005; Foshee and Reyes 2009). 
In one of the more rigorously evaluated interventions, Wolfe et al.(2009) 
experimentally examined the 4R: Skills for Youth Relationships program with 
Canadian ninth graders. They found that after 21 sessions the program was able to 
reduce physical dating violence in the intervention group as compared to the control 
group. Safe Dates, a U.S.-based program for eighth and ninth graders designed and 
evaluated by Foshee et al. (1996, 1998, 2000, 2005), has also experimentally shown 
a reduction in long-term physical dating violence after only 10 sessions. Evidence of 
GV/SH in the eighth grade suggests that students in younger grades, specifically 
sixth and seventh grades, are important points of primary prevention before dating 
patterns have been set (Lonsway 1996; Mulford and Giordano 2008). 
In Foshee & Matthew’s (2007) review of GV/SH program evaluations, gender 
differences from some high quality experimental studies were summarized. In one of 
those studies, black male junior high students with high academic abilities showed 
the greatest and most significant gains (Macgowan 1997; Kraizer and Larson 1993). 
In the evaluation of Safe Dates, the researchers (Foshee and Langwick 2004) found 
that the program was equally effective in prevention perpetration for males and 
females and for white and minority adolescents (Foshee and Matthew 2007). Wolfe’s 
cluster randomized trial of 21 sessions conducted in health classes for ninth graders 
in 20 Canadian schools (1,722 students aged 14–15) on the topics of healthy 
3 The Jaycox et al. (2006) study is very different than our study in that it involved high school students, 
included three intervention sessions and was taught by lawyers. 


relationships, sexual health and substance use showed promising results, especially 
for boys (Wolfe et al. 2009). Physical dating violence (PDV) was lower in the 
intervention compared to the control group (9.8% vs 7.4%; adjusted odds ratio, 2.42; 
p = .05), and a significant group-to-sex interaction effect 
the 
intervention effect was greater in boys (PDV: 7.1% in controls vs 2.7% in 
intervention students) than in girls (12.1% vs 11.9%). However, the likelihood of 
replication in the US might be minimal given the pressures of high stakes testing that 
permeates U.S. schools and the corresponding constraints for implementing a 21- 
session curriculum. 

In an effort to curb the vast prevalence of GV/SH, as documented in the previous 
section, we evaluated two substantively distinct curricula on GV/SH prevention. In a 
prior analysis (Taylor et al. 2008, 2010), we found largely positive findings 
regarding the effectiveness of our interventions in reducing GV/SH compared to a 
control group. In this paper, we explore whether these largely positive findings 
remain for both girls and boys or works better for one over the other, as suggested by 
Wolfe et al. (2009). We had originally thought that girls would have experienced 
more sexual violence and therefore would be more receptive to our interventions. 
Moreover, we wondered if 
there were differences in the levels of violence 
perpetrated or experienced by girls or by boys. In the sections that follow, we 
describe our interventions and methods used in our study, followed by a review of 
our data analytic results on gender differences and its possible interaction effects 
with our interventions. 

The two curricula were (1) an interaction-based curriculum and (2) a law and justice 
curriculum. Also, a third set of classes served as the control condition that did not 
receive either of the two curricula designed by our team. Instead, 
the control 
condition received the standard health education offered by their respective school 
districts, which did not include dating violence prevention material. 
We developed the two treatments in close collaboration with the staff members 
from the three participating school districts and a local rape crisis center. Both 
curricula contained five lessons (designed to last 40 minutes each) and were taught 
over about five consecutive weeks. The lessons were taught by an experienced 
female educator from a local sexual assault center. This educator was the center’s 
manager of education services, and had extensive experience teaching violence 
prevention in schools. Since the lessons were written for middle school students, the 
classroom pedagogy had to engage them and not rely on simply didactic lessons. 
Although a longer program could have been developed, the project team decided to 
develop lessons that could be implemented within the typical time constraints that 
most schools faced. 
Our lessons concentrated on the definitions and applications of “personal space” 
and “boundaries”—notions that are synonymous with laws—distinguishing permis- 
sible behaviors from those that are not. From the obvious wall that serves as a 
boundary of a room, to a border that delineates one state or nation from another, to a 
more abstract use of boundaries employed in rule- and law-making, students have 


various opportunities to apply these concepts in activities themed around precursors 
to GV/SH. Both curricula began with the same lesson on the establishment of 
relationship boundaries through an activity that measures “personal space.” The 
distinctions between the two treatments (interaction-based, law and justice) were 
reflected in the questions that followed the activity during the first lesson. The law 
and justice curriculum prompted discussion about the consequences of not obeying 
boundaries (e.g., rules, laws). The interaction-based treatment centered on the ways 
in which one notices that boundaries have been crossed or violated, either in terms of 
transmitting oneself or understanding the ways in which someone else might indicate 
his or her boundaries had been crossed. 
More broadly, the interaction-based curriculum addressed GV/SH by focusing on 
setting and communicating boundaries in relationships; the formation of deliberate 
relationships/friendships and the continuum between friendship and intimacy; the 
determination of wanted/unwanted behaviors; and the role of the bystander as 
intervener in GV/SH incidents. The law and justice curriculum focused on laws, 
definitions, information, and data about penalties for sexual assault and sexual 
harassment as well as imparting results from research about the consequences for 
perpetrators of GV/SH. The law and justice intervention explored the concepts of 
laws/boundaries, plotting the shifting nature of personal space, considering laws as 
they apply by gender, and a final activity on myths and facts about sexual 
harassment. 
Very detailed instructions were included with each lesson. These instructions 
covered items such as ground rules (e.g., “no swear words”) as well as the length of 
time to devote to each activity within the class period. We carefully monitored the 
curricula implementation. As pointed out by Durlak and Dupre (2008), an 
assessment of implementation of an intervention is a critical aspect of a program 
evaluation. Based on the student surveys, observations by our team, and tracking 
logs maintained by the interventionist, the curricula were implemented as designed 
and planned.4 
The rationale for selecting these two curricula to test was based on the Theory of 
Reasoned Action (TRA). TRA is based on research that demonstrates that intentions 
to behave are immediate predecessors to specific actions, and proposes that attitudes 
toward and perceived norms about the desired behavior facilitate the intention to 
change, modify, or adopt a particular behavior (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein 
1967). Our interaction-based curriculum was designed to address negative attitudes 
and beliefs about dating violence, through interaction skill building, that in turn will 
lead to behavioral change. However, the law and justice curriculum was designed to 
change behavior more directly through a fact-based curriculum on the laws 
pertaining to dating violence. Knowledge of these laws and penalties was then 
expected to reduce violent behavior toward dating partners. Our use of TRA was 
based on the explanatory power of this theory, as demonstrated in a variety of fields 
for the past 30 years (Fores et al. 2002; O’Callaghan et al. 1997; McGahee et al. 
2000; Budd et al. 1983; Conner et al. 1998; de Vroome et al. 2000). 
4 A detailed description of the interventions and the roles of our project team members and project 
partners are provided in the project final report (see Taylor et al. 2008). 




This experiment was conducted in 2006 and 2007 with students in sixth and seventh 
grade classrooms from three suburban school districts in the Cleveland, Ohio area, 
including: 80 science classes, 17 social studies classes, 12 health classes and 14 
other classes. The 123 classrooms were drawn from three participating school 
districts from Shaker Heights City School District, Berea City School District, and 
Cleveland Heights-University Heights School District. All sixth and seventh grade 
classrooms from these three school districts were selected and participated in the 
random assignment process, and student survey process). We selected these school 
districts because they had large numbers of sixth and seventh grade classes (n>100) 
available for random assignment and the student body (n > 15,000) represented a 
diversity of ethnic groups to study the interventions. In total, seven schools from 
across these districts were included in the study (n=1,639 students across 123 study 
classrooms). 
With such a sample size, our study had a good degree of statistical power to find 
small to medium effect sizes. According to Cohen (1988), effect sizes can be 
classified in the following manner: Small effects =.25; medium effects =.75; large 
effects=1.25. Using Optimal Design developed by Raudenbush and Liu (2000), it 
was possible to calculate the statistical power of this HLM-based study (assuming an 
alpha of .05, a two-sided test, and an intraclass correlation coefficient of .15). This 
study had enough power to detect large, medium and small effect sizes, although the 
power did not quite reach the .80 threshold for very small effect sizes (power just 
below .7).5 
While we had 1,639 students in the study, not all the participants completed 
all of the questions on the study surveys across all the waves of the survey. 
Nevertheless, we were able to achieve a fairly high participation rate. At Wave 1, 
1,507 of 1,639 study eligible participants completed the survey (92%), at Wave 
2, we retained an 89% participation rate (1,460 of the original 1,639), and at 
Wave 3, we retained an 83% participation rate (1,356 of the original 1,639). As 
displayed in Table 1, our attrition of students was relatively balanced across the 
treatment and control groups. As reported in an earlier paper (Taylor et al. 2010), 
we found no differences in the survey participation rates across the Control, 
Interaction Treatment Group and Law and Justice Treatment Group for the three 
survey waves. 
We used a randomized control trial (RCT) design. RCTs are typically considered 
the best method for eliminating threats to internal validity in evaluating social 
policies and programs (Berk et al. 1985; Boruch et al. 1978; Campbell 1969; 
Campbell and Stanley 1963; Dennis and Boruch 1989). RCTs provide a strong 
counterfactual description of what would have happened to the treatment group if 
they had not been exposed to the treatment (Rubin 1974; Holland 1986). Random 
5 Due to resource constraints, our main interest was in detecting small to medium effect sizes, for anything 
below that level (given the time and resources to implement the program) might possibly be considered 
less meaningful for policy making purposes. 



Wave 1 
(preceding the intervention) 
Wave 2 
(period during the intervention) 
Wave 2 
(period during the intervention) 
Interaction 
treatment 
Law and 
justice 
treatment 
Control 
group 
Interaction 
treatment 
Law and 
justice 
treatment 
Control 
group 
Interaction 
treatment 
Law and 
justice 
treatment 
Control 
group 

































assignment was implemented at the classroom level,6 and we worked carefully to 
maintain the integrity of the assignment process (e.g., avoiding contamination). We 
established procedures to monitor and maintain the integrity of the classroom 
assignment process (and monitor for expectancy, novelty, disruption, and local 
history events). 
We used a stratified random allocation procedure (see Boruch 1997). Classes were 
classified by two relevant stratifying criteria (grade level and school).7 Also, given 
that our main question was whether treatment was more effective than no treatment, 
we randomly assigned about half of our classes (54%) to the control condition and 
the other half to receive an intervention (either the interaction-based or law and 
justice-based curriculum). Twenty-three percent of the classrooms (n=29) were 
assigned to treatment 1 (an interaction-based curriculum) conducted over a five- 
week period. Twenty-three percent of the classrooms (n=29) were assigned to 
treatment 2 (a law and justice-based curriculum) also conducted over a five-week 
period. Fifty-four percent of the classrooms (n=65) were assigned to the control 
condition. 
All classes assigned to treatment received their appropriate treatment, and the 
same held true for the control group (i.e., our study had no “overrides” or cases that 
did not follow the random assignment protocol). Also, as reported in Taylor et al. 
(2008), our RCT design produced largely equivalent treatment and control groups 
prior to the delivery of the intervention. That 
is, we found no pre-treatment 
differences between the Control, Interaction Treatment Group, and Law and Justice 
Treatment Group for a whole series of baseline variables [demographics (including 
gender), history of victimization or perpetration, experience with prevention 
programs, and history of dating] (Taylor et al. 2008). 
6 Logistically, it would not have been possible to take students out of their regular schedule and randomly 
assign them on an individual basis to new classes. Also, the funding necessary to assign a large number of 
schools (e.g., over 50 schools) randomly to our study conditions was not available. 
7 Although not strictly necessary, pre-stratification helps ensure that groups start out with some identical 
characteristics and assure that we have adequate numbers of classrooms in each of the cells for each 
participating school (see Boruch 1997). 



Student surveys were completed using paper and pencil, and were distributed by a 
member of the research team: (1) immediately before the assignment to one of the 
three study conditions, (2) immediately following after the treatment or control 
condition were completed, and (3) five to six months8 after their assignment to one 
of the three study conditions. To participate in the survey, we required the active 
written consent of the parents’ of the students, along with the verbal assent of the 
students. There were no apparent differences in the survey participation rates across 
the three comparison groups for the three survey waves. That is, all the groups 
participated (both parents consented and child assented to completing a survey) at a 
rate of about 75% for the baseline survey and 70% for the first and second follow-up 
surveys. Below is a brief description of our survey measures. In Taylor et al. (2008), 
we include a copy of the survey, and present a more detailed review of these 
measures, along with reliability scores. 

The survey included prevalence (yes/no) and incidence (number of times) questions 
on the experience of being a victim and/or perpetrator of sexual violence and non- 
sexual (physical) violence by/of peers,9 and people that you have dated.10 While the 
intervention was focused on reducing violence among dating partners, we examine 
this issue to assess if the intervention’s effect might extend to peers, as well as dating 
partners. The items for this survey were adapted from CDC’s Youth Risk Behavior 
Survey and from a study by Foshee et al. (1998). Physical violence items included: 
slapping or scratching; physically twisting an arm or bending back fingers; pushing, 
grabbing, shoving, or kicking somewhere on the body other than in the private parts; 
hitting with a fist or with something hard besides a fist; and threatening with a knife 
or gun. Sexual violence items included: pushing, grabbing, shoving, or kicking in 
the private parts; and making you touch their private parts or touching yours when 
you did not want them to. All of the victimization measures have Cronbach’s alpha 
scores above .71, except for the frequency measure of dating victimization in Wave 
2 which had a score of .60. All the violent perpetration measures have Cronbach’s 
alpha scores above .70. 

In order to address any missing data from partially completed questionnaires, we 
used multiple imputations in our analyses (Fichman and Cummings 2003). First, we 
8 School scheduling precluded us from doing all of the surveys at the six-month follow-up point in time. 
9 This was defined for students as, “People about the same age as you. They may be your classmates, kids 
in your school, neighborhood/community, and are both girls and boys the same age as you. You might or 
might not know them or think of them as your friends.” 
10 This was defined for students as, “People who you are ‘going with’, ‘dating,’ ‘going steady with’ or 
have ‘gone out with,’ ‘dated,’ or ‘gone steady with’ for at least a week. This group also includes anyone 
who is or was your boyfriend/girlfriend for at least a week.” 


created five multiply imputed datasets in SAS 9.1 using the PROC MI procedure. 
Secondly, we analyzed our datasets in HLM 6.0, which supports multiple 
imputations. To address all of our quantitative study aims we used HLM 6 software 
developed by Raudenbush et al. (2004). HLM provides a conceptual framework and 
a flexible set of analytic tools to analyze the special requirements of our data (i.e., 
students are nested within classes that are nested within schools). We estimated 
numerous HLM models examining the effects of GV/SH classes on our outcomes 
immediately after the GV/SH classes and at a six-month follow up. We examined a 
number of HLM models for the experience of being a victim and/or perpetrator of 
sexual violence and non-sexual (physical) violence from/to “peers” and “people that 
you have dated.” 

The first part of this section presents the background characteristics of our sample, 
including descriptive statistics on the distribution of our outcome measures. The 
subsequent section presents the substantive results of our multivariate HLMs for 
each of our outcome measures. 

The students in our study were from the sixth and seventh grades and were generally 
between the ages of 11 to 13 years old. Our study is unique in our use of such a 
young group to study GV/SH. That is, most GV/SH studies are done with students in 
the ninth grade through twelfth grades of high school. Next, we had slightly more 
girls (52%, n=831) in our sample than boys (48%, n=761).11 Approximately a 
quarter of our student sample were African American (27% or n=392), about half 
were Caucasian (52% or n=750), 3% were Asian (n=43), 3% were Hispanic (n= 
40), 2% Native American (n=32), and 13% multi-racial or other ethnicities (n=187). 
About a quarter of our sample (23% or n=288) also had prior experience with a 
violence prevention educational program. The majority of our sample (56% or n= 
705) had been in a dating relationship at least once in their lifetime (where the dating 
lasted longer than at least one week); about half of these students had either one or 
two dating partners (75% had five or fewer dating partners). Our sample consisted of 
a relatively large number of students who had already experienced dating violence in 
their lifetime prior to our study (28% or n=445). Also, 21% (n=334) of our sample 
reported in the baseline survey perpetrating at least one act of dating violence in their 
lifetime. 
To provide an overview of the distribution of our outcome measures, we 
present descriptive statistics for each of our main outcome measures for boys and 
girls in Table 2 for our baseline (Wave 1), time 2 point immediately after the 
11 As discussed earlier, not all the respondents completed all of the questions on the survey. For example, 
47 students did not answer the gender question on the survey. 













Q1. Have your peers… 
Prevalence of any violence 





























Q3. Has someone you have dated … 
Prevalence of any violence 











































Q4. Thinking about peers, have you… 
Prevalence of any violence 










































Q6. Thinking about people you have dated, have you… 
.21 (.71) 
Prevalence of any violence 










































intervention (Wave 2) and time 3 (Wave 3) five to six months post-intervention 
measures (see below). As a reference point for the reader, we present the baseline 
data, but our focus is on changes that occurred after the intervention. For each 
main outcome of “any” violence (inclusive of sexual and physical violence), sexual 


violence, and non-sexual 
(physical) violence we calculated prevalence and 
frequency scores. Prevalence was calculated by looking at the survey items in 
each domain and scoring student responses as “yes” and “no” and then summing 
these responses into a count of the number of times a student responded yes to 
each domain.12 For example, a value of 1.26 for peer victimization (the upper left- 
hand corner value) means that, on average, male students face 1.26 out of 7 types 
of victimization in Wave 2 [for the same measure girls experienced just under 1 
(.95) out of 7 types of victimization]. Also, on average, male students face .15 
sexual victimizations from their peers out of 2 types of sexual victimization. On 
average, students face 1.1 non-sexual victimizations from their peers out of the 5 
types of non-sexual victimization. Frequency was calculated by looking at the 
survey items in each domain and scoring student responses as the number of times 
they were victimized/ perpetrated violence, which means that the frequencies must 
always be higher than the prevalence measures.13 For example, a score of 1.83 
(second row, upper left-hand column) means that on average male students were 
victimized more than 3 times (1=1–3 victimizations) in Wave 2 (the period during 
the intervention). 
Overall, peer victimization is generally reported at the highest level by students 
followed by peer perpetration, dating victimization and dating perpetration. Based on 
Table 2, it can be seen that boys are experiencing higher level of victimization than 
girls for all categories across Waves 1, 2 and 3. also, boys are perpetrating more 
violence than girls in most of the categories from Table 2 (except for Wave 1 under 
dating perpetration and some of the categories under dating perpetration for Waves 2 
and 3). Our tests of whether these differences are statistically significant are 
conducted in the context of our HLM models (see next section) which are well 
suited to address the nested nature of our data. 

The student, classroom and school-level variables used in the analyses were selected 
from the student surveys and included a level 1 classroom variable of a baseline 
score for each respective outcome variable selected (e.g., when sexual violence at 
time 2 follow-up is the outcome variable than we included a baseline measure of 
sexual violence). Our level 2 student variables included: a variable noting the 
treatment assignment (i.e., treatment 1, treatment 2 and control group), a gender 
variable (0=male and 1=female), a gender × treatment interaction term, and a site 
12 Prevalence of “any” violence was the sum of all student responses for one domain, with a possible score 
of 7 for survey items a through g. Prevalence of sexual violence was the sum of all student responses for 
sexual violence, with a possible score of 2 for items d and f. Prevalence of non-sexual (physical) violence 
was the sum of all student responses for one domain, with a possible score of 5 for items a, b, c, e, and g. 
Each outcome measure represents a sum of the different types of violence individuals face/perpetrate. 
13 If a student scored “0”, they had 0 victimizations; 1=1-– victimizations; 2=4-– victimizations; 3=10+ 
victimizations. Each frequency measure represents a sum of the number of times students face violence on 
those measures. 


variable (coded as 1 to 7 for each school building).14 For each covariate introduced 
at the classroom level, it is centered at the grand mean for that variable.15 
We ran 48 HLM models and used an alpha level of .05 (with a two-tailed test). 
Table 3 (see Appendix 1) presents our HLM models, 
including covariates for 
gender,16 treatment assignment17 and gender × treatment. The tables include 
estimated beta coefficients, standard errors for each fitted model (the numbers in 
parentheses), and asterisks for p values that convey the level of statistical 
significance of the beta coefficients (*< .05, **< .01). 

We explored personal victimizations perpetrated by the respondent’s (1) peers and 
(2) individuals the respondent have dated. For each of these types of personal 
victimizations, we explored an overall victimization measure, sexual victimization, 
and non-sexual victimization. Within each of these three victimization measures, we 
explored prevalence post-intervention, and incidence/frequency post-intervention. 
Our victimization variable represents a sum of the seven types of victimization asked 
in our survey; 
therefore, a positive score is indicative of a greater level of 
victimization, while a negative number would indicate decreased levels. 

During the intervention period (Wave 2 within the interaction-based treatment 
model), we found that girls experienced less sexual victimization from peers than 
boys experienced from peers [β= −.044 (.021), p = .038], less “any” victimization 
from dates than boys experienced from dates [β=−.078 (.039), p =.046], and less 
non-sexual victimization prevalence [β=−.073 (.033), p =.026] from dates than boys 
experienced from dates and less non-sexual victimization frequency [β=−.109 
(.054), p <.05] from dates than boys experienced from dates. Over the same period, 
no statistically significant differences were observed for any of the treatment to 
control comparisons, nor were significant differences observed for the treatment 
multiplied by gender interaction terms for the victimization variables. 

Six months after the intervention (Wave 3), we found that girls experienced fewer 
incidents of “any” victimization from peers than boys [law and justice model β= −.439 
14 Site 1=Ford MS (Berea), Site 2=Roehm MS (Berea), Site 3=Monticello MS (CHUH), Site 4=this 
planned site did not participate in the experiment and was dropped from the analysis, Site 5=Wiley MS 
(CHUH), Site 6=Shaker Heights MS (Shaker Heights), and Site 7=Woodbury School (Shaker Heights) 
which served as the reference category. 
15 That is, for each school, the intercept of the level 1 model is adjusted for the linear regression of the test 
scores on that variable. In a sense, that puts all school means on an equal footing with respect to that 
variable. In the HLM setting, the adjusted intercepts can be described as “adjusted school means.” The 
variation among adjusted means will usually be less than the variation among the unadjusted means (see 
Raudenbush and Bryk, chapter 5 [2002]). 
16 Coded as female=1 and male=0. 
17 Coded as treatment=1 and control condition=0. 


(.193), p = .023], less sexual victimization prevalence from peers than boys [law and 
justice model β=−.067 (.032), p = .037], fewer incidents (frequency measure) of sexual 
victimization from peers than boys [interaction-based treatment model β=−.128 (.054), 
p = .017; law and justice model β=−.172 (.059), p = .004], fewer incidents of non- 
sexual victimization from peers than boys (law and justice model β=−.321 (.159), 
p = .044], less “any” victimization prevalence from dates than boys [interaction-based 
treatment model β=−.131 (.053), p = .013; law and justice model β=−.106 (.052), 
p = .040], fewer incidents of “any” victimization from dates than boys [interaction- 
based treatment model β=−.260 (.104), p = .013; law and justice model β=−.301 
(.110), p = .007], fewer incidents of sexual victimization from dates than boys [law and 
justice model β=−.074 (.037), p = .046], less non-sexual victimization prevalence from 
dates than boys [interaction-based treatment model β=−.119 (.040), p = .003; law and 
justice model β=−.096 (.040), p = .018], and fewer incidents of non-sexual 
victimization from dates than boys [law and justice model β=−.241 (.082), p = .004]. 
the 
interaction-based treatment compared to the control group for the prevalence 
[β=−.071 (.035), p = .048] and frequency [β=−.144 (.065), p = .030] of peer 
sexual violence victimization (indicating less sexual violence victimization for 
those in the interaction-based treatment compared to the control group). However, 
no significant differences were observed for the treatment multiplied by gender 
interaction terms for the victimization variables. 



We also explored violence perpetrated by respondents against their (1) peers and (2) 
people the respondent dated, including an overall violence perpetration measure, a 
sexual violence perpetration measure, and a non-sexual (physical) violence non- 
sexual (physical) violence perpetration measure. 

Over this period, while no statistically significant variables were observed for the 
peer perpetration dependent variable, a number of significant variables emerged for 
the dating perpetration dependent variable. During the intervention period (Wave 2 
within the interaction-based treatment model), we found that girls perpetrated less 
sexual dating victimization (prevalence) than boys [β=−.022 (.009), p = .015], and 
girls perpetrated fewer incidents of sexual dating victimization than boys (frequency) 
[β=−.037 (.016), p = .022]. 
Over the same period, statistically significant differences were observed for the 
interaction-based treatment [β = .071 (.030), p = .020] compared to the control group, 
and the law and justice treatment [β = .064 (.032), p = .048] compared to the control 
group for the prevalence of “any” violence against dating partners (suggesting that the 
interventions increased the perpetration of dating violence). Also of concern is that 
interaction-based treatment was associated with higher levels of the prevalence of 
perpetrating dating sexual violence [β = .20 (.010), p = .039]. Of note, no significant 
differences were observed for the treatment multiplied by gender interaction terms for 
the perpetration variables (indicating the treatment affected the girls and boys similarly). 



Six months after the intervention (Wave 3 within the law and justice treatment 
model), we found that girls perpetrated fewer incidents (frequency) of sexual 
peer victimization than boys [β = −.081 (.036), p = .024], and that girls 
perpetrated fewer incidents (frequency) of sexual dating victimization than boys 
[β =−.079 (.029), p = .007]. 
Over the same period, statistically significant differences were observed for the 
law and justice treatment [β=−.156 (.076), p = .043] compared to the control group 
for the prevalence of “any” peer violence (suggesting that 
the interventions 
decreased the perpetration of peer violence). Similarly, the law and justice treatment 
was associated with lower levels of the prevalence of perpetrating peer non-sexual 
(physical) violence [β=−.153 (.071), p = .034]. However, statistically significant 
differences were observed for the law and justice treatment [β = .187 (.087), 
p = .036] compared to the control group for the frequency of perpetrating “any” 
dating violence and the frequency of perpetrating dating sexual violence [β = .072 
(.032), p = .025]. These last two findings suggest that the interventions increased the 
perpetration of dating violence and dating sexual violence. Of note, no significant 
differences were observed for the treatment multiplied by gender interaction terms 
for the perpetration variables in Wave 3 (indicating the treatment affected the girls 
and boys similarly). 

In an earlier paper (see Taylor et al. 2010), we demonstrated the effectiveness of 
two approaches to youth GV/SH prevention programming. While most research on 
this topic has been on programs that target older middle/high school students, to 
serve as a primary prevention effort, we geared our intervention towards studying 
sixth and seventh grade students and found largely positive findings on 
effectiveness. In this paper, we explored whether these largely positive findings 
remain for both girls and boys, including whether girls experience higher levels of 
peer or dating violence than boys. Based on our analyses presented in this paper, 
the introduction of a gender variable substantively altered one of our original 
findings regarding whether our interventions reduced the perpetration of some 
forms of peer violence. Also, we found differences in levels of victimization and 
perpetration of peer and dating violence for boys compared to girls. Below we 
summarize our findings on whether treatment was more effective while controlling 
for gender effects, whether our treatment multiplied by gender interaction was 
statistically significant, and overall differences in rates of violence and perpetration 
for girls compared to boys. 

As reported in our earlier paper (see Taylor et al. 2010), we also found that six 
months after the intervention (Wave 3), statistically lower rates for the prevalence 
and frequency of peer sexual violence victimization for the interaction-based 


treatment. That is, we confirmed our earlier finding of less peer sexual violence 
victimization for those in the interaction-based treatment (but not law and justice- 
based treatment) compared to the control group even when controlling for the 
variable of gender, and gender multiplied by treatment interaction term. Regarding 
our primary research question, we observed no statistically significant differences for 
the treatment multiplied by gender interaction terms for any of the victimization 
variables in Waves 2 or 3. Our results suggest that treatment was equally as effective 
for girls and boys on this measure.18 This positive finding is encouraging in our 
efforts to reduce violence for all students, for our analyses identified that during the 
intervention period (Wave 2 within the interaction-based treatment model) boys 
experienced more sexual victimization from peers than girls experienced from 
peers,19 and more “any” victimization and non-sexual victimization from dates than 
girls experienced from dates. Also, six months after the intervention (Wave 3), boys 
were still experiencing more sexual victimization from peers than girls were 
experiencing from peers, but were also now experiencing more “any” victimization 
and non-sexual victimization from peers than girls. In terms of violence by dating 
partners, six months after the intervention, boys were still experiencing more “any” 
victimization and non-sexual victimization from dates than girls, but were also now 
experiencing more sexual victimization from dates than girls.20 

As reported in our earlier paper (see Taylor et al. 2010), we also found that during 
the intervention period (Wave 2) statistically higher levels of prevalence of “any” 
violence against a dating partner for both treatments compared to the control group, 
and that the interaction-based treatment was associated with higher levels of the 
prevalence of perpetrating sexual violence with dating partners (also at Wave 2). 
Along the same lines, we found statistically higher levels of the frequency of 
perpetrating “any” dating violence and sexual violence against dating partners six 
months after the intervention for the law and justice treatment compared to the 
control group. These findings suggest 
the interventions increased the 
perpetration of “any” dating violence and dating sexual violence. However, when 
we introduce a gender variable and a treatment multiplied by gender interaction term 
we now have an encouraging finding on our perpetration of peer violence measures. 
That is, six months after the intervention, statistically significant reductions were 
observed for the law and justice treatment compared to the control group for the 
prevalence of perpetrating “any” peer violence and peer non-sexual violence. 
Suggesting that the interventions decreased the perpetration of peer “any” violence 
and non-sexual violence. Below, we discuss the implications of our finding that 

18 Conversely, our findings also demonstrate our interventions to be equally as ineffective on all of our 
other non-significant victimization outcome measures. 
19 As stated in the measures section, our definition of sexual violence includes a range of very serious 
forms of sexual assault plus behaviors such as “butt grabbing.” 
20 Students were asked the following two questions regarding sexual violence: “Have any of your PEERS 
ever done any of the following things to you? Pushed, grabbed, shoved, or kicked you in your private 
parts? Made you touch their private parts or touched yours when you did not want them to? 


dating violence perpetration increased with treatment but 
perpetration decreased with one of the treatments. 

Regarding our primary research question, we observed no statistically significant 
differences for the treatment multiplied by gender interaction terms for any of the 
the 
perpetration outcome variables in Waves 2 or 3. Our results suggest 
treatment had similar effects on the girls and boys on all of our perpetration 
measures. Despite this finding, we did observe that during the intervention period 
(Wave 2 within the interaction-based treatment model), that boys perpetrated more 
sexual dating victimization (prevalence and frequency) than girls. Six months after 
the intervention (within the law and justice treatment model), we found that boys 
also perpetrated more incidents (frequency) of sexual victimization against peers and 
dating partners than girls. 


Both interventions were designed to prevent GV/SH. Two of our measures indicate 
that at least one of the interventions reduced peer sexual violence victimization or 
reduced peer perpetration. However, another measure indicated that dating 
perpetration increased. One possible explanation for the iatrogenic finding regarding 
dating violence perpetration is that as students were exposed to these lessons, they 
may have reflected on past behaviors associated with dating that had previously 
seemed normal, and now after the treatment, they viewed as acts of violence. 
However, the control group did not have any exposure to the interventions and likely 
continued to fail to identify their dating behavior as GV/SH. In the context of dating, 
students in the control group not exposed to the lessons might still have a hard time 
recognizing their behavior with dating partners as GV/SH, perhaps even believing 
that GV/SH is a normal part of a relationship. However, 
in the area of peer 
victimization or peer perpetration, the control group has fewer problems recognizing 
their behavior as GV/SH—leading to the result that one of the treatment groups has a 
lower rate of peer victimization and a lower rate of peer perpetration than the control 
group. Under this rationale, the interventions might have affected the student’s 
sensitivity to the problem of GV/SH, and it made it more likely for them to identify 
and report certain dating behaviors as GV/SH. It is possible that this iatrogenic 
finding (increase in dating violence perpetration) is due to reporting issues as 
opposed to actual behavioral changes in GV/SH levels. The fact that there was not 
also an increase in dating victimization supports the possibility that some students 
might have exaggerated their reporting of violence or were more sensitized to 
recognizing certain behaviors as GV/SH. That is, if perpetration increased, we would 
likely have seen an increase in victimization (but we did not). Future research will 
need to consider this type of reporting problem, and design measurement strategies 
to disentangle these issues (e.g., build in questions distinguishing between actual 
behavioral changes and perceptual changes about behavior). 

this is just an anomalous finding. With two 
measures indicating that peer victimization and peer perpetration decreased for 
one of the treatment groups, and only one measure suggesting an increase in 
the iatrogenic finding could be a 
dating violence associated with treatment, 
spurious result. 



Overall, we observed in our study data that boys are more involved in violence than 
girls: both as victims and perpetrators. Boys experienced significantly more of all 
three types of victimization from peers and dating partners compared to what girls 
experienced at the hands of their peers and dating partners.21 As perpetrators, boys 
committed more sexual victimization against peers (Wave 2 only) and more sexual 
victimization against dating partners (Waves 2 and 3) than girls did as perpetrators. 
Our findings on perpetration are congruent with findings showing that boys are more 
physically aggressive than girls (Dodge et al. 2006; Foshee and Matthew 2007; 
Wolfe et al. 2009). Our finding of greater involvement of boys in violence compared 
to girls is also consistent with the general criminological literature of males more 
likely to be both the perpetrators and victims of violence than females.22 Girls may 
be more concerned with conformity and following school rules, and care more about 
“not getting in trouble.” Girls that perpetrate violence may get more noticed, 
especially when they act in sex role atypical or sexually deviant behavior (Stein 
1995; Brown et al. 2003, 2007; Chesney-Lind 2005). 
We were surprised to observe that boys were more likely to be victims of sexual 
violence than girls. One possibility is that schools are more geared to combat sexual 
violence against girls but largely ignore boys that are sexually victimized by either girls 
or boys. Schools may be inadvertently sending the wrong measure to boys. Boy victims 
are told to “walk it off.” Boy perpetration of violence may be dismissed as “boys being 
boys.” Another possibility relates to a limitation in our study measures of sexual 
violence. Our measure of sexual violence includes a range of very serious forms of 
sexual assault but also behaviors such as pushing, grabbing, shoving, or kicking 
someone in their private parts. These items are all in one of our survey questions and 
cannot be disentangled. Therefore, it may be that boys are experiencing more behaviors 
such as “butt grabbing” as opposed to rape. Future research will need to consider 
including more detailed measures of sexual violence in the student surveys.23 

The many non-significant findings and both positive and iatrogenic findings 
suggests that there is likely a need for further refinements in our interventions. 
21 More specifically, boys experienced more sexual victimization, “any” victimization (Wave 3 only) and 
from peers, and more “any” victimization, non-sexual 
non-sexual victimization (Wave 3 only) 
victimization, and sexual victimization (Wave 3 only) from dating partners than girls. 
22 Based on data from the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) from 1973 to 2006, males have 
experienced higher rates of victimization for violence than females for all types of violent crime except 
rape/sexual assault (see http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/glance/vsx2.htm). Also, males perpetrate much more 
crime than females regardless of whether the data analyzed are arrest rates, victimization reports on 
characteristics of offenders, or self-reports of criminal behavior (Heimer 2000). 
23 However, this will be a real challenge. Based on our experience working in schools, districts are very 
concerned about including sexual assault measures on surveys due to the potential negative feedback they 
may receive from parents. Researchers may need to work with parent groups to explain the rationale for 
these measures and carefully work through the wording of these items on surveys to get approval for more 
detailed items. 


Future research should further investigate the interaction-based versus law and 
justice based curricula to provide further information as to which components are 
most successful or deleterious in reducing GV/SH. It would also be important to 
learn if booster sessions might be needed to enhance the intervention or if the 
curricula need to be longer than five sessions. We might also consider expanding 
the target of our intervention to saturate the whole middle school environment to 
include the 8th grade, as well as the sixth and seventh grades. Along with some 
changes to the intervention, future research will also need to consider if the 
effects detected at up to six months post intervention hold up after a year or 
more post intervention. Longer longitudinal research might help us sort through 
our mixed findings (e.g., perhaps the positive findings will continue to be 
measured but the iatrogenic findings may dissipate). Future researchers might 
also consider adding a qualitative component involving detailed interviews with 
students receiving the intervention to explore any possible iatrogenic effects. For 
example, is the intervention leading to real negative results or just increasing the 
reporting of it by those in the intervention? 


On balance, we believe we have mixed findings regarding the efficacy of our 
interventions in reducing perpetration. First, we have many non-statistically 
significant findings. As discussed earlier, with a sample of 1,639 students across 
123 study classrooms, we had a good degree of statistical power to find small to 
medium effect sizes. Therefore, our absence of statistically significant findings 
could be a reflection of 
this type of 
prevention programming can have, as opposed to a by-product of one of our 
study features. Next, while two of our measures indicate that at least one of the 
interventions reduced peer sexual violence victimization or 
reduced peer 
perpetration, another measure indicated that dating perpetration increased. To 
through these mixed findings, more experimental research is needed to 
sort 
provide greater clarity to our 
findings in additional cities. However, some 
modifications may be needed in the tested interventions, as discussed above, to 
address the possibility of iatrogenic results. Also, additional study measures 
should be incorporated to address the possibility of iatrogenic results and help 
document why they may be emerging. 

Nevertheless, there is some encouraging news based on our results. We now 
have an emerging sense of the types of lessons and pedagogy that can be helpful 
for students in sixth and seventh grades, under certain circumstances, in the area 
of reducing student-to-student violence. We also observed that the treatment had 
similar effects on girls and boys. There are positive implications to this finding, 
given our corresponding results that boys are more involved in violence than 
girls (both as victims and perpetrators). That is, we are now hopeful that building 
on our research, school districts will be in a better position to adopt interventions 
and then observe reductions in student-to-student violence with both boys and 
girls. 







Interaction-based 
treatment 
Law and 
Justice 
Interaction-based 
treatment 




























−.032 (.093) 
−.010 (.078) 
−.232 (.159) 
−.151 (.148) 
−.048 (.128) 
−.309 (.265) 

.074 (.087) 
−.013 (.164) 

.013 (.140) 
−.060 (.271) 
−.036 (.110) 
−.084 (.101) 

−.250 (.224) 
−.257 (.180) 

.013 (.027) 
−.044 (.021) * 
−.024 (.045) 
.010 (.026) 
−.020 (.022) 
−.071 (.035) * 
−.046 (.031) 


.007 (.102) 
−.129 (.097) 
−.107 (.215) 
.029 (.224) 
−.439 (.193) * 
−.158 (.419) 
−.008 (.036) 
−.067 (.032) * 
−.020 (.068) 
.000 (.039) 
−.058 (.033) 
−.008 (.071) 

.011 (.069) 
−.204 (.141) 
−.156 (.127) 
−.019 (.111) 
−.303 (.232) 
.006 (.039) 
−.022 (.033) 
−.144 (.065) * 
−.128 (.054) * 
.010 (.071) 
−.172 (.059) ** 




.070 (.076) 
−.072 (.146) 
.027 (.091) 
−.072 (.086) 
−.035 (.168) 
.019 (.084) 
−.094 (.082) 
−.090 (.177) 

.015 (.124) 
−.179 (.241) 
−.244 (.222) 
−.259 (.180) 

.034 (.179) 
−.321 (.159) * 
−.231 (.337) 



.024 (.045) 
−.078 (.039) * 
−.108 (.082) 
.003 (.043) 
−.019 (.041) 
.062 (.058) 
−.131 (.053) * 
.022 (.055) 
−.106 (.052) * 











.007 (.066) 
−.112 (.060) 
−.037 (.122) 
−.006 (.018) 
−.008 (.014) 
−.028 (.029) 
−.002 (.065) 
−.040 (.058) 
.032 (.109) 
−.260 (.104) * 
.045 (.116) 
−.301 (.110) ** 





.011 (.021) 
−.016 (.019) 


.011 (.020) 
−.018 (.018) 







Interaction-based 
treatment 
Law and 
Justice 
Interaction-based 
treatment 

−.007 (.024) 
−.004 (.018) 
−.031 (.038) 


.017 (.041) 
−.049 (.038) 
.027 (.040) 
−.074 (.037) * 

























.035 (.036) 
−.073 (.033) * 
−.079 (.069) 
.020 (.058) 
−.109 (.054) * 
−.001 (.108) 

.054 (.060) 
−.004 (.126) 
−.042 (.117) 
−.020 (.100) 



















.007 (.015) 
−.003 (.032) 
.023 (.021) 
−.004 (.021) 
−.018 (.044) 



−.057 (.114) 
−.033 (.095) 

.009 (.036) 
−.031 (.034) 
.053 (.044) 
−.119 (.040) ** 
.010 (.043) 
−.096 (.040) * 



−.003 (.056) 
−.063 (.050) 
−.106 (.148) 
−.102 (.134) 
.019 (.086) 
−.241 (.082) ** 




.012 (.061) 
−.116 (.133) 
−.006 (.078) 
−.053 (.076) 

−.156 (.076) * 
−.064 (.073) 
−.057 (.161) 
−.043 (.130) 
−.046 (.100) 
−.106 (.148) 
−.102 (.134) 



.009 (.014) 
−.005 (.027) 
−.012 (.018) 
−.028 (.018) 



−.034 (.034) 
−.045 (.033) 


.000 (.076) 
−.003 (.057) 
−.114 (.124) 
.007 (.075) 
−.030 (.068) 

−.040 (.125) 
−.070 (.093) 

−.066 (.137) 
−.061 (.117) 
−.020 (.256) 
−.193 (.144) 
−.165 (.141) 
−.249 (.303) 
−.001 (.019) 
−.034 (.019) 
−.005 (.039) 
.004 (.037) 
−.081 (.036) * 
−.033 (.074) 
−.153 (.071) * 
−.037 (.065) 
−.048 (.144) 
−.194 (.129) 
−.098 (.120) 
−.208 (.261) 





.022 (.026) 
−.051 (.057) 
.037 (.030) 
−.052 (.063) 
.059 (.039) 
−.003 (.036) 
−.024 (.077) 

.006 (.040) 
−.007 (.084) 






Interaction-based 
treatment 
Law and 
Justice 
Interaction-based 
treatment 

.187 (.087) * 
−.091 (.082) 
−.151 (.174) 
.031 (.015) 
−.019 (.014) 
−.018 (.030) 





.005 (.039) 
−.104 (.086) 

.035 (.042) 
−.053 (.086) 
.055 (.062) 
−.042 (.058) 
−.020 (.123) 









.020 (.010) * 
−.022 (.009) * 
−.025 (.019) 
.017 (.010 
−.012 (.010) 

.019 (.015) 
−.012 (.013) 
−.003 (.029) 
.037 (.019) 
−.037 (.016) * 
−.047 (.034) 
.024 (.016) 
−.020 (.016) 
−.005 (.032) 
.019 (.025) 
−.040 (.023) 

.072 (.032) * 
−.079 (.029) ** 
−.067 (.062) 






.048 (.027) 
−.029 (.052) 
.048 (.027) 
−.055 (.057) 
.015 (.029) 
−.025 (.061) 





.047 (.036) 
−.063 (.078) 
.056 (.037) 
−.051 (.080) 
.003 (.044) 
−.041 (.094) 







.113 (.066) 
−.004 (.062) 
−.090 (.130) 












Blow, C. M. (2009, February 12), Love Shouldn’t Hurt. New York Times. http://blow.bolgs.nytimes.com/ 
Boruch, R. F. (1997). Randomized experiments for planning and evaluation: A practical guide. Thousand 









Budd, R., Bleiker, S., & Spencer, C. (1983). Exploring the use and non-use of marijuana as reasoned 
actions: An application of Fishbein and Ajzen’s methodology. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 11, 
217–224. 
Campbell, D. T. (1969). Reforms as experiments. The American Psychologist, 24, 409–429. 
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. S. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for research. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (1998). Measuring violence-related attitudes, beliefs, 
and behaviors among youths: A compendium of assessment tools. Atlanta: CDC, National Center for 
Injury Prevention and Control. 
Chalk, R., King, P.A., & Eds. (1998). Violence in Families: Assessing Prevention and Treatment 
Programs. Committee on the Assessment of Family Violence Interventions Board on Children, Youth, 
and Families. 
Chesney-Lind (2005). Girls gone wild? hardly. Boston Globe. 
Cohen, J. (1988), Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (2nd edn) New York: Academic . 
Conner, M., Sherlock, K., & Orbell, S. (1998). Psychosocial determinants of ecstasy use in young people 



de Vroome, E. M. M., Stroebe, W., Sandfort, T. G. M., & van Griensven, G. J. P. (2000). Safer sex in 
social context: Individualistic and relational determinants of AIDS preventive behavior among gay 
men. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 11, 2322–2340. 


Dodge, K.A., Coie, J.D., & Lynam, D (2006). Aggression and antisocial behavior in youth. In W. Damon 
(Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and 
personality development (6th ed., pp. 719-788). New York: Wiley. 
Durlak, J. A., & Dupre, E. P. (2008). Implementation matters: A review of research on the influence of 
implementation on progam outcomes and the factors affecting the implementation. American Journal 
of Community Psychology, 41, 327–350. 


Fineran, S., & Gruber, J.E. (2004). The impact of sexual harassment victimization on the mental and 
physical health and coping responses of 8th grade students. Paper given at the 8th Annual Conference 
for the Society for Social Work and Research, New Orleans 
Fishbein, M. (1967). Readings in attitude theory and measurement. In K. Glanz, F. M. Lewis, & B. K. 
Rimer (Eds.), Health behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 257–266). 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 






Foshee, V.A. & Matthew, R.A. (2007). Adolescent dating abuse perpetration: A review of findings, 
methodological limitations, and suggestions for future research. In Flannery, D., Vazsonyi, A., & 
Walkman, R. (eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Violent Behavior, Cambridge Univ Press 
Foshee, V. A. & Reyes, M. L. (2009). Primary prevention of adolescent dating abuse: When to begin, 
whom to target, and how to do it. In: Whitaker, D. & Lutzker, J. (eds.), Preventing Partner Violence, 
American Psychological Association, pp 141–168. 
Foshee, V. A., Linder, G. F., Bauman, K. E., Langwick, S. A., Arriaga, X. B., Heath, J. L., McMahon, P. 
M., & Bangdiwala, S. (1996) The safe dates project: theoretical basis, evaluation design, and selected 
baseline findings. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 12(5 Suppl), 39–47. 
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Arriaga, X. B., Helms, R. W., Koch, G. G., & Linder, G. F. (1998). An 
evaluation of Safe Dates, an adolescent dating violence prevention program. American Journal of 
Public Health, 88, 45–50. 
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Greene, W. F., Koch, G. G., Linder, G. F., & MacDougall, J. E. (2000). The 
Safe Dates program: 1-year follow-up results. American Journal of Public Health, 90, 1619–1622. 





Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Ennett, S. T., Linder, F., Benefield, T., & Suchindran, C. (2004a). 
Assessing the long-term effects of the Safe Dates Program and a booster in preventing and 
reducing adolescent dating violence victimization and perpetration. American Journal of Public 
Health, 90(4), 619–624. 
Foshee, V., Benefield, T. S., Ennett, S. T., Bauman, K. E., & Suchindran, C. (2004b). Longitudinal 
Predictors of Serious Physical and Sexual Dating Violence Victimization during Adolescence. 
Preventive Medicine, 39, 1007–1101. 
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Ennett, S. T., Suchindran, C., Benefield, T., & Linder, G. F. (2005). 
Assessing the effects of the dating violence prevention program “Safe Dates” using random 
coefficient regression modeling. Prevention Science, 6, 245–258. 
Foshee, V. A., Bauman, K. E., Linder, F., Rice, J., & Wilcher, R. (2007). Typologies of adolescent dating 
violence: identifying typologies of adolescent dating violence perpetration.Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence, 22, 498–519. 
Foshee, V. A., Karriker-Jaffe, K. J., McNaughton Reyes, H. L., Ennett, S. T., Suchindran, C., Bauman, K. 
E., & Benefield, T. S. (2008). What accounts for demographic differences in trajectories of adolescent 
dating violence? An examination of intrapersonal and contextual mediators. Journal of Adolescent 
Health, 42, 596–604. 


Heimer, K. (2000). “Changes in the Gender Gap in Crime and Women’s Economic Marginalization.” Pp. 
427-483 in Criminal Justice 2000 Volume 1- The Nature of Crime: Continuity and Change. In: Gary 
LaFree (ed.). Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice. 
Hickman, L. J., Jaycox, L. H., & Aranoff, J. (2004). Dating violence among adolescents: Prevalence, 
gender distribution, and prevention program effectiveness. Trauma, Violence & Abuse, 5, 123–142. 
Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 









Jaycox, L. H., McCaffrey, D., Eiseman, E., Aronoff, J., Shelley, G.A.,Collins, R.L., & Marshall, G.N. 
Impact of a school-baseddating violence prevention program among Latino teens:a 
(2006). 
randomized controlled effectiveness trial. Journal ofAdolescent Health, 39, 694–704. 


Kraizer, S., & Larson, C. L. (1993). Dating violence: Intervention and prevention for teenagers. Tulsa: 
National Resource Center for Youth Services, College of Continuing Education, University of 
Oklahoma. 







Lesko, N. (ed.). (2000) Masculinities at School. London: Sage. 
Lonsway, K. (1996). Preventing acquaintance rape through education. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 





















O’Callaghan, F., Chant, D., Callan, V., & Baglioni, C. (1997). Models of alcohol use by young adults: An 
examination of various attitude-behavior theories. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58, 502–506. 
O’Keefe, M. (1997). Predictors of dating violence among high school students. Journal of Interpersonal 



Pellegrini, A. D. (2001). A longitudinal study of heterosexual relationships, aggression, and sexual 
harassment during the transition from primary school through middle school. Applied Developmental 
Psychology, 22, 119–133. 






Silverman, J. G., Raj, A., Mucci, L. A., & Hathaway, J. E. (2001). Dating Violence against Adolescent 
Girls and Associated Substance Use, Unhealthy Weight Control, Sexual Risk Behavior, Pregnancy, 
and Suicidality. Journal of the AMA, 286(5), 572–579. 






Sugarman, D. B., & Hotaling, G. T. (1989). Dating violence: Prevalence, context, and risk markers. In M. 
A. Pirog-Good & J. E. Stets (Eds.), Violence in dating relationships (pp. 3–32). New York: Praeger. 
Taylor, B., Stein, N., Mack, A.R., Horwood, T.J., & Burden, F. (2008). Experimental Evaluation of 
Gender Violence/Harassment Prevention Programs in Middle Schools. Final Report. National Institute 
of Justice. 
Taylor, B., Stein, N., & Burden, F. (2010). The effects of gender violence/harassment prevention programming 
in middle schools: a randomized experimental evaluation. Violence and Victims, 25(2), 202–223. 
Tolman, D. L., Spencer, R., Rosen-Reynoso, M., & Porche, M. V. (2003). Sowing the Seeds of Violence in 
Heterosexual Relationships: Early Adolescents Narrate Compulsory Heterosexuality. Journal of 
Social Issues, 59(1), 159–178. 


Whitaker, D. J., Morrison, S., Lindquist, C., Hawkins, S. R., O'Neil, J. A., Nesius, A. M., et al. (2006). A 
critical review of interventions for the primary prevention of perpetration of partner violence. 
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 11(2), 151–166. 
Wolfe, D. A., Crooks, C., Jaffe, P., Chiodo, D., Hughes, R., Ellis, W., et al. (2009). A School-based 
program to prevent adolescent dating violence: a cluster randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics & 
Adolescent Medicine, 163(8), 692–699. 
Wolitzky-Taylor, M. A., Ruggiero, K. J., Danielson, C. K., Resnick, H. S., Hanson, R. F., Smith, D. W., et 
al. (2008). Prevalence and correlates of dating violence in a national sample of adolescents. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 755–762. 


Bruce G. Taylor Ph.D., is a Principal Research Scientist with NORC at University of Chicago. He has 
conducted studies in the areas of policing, technology and officer safety, school violence prevention, violent 
offenders, victimization, and dynamics of drug markets. His current research examines the effectiveness of a 
dating violence prevention program in schools, dynamics of drug markets, license plate recognition devices in 
reducing auto theft, the integration of crime analysis into patrol work, community policing self-assessment tools, 
officer use of body armor, and a study on officer road safety. He received his doctorate from Rutgers University. 
Nan Stein Ed.D., has been a senior research scientist at Wellesley College Center for Research on Women 
since 1992. For nearly 30 years, her research has focused on sexual harassment and teen dating violence in 
K-12 Schools, and she is the author of numerous book chapters and articles published in law review 
journals and scholarly journals, as well as op-ed pieces in the mainstream press and curriculum materials 
for schools. She also serves as an expert witness in school sexual harassment lawsuits. 
Frances Frick Burden received a Ph.D. in Crime, Law and Justice from Penn State University and a M.P. 
P. in Public Policy from the College of William and Mary. Currently, she is working as an independent 
consultant with her husband, William E. Pate II, at their company Ad Hoc Analytics. Dr. Burden has 
conducted research across a broad spectrum of social science issues, including projects examining 
neighborhood effects upon individuals, evaluations of school-based interventions, and spatial examina- 
tions of poverty in rural areas. 
