Brief Communication
Feasibility of a Mobile Phone-Based Surveillance
for Surgical Site Infections in Rural India
Ashish Pathak, DNB, PhD,1–3 Shailendra Sharma, MS,4
Megha Sharma, MSc, PhD,1,5 Vijay K. Mahadik, DCH,6
and Cecilia Sta˚lsby Lundborg, PhD1
1Global Health/IHCAR, Department of Public Health Sciences,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Departments of 2Paediatrics, 4Surgery, and 5Pharmacology,
Ruxmaniben Deepchand Gardi Medical College, Ujjain, Madhya
Pradesh, India.
3Department of Women and Children’s Health, International
Maternal and Child Health Unit, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
6Ruxmaniben Deepchand Gardi Medical College, Ujjain, Madhya
Pradesh, India.
Abstract
Objectives: To assess the feasibility of using mobile com-
munication technology in completing a 30-day follow-up of
surgical site infection (SSI). Subjects and Methods: SSIs are
infections occurring up to 30 days after an operative procedure.
This prospective exploratory study was conducted in a cohort of
patients who were admitted and operated on in the general sur-
gery wards of a rural hospital in India from October 2010 to June
2011. At the time of discharge, all patients were requested to
follow-up in the surgical outpatient clinic at 30 days after surgery.
If this was not done, a mobile phone-based surveillance was done
to complete the follow-up. Results: The mean age of the 536
operated-on patients was 40 years (95% confidence interval [CI],
38–41 years). The mean duration of hospital stay was 10.7 days
(95% CI, 9.9–11.6 days). Most (81%) operated-on patients were
from rural areas, and 397 (75%) were male. Among the operated-
on patients the ownership of mobile phones was 75% (95% CI,
73–78%). The remaining 25% of patients (n=133) used a shared
mobile phone. For 380 patients (74.5%) the follow-up was
completed by mobile phones. The SSI rate at follow-up was 6.3%
(n=34). In 10 patients, an SSI was detected over the mobile
phone. Conclusions: Mobile communication technology is feasible
to be used in rural settings to complete case follow-up for SSIs.
Key words: surgical site infections, surveillance, mobile
phones, rural, India
Introduction
S
urgical site infections (SSIs) are one of the most
frequent healthcare-associated infections.1 The SSI
rates are 2–20 times higher in low- and middle-
income countries compared with high-income coun-
tries.1 However, there is a scarcity of studies done in low- and
middle-income countries.2 Inability to set up a surveillance
system for SSI can, to a large extent, explain the scarcity of
studies in resource-constrained settings. For completing the
surveillance for SSI, a patient is required to be followed up for
30 days postoperatively.3 Most patients in resource-constrained
settings like those in India come to a surgical facility from
widely dispersed geographical areas, as facilities for surgery are
not easily available. Follow-up studies are therefore difficult to
perform, as a majority of patients do not return. This incomplete
follow-up is the main hindrance to SSI surveillance.
Because India has one of the largest expanding networks of
mobile phones in the world, we decided to assess the feasibility
of using mobile communication technology for completion of
follow-up for SSI surveillance in a rural hospital in India.
Subjects and Methods
STUDY SETTING
This prospective, exploratory study was conducted in the
90-bed general surgery ward of Chandrikaben Rashmikant
Gardi Hospital, a 600-bed teaching hospital associated with
Ruxmaniben Deepchand Gardi Medical College (RDGMC),
Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, India. The time period of the study
was from October 2010 to June 2011. Chandrikaben Rash-
mikant Gardi Hospital is located 6 km outside Ujjain City and
caters predominantly to the rural population. The patients
included in the study traveled an average distance of 31 km
(range, 0.4–440 km) to the hospital. Most (70%) patient vis-
its were unscheduled; however, most surgeries (90%) were
planned. Four surgery clinical units managed the admitted
ª The Author(s) 2015; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits any noncommercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
946 TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH
NOVEMBER 2015
DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2014.0199

patients. Each unit consists of at least one professor or asso-
ciate professor, one assistant professor, and three to four
residents. There were four operating theaters available during
the study period.
DATA COLLECTION PROCEDURE
For SSI surveillance a trained study-assistant filled a pre-
designed form containing SSI risk factors. Details of methods
and risk factors for SSI in a larger cohort have been published
elsewhere.4 Table 1 shows the template of the data collection
form. The study-assistant also collected phone numbers either
of self-owned or of a shared mobile number at the time of
discharge. For postdischarge SSI surveillance, patients were
asked to return for follow-up within 1 week of completing the
30-day postsurgery period. Those patients who did not return
for follow-up within the stipulated time were contacted on
their mobile phones for an interview regarding the patient’s
surgical site to complete the SSI surveillance.
To operationalize the actual phone calls, we made a diary of
the calendar year with the patient’s name in the case of self-
owned mobile phones or the name of the patient’s relative or
friend having the shared mobile phone. The mobile phone
numbers were noted at the time of discharge from the hospital.
The patients were reached on their mobile phones within 1
week after the 30-day period postsurgery, so as to give the
patients a chance to complete the physical follow-up. During
the mobile phone contact, the study-assistant asked questions
regarding the general well-being of the patient, including the
current condition of the wound, in the local language, Hindi.
Specific questions were asked regarding wound dehiscence
and purulent discharge from the wound. If wound infection
was suspected, the patient was requested to visit the surgery
Table 1. Summary of the Data Collection Form Filled
in for All Patients Undergoing Surgery at the Rural
Hospital in Ujjain, India
DATA
PARAMETER
Patient-related
 Age (years): < 18, > 18–35, > 35–50,
> 50–65, > 65
 Sex: male, female
 Chronic disease (present/absent): tuberculosis,
heart disease, renal disease, hepatic disease, diabetes
 Immunosuppression (yes/no)
 History of smoking (present/absent)
 ASA score: I/II, III/IV, and Va
Surgery-related
 Type of surgery: upper and lower gastrointestinal
surgery, genitourinary surgery, skin surgery and minor
procedures, superspecialty surgery, exploratory
laparotomy, and multiple operations
 Nature of surgery: elective operation,
emergency operation
 Wound classification: clean/clean-contaminated
wound, contaminated/dirty wound
 Duration of surgery: < 60 min, > 60 min
 Drains inserted
 Preoperative shower
 Hair removal and method
 Hypoxia during surgery
 Oxygen administration during surgery
Healthcare-related
 Dates of admission, surgery, and discharge
 Duration of preoperative stay: 0–3 days,
4–7 days, 8–14 days, > 15 days
 Duration of postoperative stay: 0–3 days,
4–7 days, 8–14 days, > 15 days
 Previous hospitalization
 Preoperative infection
 Dates of start and end of antibiotic administration
 Antibiotic administration
 History of antibiotic use
Follow-up
 Postoperative day dressing was opened
 Method of follow-up: appointment or mobile phone
 Wound on visual inspection (actual appointment
or mobile phone): healthy/infected
 Characteristics of infected wound: warmth,
redness, swelling, pain
 SSI detected on visual impression
on appointment (yes/no)
Table 1. continued
DATA
PARAMETER
 SSI detected by mobile phone image (yes/no)
 Patient outcome: SSI detected/not detected
 SSI confirmed by Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention guidelines (yes/no)
 Type of SSI: superficial incisional primary,
superficial incisional secondary, deep incisional
primary, deep incisional secondary
aAmerican Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification: class I–II, a normal
healthy patient or a patient with mild systematic disease; class III–V, a patient
with severe systematic disease, a patient with severe systematic disease that is
a constant threat to life, or a moribund patient who is not expected to survive
without the operation.
SSI, surgical site infection.
SURGICAL SITE INFECTION SURVEILLANCE BY MOBILE PHONES
ª M A R Y A N N L I E B E R T , I N C .  VOL. 21
NO. 11  NOVEMBER 2015
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 947

outpatient clinic for a review. All patients who were ap-
proached agreed to participate in the study.
ETHICAL STATEMENT AND DATA MANAGEMENT
The Ethical Committee of Ruxmaniben Deepchand Gardi
Medical College approved the study (approval number 114/
2010). Informed verbal consent was obtained from all study
participants prior to enrollment.
EpiData version 3.1 software (EpiData Association, Odense,
Denmark) was used for data entry, and STATA version 12.0
software (StataCorp, College Station, TX) was used for data
processing and analysis. Descriptive statistics were calculated.
The SSI rate was calculated with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs), and a value of p < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
In total, 536 patients were operated on during the study
period; among them, 397 (75%) were male. The mean age of
the operated-on patients was 40 years (95% CI, 38–41 years).
The mean duration of hospital stay was 10.7 days (95% CI,
9.9–11.6 days). Most (81%) operated-on patients were from
rural areas. The most common surgical procedures included
herniotomy or herniorraphy (50%), lower gastrointestinal
surgeries (30%), and urogenital surgeries (20%).
Among the surgical patients, ownership of mobile phones
was 75% (95% CI, 73–78%). The remaining 25% patients
(n = 133) used a shared mobile phone. All patients had an
ordinary mobile phone. No patient had a self-owned or
shared smartphone. For 380 patients (74.5%), the follow-up
was completed by mobile phone, as they did not return for
follow-up to outpatient clinics. Among the patients who did
not return for follow-up within 1 week of completing the 30-
day postsurgery period (n = 380), most (n = 289, 76%) could
be contacted during the first mobile phone call. An addi-
tional 80 patients (21%) could be reached by a second call,
and the remaining 11 (3%) required three or more calls to be
reached. If we had considered the follow-up in surgical
outpatients only, the SSI rate would have been 15.3% (24/
156). But, because SSI surveillance was completed in all 536
patients and an additional 10 cases with SSI were detected
over the mobile phone, the corrected SSI rate at the end of
follow-up was 6.3% (n = 34). Out of these 10 SSI cases detected
over mobile phones, 4 cases had shared mobile phones, and the
remaining had self-owned mobile phones. All 10 patients had
physical follow-up within the next 7 days on an outpatient
basis. The distribution of the SSIs according to type of surgeries
was four herniorraphies, three exploratory laparotomies for
intestinal obstruction, two exploratory laparotomies for in-
testinal perforation, and one for urogenital surgery.
All patients who were suspected to have an SSI based on the
mobile phone call were physically followed up in the surgical
outpatient clinic where the wound infection was verified by
trained surgeons: Figure 1 shows the healed surgical wound
from right-sided hernioplasty of a 45-year-old male patient,
taken at 30 days of follow-up postsurgery, and Figure 2 shows
the superficial SSI of an incised wound of a 22-year old male
patient taken at 30 days of follow-up postsurgery.
Discussion
The present study found that a high percentage (75%) of
patients do not return for the follow-up visit postsurgery in
our set-up in a rural Indian hospital. Surveillance for SSI is
difficult to complete in remote rural areas, as by definition SSI
Fig. 1. Healed surgical wound from right-sided hernioplasty of a
45-year-old male patient, taken at 30 days of follow-up
postsurgery.
Fig. 2. Superficial surgical site infection of an incised wound of a
22-year-old male patient, taken at 30 days of follow-up post-
surgery.
PATHAK ET AL.
948 TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH
NOVEMBER 2015
ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

surveillance requires a 30-day follow-up visit postsurgery.3
This gap in surveillance could be filled by mobile-based sur-
veillance. In the future, as increasing numbers of rural resi-
dents own a mobile phone or have a shared mobile phone, SSI
follow-up can be achieved in other similar settings.
A study from Cambodia significantly increased the follow-
up of patients after cleft palate surgery for speech and lan-
guage therapy (23% pre-intervention to 73% postintervention)
by using mobile phone communication.5 A study from Nigeria
reported significantly higher numbers of follow-up appoint-
ments for postcancer care (19% pre-intervention to 98% post-
intervention).6 Another study from China found short message
service provided significantly higher (relative risk = 1.5)
follow-up adherence in a pediatric cataract treatment pro-
gram.7 India has the second largest subscriber base for mobile
phone connections in the world, with nearly 950 million
mobile phone connections, of which 41% (384 million) are in
rural areas.8 Mobile phones have been used for delivering
disease control intervention in the field of human immuno-
deficiency virus infection.9 However, the use of mobile tech-
nology in the field of surveillance of SSI has remained largely
untapped.
LIMITATIONS
Because none of our patient had smartphones, we did not
use patient wound photographs sent through mobile phones
in our study. Pictorial messages or images using multimedia
messaging service could not be used for the same reason.
Short messaging service could not be used as the study was
done in a rural area with a poor literacy rate, and most ( > 75%)
of the users were unaware how to open or send a text message.
Conclusions
The follow-up of two-thirds of all the operated-on patients
for SSI surveillance was completed using mobile phones, and
one-third of SSIs were detected over the mobile phone. Pa-
tients should also be asked for a shared mobile number in case
they do not have a mobile phone of their own. As India has one
of the fastest growing mobile networks in the world, this
communication technology is feasible to be used in rural set-
tings to complete case follow-up for SSIs.
Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Pittet D, Allegranzi B, Storr J, et al. Infection control as a major World Health
Organization priority for developing countries. J Hosp Infect 2008;68:285–292.
2. Allegranzi B, Bagheri Nejad S, Combescure C, et al. Burden of endemic health-
care-associated infection in developing countries: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet 2011;377:228–241.
3. Horan TC, Gaynes RP, Martone WJ, Jarvis WR, Emori TG. CDC definitions of
nosocomial surgical site infections, 1992: A modification of CDC definitions of
surgical wound infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:606–608.
4. Pathak A, Saliba EA, Sharma S, et al. Incidence and factors associated with
surgical site infections in a teaching hospital in Ujjain, India. Am J Infect
Control 2014;42:e11–e15.
5. Foong DY, Butler DP, Vanna K, Sok Leng T, Gollogly J. A mobile phone initiative
to increase return for speech therapy follow-up after cleft palate surgery in the
developing world. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg 2012;65:e260–e261.
6. Odigie VI, Yusufu LM, Dawotola DA, et al. The mobile phone as a tool in
improving cancer care in Nigeria. Psychooncology 2012;21:332–335.
7. Lin H, Chen W, Luo L, et al. Effectiveness of a short message reminder in
increasing compliance with pediatric cataract treatment: A randomized trial.
Ophthalmology 2012;119:2463–2470.
8. TRAI. Press Release on Telecom Subscription Data as on 31st July, 2014.
Available at www.trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/WhatsNew/Documents/PR-TSD-
July,14.pdf (last accessed September 20, 2014).
9. DeSouza SI, Rashmi MR, Vasanthi AP, Joseph SM, Rodrigues R. Mobile phones:
The next step towards healthcare delivery in rural India? PloS One 2014;
9:e104895.
Address correspondence to:
Ashish Pathak, DNB, PhD
Global Health/IHCAR
Department of Public Health Sciences
Karolinska Institutet
Tomtebodava¨gan 18a
Widerstro¨mska Building
Stockholm 17177
Sweden
E-mail: ashish.pathak@ki.se
drashishp@rediffmail.com
Received: September 26, 2014
Revised: January 12, 2015
Accepted: January 13, 2015
SURGICAL SITE INFECTION SURVEILLANCE BY MOBILE PHONES
ª M A R Y A N N L I E B E R T , I N C .  VOL. 21
NO. 11  NOVEMBER 2015
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH 949

