.................................................................................................................................
..............................................................
RESEARCH
Original article
Q Home telemental health implementation and
outcomes using electronic messaging
Linda Godleski*†, Dana Cervone*, Donna Vogel‡ and Meghan Rooney*
*National Telemental Health Center, Veterans Health Administration, West Haven, Connecticut, USA; †Department of Psychiatry, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA; ‡VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut, USA
Summary
In 2007, the VA Connecticut Healthcare System began a home electronic messaging programme for mental health
patients. During the ﬁrst two years, 76 patients with diagnoses of schizophrenia, post traumatic stress disorder, depression
and substance-use disorders received a home messaging device, which was connected via an ordinary telephone line.
There were daily questions, which were based on disease management protocols, and included alerts, data and
educational components. Patient data were sent to a nurse practitioner each day for triage and follow-up. Patients used the
device for at least six months. In the six months prior to enrolment, 42 patients were hospitalized for 46 admissions. In the
following six months, six patients were hospitalized for nine admissions (P , 0.0001). In the six months prior to enrolment,
47 patients had a total of 80 ER visits. In the following six months, 16 patients had a total of 32 ER visits (P , 0.0001).
Questionnaire responses indicated a high level of satisfaction with the home messaging programme.
Introduction
In 2007, the VA Connecticut Healthcare System (VACHS)
developed a home telehealth programme for mental health
patients. High risk, high cost patients were targeted. These
were patients with high numbers of hospital admissions,
psychiatric emergency room visits, unscheduled urgent
visits, no-shows and a history of self-harm attempts or
gestures amenable to treatment. The inclusion criteria were:
(1) agreement with and referral from the outpatient primary
psychiatric clinician, (2) a primary psychiatric diagnosis of
depression, post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
schizophrenia or substance-use disorders, (3) house with a
telephone line and (4) sufﬁcient psychiatric stability to
participate in the programme. The exclusion criteria were
patients who were unable to use the equipment, who
declined the programme, or who were clinically
inappropriate as judged by the patient’s treatment team.
Inappropriate patients were those who were homicidal,
patients with technology speciﬁc delusions and patients
whose treatment would be compromised rather than
enhanced by multiple providers.
A telehealth coordinator reviewed potential patients. If
appropriate, the patient was assessed for enrolment. The
patient was then taught to use the home telehealth unit.
Emergency procedures were reviewed with the patient, since
the home electronic messaging unit was not an emergency
response device.
Patients were provided with an electronic messaging
device (Health Buddy Appliance Models 2 and 3, Bosch
Healthcare). Each unit was approximately 15  20 cm and
required a conventional telephone line for communication.
There was a screen on the front of the unit where a series of
questions were displayed. The patient answered the
questions by pressing large buttons on the front of the
device. The patient was alerted each day by a small LED
light on the unit.
The questions were scripted according to Disease
Management Protocols (DMPs) in depression,
schizophrenia, PTSD and substance-use disorder. The scripts
consisted of 6–15 questions about items that had been
demonstrated to trigger decompensation. Questions
addressed daily medication compliance, follow-up with
clinicians, diagnostic-speciﬁc symptoms, ratings (e.g. of
mood, substance usage) and relevant activities of daily
living. Additional questions reinforced information about
the diagnosis and provided suggestions for therapeutic
coping strategies.
The daily scripts focused on three areas: (1) symptoms
and behaviours indicating potential for decompensation,
which were forwarded as alerts to the clinician for priority
triage, (2) quantitative symptom data, e.g. depression
ratings or amounts of substances used, and (3) psychosocial
educational material, generally adapted from
evidence-based treatments such as motivational
interviewing or cognitive behavioural therapy. The
Accepted 14 July 2011
Correspondence: Linda Godleski, Yale School of Medicine, 950 Campbell Ave-11
TMH, West Haven, CT 06516, USA (Fax: þ1 203 937 3868; Email: Linda.
Godleski2@va.gov)
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2012; 18: 17–19
DOI: 10.1258/jtt.2011.100919
 at University of Victoria on April 9, 2015
jtt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

..............................................................
..............................................................
information was transmitted according to VA patient
privacy regulations.
The response to each question was scored according to a
pre-deﬁned importance level, based on the severity of
symptoms, compliance with treatment and the need for
clinical intervention. Depending upon the seriousness, the
patient received an appropriate response from the device
and the information was transmitted to the coordinator.
Level 1 indicated that there were no concerns in the
response. Level 2 indicated potential concern, which
required follow-up by the coordinator. Level 3 indicated the
need for rapid intervention. The patient could be instructed
to seek emergency help by the device and the nurse
practitioner could also be alerted.
The telehealth coordinator was a psychiatric nurse
practitioner who monitored the data sent from the patients
by the home messaging device. She was part of a
multi-disciplinary team treating the patient (psychiatrist,
psychologist, social worker and other mental health
clinicians).
Each day the nurse practitioner reviewed the transmitted
data and contacted the patient by telephone for any Level 2
or 3 responses. The nurse conducted a telephone assessment
to make decisions on interventions, ranging from no
intervention, intervention by telephone (e.g. ordering,
reﬁlling or changing medications), scheduling or checking
on appointments for face-to-face evaluation, or immediate
intervention to bring the patient to the Emergency Room
for evaluation.
The nurse practitioner contacted the patient’s primary
psychiatric clinician if there was any signiﬁcant change in
the patient’s psychiatric condition and with this clinician
made any subsequent decisions, e.g. making an
appointment for the patient to see their clinician, arranging
for the patient to come to the psychiatric Emergency Room
for evaluation, contacting local police to check on the
patient. All interventions were documented in the patient’s
electronic medical record.
We found that one full time (40 h/week) nurse
practitioner could monitor 90–100 patients who were using
home messaging devices.
The object of the present report was to assess the
feasibility and outcomes of the home electronic messaging
programme for a diverse psychiatric patient population.
Methods
Data were obtained for the ﬁrst two years of the programme,
beginning in July 2007. Information about performance
improvement was obtained from the VACHS electronic
medical databases, with no individual patient information
nor patient identiﬁers. All veterans who had enrolled in the
programme for at least six months were included.
Inpatient and emergency utilization were obtained for
the six months immediately prior to patient entry into the
programme and the ﬁrst six months of their participation in
the programme. Equipment usage information was
obtained from electronic equipment tracking information.
Veteran satisfaction ratings were obtained from patient
responses entered on the home messaging device itself, as
routine satisfaction questions were built into the DMPs at
three-month intervals.
Results
During the ﬁrst two years of the home telemental health
programme, a total of 76 veterans were enrolled: 68 men
and eight women. There were 60 white, 13 black and three
Hispanic patients. Their mean age was 58 years (range
27–87). Their diagnoses were: 54 depression, 14 substance
use disorders, ﬁve schizophrenia and three PTSD.
The patients used the home messaging device for at least
six months. A total of 46 used the device 5–7 times/week
(excluding days of hospitalization, known vacation or
anticipated absences) and 20 used the device 1–4 times/
week. If a patient’s usage dropped below once a week, a
decision was made as to whether continued participation
was appropriate. On days when patients signed onto the
device, they answered all of the questions on approximately
99% of occasions. The rare exceptions were usually related
to a technology interruption or accidental termination on
the part of the patient.
Hospital utilization
In the six months prior to enrolment in the programme,
42 patients were hospitalized for 46 admissions. In the
following six months, six patients were hospitalized for
nine admissions. This represents a decrease of 86% in the
number of patients who were hospitalized and a decrease
of 80% in the number of admissions (chi-square
P , 0.0001).
Emergency room utilization
In the six months prior to enrolment in the programme,
47 patients had a total of 80 ER visits. In the following six
months, 16 patients had a total of 32 ER visits. This
represents a 66% decrease in the number of patients with ER
visits and a 60% decrease in the number of ER visits
following enrolment (chi-square P , 0.0001).
Satisfaction
Patients responded to three satisfaction questions. When
asked, ‘Are you happy with your electronic messaging
device?’ 54% reported that they were very satisﬁed, see
Table 1. To the statement, ‘Since I started answering the
educational questions on the device, my understanding of
my mental health condition is . . .’ 55% reported they were
much better. When asked to complete the following,
L Godleski et al.
Home telemental health
18
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
Volume 18
Number 1
2012
 at University of Victoria on April 9, 2015
jtt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

..............................................................
‘Since I started answering the educational questions on the
device, my ability to manage my mental health condition
is . . .’ 40% reported they were much improved, see
Table 1.
Discussion
The present report is one of the ﬁrst to demonstrate the
feasibility and outcomes of a home telemental health
programme based on electronic messaging for a diverse
psychiatric patient population. While a number of studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of home telehealth
electronic messaging for medical conditions,1–5 there are
few reports about mental health. Some previous studies
have employed interactive voice response (IVR)
technology6,7 or videophones.8,9 The only report addressing
electronic home messaging in pain and depression had a
sample size of ﬁve patients.10
In our programme, the 76 patients demonstrated
substantial reductions in hospitalization rates and ER visit
rates. We postulate that the decrease in health-care resource
utilization was the result of the daily monitoring, which
allowed earlier intervention to alleviate the need for ER
visits and hospitalization. Home monitoring allows a
clinician to focus on the small proportion of patients in
need of intervention each day.
The satisfaction data indicated a high level of satisfaction
with the programme. In particular, the educational
component was well received by the patients. We further
hypothesize that patient education transmitted
electronically can contribute to an improvement in illness
outcomes.
A limitation of the present report was the before and after
design, i.e. there was no comparison group or randomized
controlled trial. Further work is therefore needed. In
addition, outcomes should be analysed over longer periods
following enrolment, e.g. one year or more.
Telehealth has advanced from the use of cumbersome
equipment such as the 270 kg HANC Heath Assisted
Nursing Care Telehealth Robotic Unit (HealthTech Systems
Corp) to devices weighing less than 4 kg, that can be hand
carried home from the medical centre for self-installation
and take up little space. Future developments may allow
patients to use web based applications to respond to
psychiatric disease management questions.
References
1 Noel HC, Vogel DC. Resource costs and quality of life outcomes for
homebound elderly using telemedicine integrated with nurse case
management. Care Management 2000;October:22–31
2 Noel HC, Vogel DC, Erdos JJ, Cornwall D, Levin F. Home telehealth
reduces healthcare costs. Telemed J E Health 2004;10:170–83
3 Darkins A, Ryan P, Kobb R, et al. Care Coordination/Home Telehealth: the
systematic implementation of health informatics, home telehealth, and
disease management to support the care of veteran patients with chronic
conditions. Telemed J E Health 2008;14:1118–26
4 Schoﬁeld RS, Kline SE, Schmalfuss CM, et al. Early outcomes of a care
coordination-enhanced telehome care program for elderly veterans with
chronic heart failure. Telemed J E Health 2005;11:20–7
5 Polisena J, Tran K, Cimon K, Hutton B, McGill S, Palmer K. Home
telehealth for diabetes management: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2009;11:913–30
6 Turvey CL, Willyard D, Hickman DH, Klein DM, Kukoyi O. Telehealth
screen for depression in a chronic illness care management program.
Telemed J E Health 2007;13:51–6
7 Simpson TL, Kivlahan DR, Bush KR, McFall ME. Telephone
self-monitoring among alcohol use disorder patients in early recovery: a
randomized study of feasibility and measurement reactivity. Drug Alcohol
Depend 2005;79:241–50
8 Nieves JE, Godleski LS, Stack KM, Zinanni T. Videophones for intensive
case management of psychiatric outpatients. J Telemed Telecare
2009;15:51–4
9 Egede LE, Frueh CB, Richardson LK, et al. Rationale and design:
telepsychology service delivery for depressed elderly veterans. Trials
2009;10:22
10 Dobscha SK, Corson K, Pruitt S, Crutchﬁeld M, Gerrity MS. Measuring
depression and pain with home health monitors. Telemed J E Health
2006;12:702–6
Table 1 Satisfaction responses of home telemental health users (196 responses from the 76 patients at 3 month intervals)
Much improved
Somewhat improved
No change
Worse
Much worse
1. Able to manage mental health condition
40%
31%
27%
2%
0%
2. Understanding of mental health condition
55%
32%
11%
2%
0%
Very satisﬁed
Fully satisﬁed
Somewhat satisﬁed
Not satisﬁed
Not at all
3 . Are you satisﬁed with the TMH device?
54%
23%
21%
2%
0%
L Godleski et al.
Home telemental health
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
Volume 18
Number 1
2012
19
 at University of Victoria on April 9, 2015
jtt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

