 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Telemedicine Based Remote Home Monitoring After
Liver Transplantation
Results of a Randomized Prospective Trial
Tiffany C. Lee, MD, Tiffany E. Kaiser, PharmD, Rita Alloway, PharmD, Ervin Steve Woodle, MD,
Michael J. Edwards, MD, and Shimul A. Shah, MD, MHCMY
Objective: This study assesses the impact of a telemedicine-based home
management program (THMP) on patient adherence, hospital readmissions,
and quality of life (QOL) after liver transplantation (LT).
Summary of Background Data: Telemedicine interventions represent an
opportunity to personalize care and can lead to improved adherence and
patient satisfaction. However, there is limited data on impact of these
interventions on outcomes after LT. Therefore, we conducted the first
randomized controlled trial (RCT) of a THMP compared to standard of care
(SOC) after LT.
Methods: One hundred six consecutive LT recipients were randomized (1:1)
to 1 of 2 posttransplant care strategies: SOC or THMP. The THMP included an
electronic tablet and bluetooth devices to support daily text messages,
education videos, and video FaceTime capability; data was cyber-delivered
into our electronic medical record daily. Endpoints were THMP participation,
90-day hospital readmission rate, and QOL.
Results: One hundred patients completed the study with 50 enrolled in each
arm. Participation and adherence with telemedicine was 86% for basic health
sessions (vital sign recording), but only 45% for using messaging or Face-
Time. The THMP group had a lower 90-day readmission rate compared to
SOC (28% vs 58%; P ¼ 0.004). The THMP cohort also showed improved
QOL in regards to physical function (P ¼ 0.02) and general health (P ¼ 0.05)
at 90 days.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first RCT demonstrating the
impact of THMP after LT. The magnitude of effect on LT outcomes, hospital
readmissions, and QOL suggests that the adoption of telemedicine has great
potential for other major operations.
Keywords: bluetooth, liver transplantation, readmissions, remote home
monitoring, telemedicine
(Ann Surg 2019;270:564–572)
C
are after liver transplant (LT) and other major surgery needs to
be more patient-centered. Postoperative care after discharge
from the hospital remains provider and hospital-centered and not
individualized to optimize patient outcomes and quality of life
(QOL). Following LT, patients are discharged after their hospital
stay and given care instructions with weekly follow-up visits.
Providers expect patients to improve at home and have a complete
understanding of how to manage their care once home. The tradi-
tional postoperative care paradigm is a ‘‘one size fits all’’ approach; it
is not individualized to optimize outcomes. Current practice guide-
lines in LT do not incorporate patient preferences, needs, and
expectations. Depression and anxiety are common after LT, leading
to apprehension about the ability to successfully care for oneself and
poor adherence with complex medication and health behavior regi-
mens.1–3 Although a patient’s QOL improves following LT, when
compared with the general population, the vast majority of LT
recipients have significant deficiencies in most QOL domains.4,5
Additionally, the reoperation and readmission rates in the first 90 days
after LT are the highest of any surgery performed in the United
States.6
By 2030, the total number of patients with end-stage liver
disease is expected to be more than quadruple from the current
number (14,000 patients), reaching total annual costs of $85 billion
in the United States.7 Despite the high burden on the health care
system, the care of LT recipients does not significantly leverage
information technology resources, personalized care, or use of
patient-centered mechanisms to improve outcomes. Readmissions
after LT remain high while patient satisfaction and adherence are
suboptimal. We previously reported a national 90-day post-LT
readmission rate of 47% with half of all readmissions occurring
within the first 7 days.6
Through a stakeholder engagement process with the Univer-
sity of Cincinnati Liver Transplant Program that was designed to find
ways to improve posttransplant care, we found that increasing care
between visits was a top priority for patients to improve function,
QOL, and independence.8 The development of telemedicine pro-
grams and smart technology presents an opportunity to personalize
care to meet the needs of individual patients. In a previous small pilot
study, we demonstrated feasibility of developing a telemedicine-
based home management program (THMP).8,9 Participants in this
study had lower 90-day hospital readmission rates than the institu-
tional and national averages.6,10 Additionally, participants reported
high overall satisfaction, along with satisfaction with posttransplant
preparation, quality of medical care, and access to medical care and
specialists. In this follow-up randomized clinical trial, we aimed to
assess the impact of this THMP in addition to standard of care on
posttransplant THMP participation, hospital readmission rates, and
quality of life.
METHODS
We performed a randomized controlled nonblinded pilot trial
to test the clinical effectiveness of a THMP compared to the standard
provider-centered care model after LT from Jan 2017 to July 2018.
The LT procedure and postoperative protocols did not change over
the course of the study at our center. All transplants were performed
in a piggyback fashion with standard immunosuppression of
From the Cincinnati Research on Outcomes and Safety in Surgery (CROSS),
Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cin-
cinnati, OH.
Y shahsu@ucmail.uc.edu.
Grants and financial support: University of Cincinnati Comparative Effectiveness
and Patient Centered Outcomes Grant and Care Innovations, LLC.
This paper was presented at the 139th American Surgical Association Annual
Meeting in Dallas, TX on April 12, 2019.
The author reports no conflicts of interest.
Copyright  2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
ISSN: 0003-4932/19/27003-0564
DOI: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000003425
564 |
www.annalsofsurgery.com
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
ASA-RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
tacrolimus, mycophenalate mofetil, and steroids. All LT recipients
were considered for participation including whole organ, split liver,
and combined liver kidney recipients. Internal Review Board
approval was obtained from the University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine (UC-IRB 2015-0865). The ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier
is NCT03878329.
Consecutive LT recipients were enrolled to 1 of 2 posttrans-
plant care strategies: standard of care (SOC) or THMP (Fig. 1).
Inclusion and exclusion criteria are shown in Table 1. After LT,
patients were consented to participate in the study when they were
transferred from intensive care unit to the transplant floor which
usually occurred around postoperative day (POD) 2 or 3. Once
enrolled, they were then randomized (1:1) to SOC or THMP using
randomly permuted blocks of 2 to 8 subjects per block. The ran-
domization list was created using R 3.3.1 (R Foundation for Statisti-
cal Computing, Vienna, Austria). Consort diagram for study is shown
in Figure 2.
Subjects enrolled into the SOC arm received the standard
discharge education provided by our multidisciplinary team. Accord-
ing to our current SOC model, upon discharge home, patients are
instructed to check their temperature, weight, blood pressure, pulse,
and blood sugar values at varying times throughout the day during the
first 90 days at home. Temperature, weight, blood pressure, and pulse
were checked in the AM. Blood sugars were checked every 6 hours.
They are provided with a Home Monitoring Paper Log to record the
information they collect while at home. There were given instruc-
tions for when to call their coordinator or office. Prophylactic phone
calls were not performed by our team. Study visits occur as part of the
SOC clinic visits, initially weekly and then less frequently according
to patients’ recovery and clinical situation.
The THMP intervention added the telemedicine-based HMP
to the SOC protocol. All smart technology and support was provided
by Intel-GE Care Innovations, LLC (Roseville, CA). Subjects
enrolled into the THMP arm received the standard discharge educa-
tion provided by our multidisciplinary team members similar to the
SOC arm. In addition to the typical Home Monitoring Paper Log,
subjects enrolled into this arm also received a smart tablet and
peripheral Bluetooth devices, free of charge (Fig. 3). The smart
tablet and peripherals were used during the first 90 days at home to
obtain and record vital signs measurements including temperature,
blood pressure, blood sugar, and weight. The devices also supported
daily text messages, education videos, and video FaceTime capabil-
ity. Additionally, the tablet delivered daily questions and reminders
based on postoperative day to assess clinical status including surgical
wound, pain, gastrointestinal distress, medication adherence, and
comfort level of using telehealth technology. This data was captured
at varying frequencies throughout the day during the first 90 days at
home. Answers to these questions provided insight into the transplant
FIGURE 1. Schematic of randomized nonblinded controlled trial of 50 patients in each arm.
TABLE 1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Participation in the Randomized Trial
Inclusion criteria:
1. Male and female subjects ( 18 yrs old) who are liver transplant recipients.
2. Discharged home within 45 d of liver transplant.
3. Able and willing to provide informed consent.
Exclusion criteria:
1. Posttransplant admission and care provided by University of Cincinnati Medical Center or rehab facility > 45 d after liver transplant.
2. Unable to have 4G wireless connectivity or wifi in their home.
3. Patient has any form of psychiatric disorder or a condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, may hinder communication with the investigator.
4. Inability to cooperate or communicate with the investigator.
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
Remote Home Monitoring LT
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
www.annalsofsurgery.com |
565

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
team regarding the patients’ general mood, recovery, and function
that is not ascertainable from vital signs and other measurements.
Education on each of these components of the technology was
provided to the patient and their caregivers prior to discharge by
a member of the study team. Additionally, within the first few days
after discharge, a study team member contacted the patient to answer
questions, ensure the e-health delivery is working, and assess patient
comfort with the technology. When necessary, a home visit could
occur. Data captured in the telehealth tablet was stored within the
Health Harmony application of Care Innovations LLC. The research
and clinical team had access to the secure site to allow for data review
in real time. In addition, vital sign data was transmitted and organized
in Epic, the patients electronic health record (EHR), to facilitate
review for both patient and provider in a password protected inter-
face. This was reviewed on a daily basis and alerts were responded to
first by the nurse care coordinator and then escalated to the providers.
Different algorithms for alerts were created and allowed the staff to
address issues as they arose. Appropriate care was initiated if
necessary usually with treatment or a clinic visit if needed.
Assessments of patient satisfaction and QOL (with the SF-36)
were performed at 90 and 180 days posttransplant in both groups. We
also assessed functional health literacy for patients and their primary
caregivers using the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine
(REALM).11,12 The REALM takes a short time to administer and
results in a score between 0 and 66. Scores are categorized as follows:
0–18 (third grade and below), 19–44 (fourth to sixth grade), 45–60
(seventh to eighth grade), and 61–66 (ninth grade and above).
Qualitative assessments of the study were performed during
regular post-LT follow-up clinic visits by the study team either
alone or within a group setting at various times points in the study
(30 and 90 d).
Study data were collected and managed using REDCap elec-
tronic data capture tools hosted at University of Cincinnati.13 All data
transfers, management, and handling were in compliance with
HIPAA regulations. We provide descriptive data for patient charac-
teristics and primary outcomes (90-d readmission rates, THMP
participation, and patient satisfaction) for both study arms. Continu-
ous variables were described as estimates of central tendency
FIGURE 2. CONSORT diagram of study.
FIGURE 3. Tablet interface in THMP arm. A, Interface with pulse oximeter monitoring device. B, Interface with blood pressure
monitoring device. C, Interface with blood glucose monitoring device.
Lee et al
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
566 |
www.annalsofsurgery.com
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
(median) and interquartile range (IQR). Categorical variables were
described as percentages (%). Categorical variables were analyzed
using Pearson chi-squared test or Fisher exact test when appropriate,
while continuous variables were compared through Wilcoxon rank-
sum test. Variables with a P value of < 0.05 were determined to be
statistically significant. We censored patients with missing data prior
to the 6 month time point at the last date for which status can be
determined. The status of the patient was set to ‘‘failure’’ at the date
of the last contact with the patient.
RESULTS
Beginning in January 2017, 106 consecutive LT patients were
enrolled, with 100 patients completing the study (50 per study arm).
Only 6 patients were unable to participate after consenting due to
unable to be discharged home within 45 days (n ¼ 3), no LG4
connection at residence (n ¼ 1), and inability to conduct study due to
recurrent readmissions in the first 90 days (n ¼ 2). Table 2 shows no
difference in recipient demographics before LT, ensuring both groups
were similar medically prior to enrollment. Donor characteristics and
perioperative outcomes were also similar between groups.
We assessed the THMP participation as shown in Table 3.
Patients randomized to the THMP group were receptive to the device,
but assistance was needed at the home to ensure appropriate hookup
and function of the remote device in nearly one-third of patients
(32%). This was despite extensive teaching when in hospital with
explanation of bluetooth technology. Vital sign monitoring and use of
the devices to input the data was excellent with 86% frequency.
Patients were sent text messages daily in the first month and then
periodically after that to assess their general health. This was not very
effective as only 60% of the patients would respond to text messages
in the first month and this dropped to 25% after POD 30. A similar
trend was seen with the vital sign monitoring but was not significant.
Common explanations for this were returned to activity or work and
not having remote device with them or not knowing they had to
respond to the questions. In many instances, responses to the ques-
tions did not correlate with the patients complaints (eg, call about
abdominal pain, but response to text message revealed no abdominal
pain). Most patients used phone calls for their issues (70%), while
very few used the FaceTime or messaging feature for complaints.
This was consistent on both the patient and the provider sides as
providers preferred to call the patient due to general comfort
compared with text message or video discussion. Video educational
sessions were all downloaded on the remote device and these were
generally viewed and enjoyed by patients. These videos were made
by our faculty, have been in place since 2015, and are available on
line as well. Most patients preferred this form of education compared
to a book or general text.
The primary endpoint was to examine the rate of 90-day
hospital readmissions. The THMP arm showed a lower rate after
discharge at 28% compared to 58% with SOC (Table 4A; P ¼ 0.004).
Further analysis showed that the largest difference with THMP
TABLE 2. Demographics of 100 Patients Enrolled in Randomized Trial Comparing Remote Home Monitoring With Standard of
Care
Standard of Care (n ¼ 50)
Telemedicine Based Home Monitoring Program (n ¼ 50)
Demographics
N (%) or Median (IQR)
N (%) or Median (IQR)
P Value
Pre liver transplantation
Age (yrs)
60 (56,65)
58.5 (51,65)
0.32
Male sex
26 (52%)
30 (60%)
0.42
Race/ethnicity
0.81
Caucasian
48 (96%)
46 (92%)
African-American
1 (2%)
3 (6%)
Other
1 (2%)
1 (2%)
Type of transplant
0.06
Whole organ
47 (94%
44 (88%)
Split
2 (4%)
0
Liver-kidney
1 (2%)
6 (12%)
MELD score
23
24
0.90
BMI
29 (26,36)
30.5 (26,35)
0.84
HgbA1c
5 (4.5,5.5)
5.2 (4.6,6.3)
0.23
History of abdominal surgery
10 (20%)
11 (22%)
0.81
Hemodialysis
2 (4%)
3 (6%)
1.00
Post liver transplantation
Hemodialysis
5 (10%)
3 (6%)
0.72
Unplanned postoperative reoperation
8 (16%)
11 (22%)
0.44
Postoperative technical complication
15 (30%)
19 (38%)
0.40
Hospital length of stay
7 (6,9)
7 (6,9)
0.60
Hospital discharge location to home
39 (78%)
40 (80%)
0.81
BMI indicates body mass index; HgbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; MELD, model for end stage liver disease; Unplanned: some operation for any reason after transplant; Technical
complication: hepatic artery thrombosis, bile leak or bile stricture.
TABLE 3. Participation in Telemedicine Base Home Monitor-
ing Program
Postdischarge Task
Frequency (%)
Vital sign monitoring
86%
Response to text messages 0–30 d
60%
Response to text messages 31–90 d
25%
Use of FaceTime or video messaging
6%
Use of phone calls for issues
70%
Educational video slides viewed
75%
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
Remote Home Monitoring LT
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
www.annalsofsurgery.com |
567

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
occurred between days 31 and 90 as the readmission rate was similar
between groups in the first 30 days. Table 4B summarizes the
different readmission causes and reveals that the THMP group
was associated with fewer readmissions for complications that were
able to be tracked by the tablet compared to SOC, such as abdominal
pain, fever/sepsis, and blood sugar issues.
All patients received the SF-36 QOL questionnaire at dis-
charge and at 90 days. We focused on physical function and general
health components of the questionnaire since the goal of the THMP
was to improve those aspects of care. At 90 days, compared to
discharge, patients in the THMP arm had significantly improved
QOL for physical function (P ¼ 0.02) and general health (P ¼ 0.05).
We did not see significant differences in energy or social functioning
on the SF-36 (Table 5). Patients have commented that in their view,
the biggest determinant for QOL is time spent at home compared to
the hospital. There was no difference in the REALM health literacy
assessments between the 2 groups as 90% patients scored in the
highest group at ninth grade or above.
DISCUSSION
Historical barriers to widespread adoption of telemedicine
interventions include technological literacy and costs of implemen-
tation, limiting consumers to younger patients with higher socioeco-
nomic statuses.14 As part of our previous pilot study, we
demonstrated that patients in our LT clinic, despite older age and
socioeconomic barriers, had satisfactory exposure to and understand-
ing of smart technology and software applications.8 Indeed, a
majority indicated that use of electronic monitoring and communi-
cation would be helpful for postoperative care. Participation in this
current study was 94.3%, demonstrating feasibility of this THMP in
the LT population. Additionally, health literacy was similar in both
groups and in the highest category in the majority, showing that the
LT population generally has adequate ability to understand most
patient education materials. Although not a direct assessment of
technological literacy, one can extrapolate that these patients are
generally able to understand the education videos and should be able
to navigate self-monitoring devices. This randomized controlled trial
demonstrated the impact of a THMP after LT. The magnitude of the
effect on outcomes, readmissions, and QOL suggests that the adop-
tion of telemedicine has great potential for other major operations
and conditions.
Given the complexity of posttransplant care involving man-
agement of polypharmacy, routine laboratory testing, and monitoring
of clinical factors such as blood pressure and blood glucose, the
importance of patient adherence is crucial to optimizing outcomes
and preventing complications. The use of telemedicine interventions
has been shown to increase adherence with medications, self-moni-
toring, and laboratory testing in adult kidney and lung transplant
recipients, as well as adolescent liver transplant recipients.15–18 We
did not measure strict medication adherence in this study but future
work with THMP is under way with new pill box technologies.
National readmission rates after LT range from 27 to 50% at
30 days and 46 to 48% at 90 days.6,19 At our institution, historical
readmission rates were 42% at 30 days and 69% at 1 year posttrans-
plant.10 Several reasons for readmissions which could be targeted
using telemedicine interventions included immunosuppression com-
plications, graft rejection, and medication toxicity. In this current
study, 90-day readmission rates were significantly lower in the
THMP group than the standard of care group, as well as compared
to historical rates. A study by Kothari et al demonstrated that LT
recipients who were readmitted to hospitals other than that at which
they received their transplant had worse 30-day mortality as well as
subsequent readmissions.20 Although reasons for readmission to an
outside hospital were unclear, the use of a THMP provides closer
monitoring and more convenient access to the transplant care team,
which may either prevent readmissions altogether, or help facilitate
readmission to the transplant center hospital if necessary. In our
center, almost all readmissions occur within our medical system so
we are able to capture and be involved in the care of all the
TABLE 4. A Readmissions After Liver Transplant in 100
Patients Enrolled in Randomized Trial Comparing Telemedi-
cine Based Home Monitoring With Standard of Care
Days After
Transplant
Standard of
Care (n ¼ 50)
Telemedicine
Based Home
Monitoring Program
(n ¼ 50)
P Value
0–30
18 (36%)
12 (24%)
0.19
31–90
11 (22%)
2 (4%)
0.01
0–90
29 (58%)
14 (28%)
0.004
B Causes of Readmissions After Liver Transplant in 100 Patients
Enrolled in Randomized Trial Comparing Telemedicine Based Home
Monitoring With Standard of Care
Causes of
Readmission
Standard of
Care (n ¼ 50)
Telemedicine
Based Home
Monitoring Program
(n ¼ 50)
P Value
Abdominal pain/
gastrointestinal
issues
5
2
0.43
Acute kidney injury
2
2
1.00
Anemia
2
1
1.00
Biliary
4
3
1.00
Cardiac
1
0
1.00
Dehydration
2
1
1.00
Elevated liver
function tests
1
0
1.00
Fever/Sepsis
3
1
0.62
Hyperglycemia
4
1
0.36
Pulmonary
1
0
1.00
Seizures/Neuro
1
0
1.00
Wound
3
3
1.00
TABLE 5. Short Form 36 Health-care Related Quality of Life
Assessment at 90 D Posttransplant Comparing Standard of
Care and Telemedicine Based Home Monitoring Program
Category
Standard
of Care
(n ¼ 50)
Telemedicine
Based Home
Monitoring
Program
(n ¼ 50)
P Value
Physical function
60
75
0.02
Role limitations—physical
61
70
0.05
Role limitations—emotional
60
60
0.72
Energy/fatigue
60
65
0.95
Emotional well being
62.5
70
0.12
Social functioning
60
71
0.05
Pain
63
64
0.90
General health
60
70
0.05
Values represent medians.
Lee et al
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
568 |
www.annalsofsurgery.com
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
readmissions in this study. It is difficult to measure the true impact of
a THMP on readmissions but examination of the different reasons for
readmissions suggests that some of the aspects of care addressed by
the THMP, including abdominal pain, temperature elevations, and
blood sugar control issues, may help to reduce those readmissions.
Surgical complications and emergencies that occur after LT cannot
and will not be prevented by a THMP and our data confirmed this.
There have been other interventions in the LT population
aimed at improving post-LT care and reducing readmissions. Mah-
mud et al demonstrated that implementation of a nurse practitioner
(NP)-based post-LT care program including increased NP clinic
availability and in-house weekend care coordination was associated
with significantly decreased rates of 30-day and 90-day readmis-
sion.21 The authors attributed this improvement to earlier first follow-
up clinic visits as well as earlier phone encounters. However, an
increasing number of phone encounters was associated with
increased readmissions at both 30 and 90 days, while increasing
number of clinic visits was associated with fewer readmissions at 30
days. A limitation in our current pilot study is that number of clinic
visits was not tracked and therefore we cannot comment on impact of
the THMP on this metric. However, this will be addressed in a future
study, with the hypothesis that the THMP would allow providers to
address issues remotely without the need for increased clinic visits.
Additional work has been done by Toledo et al22 using Lean Six
Sigma methods to systematically analyze their processes from
transplant listing to hospital discharge after transplant. Through this
process, they were able to implement multiple interventions, includ-
ing a clinical pathway and enhanced communication, with a resultant
decrease of median length of stay from 11 to 8 days. While
readmission rates were not significantly changed throughout this
study, the systematic approach to evaluating the LT processes
represents another potential approach to identifying and decreasing
risk factors for readmissions.
The use of any telemedicine intervention may be complicated
by inefficiencies in handling the large amounts of data that can be
transmitted from the patient to the provider. For example, McElroy
et al23 describe the use of digital health kits (including a tablet linked
to vital sign monitors) to reduce readmissions after cardiac surgery.
In this study, the authors found that there was a median of 54 alerts
per patient during the 30-day study period, prompted by abnormal
biometric measurements, triggered by responses to daily survey
questions, patient requests for additional video sessions, or notifi-
cations of noncompliance with daily monitoring. However, only the
alerts due to abnormal biometrics (64% of the total alerts) were
significantly correlated with requiring an intervention such as medi-
cation adjustment, patient education, or further triaging. This dem-
onstrates the potential inefficiencies in the alerts, with only a portion
resulting in necessary interventions, and may also lead to alert fatigue
in providers. Additionally, despite this high number of alerts, they
found no difference in 30-day readmission rates using this digital
health kit intervention. In our current study, we also had a significant
number of alerts or abnormal values that were addressed and this will
be analyzed in a future project. The main focus of ‘‘alerts’’ is for
providers to address what to do with alerts in the middle of the night
or on weekends. This could be a liability issue and one the commu-
nity will need to address in the future.
Recognition of the importance of patient-centered outcomes
has increased interest in optimizing not only clinical outcomes, but
also patient satisfaction with their medical care. In a study by Le
et al,24 general patient satisfaction was similar between LT recipients
utilizing a telemedicine follow-up care and those undergoing stan-
dard care. However, the telemedicine group had significantly less
commute and waiting times. Similarly, in this study, we established
patient satisfaction improvement in some areas with THMP
compared to SOC because patients felt that they were being moni-
tored more closely with the THMP devices. This was reassuring
because some providers felt that patients may be annoyed by the
amount of work and monitoring of results that would be needed but
this turned out to be minimal. These results show that telemedicine-
based programs may enhance patient satisfaction in medical care
after transplant by optimizing efficiency and convenience in access to
care, along with decreasing readmissions.
Although posttransplant QOL has been shown to be improved
compared to pretransplant status, it still remains inferior to that of the
general population.4,25 Therefore, any intervention that has potential
to result in incremental increase in QOL after LT is of significant
interest. To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess the impact
of a telemedicine program on QOL after LT. We demonstrated that
physical function and general health was improved by 90 days. More
work is needed to determine if this persists to 180 or 360 days when
patients do not have the tablet and rely on improve health behaviors.
One of the remaining challenges in the implementation of
telemedicine-based interventions is cost-effectiveness.14 A cost anal-
ysis at a German center showed that a telemedicine-based case
management after living donor kidney transplantation was less costly
than standard of care.26 However, similar studies have not been
conducted in the United States or in the LT population. Variability in
and insufficiency of reimbursements by Medicaid and Medicare may
limit the feasibility of telemedicine implementation in underserved
populations that may benefit the most.27 We had previously shown
that the cost of readmissions after liver transplant amounted to
$45,000 per episode.6 The cost of a telemedicine program up front
would be cost-effective based on historical data for payers. Future
studies should include a cost-effectiveness analysis of these inter-
ventions, with the understanding that it may vary from state to state.
There are several limitations to this study. As a single-center
study, this trial does have limitations in regards to patient heterogene-
ity, race, and socioeconomic status. First, we did not track the total
amount of data transmitted from the devices to Epic, the number of
phone calls, or the number of clinic visits and therefore cannot
comment on differences in the amount of time required by the staff
to monitor patients within each group. This time cost will need to be
addressed in future cost-effectiveness analyses. Second, we chose to
use standard of care as our control group to demonstrate feasibility of
our intervention. However, there may be other interventions which we
didnotutilizeinthis study,suchasscheduled phonecalls,thatmayalso
result in better monitoring and decreased readmission rates. Third, as
we provided the home-monitoring devices free of charge, we cannot
evaluatethecostoftheinterventionfromthepatientperspective,which
may be a substantial barrier to utilization outside the study.
CONCLUSION
To our knowledge, this is the first RCT demonstrating the
impact of THMP after LT. The magnitude of effect on LT outcomes,
readmissions, and QOL suggests that the adoption of telemedicine
has great potential for other major operations. Its role could be
greater in planned elective operations where education and learning
with the device could be planned preoperatively.
REFERENCES
1. Thompson DA, Leimig R, Gower G, et al. Assessment of depressive symptoms
during post-transplant follow-up care performed via telehealth. Telemed J E
Health. 2009;15:700–706.
2. Karl BC, Finkelstein SM, Robiner WN. The design of an Internet-based
system to maintain home monitoring adherence by lung transplant recipients.
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2006;10:66–76.
3. Annema C, Roodbol PF, Stewart RE, et al. Prevalence of psychological
problems and associated transplant-related variables at different time periods
after liver transplantation. Liver Transpl. 2015;21:524–538.
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
Remote Home Monitoring LT
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
www.annalsofsurgery.com |
569

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
4. Tome S, Wells JT, Said A, et al. Quality of life after liver transplantation. A
systematic review. J Hepatol. 2008;48:567–577.
5. Miller-Matero LR, Eshelman A, Paulson D, et al. Beyond survival: how well
do transplanted livers work? A preliminary comparison of standard-risk, high-
risk, and living donor recipients. Clin Transplant. 2014;28:691–698.
6. Wilson GC, Hoehn RS, Ertel AE, et al. Variation by center and economic burden
of readmissions after liver transplantation. Liver Transpl. 2015;21:953–960.
7. Kim WR, Brown RS Jr, Terrault NA, et al. Burden of liver disease in the
United States: summary of a workshop. Hepatology. 2002;36:227–242.
8. Ertel AE, Kaiser T, Shah SA. Using telehealth to enable patient-centered care
for liver transplantation. JAMA Surg. 2015;150:674–675.
9. Ertel AE, Kaiser TE, Abbott DE, et al. Use of video-based education and tele-
health home monitoring after liver transplantation: results of a novel pilot
study. Surgery. 2016;160:869–876.
10. Paterno F, Wilson GC, Wima K, et al. Hospital utilization and consequences of
readmissions after liver transplantation. Surgery. 2014;156:871–878.
11. Davis TC, Crouch MA, Long SW, et al. Rapid assessment of literacy levels of
adult primary care patients. Fam Med. 1991;23:433–435.
12. Davis TC, Long SW, Jackson RH, et al. Rapid estimate of adult literacy in
medicine: a shortened screening instrument. Fam Med. 1993;25:391–395.
13. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, et al. Research electronic data capture (RED-
Cap)—a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing
translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42:377–381.
14. Fleming JN, Taber DJ, McElligott J, et al. Mobile health in solid organ
transplant: the time is now. Am J Transplant. 2017;17:2263–2276.
15. McGillicuddy JW, Gregoski MJ, Weiland AK, et al. Mobile health medication
adherence and blood pressure control in renal transplant recipients: a proof-of-
concept randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res Protoc. 2013;2:e32.
16. Reese PP, Bloom RD, Trofe-Clark J, et al. Automated reminders and physician
notification to promote immunosuppression adherence among kidney trans-
plant recipients: a randomized trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2017;69:400–409.
17. DeVito Dabbs A, Song MK, Myers BA, et al. A randomized controlled trial of
a mobile health intervention to promote self-management after lung trans-
plantation. Am J Transplant. 2016;16:2172–2180.
18. McKenzie RB, Berquist WE, Foley MA, et al. Text messaging improves
participation in laboratory testing in adolescent liver transplant patients.
J Particip Med. 2015;7. e7.
19. Patel MS, Mohebali J, Shah JA, et al. Readmission following liver transplan-
tation: an unwanted occurrence but an opportunity to act. HPB (Oxford).
2016;18:936–942.
20. Kothari AN, Loy VM, Brownlee SA, et al. Adverse effect of post-discharge
care fragmentation on outcomes after readmissions after liver transplantation.
J Am Coll Surg. 2017;225:62–67.
21. Mahmud N, Halpern S, Farrell R, et al. An advanced practice practitioner-
based program to reduce 30- and 90-day readmissions after liver transplanta-
tion. Liver Transpl. 2019;25:901–910.
22. Toledo AH, Carroll T, Arnold E, et al. Reducing liver transplant length of stay:
a Lean Six Sigma approach. Prog Transplant. 2013;23:350–364.
23. McElroy I, Sareh S, Zhu A, et al. Use of digital health kits to reduce
readmission after cardiac surgery. J Surg Res. 2016;204:1–7.
24. Le LB, Rahal HK, Viramontes MR, et al. Patient satisfaction and healthcare
utilization using telemedicine in liver transplant recipients. Dig Dis Sci.
2019;64:1150–1157.
25. Burra P, Ferrarese A, Feltrin G. Quality of life and adherence in liver transplant
recipients. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2018;64:180–186.
26. Kaier K, Hils S, Fetzer S, et al. Results of a randomized controlled trial
analyzing telemedically supported case management in the first year after
living donor kidney transplantation—-a budget impact analysis from the
healthcare perspective. Health Econ Rev. 2017;7:1.
27. Weinstein RS, Lopez AM, Joseph BA, et al. Telemedicine, telehealth, and
mobile health applications that work: opportunities and barriers. Am J Med.
2014;127:183–187.
DISCUSSANT
DR. Sherry M. Wren (Palo Alto, CA):
I have no disclosures. I compliment the authors on completing
a randomized clinical trial to assess whether patients’ participation in
a home telemonitoring program could minimize admissions. The
majority of telehealth papers have been done in lower risk proce-
dures, not liver transplants where 30 to 50% of patients require
readmission within the first 90 days. Post-transplant care is also
much more complicated than standard general surgical follow-up.
Post-transplant patients’ are at risk for post surgical complications,
rejection, changing medical regimens, and infections.
There have been other successful post-liver transplant follow-
up interventions that have resulted in similar readmission reductions,
as seen in this presentation Carolinas Medical Center improved their
readmission rates from 53%–26% by developing a protocol to 1.
Decrease the need to consider readmission. 2. Define readmission
criteria. 3. Establish outpatient alternatives to readmission. The
University of Pennsylvania expanded its nurse practitioners fol-
low-up protocol to utilize phone calls post discharge, after lab draws,
and after any medication change as well as provide expedient access
to NP clinics as needed. They too saw significant decreases in
readmission rates at 30 and 90 days post discharge. Neither one
of these examples utilized a telehealth internet platform for com-
munication and tracking of patient variables.
This trial by Dr. Shah and the University of Cincinnati group
focused on home tablets equipped with Bluetooth-enabled vital
signs, daily question reminders, and video education. They showed
an impressive decrease in readmission rate in the readmission rate in
the post operative day 31–90 time period.
Readmission causes were not reported as different between the
two groups, but there were more admissions for abdominal pain, GI
issues, fever and sepsis in the standard care group. The authors state
the readmissions for issues that could be tracked by the device were
less than in the control group.
A similar study was done at UCLA in post-cardiac surgery
patients. They showed there is no difference in the rate of 30-day
readmissions, but readmissions were different. CV and pulmonary
causes were most common in the standard care group as compared to
the telehealth group where issues that could not have been detected
by monitoring vital signs, such as amiodarone toxicity, resulted in
readmission. The telehealth platform generated approximately 55
real-time alerts per patient in this cardiac group, the vast majority of
which were from abnormal vital sign measurements with an average
of 14 alerts per one intervention observed.
All of the studies including the one presented by Dr. Shah’s
group show a high degree of patient and health team satisfaction,
time saved on the part of the patient and their family, and clearly this
will be incorporated in some way on future post operative care.
I have a few questions:
Did anyone in the health care team for the standard cohort
make any calls to discuss symptoms or issues as was done in the
telehealth group? Were the standard cohorts given access to the
videos that the telehealth group used? If not, how do you know that
this is really the telehealth platform but just not the number of
touches from someone on the team after the transplant as well as
information available to them that’s driving the results? When you
had to do the home visits to get the Bluetooth systems set up by your
research group, did this also include a health assessment? Was patient
education also done at this time?
It’s also not clear from the paper how the biometric data was
reviewed from the telehealth cohort. Was it in real-time? Who
reviewed it? What action was taken? Did this result in more clinic
visits in the telehealth cohort compared to the standard cohort?
After looking at all this, do you believe that the device itself
was necessary, or could you have seen the same reductions by just
doing more simple telephone follow-ups and close monitoring as was
done in these other studies? Thank you.
Lee et al
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
570 |
www.annalsofsurgery.com
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Dr. Shimul A. Shah:
Thank you, Dr. Wren. The videos were made available by
YouTube, and all patients are told about the videos. The difference is
that if you’re in the standard of care group, you actually have to get on
a computer and log in and watch the videos versus the videos being
readily available on the iPad. So everyone does have access to it. And
the phone calls essentially are just normal standard of care. Patients
are not getting phone calls asking if you’re feeling well. Just like with
typical care, you call the office if you’re not feeling well, and that’s
the same aspect with the telemedicine arm.
There are a lot of outliers that occur with the vital sign
measurement, and we’re studying that. I didn’t report that here
today, but there’s a lot of "noise," and consistent with abnormal
blood pressures and things, and we’re trying to understand how to
interpret that, especially if it’s at odd hours. But the care is essentially
the same care. The main issue is when there is a problem, how is the
provider dealing with the data they have at hand. They have more
data at hand with the telemedicine information that they can just log
into and look at.
The visits that are done to the home are done by the research
staff, which are non-transplant clinicians, and so another visit wasn’t
performed at home.
The biometric data that we get two to three times a day was
reviewed by a medical assistant or a transplant coordinator daily or as
needed. It was my interpretation of dealing with this on the qualita-
tive side that there was a lot of resistance to adopting this technology
by my team primarily because of just old standards, ‘‘This is the way
we do it.’’
So the ability to use video technology by my team was resisted
more than just picking up the phone and calling the patient if there
was an issue. The biometric data and examining it needs to be sorted
out. One thing that we did not do in this study was track utilization.
Clinic visits, phone calls, the touches, as you mentioned, and that’s an
important aspect we believe for the next study. Can we reduce
utilization? Can we reduce the number of clinic visits if we have
some technology that’s taking care of the patients at home?
When we compare the use of telehealth to just phone calls,
that’s an interesting question, and my view of telemedicine is that the
advantages are more than just picking up the phone and talking to the
patient. The goal here is increase engagement and increase education
to the patient so they care about how they’re doing. They can look at
charts on the iPad and see what their weight has been over the course
of the last ten days. They can start to interpret what their health is
postoperatively. To me, that’s the advantage, that increased care in
the first 90 days, which is when they get the tablet, does that lead to
better care at the one-year mark and at the two-year mark in terms of
blood pressure, blood sugar control, and weight gain, which are big
issues post-transplant? Thank you.
Dr. Goran Klintmalm (Dallas, TX):
No disclosures. This was a very interesting presentation. New
technology and something that is so inside our society today, but I
have two questions. One different angle.
Number one, this actually implies significant additional work-
load on the team-coordinators, assistants, nurses, and physicians. Do
we have the funding to increase the number of employees to actually
deal with all of these, review the report, et cetera, and respond to all
the stuff that comes in? That’s my first question.
My second question is, I think, maybe even more important.
Say that we, the team, missed something that was sent by one of these
things because we didn’t review that report on an hourly or three-
times-a-day basis. What kind of legal liabilities are we creating for
ourselves as a medical community? As we know, we are continuously
running head on into the legal community in a very unpleasant way.
So those are my two questions: resources and legal implica-
tions.
Dr. Shimul A. Shah:
Certainly increased resources are required, I think, if we’re
going to do a higher monitoring system. The way to think about it is
what kind of resources do we really need? You really need probably a
medical assistant, college kids that can just monitor the data and look
if there is a blip or look if there is a response out of the ordinary. It
does not need a hepatologist, a surgeon, potentially even a nurse. It
could be lower–level type FTEs that we’re talking about.
The way to justify it is to talk about the decrease in read-
missions, and the benefit to the medical center– –all our hospitals are
clogged, but the benefit to the medical center to reduce the read-
missions and potentially reduce utilization by increasing one or two
extra FTEs just to monitor this program. So I think it can be sold if
framed in the right way in a pretty easy financial justification.
The liability issue is a big one across the country as other
programs are adopting this model, and there are numerous avenues to
do 24/7 monitoring through paid companies and things like that. We
didn’t do that here. I agree, that’s an issue, and that’s something that
needs to be taken very seriously. We advise patients that if it was after
hours and it was an emergency, obviously they have to call our
emergency line in our office to get a human on the phone, and there is
a lot of education about that. I agree, that is a big issue we need to
think long and hard about as we adopt other programs.
Dr. Fabrizio Michelassi (New York, NY):
Dr. Shah, congratulations. This was a great presentation and a
clear example of innovation, minutes after President Ellison talked
about innovation and just minutes before the panel on innovation. I
congratulate you. I think this technology will become even more used
in the future, and I think it’s going to be important for us to embrace it
and figure out its limitations and advantages.
We have been involved in creating apps for post-discharge
patients after gastrointestinal procedures. One of our challenges has
been sometimes the lack of app literacy with the patients that we
treat. You mentioned that to solve this challenge you occasionally
send your collaborators to the homes of the patients to instruct them.
Can you please elaborate on this and how you approach this issue.
I noticed that the measured decrease in readmission rate was
after 30 days. I also noticed that the compliance with this new
technology decreased substantially after 30 days. I think that only a
fourth of your patients continued to use this app after other initial
month. Were there other reasons, maybe stimulated by the use of the
app or for that matter telemedicine, that contributed to the drop in
readmission rate?
Finally, one last comment and maybe a question. Did this
contribute to patient satisfaction? Are you thinking potentially of
including patient-reported outcomes in this technology? Patient
reported outcomes will play an even more important role in the
future. Could this technology achieve both the goal of post-discharge
monitoring of patients and the collection of patient reported out-
comes into the same technology. Again, congratulations.
Dr. Shimul A. Shah:
Thank you, Dr. Michelassi. I did not show the iPad in a live
video, but although it’s an iPad, it’s not really an iPad. It’s big writing.
You can’t surf the net, you can’t get on other sites. It’s written in big
block lettering, and you just click boxes. It’s very user friendly for
those that are not smart technology avid.
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
Remote Home Monitoring LT
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
www.annalsofsurgery.com |
571

 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
We did a lot of qualitative work in 2014-15 to understand
patients, at least patients in Ohio, what their literacy was. 80% of
patients said that they were comfortable using smart phones, and
about 75% said they used e-mail and smart phones daily. What we
found in our 20-patient pilot, though, was that was not the case. So
we’re still working and trying to understand how to improve com-
pliance. I agree, the apps are difficult to use, so that’s what made this
product a little bit better in the sense that it was easy to use and just
had health care stuff related to our project.
I would say one-third to one-half of the patients required some
help once they got home with how to get on the WiFi, how to log in or
how to use the LG interface and how to turn it on.
In terms of what happens after 30 days, the common feedback
that we got were two things. One, ‘‘This is redundant; I don’t need it
anymore.’’ Secondly, a bunch of patients actually went back to work.
They said, ‘‘How am I supposed to answer all these questions? I’m
done with it.’’ Those are the patients that obviously did very well. So I
think part of having enhanced care and increased care we as providers
have to realize, when is it getting redundant, and maybe we can peel
back. That was the feedback we got just qualitatively.
I agree with you that the patient reported outcomes is going to
be the next step. Patients loved having the technology, and the
primary feedback that we got was they felt that we were just watching
them more, and that the care was more comprehensive. Was it more
just a placebo effect? Maybe. But they certainly responded very well
in terms of their satisfaction with the project.
Dr. Keith Lillemoe (Boston, MA):
Shimul, this is a great technology, a lot of work and a nicely
done study and presentation. I’d like to get your thoughts as to taking
it to the next level. Our medical physicians have been working on
home hospital status for patients with heart failure, pneumonia, some
of the common conditions that lead to readmission and the penalties
associated with readmission. We’re now starting a pilot with patients
with complications after colorectal surgery where we have teams
with the ability to go into the patient’s home to assess and deliver
care; they can administer IV fluids, place NG tubes, draw labs,
administer IV antibiotics, all this can be done. Do you see your
technology leading the ability to keep people out of the hospital even
when they have conditions that might now still be bringing them into
the emergency room or even requiring readmission.
Clearly, we haven’t had a lot of experience yet. We have just
had few patients that have been successfully managed in the last few
weeks. Your technology would be a nice adjunct to continue to
maintain close communication with the patients in the home
hospital setting.
Dr. Shimul A. Shah
That is a great point. I think this would alert you when you
need to go to their home. The only caveat, I’m sure at your center and
what we’re seeing at our center, is patients are traveling a lot farther
for their care. If the patient lives 200 miles away and comes for their
transplant, it’s not as easy to go to their home. But it is a way to
communicate with them from far away. I think that is an
excellent adjunct.
Dr. Dennis Lund (Palo Alto, CA):
Great study. I congratulate you on doing a randomized trial on
this. I also want to take this to the next step, and that is in the realm of
wearables. We are making quite a bit of use of wearables in children.
We developed a single ventricle interstage program as well as a type 1
diabetes home monitoring program for children. And in this case, the
data actually goes into the electronic health record in real time. And
now we’re working on AI, machine learning interfaces that will
assess this data and really monitor, do the medical assistant work that
you’re talking about. Are you thinking about wearables as a way to
maybe enhance the home monitoring? Again, what we found is the
nurses spend less time on the phone transcribing data because the
data is all in the electronic health record already for them to see.
Then the second thing is, have you considered maybe doing
this as a pre-transplant interaction with the patient to help train them
when they get their transplant to better comply with treatment
afterwards? You could even possibly incorporate the use of smart
pills to make sure that they are actually taking their medications on
schedule. Thanks again, and congratulations.
Dr. Shimul A. Shah:
Thank you for the questions. The wearables is the future of
medicine, and we did separate projects looking at wearing a Fitbit
after transplant and found you have to really collaborate with your
mathematicians at the medical center because the amount of noise
that you get with the number of steps each day was hard to interpret.
But I think wearing a Fitbit gives you an idea, whether it’s pre-op or
post-op in terms of activity level versus what any patient tells you.
We also did a separate study looking at a electronic pillbox, so we
know when the patients are opening their pillbox and when they are
closing it to make sure that we have compliance.
Nowadays, we have Bluetooth pills, so you can actually make
sure that they are also taking the pills. So that’s the future of
medicine. The third aspect of it which we haven’t done is using
sweat technology. Someone we’re collaborating with at our center
who is putting wearables on and understanding sweat technology to
get your electrolyte lab values just through the sweat.
We’ve done some work with oral glucose monitoring as well
to eliminate finger sticks to improve patient compliance. But I do
agree that wearables are the future. We’ve done some work with it.
It’s hard to put all of it together in one huge study given just
information overload, especially because we’re doing our aspect
in the post-transplant setting. So I think that addresses your
first question.
The second question, which was can we look at them pre-
transplant and start the education? It’s hard because, as many people
in transplant are in the room, we don’t know who we’re transplanting.
It’s hard to do it preoperatively. But that’s the caveat, I think, for
many people in the room.
If you do complex GI surgery, complex thoracic surgery, I
think this is really a great way to improve post-op care, where when
you see the patient one week before the operation, when you get the
consent, you’re doing your H&P, the educational process can be
performed right then and there by the research team, by your nurse,
and they go home with the electronic devices, and they spend the
week at home pre-op understanding how to use the tablet, how to use
the devices. That way, post-op they are ready to go. For instance, if
you’re doing a pancreaticoduodenectomy, the length of stay is similar
to a liver transplant but their care post-op is almost as complex, but
now they know how to use the machine. After transplant or after
major surgery, there are so many things going on, it was hard
sometimes to educate them. So educating them in the clinic, I think,
is the next step.
Thank you very much for the podium.
Lee et al
Annals of Surgery  Volume 270, Number 3, September 2019
572 |
www.annalsofsurgery.com
 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

