Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
301
Development and pilot testing of a mobile health 
solution for asthma self-management: Asthma action 
plan smartphone application pilot study
Christopher J Licskai MD1, Todd W Sands PhD2, Madonna Ferrone RRT3
1Western University, London; 2University of Windsor; 3Hotel-Dieu Grace Hospital, Windsor, Ontario
Correspondence: Dr Christopher J Licskai, Western University, St Joseph’s Health Care, 268 Grosvenor Street, London, Ontario N6A 4V2. 
Telephone 519-646-6405, fax 519-646-6064, e-mail clicskai@uwo.ca
A
sthma is the most common pediatric disease and the third most 
common adult chronic disease in Canada, with a prevalence of 
12% in children ≤12 years of age and 8.4% in individuals >12 years of 
age (1-4). Although asthma care based on guideline recommendations 
leads to well-controlled asthma in the majority of patients, studies 
have demonstrated that 50% of patients with asthma in Canada 
experience disease that is uncontrolled (1,5). There are nearly 
150,000 resultant emergency room visits and 60,000 hospital admis-
sions in Canada each year (1). The economic burden of asthma in 
Canada is substantial: the estimated direct and indirect costs in 2011 
totalled more than $1.8 billion (6).
Collaborative self-management and engaging patients as active 
participants in their care can reduce this morbidity by 40% to 60% 
(7-9), is a key element in the Wagner chronic disease management 
model (10) and is a core recommendation of national asthma guide-
lines including the Canadian Asthma Consensus Guidelines (CACG) 
(11,12). The written action plan is a patient-focused knowledge tool 
that facilitates knowledge translation, specifically by supporting 
patient-initiated evidenced-based clinical decision making. It is a 
communication tool that supports patients in the assessment of asthma 
control and directs management decisions that occur between regular 
clinic visits. In the context of regular clinical review, the written 
asthma action plan has been demonstrated to be efficacious in mul-
tiple randomized controlled trials and demonstrated to be effective as 
a component of care in community asthma programs (7-9).
However, outside of specialized asthma programming, there is a sig-
nificant knowledge-to-action gap, with as few as 2% of asthmatic 
patients having a written action plan (13). An action plan delivered as 
a wireless mobile health application has the potential to be a more 
effective community knowledge translation tool. eHealth technologies 
can improve access to care and improve communication between 
patients and providers; they have been demonstrated to increase 
originAl Article
©2013 Pulsus Group Inc. All rights reserved
CJ Licskai, TW Sands, M Ferrone. Development and pilot testing 
of a mobile health solution for asthma self-management: Asthma 
action plan smartphone application pilot study. Can Respir J 
2013;20(4):301-306.
bACkgRounD: Collaborative self-management is a core recommenda-
tion of national asthma guidelines; the written action plan is the knowl-
edge tool that supports this objective. Mobile health technologies have the 
potential to enhance the effectiveness of the action plan as a knowledge 
translation tool.
obJeCTive: To design, develop and pilot a mobile health system to sup-
port asthma self-management. 
MeThoDS: The present study was a prospective, single-centre, nonran-
domized, pilot preintervention-postintervention analysis. System design 
and development were guided by an expert steering committee. The net-
work included an agnostic web browser-based asthma action plan smart-
phone application (SPA). Subjects securely transmitted symptoms and 
peak flow data daily, and received automated control assessment, treatment 
advice and environmental alerts.  
ReSuLTS: Twenty-two adult subjects (mean age 47 years, 82% women) 
completed the study. Biophysical data were received on 84% of subject days 
(subject day = 1 subject × 1 day). Subjects viewed their action plan current 
zone of control on 54% and current air quality on 61% of subject days, 86% 
followed self-management advice and 50% acted to reduce exposure risks. 
A large majority affirmed ease of use, clarity and timeliness, and 95% 
desired SPA use after the study. At baseline, 91% had at least one symptom 
criterion for uncontrolled asthma and 64% had ≥2, compared with 45% 
(P=0.006) and 27% (P=0.022) at study close. Mean Asthma Quality of 
Life Questionnaire score improved from 4.3 to 4.8 (P=0.047).  
ConCLuSionS: A dynamic, real-time, interactive, mobile health sys-
tem with an integrated asthma action plan SPA can support knowledge 
translation at the patient and provider levels. 
key Words: Asthma; Cellular phone; Guideline adherence; Implementation; 
Knowledge translation; Patient education as topic; Primary care
L’élaboration et le projet pilote d’une solution 
mobile pour l’autogestion de l’asthme : projet pilote 
d’une application pour téléphone intelligent d’un 
plan d’action de l’asthme
hiSToRiQue : L’autogestion coopérative est une recommandation clef 
des lignes directrices nationales sur l’asthme. Quant au plan d’action écrit, 
c’est l’outil de connaissance qui appuie cet objectif. Les technologies 
mobiles dans le secteur de la santé peuvent accroître l’efficacité du plan 
d’action à titre d’outil de transfert du savoir.
obJeCTiF : Concevoir, élaborer et faire l’essai pilote d’un système mobile 
dans le secteur de la santé pour soutenir l’autogestion de l’asthme. 
MÉThoDoLogie : La présente étude était une analyse monocentrique 
prospective et non aléatoire d’un projet pilote avant et après l’intervention. 
La conception et l’élaboration du système ont été orientées par un comité 
d’experts. Le réseau se composait de l’application pour téléphone intelligent 
(ATI) d’un plan d’action sur l’asthme fondé sur un fureteur Web agnostique. 
En toute sécurité, les sujets transmettaient quotidiennement leurs symptômes 
et leur débit de pointe et recevaient des évaluations du contrôle, des conseils 
thérapeutiques et des alertes environnementales automatisés.
RÉSuLTATS : Vingt-deux sujets adultes (âge moyen de 47 ans, 82 % de 
femmes) ont effectué l’étude. Les données biophysiques ont été trans-
mises dans 84 % des jours-sujets (jour-sujet = 1 sujet × 1 journée). Dans 
54 % des jours-sujets, les sujets ont vérifié la zone de contrôle de leur plan 
d’action et dans 61 % des jours-sujets, la qualité de l’air courante. De 
plus, 86 % respectaient les conseils d’autogestion et 50 % prenaient des 
mesures pour réduire leurs risques d’exposition. Une grande majorité 
soulignait la facilité d’utilisation, la clarté et la rapidité, et 95 % désiraient 
continuer d’utiliser l’ATI après l’étude. Au départ, 91 % présentaient au 
moins un critère d’asthme non contrôlé et 64 % en présentaient au moins 
deux, par rapport à 45 % (P=0,006) et à 27 % (P=0,022) à la fin de 
l’étude. L’indice moyen du questionnaire sur la qualité de vie avec 
l’asthme est passé de 4,3 à 4,8 (P=0,047). 
ConCLuSionS : Un système mobile dans le secteur de la santé, à la fois 
dynamique, interactif et en temps réel, muni d’une ATI intégrée du plan 
d’action sur l’asthme, peut soutenir le transfert du savoir pour le patient et 
le dispensateur.

Licskai et al
Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
302
adherence with practice guidelines and improve health outcomes 
(14,15). Furthermore, there is a consumer demand for eHealth self-care 
technology from individuals who seek answers to questions about their 
chronic disease (16). Importantly, virtually all Canadian households 
now have access to broadband Internet services via computers and/or 
mobile phones, making mobile health systems highly accessible (17).
An asthma action plan smartphone application (SPA) has the fol-
lowing advantages over a written action plan: decision support for the 
creation of an evidence-based plan; increased accessibility, portability 
24 h per day, seven days per week; real-time and standardized assessment 
of asthma control with interactive feedback on clinical actions; auto-
mated medication adherence reminders; improved patient engagement 
and self-efficacy by capitalizing on teachable moments; and permitting 
real-time and forecast environmental inputs, such as air quality condi-
tions, that support risk reduction/trigger avoidance behaviours. Health 
Canada and Environment Canada have developed and implemented 
the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) nationally. The AQHI is a sim-
ple air quality and health risk scale ranging from 1 to 10, best air quality/
lowest health risk to poorest air quality/highest health risk (18). With its 
clear risk reduction messaging, the AQHI can provide real-time asth-
matic trigger avoidance advice as a component of the asthma action 
plan.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research defines knowledge 
translation conceptually as the process that connects the researcher to 
the knowledge user, converts knowledge into actions and links 
research outputs to clinical practice (19). Nationally, there remains a 
significant knowledge-to-practice gap with respect to asthma collab-
orative self-management; we hypothesized that access to an asthma 
action plan SPA would reduce that gap by intervening at two levels: by 
implementing an asthma action plan in patients who may not other-
wise have received one (provider level); and/or by facilitating utiliza-
tion of the action plan (patient level). In the present study, we sought 
to design, develop and pilot test a mobile asthma self-management 
system within the Canadian context.
MeThoDS
Study design and participants
The present analysis was a prospective, single-centre, nonrandomized 
pilot study. Asthma-related health outcomes are reported comparing 
preintervention with postintervention data. A convenience sample of 
subjects recruited from the Primary Care Asthma Program in Windsor, 
Ontario, was used. This population has been described previously (8). 
Adults (>18 years of age) with a physician diagnosis of asthma who 
reported symptom worsening with exposure to air pollution were 
enrolled. Patients with respiratory disease other than asthma were 
excluded. There were no specific technology-based inclusion or exclu-
sion criteria. All subjects received care within the asthma program 
including self-management education and a written action plan before 
enrollment. On enrollment, subjects were provided with a BlackBerry 
Storm 2 (BlackBerry, Canada) smartphone and a data plan using 
TELUS as the carrier at no cost. Certified asthma/respiratory educators 
instructed subjects on how to use the smartphone and the asthma action 
plan SPA. Subjects were educated about the AQHI scale and health-risk 
messages and provided with a Health Canada AQHI brochure.  
Mobile health network and communication infrastructure
The SPA used standard 3DES encryption and secure sockets layer 
network transmission security protocols in an IBM Domino enterprise 
application server architecture, with an integrated lightweight direc-
tory access protocol for authentication according to user name and 
encrypted passwords. The SPA-based platform used bidirectional wire-
less communication. The system server acquired forecast and real-time 
AQHI data from the Ontario Ministry of Environment through a dir-
ect secure server-to-server connection (Figure 1).
SPA design
The SPA was developed and beta tested in collaboration with expertise 
at the Centre for Smart Community Innovation. An interdisciplinary 
expert steering committee provided clinical advice on the content and 
format of the SPA. The design process was iterative and informal, and 
no users were engaged during this phase. The CACG were the evi-
dence-based guidelines selected as the foundational knowledge tool 
(12). The written action plan of the Ontario Lung Association was 
adapted. This plan has a traffic light configuration. 
SPA description
The SPA was a web browser-based application functional on any 
Internet-enabled device, presented to fit the screen size of a smart-
phone. Adaptive design technology was not used. After launching the 
application, the user was directed to a splash screen where they 
entered their username and password. After authentication, the user 
was presented with all of the functional components of the application 
in a tab-accessible format. Accessible tabs were as follows: AQHI, 
which opened current AQHI information; AQHI Forecast for 
Tomorrow; Breathing Test (for entering peak flow data); Today’s 
Symptoms (for entering current symptoms); Your Current Zone (cal-
culated based on the subjects symptoms and peak expiratory flow 
inputs); Your Asthma Action Plan (a view of their complete action 
plan); and Breathing Test Graphs (a summary plot of their peak 
expiratory flow values). The peak expiratory flow meters were not 
‘Bluetooth’ linked; subjects entered numerical data using the SPA 
device keypad. Symptoms, β2-agonist use and adherence to asthma 
control medication were entered daily using on-screen radio buttons 
for symptoms/adherence and the numerical keypad for the number of 
β2-agonist puffs. Adherence was self-reported based on a ‘yes or no’ 
response to a question personalized with their controller medication, 
dose and frequency. This functioned as a medication adherence 
reminder system. Subjects received e-mail reminder prompts if their 
data were not entered within a predefined time range.
Bidirectional secure communication was established consisting of 
information sent by the subject to the server and from the server to the 
subject.
Subject to server: Daily symptoms, β2-agonist use, peak expiratory 
airflow and controller medication use, daily self-reported risk reduc-
tion behaviour in response to the AQHI and weekly self-reported 
health care utilization. The server analyzed biophysical inputs, deter-
mined the subjects’ level of asthma control, and instantly presented a 
green, yellow or red screen on the smartphone identifying current zone 
of control along with the self-management recommendations. Asthma 
control was assessed continuously based on the benchmark criteria for 
control described in the CACG and calculated using a rolling seven-
day average (12).
Server to subject: Daily AQHI forecast for the next day was sent at 
15:00 with corresponding risk reduction message; real-time notifica-
tion was sent if the AQHI forecast differed significantly from current 
conditions; e-mail alerts were sent for moderate and high-risk days; 
and asthma control assessment displayed as green, yellow or red zone 
with the corresponding asthma management advice (Figure 1). The 
server was able to track whether system messages were viewed by the 
subject.  
Figure 1: Application Network Diagram
Legend: AQHI - Air Quality Health Index
PEF - Peak Expiratory Flow
AAP - Asthma Action Plan
Ministry of the
Environment Server
AQHI
University 
of Windsor 
Server
Symptoms/PEF
On Demand
AQHI Values
Daily AQHI Forecast
E-mail Reminder
Subjects/
Smartphones
Feedback: 
Current control
and AAP
recommendations.
Local Air Quality
Monitoring Station
Local Air Quality
Monitoring Station
Symptoms/PEF
Feedback:
Feedback
F
db
k
F
db
k
Feedback:
Feedback:
On Demand
On Demand
O D
d
O D
d
On Demand
On Demand
AQHI Values
AQHI Values
AQHI Values
AQHI Values
AQHI Values
AQHI Values
Q
AQHI Values
E mail Reminder
E mail Reminder
E mail Reminder
E mail Reminder
Server tracks if
message was
viewed by
Subject
Figure 1) Application network diagram

Asthma action plan smartphone application
Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
303
outcome measures
System outcomes: The primary outcome was the volume of data 
transferred between the subject and the server; the secondary outcome 
measures were the effective message delivery/contact rate (how fre-
quently information sent by the server was reviewed by the subject) 
and subject satisfaction. 
Patient outcomes: The primary health outcome measure was the 
change in mini-Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ) 
administered by paper questionnaire at the enrollment and withdrawal 
visits, respectively. Secondary outcomes included subject self-reported 
adherence to risk reduction messaging (recorded by radio button daily 
on the SPA) and self-management recommendations (evaluated by 
questionnaire at study close), subject understanding of the action plan 
and the AQHI (by paper questionnaire at the enrollment and with-
drawal visits respectively), asthma symptom control (baseline by 
questionnaire averaging symptoms over the preceding four weeks by 
recall and postintervention based on the last week of symptoms 
recorded by radio button on the SPA), and health care utilization 
(baseline over the preceding three months by recall and intervention 
self-reported weekly by radio button on the SPA). There is no valid-
ated knowledge assessment tool for the action plan or the AQHI; 
therefore, a simple knowledge questionnaire was created. A satisfac-
tion survey was created: subjects used a five-point Likert scale ranging 
from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’ to rate statements.
Statistical analysis 
Descriptive: Contact rates, subject satisfaction and self-reported risk 
reduction behaviours, and knowledge outcomes are presented 
descriptively.
Comparative: Pre-post intervention, mini-AQLQ, symptoms and 
health care utilization were compared using McNemar’s χ2 test.  
ethics review
The present study was approved by the Research Ethics Board at 
Western University, London, Ontario (REB 17197E). Informed con-
sent was obtained from all subjects.  
ReSuLTS
In the comparative analysis, P values were included where statistically 
significant differences were identified.
Subject characteristics
Twenty-four subjects from the Primary Care Asthma Program operat-
ing in seven sites with nine primary care physicians were recruited 
over an eight-day period. Twenty-two subjects completed the study 
between July 12 and September 30, 2010 (81 days), 82% women, 82% 
on controller therapy, mean (± SD) age 47±12 years (Table 1).   
bidirectional communication 
The total volume of data transfers between server and subject were 
4135 including: subject-to-server clinical (ie, symptoms) 2773; and 
server-to-subject forecasts 409, AQHI real-time values 953.  
Message delivery/contact rates 
Contact rate data are presented as ‘subject-days’, in which 1 subject day 
= 1 subject × 1 day (or, for example, 10 subjects × 20 days = 200 subject 
days). The AQHI forecast was viewed by the subject on 24% (409 of 
1694) and AQHI real-time values on 61% (953 of 1573) of subject 
days. Clinical data were received from subjects on 84% (1433 of 1716) 
of subject days. The action plan current zone of control with self-
management advice was viewed on 54% (846 of 1562) of subject 
days.  
Satisfaction
A majority (82% to 100%) of subjects agreed or strongly agreed with 
seven positive statements about the ease-of-use, timeliness, simplicity 
and clarity of the SPA, mobile health system and the associated AQHI 
advisories. Subjects agreed or strongly agreed that the system “improved 
my ability to control my asthma” (82%) and that the system “is ready for 
use by people with asthma” (95%). Almost all subjects indicated that 
they would continue to use the SPA if it was available after the study.  
knowledge
Subjects had no knowledge of the AQHI before enrollment. The base-
line knowledge questionnaire (three questions) was administered after 
initial AQHI education. At baseline, 50% and 68% correctly identi-
fied the high and moderate risk reduction messages, 68% correctly 
identified that the AQHI was reported on a scale from 1 to 10 versus 
86%, 100% and 95% at study close. 
All subjects had a written action plan before enrollment in the 
study. An 11-question action plan knowledge questionnaire that 
included questions about the number of zones on the action plan, the 
benchmark symptom profile for each zone, the name of the controller 
medication to be taken in each zone, the role of preventer medication, 
the role of rescue medication, and the dose and frequency of controller 
medications in each zone was administered. In nine of 11 questions, 
the proportion of subjects that answered correctly improved from base-
line to study close. The average increase in the proportion of individ-
uals answering correctly was 18%. 
Adherence to self-management and risk reduction 
recommendations
All subjects indicated that they used the SPA to determine whether 
their asthma was controlled. Sixty-eight per cent were surprised to be 
notified by the SPA that their asthma was not controlled, and 86% 
reported following action plan recommendations to improve control. 
Fifty per cent of subjects changed their behaviour at least once in 
response to a moderate risk AQHI health message that read “consider 
reducing or rescheduling strenuous activities outdoors if you are 
experiencing symptoms” and 32% changed their behaviour at least six 
times. There were no high-risk air quality days during the study 
interval.
Quality of life
Subjects demonstrated an improved asthma-related quality of life; the mean 
mini-AQLQ score improved by 0.5, from 4.3 at baseline to 4.8 (P=0.047). 
TAbLe 1
Subject characteristics (n=22)
Characteristic 
Female sex
18 (82)
Age, years, mean ± SD
47±12
Smoking status
   Current 
4 (18)
   Previous 
5 (23)
   Expose to second-hand smoke
4 (18)
Own and use a cellular telephone
17 (77)
Own a smartphone 
14 (64)
Skill level* with using the web browser and e-mail 
   Very good
4 (18)
   Average
6 (27)
   Below average
2 (9)
   Poor
3 (14)
Mean FEV1, % predicted ± SD
87±24
Mean PEF,  % predicted ± SD
73±21
Patient taking any controller medication
18 (82)
   ICS alone
3 (14)
   Combination therapy (ICS+LABA)
15 (68)
Patients taking rescue medication (past two weeks)
15 (68)
Rescue medication dose/day, mean ±SD
0.92±1.53
Data presented as n (%) unless otherwise indicated. *Skill level is self-
reported. FEV1 Forced expiratory volume in 1 s; ICS Inhaled corticosteroid; 
LABA-Long-acting beta agonist; PEF Peak expiratory flow

Licskai et al
Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
304
TAbLe 2
Functionality of commercially available asthma smartphone applications
No
App name
Description
Daily 
journal
Share 
info
Graph 
or chart
Peak 
flow
Zones 
(R,G,Y)
TT
Participate in 
Research
Location*
Inhale 
puffs†
FeV1
excel 
data
Google 
Health
GINA
eA
Action 
plan
KF
Sx
Current study mHeALTH System. Agnostic: iPhone, blackberry and Android compatible
1
AQHI – Asthma Action Plan 
Smartphone Application












blackberry, Waterloo, Ontario
1
Asthma Tracker
Track asthma level




2
Peak Flow Calculator
Track peak flow


iPhone, Apple Inc, USA 
1
STAT Asthma NHLBI 
Guidelines
Navigate the complex NHLBI guidelines on the 
Treatment of Asthma 
2
Asthma-Charter
Peak flow and medication recording

3
Asthma Journal Free
Keep daily journal


4
Asthma Journal Pro
Keep daily journal


5
AsthmaMD
Track asthma and help research







6
iAsthma GPS Tracker  
HD Lite
Record of the location of the asthma attacks, 
temperature, time of the year, and other 
relevant information 


7
Asthma Tracker by 
healthycloud.com






8
Asthma journal (iAsthma)
Diary to track triggers, medication



9
iAsthma GPS Tracker HD
Record of the location of the asthma attacks, 
temperature, time of the year, and other 
relevant information


10 AsthmaCheck
Medication planner, notification, Symptom check





11 Asthma-Charter MMC
Peak flow and medication recording 

12 AsthmaPulse









13 Peak Flow
Provided by NAEPP

14 asthmaTrack
Record symptoms, treatments, vital signs  
and environmental conditions using our  
pre-loaded templates




15 Abriiz
Record information and receive reminders to 
take medication



16 iAsthma in Control
Manage daily medications



Android
1
Asthma Tracker & Log
Frequency of attacks with the length of  attack





2
Asthma Tracker & Log Free
Frequency of attacks with the length of  attack





3
My Asthma Log Pro
Manage: Attacks, medications, triggers,  loca-
tions, symptoms



4
Peakflow
Peak flow readings o




5
SymptomTracker Pro
Track any symptoms/triggers/ conditions for 
several disease included asthma


6
AsthmaTracker Pro
Track a variety of triggers related to asthma


*Record the location of asthma events; †Records information about inhalers . EA Emergency alert; FEV1 Forced expiratory volume in 1 s; G Green; GINA Global Initiaitve for Asthma; KF Kids info friendly; R Red; NAEPP 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program; TT Track triggers; Sx Symptoms; Y Yellow

Asthma action plan smartphone application
Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
305
There were improvements in all four domains: symptoms, activity 
limitation, emotional function and environmental stimuli; however, 
only improvements in the activity domain were statistically signifi-
cant. Thirty-two per cent of subjects demonstrated an increase of at 
least 0.5 (minimum clinically important difference).  
Symptoms
The CACG symptom benchmarks of asthma control were better at 
study end than at enrollment. In the week before enrollment, 91% of 
subjects had >1 symptom outside of benchmark criteria and 64% had 
>2, compared with 45% (P=0.006) and 27% (P=0.022), respectively, 
in the final week of the study.  
health services utilization
There were fewer total urgent health care visits (unscheduled phys-
ician visits, emergency department visits, hospitalizations) and a 
smaller proportion of subjects requiring visits during the study (approxi-
mately three months) compared with the three-month interval before 
enrollment (21 versus 15 visits, and 46% versus 32%, respectively). The 
results, however, did not reach statistical significance. 
DiSCuSSion
We designed, developed and pilot tested a mobile eHealth application 
for asthma self-management that embedded a web browser-based asthma 
action plan SPA in a telecommunication network that delivered real-
time environmental (air quality) information with risk-reduction 
advice; received and analyzed biophysical inputs; and provided immedi-
ate asthma self-management instructions back to the subject. Subjects 
accepted the SPA, were satisfied with its functionality and most wanted 
to continue using it after the pilot study. Our cohort was highly engaged 
in the management of their asthma: they used the SPA system almost 
daily; viewed their action plan approximately every other day; followed 
risk reduction and asthma management recommendations; and learned 
about their asthma action plan and about the AQHI. An evaluation of 
health outcomes demonstrated improvements in symptom control and 
in asthma-related quality of life. 
Despite a proliferation in the use of eHealth technologies, and 
despite the pervasiveness of smartphones, there are relatively few 
studies that have evaluated the role of mobile health technologies in 
the management of chronic respiratory disease (14,15). We identified 
seven studies that focused on a qualitative description of a SPA, patient 
acceptance and satisfaction, but without health outcomes or system 
performance measures (20-26). Two randomized controlled trials exam-
ined the health impacts of a mobile asthma self-management system 
(27,28). Ryan et al (27) compared a mobile phone-based monitoring 
system with paper-based monitoring in 288 adolescents and adults in 
the United Kingdom, and concluded that the mobile phone-based sys-
tem was not more effective. In contrast, in a study from Taiwan, Liu et 
al (28) randomly assigned 89 patients to a mobile phone-based system 
or usual care and found significant improvements in lung function, 
quality of life and reduced health services utilization.
A commercial search of the three major online App stores, 
BlackBerry App World (http://appworld.BlackBerry.com/webstore/
product/1?lang=en); App Store (iPhone, Apple Inc, USA) (www.
apple.com/ca/itunes/); and Android Market (https://market.android.
com/) using the search term “Asthma” identified 180 Apps. Of this 
initial group, 133 did not directly relate to asthma, leaving 47 asthma 
Apps. Of these 47 Apps, only 24 (two for BlackBerry, 16 for iPhone 
and six for Android) were functionally related to the system in the 
present project. A majority of these Apps had limited functionality, 
were primarily electronic diaries and, to our knowledge, none have 
been evaluated in a clinical trial or developed using the CACG. 
Selected criteria of the functionality of the ‘best’ 24 Apps are com-
pared with the SPA developed for the present project in Table 2.
In the present study, the SPA transformed a static written 
action plan into a real-time interactive plan that was ‘always’ 
accessible, responded to current symptoms, lung function measure-
ments and environmental exposures, and provided physician-directed 
management recommendations based on the current level of asthma 
control. There is a strong consumer demand for eHealth information 
that creates the environment within which eHealth self-care tech-
nologies, such as SPA, can be developed and implemented (16). This 
demand is mirrored by increasing access to mobile health technology 
in Canada. In 2011, there were more than 27 million wireless sub-
scribers, and almost one-half were smartphone users (16,17). Thus, a 
national infrastructure to support mobile health self-care exists, there 
is a perceived demand for these technologies, and our study suggests 
that an asthma action plan SPA would be accepted and used. Future 
development of eHealth tools needs to consider societal disparities in 
access to wireless resources (16). Paradoxically, asthma patients of low 
socioeconomic status – who have the lowest rates of access to wireless 
service – may have the greatest need for enhanced self-management 
tools (16). A tiered implementation approach that ensures access to 
eHealth tools on any Internet-enabled device would mitigate this 
disparity.
The present analysis was designed as a feasibility/pilot study and our 
primary objective was to design, develop and pilot test a mobile health 
self-management system for asthma; there was no expectation that we 
would show an improvement in health outcomes. However, we demon-
strated improvements in asthma-related quality of life and in symptom 
control. We acknowledge that without a randomly assigned control 
group, we cannot exclude the possibility of bias in our health outcomes 
evaluation. These results also have limited generalizability because of 
the small sample size and because this population self-identified air pol-
lution as a trigger, was in poor baseline control and did not all own a 
smartphone. Additionally, we used two methods for recording asthma 
symptoms that may have influenced these results. The sample size and 
pre-post design do not permit conclusions regarding causation. Whereas 
there is a seasonal influence on asthma, the present study was conducted 
over the summer months only – a future trial will need to test the effect 
of the application over a full year. An additional limitation of the 
present study was the absence of end-user involvement in the design 
phase. Acknowledging these important limitations, the lessons learned 
from the present study can be applied to a definitive future trial. 
It is feasible to implement a mobile eHealth solution in support of 
asthma self-management based on the CACGs that is accepted by indi-
viduals with asthma, measures subject and system performance and has 
the potential to improve asthma-related health outcomes. Future 
development will include a more robust design phase using user-centred 
design philosophy, adaptive design technology to enhance access, 
enhanced functionality including a formally developed interactive 
medication adherence reminder system, and a randomized controlled 
evaluative design with a statistically determined sample size. 
ACknoWLeDgeMenTS: The authors acknowledge and thank the fol-
lowing individuals for their contribution to this project: Ms Kathy Colledge for 
assistance with preparation of the manuscript; Ms Shabnam Rajaie; Mr Larry 
Stitt from Western University for biostatistical support; and Mr Jason West 
from the University of Windsor – Centre for Smart Community Innovation for 
his design recommendations and programming support; members of the expert 
steering committee; Ms Nancy Garvey, Dr Alan Abelson, Dr David Yap, Mr 
Duncan Frasier, Dr Itamar Tamari, Ms Oxana Latycheva, Ms Andrea Stevens 
Lavigne, Ms Carole Madeley, Mr Brian Stocks, Ms Janice Belanger, Ms Pam 
Wilton, the Ontario Ministry of the Environment and the volunteer Board 
members of Asthma Research Group . 
AuThoRS ConTRibuTionS: CL, TS and MF contributed to the 
conception and design of the study and to the analysis and interpretation 
of data. CL is the guarantor for this work. All authors were involved in 
critically revising the article for important intellectual content and gave 
final approval of the version to be published.  
FunDing: Funding for the project was provided by the Government of 
Canada and the Ontario Lung Association. The project sponsor had no 
role in the study design; the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; 
or writing the manuscript; and no role in the decision to submit the manu-
script for publication.

Licskai et al
Can Respir J Vol 20 No 4 July/August 2013
306
ReFeRenCeS
1. Public Health Agency of Canada: Life and Breath: Respiratory Disease 
in Canada, 2007. Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada, 2007.
2. To T, Dell S, Dick P, et al. Burden of Childhood Asthma.  
ICES Investigative Report. Toronto: Institute for Investigative 
Sciences, 2004.
3. To T, Gershon A, Tassoudji M, et al. The Burden of Asthma in 
Ontario. ICES Investigative Report. Toronto: Institute for Clinical 
Evaluative Sciences, 2006.
4. To T, Wang C, Guan J, McLimont S, Gershon AS. What is the 
lifetime risk of physician-diagnosed asthma in Ontario, Canada? 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;181:337-43.
5. Fitzgerald JM, Boulet LP, McIvor RA, Zimmerman S, Chapman KR. 
Asthma control in Canada remains suboptimal: The Reality of 
Asthma Control (TRAC) study. Can Respir J 2006;13:253-9.
6. Ontario Lung Association. 2011. Your Lungs, Your Life: Insights 
and Solutions to Lung Health in Ontario. <www.on.lung.ca/
Document.Doc?id=868> (Accessed January 7, 2013).
7. To T, Cicutto L, Degani N, McLimont S, Beyene J. Can a 
community evidence-based asthma care program improve clinical 
outcomes?: A longitudinal study. Med Care 2008;46:1257-66.
8. Licskai C, Sands T, Ong M, Paolatto L, Nicoletti I. Using a 
knowledge translation framework to implement asthma clinical 
practice guidelines in primary care. Int J Qual Health Care  
2012;24:538-46.
9. Gibson PG, Powell H, Coughlan J, et al. Self-management 
education and regular practitioner review for adults with asthma. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(1):CD001117.
10. Wagner EH. The role of patient care teams in chronic disease 
management. BMJ 2000;320:569-72.
11. Global Initiative for Asthma. Global strategy for asthma 
management and prevention, revised 2012 edn. Bethesda:  
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, 2012.
12. Lougheed MD, Lemiere C, Ducharme FM, et al; Canadian Thoracic 
Society Asthma Clinical Assembly. Canadian Thoracic Society 
2012 Guideline Update: Diagnosis and management of asthma in 
preschoolers, children and adults. Can Resp J 2012;19:127-64.
13. Tsuyuki RT, Sin DD, Sharpe HM, Cowie RL, Nilsson C, Man SF. 
Management of asthma among community-based primary care 
physicians. J Asthma 2005;42:163-7.
14. Smith SM, Elkin SL, Partridge MR. Technology and its role in 
respiratory care. Prim Care Respir J 2009;18:159-64.
15. Krishna S, Boren SA, Balas EA. Healthcare via cell phones:  
A systematic review. Telemed J EHealth 2009;15:231-40. 
16. Fox S. Pew Internet and American Life Project 2011. Health 
Topics: 80% of Internet users look for health information online.  
Pew Research Center. <http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/
HealthTopics.aspx> (Accessed January 7, 2013).  
17. Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission: 
Communications Monitoring Report 2012 – Update to CRTC 
Communications Monitoring Report – 5 September, 2012.  
Ottawa: Catalogue No. DC9-9/2012E-PDF.
18. Stieb DM, Burnett RT, Smith-Doiron M, Brion O, Shin HH, 
Economou V. A new multipollutant, no-threshold air quality health 
index based on short-term associations observed in daily time-series 
analyses. J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2008;58:435-50.
19. Graham ID, Logan J, Harrison MB, et al. Lost in knowledge 
translation: Time for a map? J Contin Educ Health Prof  
2006;26:13-24.
20. Anhoj J, Moldrup C. Feasibility of collecting diary data from 
asthma patients through mobile phones and SMS (short message 
service): Response rate analysis and focus group evaluation from a 
pilot study. J Med Internet Res 2004;6:e42.
21. Lee HR, Yoo SK, Jung SM, Kwon NY, Hong CS. A Web-based 
mobile asthma management system. J Telemed Telecare  
2005;(11 Suppl 1):56-9.
22. Lee RG, Chen KC, Hsiao CC, Tseng CL. A mobile care system 
with alert mechanism. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 
2007;11:507-17.
23. Marshall A, Medvedev O, Antonov A. Use of a smartphone for 
improved self-management of pulmonary rehabilitation.  
Int J Telemed Appl 2008;75:3064.
24. Neubert S, Arndt D, Thurow K, Stoll R. Mobile real-time data 
acquisition system for application in preventive medicine.  
Telemed J E Health 2010;16:504-9.
25. Pinnock H, Slack R, Pagliari C, Price D, Sheikh A. Understanding 
the potential role of mobile phone-based monitoring on asthma 
self-management: Qualitative study. Clin Exp Allergy  
2007;37:794-802.
26. Ryan D, Cobern W, Wheeler J, Price D, Tarassenko L. Mobile 
phone technology in the management of asthma. J Telemed 
Telecare 2005;(11 Suppl 1):43-6.
27. Ryan, D, Price D, Pinnock, H. Clinical and cost effectiveness of 
mobile phone supported self-monitoring of asthma: Multicentre 
randomized controlled trial. BMJ 2012;344:e1756.
28. Liu WT, Huang CD, Wang CH, Lee KY, Lin SM, Kuo HP.  
A mobile telephone-based interactive self-management care system 
improves asthma control. Eur Resp J 2011;37:310-7

