Remote monitoring of patients with biventricular
defibrillators through the CareLink system improves clinical
management of arrhythmias and heart failure episodes
Massimo Santini & Renato P. Ricci & Maurizio Lunati &
Maurizio Landolina & Giovanni B. Perego &
Maurizio Marzegalli & Milena Schirru & Chiara Belvito &
Roberto Brambilla & Giuseppe Guenzati &
Serena Gilardi & Sergio Valsecchi
Received: 16 July 2008 /Accepted: 15 September 2008 /Published online: 31 October 2008
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2008
Abstract
Purpose The aim of the present study is to evaluate if
remote monitoring with the CareLink Network may
improve clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and
heart failure episodes in patients treated with biventricular
defibrillators (CRT-D).
Methods Patients implanted with CRT-D for more than
6 months received the CareLink monitor and were trained
to perform device interrogation. At-home transmissions
were scheduled at 2 weeks, 1 and 2 months after training,
with a final in-office visit after 3 months.
Results Sixty-seven patients performed 264 data trans-
missions. Twenty-three unscheduled data transmissions
were requested by the centers after patient contact.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias were reported in nine patients
during 16 data reviews. Thirteen data reviews (81%) were
performed remotely via CareLink transmissions (nine
scheduled and four unscheduled), in seven patients. Of
these events, in two cases (15%) in-hospital visits were
requested, while in 11 (85%) no action was needed and no
additional in-clinic visits were scheduled. During the study
period, in 20/28 (71%) intra-thoracic impedance alerts, the
patients remotely transmitted their device data. After
remote data review, in ten cases drug therapy was adjusted
by phone and in four cases no action was needed and the
patient reassured. In six episodes an in-hospital extra visit
was scheduled. On the whole, in 14 cases (70%), the patient
could be managed remotely avoiding a visit to the hospital.
Conclusions Our study showed that remote follow-up is an
efficient method to manage tachyarrhythmias and heart
failure episodes in CRT-D patients. Early reaction to
clinical events may improve overall patient care.
Keywords Defibrillator. Cardiac resynchronization
therapy. Home monitoring . Remote control . Heart failure .
Tachyarrhythmias
1 Introduction
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy for the
prevention of sudden cardiac death [1–4], and cardiac
resynchronization therapy (CRT), with or without ICD
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61
DOI 10.1007/s10840-008-9321-3
M. Santini (*): R. P. Ricci
Department of Cardiology, San Filippo Neri Hospital,
Via Martinotti, 20,
00135 Rome, Italy
e-mail: m.santini@rmnet.it
M. Lunati: M. Schirru
Niguarda Hospital,
Milan, Italy
M. Landolina: C. Belvito
Fondazione Policlinico S. Matteo IRCCS,
Pavia, Italy
G. B. Perego: R. Brambilla
Istituto Auxologico S. Luca Hospital,
Milan, Italy
M. Marzegalli: G. Guenzati
S. Carlo Borromeo Hospital,
Milan, Italy
S. Gilardi: S. Valsecchi
Medtronic Italia,
Rome, Italy

capabilities [5, 6], for the treatment of heart failure have
been shown to be effective in improving overall survival,
and are now included in current guidelines [7, 8]. This has
led to a rise in device implantation rate and to a growing
demand for device follow-up. In response, several systems
are being introduced in Europe capable of remote device
monitoring. [9–11].
For heart failure patients, remote monitoring provides
an alternative option to frequent in person visits and, by
the data stored in the implanted device memory, makes
physicians early aware of issues related to device
function or patient clinical status. The CareLink Network
(Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) has been
operational in the United States since 2001 and to it has
been adopted by several clinics to allow remote device
check in defibrillator patients.
The aim of the present study is to evaluate if remote
monitoring with the CareLink Network may improve
clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and acute heart
failure episodes in patients treated with CRT-D devices.
2 Methods
2.1 The system
The CareLink system includes a patient monitor plugged
into a standard analog telephone connection, and a
lightweight wand to communicate with the implanted
device. Interrogation of the device and transmission of the
data occur when the patient places the wand over the
implanted device. The patient’s information is sent to a
secure Network server via the telephone connection. It is
not possible to remotely reprogram the implanted device.
The clinical staff can review device information, on a
secure Web site via the Internet. Available data are equivalent
to that which can be retrieved at an in-office visit: presenting
rhythm, automatic device diagnostic data and stored episode
electrograms.
2.2 Study design
Patients implanted with a CRT-D device according to
current guidelines were eligible for the study. At the
enrollment the CRT-D (InSync Sentry model 7298, Med-
tronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) had to be implanted
from more than 6 months. These devices, in addition to
standard features, are capable of continuously assessing
several diagnostic variables such as patient activity, mean
heart rate, heart rate variability and intra-thoracic imped-
ance (as a measure of fluid overload). For this latter
variable, an audible alarm may be enabled to alert the
patient when a programmable threshold is crossed.
The patients had to be able to use the monitor and had to
sign the informed consent approved by the Ethical
Committees.
At the enrollment, a baseline visit was performed and the
patients received the CareLink monitor and were instructed
on how to use the system to perform home interrogation
and transmission.
Patients completed a test transmission approximately
2 weeks after the baseline clinic visit and training session.
Subsequent data transmissions were performed 1 and
2 months after the baseline visit. A final in-clinic visit was
scheduled approximately 3 months after the baseline visit.
The clinic staff was asked to review the implanted device
data that had been remotely transmitted from the patients to
the Web site.
The patients were instructed to contact the center either
if they had received an ICD discharge or if they had heard
an audible alert or in case of symptoms. Under these
circumstances, the responsible physician had to assess the
patient file, to contact him by phone and he could request
additional device transmissions, unscheduled visits or
emergency room admissions.
In this report continuous data are expressed using means
and standard deviation, and categorical data in percentages.
3 Results
Sixty-seven patients implanted with a CRT-D device have
been enrolled. In Table 1 demographics and clinical
parameters at implant have been summarized. The median
time since the implant was 11 months [range 6–20].
Table 1 Demographics and baseline clinical parameters at device
implantation
Patients
N=67
Male gender, n (%)
58 (87)
Age, years
64±9
Ischemic etiology, n (%)
24 (36)
Primary prevention, n (%)
56 (84)
NYHA class
2.5±0.5
QRS duration, ms
152±32
LV ejection fraction, %
26±6
LV end-diastolic volume, ml
242±115
LV end-systolic volume, ml
170±89
LV end-diastolic diameter, mm
69±8
LV end-systolic diameter, ml
58±11
Mitral regurgitation, grade
2.2±1.0
Chronic atrial fibrillation, n (%)
5 (7)
Hypertension, n (%)
29 (43)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, n (%)
5 (7)
Diabetes, n (%)
8 (12)
54
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61

In Table 2 the programming of device features at
enrollment is reported, with regard to ventricular tachyar-
rhythmia detection and therapy, and intra-thoracic imped-
ance monitoring.
3.1 Clinical events
Clinical events documented in the study included death,
hospitalization for cardiac reasons, emergency room admis-
sion, and cardiac symptoms leading to medical interven-
tion. During the follow-up, 32 clinical events were reported
in 29 patients.
One patient died because of refractory heart failure. Six
patients had to be hospitalized because of acute heart
failure; furthermore four emergency room admissions and
five in-hospital visits were reported.
Two patients underwent five hospitalizations because of
tachyarrhythmias and three additional in-hospital visits
were reported during follow-up.
3.2 Data transmissions and reviews
During the evaluation, the clinics performed 32 sessions of
remote data review. The minimum set of data analyzed by
the investigators during the review sessions included the
intra-cardiac electrograms collected at the time of the
interrogation, the overall summary of the device status
and the arrhythmic and alert episode counters, the lead
parameters and clinical diagnostic long-term data trends. In
19 of the 32 review sessions, 1 or more technical or clinical
trigger events came up (Table 3).
On the whole, the 67 patients performed 264 trans-
missions, 23 of which were unscheduled. In all unplanned
remote sessions, data transmissions were requested by the
clinical staff following symptoms or events.
Reasons for these unplanned transmissions were as
follows: the audible alert was triggered signifying possible
intra-thoracic fluid accumulation (n=11), a shock was
delivered by the device (n=3), patients reported symptoms
Table 3 Device and patient related observations recorded during follow-up with scheduled and unscheduled data reviews
Events/patients
Description
Management/outcome
Device management
6 observations in 6 patients
Pacing parameters to be modified
The reprogramming was judged as non-urgent and deferred to
the upcoming in-hospital visit.
Activation of rate response
Optimization of A-V delays
Arrhythmic episodes
16 interrogations with episodes
detected in 9 patients
Ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation
detected by the ICD
After remote data review (13 events)
In-hospital visits were required (2 events)
No actions needed (11 events) ER admissions without data
transmission (3 events) for
Arrhythmic storms (2 events in 1 patient)
Ventricular fibrillation with multiple shocks (1 event)
1 episode in 1 patient
Symptomatic atrial fibrillation
An in-hospital visit was required after data review
Device alerts
28 alerts in 23 patients
Decrease in intra-thoracic impedance
After remote data review (20 episodes)
In-hospital visits were required (6 episodes)
Telephone assessment with drug therapy adjustment (10
episodes)
No actions needed (4 episodes)
In-hospital visits without data transmission (8 episodes):
ER admissions (5 episodes)
Outpatients’ visits (3 episode)
Table 2 Programming of device features at enrollment with regard to
ventricular tachyarrhythmia detection and intra-thoracic impedance
monitoring
Device parameters
VF therapy ON, n (%)
67 (100)
Detection cutoff for VF, ms
312±16
NID for VF: 12/16, n (%)
67 (100)
VT therapy ON, n (%)
30 (45)
VT therapy: CV, n (%)
3 (5)
VT therapy: ATP, n (%)
27 (40)
Detection cutoff for VT, ms
396±22
NID for VT: 16, n (%)
47 (70)
NID for VT: 20, n (%)
5 (8)
NID for VT: 24, n (%)
15 (22)
Intra-thoracic impedance monitoring ON, n (%)
67 (100)
Alert threshold: 60 ohm×day (nominal value), n (%)
58 (87)
Alert threshold: from 70 to 120 ohm×day, n (%)
4 (6)
Alert threshold: from 130 to 180 ohm×day, n (%)
5 (7)
VF ventricular fibrillation, VT ventricular tachycardia, NID number of
intervals to detect, CV cardioversion, ATP antitachycardia pacing
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61
55
55

of worsening heart failure or palpitations (n=2), patients
requested to reassess the stored data after a previous
episode of decompensation or arrhythmia (n=7).
3.3 Device issues
During the study no device related adverse event occurred.
In addition, there was no need to schedule any additional
follow-up in order to reprogram the device.
3.4 Tachyarrhythmia episodes
Previously undetected ventricular tachyarrhythmias were
reported in nine patients during 16 data reviews. Of the 16
data reviews, three were performed in hospital since two
patients experienced three emergency room admissions for
arrhythmic storm in one case and for multiple shocks
delivered on an episode of ventricular fibrillation in the
other. In these two patients no pre-admission remote data
review was performed. The remaining 13 data reviews were
performed remotely via CareLink transmissions (nine
scheduled, four unscheduled), in seven patients. Of these
events, in two cases (15%) in-hospital visits were
requested, while in 11 (85%) no action was needed and
no additional in-clinic visits were scheduled.
In Fig. 1, an episode of fast ventricular tachycardia
appropriately detected and interrupted by shock delivery is
reported. After a phone contact to verify the appropriate-
ness of drug therapy and the general status, the patient was
reassured and no further action was planned.
In one patient, an episode of paroxysmal 2:1 atrial flutter
was detected and remotely reviewed, as shown in the
Fig. 2. After data remote reviewing, the patient was called
back to the hospital for an extra visit. Antiarrhythmic drug
therapy was modified.
3.5 Heart failure alerts
During the study, 22 episodes of worsening heart failure
with signs of impending pulmonary congestion occurred in
19 patients (28%). Of these, 20 were associated with a
decrease in intra-thoracic impedance based on the diagnos-
tic data in the device and communicated via audible alert.
On the whole 28 alerts for possible fluid accumulation were
triggered, of which eight were judged to be false positive.
Device alerts were defined as false positive in the absence
of an episode of heart failure decompensation diagnosed
within 2 weeks after initial alert. According to these data,
the sensitivity of OptiVol Alert was 91% and the positive
predictive value was 71%.
Fig. 1 Diagnostic data (atrial and ventricular electrograms and
interval plots) pertaining to the episode of ventricular arrhythmia
occurred in a patient (male, 61 years, ischemic cardiomyopathy,
NYHA Class III, ejection fraction 28%, QRS width 150 ms) reviewed
via unscheduled remote transmission. These data allowed the
investigator to verify the appropriateness of the device programming
in terms of tachycardia detection and therapy. After a phone contact to
verify the adequacy of the drug therapy and to reassure the patient, no
further visits were scheduled
56
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61

Among the 28 intra-thoracic impedance alerts, in 20 the
patients remotely transmitted their device data, which
allowed the access to more information in order to evaluate
their clinical condition. In ten cases drug therapy was
adjusted by phone, in four cases no action was needed and
the patient reassured, while in six episodes an in-hospital
extra visit was scheduled. On the whole, in 14 cases, the
patient could be managed remotely avoiding a visit to the
hospital.
In eight cases, the patients went directly to the hospital
without transmitting their device data to the clinic either to
the Emergency Department (five cases) or to the outpatient
clinic (three cases).
In Fig. 3(a) case report of a patient remotely managed
after an intra-thoracic impedance alert is reported. The fluid
index alert was associated with reduced daily activity and
increased mean heart rate. Diuretic dosage was adapted by
phone and the benefits of modified therapy could be
evaluated after 1 week by a new remote transmission.
4 Discussion
The present study demonstrates that in patients implanted
with a CRT-D device atrial and ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias and heart failure episodes may be effectively managed
by the CareLink Network system for remote follow-up.
The CareLink performs full interrogation and transmis-
sion of device data. The intra-cardiac electrograms collect-
ed at the time of the interrogation, the overall summary of
the device status and the counters of arrhythmic and alert
episodes, the trends of lead parameters and the long-term
Fig. 2 The patient (male, 70 years, dilated cardiomyopathy, NYHA Class
II, ejection fraction 35%, QRS width 160 ms) called the center for
worsening of symptoms and palpitations. An extra data transmission was
requested and the 10 s atrial and ventricular electrogram captured at
interrogation showed the occurrence of an ongoing episode of paroxysmal
2:1 atrial flutter. An extra in-hospital visit was performed
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61
57
57

trends of clinical diagnostics may be reviewed remotely.
Available information is not different from that retrieved at
an in-office visit. The main advantage is represented by the
possibility of early reaction to patient symptoms and device
alerts without waiting for the patient coming to the hospital
either for scheduled or unscheduled follow-ups.
Lazarus [10] showed a high number of device and
clinical observations recorded in the subgroup of his CRT-
D patients. Similarly, we noticed many events during
scheduled and extra transmissions. In particular, the
overwhelming majority of episodes and alerts were dis-
ease-related: ventricular arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation, and
heart failure related events.
A major objective for device follow-up is to ensure
proper sensing, classification, and therapy of any tachycar-
dia episodes. The electrograms stored in the ICD memory
represent the most useful tool to evaluate appropriate
detection and treatment of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias
[12, 13]. With remote monitoring systems the electrograms
can be retrieved remotely [9, 14, 15].
In our experience, the majority of cases of ventricular
arrhythmia episodes were managed remotely without
scheduling additional visits, confirming that a large
proportion of post-shock interrogations do not require
any device reprogramming, as we previously observed
[16].
Fig.
3 The patient (male,
65 years, dilated cardiomyopathy,
NYHA Class II, ejection fraction
23%, QRS width 160 ms) heard
the alert and contacted the center.
An extra transmission was
requested and a decrease of intra-
thoracic impedance (a) with
increase of the “Fluid Index”
above the alert threshold (b) was
verified via remote data review,
together with a reduction of the
patient daily activity (c). At the
telephone follow-up, the patient
reported the worsening of heart
failure symptoms. The increase of
diuretics dosage was prescribed
and an extra data transmission
was scheduled after 1 week. This
subsequent assessment demon-
strated an ongoing increase of
impedance and daily activity (d)
that was accompanied by the
remission of patient symptoms
58
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61

In one patient we recorded the occurrence of an episode
of symptomatic paroxysmal atrial flutter that triggered an
extra transmission and the prompt adjustment of the
therapy.
Early detection of atrial tachyarrhythmias may facilitate
the timely introduction of protective interventions against
thromboembolic events, limit inappropriate therapy deliv-
ery in ICD recipients, and anticipate adverse hemodynamic
effects, notably loss of resynchronization, in patients treated
with CRT. Thus, remote monitoring with automatic early
detection may become an important tool in order to allow
prompt and early reaction [17, 18].
The CareLink device tested in this study did not permit to
automatically detect atrial fibrillation episodes and perform
transmission without patient cooperation. However, the
incoming new system version will be able to perform
automatic detection and transmission of asymptomatic
episodes.
A previous study showed that intra-thoracic impedance,
measured by an implanted device, correlates inversely with
the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and the net fluid loss
in heart failure patients hospitalized for fluid overload [19].
A recent observational study followed 373 patients
implanted with an ICD presenting such diagnostic capabil-
ity and reported that in clinical practice the algorithm was
able to detect clinical heart failure decompensation with
both sensitivity and positive predictive value of 60% [20].
For the first time we studied the follow-up of a group of
heart failure patients implanted with a device capable of
intra-thoracic impedance measurement and alert for possi-
ble fluid accumulation, managed with a device for remote
monitoring. Regardless of the short follow-up period, we
recorded many episodes of heart failure decompensation
and signs of impending pulmonary congestion. Many of
them were correctly identified by the algorithm (sensitivity
91%, positive predictive value 71%).
The better results obtained in our series with respect to
previous experiences with this algorithm [20], may be ascribed
to the fact that we enrolled patients implanted from more than
6 months. Indeed, in some cases the patients had experienced
a preceding event and the device alert threshold was adjusted
in response to that, in order to optimize the detection.
The accuracy of an algorithm for the detection of clinical
decompensation assumes even higher importance in the
perspective of remote management of heart failure patients:
if the patient is seen less often, the detection and subsequent
therapy might be significantly delayed in the absence of
adequate alert systems.
In addition to the performance of the detection algorithm, it
should be emphasized the high percentage of episodes that
were successfully managed without requiring additional in-
hospital visits, by means of remote data review and assessment
of symptom status and therapy compliance by phone.
Moreover, patients might not respond or hear the audible
impedance alert, as recently reported [21]. Thus, automated
telemetric transmission of alerts to the physician may
shorten the delay between alert and therapy initiation,
further improving the clinical outcome.
Although we tested remote follow-up only in stable CRT
patients, we can hypothesize that it may be very useful also
in the initial time of CRT. Indeed, monitoring of heart
failure parameters could early identify responders to CRT
and could allow prompt titration of drug therapy. Definitely,
this could result in more frequent patient transmissions and
heavier workload for remote data review, but this aspect
will be better addressed with the new system version that
allows automatic wireless transmissions.
The lack of remote programming capabilities, common
to all currently available follow-up systems, could represent
a potential limitation. However, in our population we did
not report any need to reprogram the device or to schedule
extra visits for this purpose. This confirms our preliminary
data showing that reprogramming of device parameters are
significantly less frequent 6 months after implant, allowing
an efficient use of remote follow-up systems [16].
Finally, as regard to technical issues [22], during the
study we did not record device-related observations.
Nonetheless, it is predictable that in the long-term an
increasing rate of such events (i.e. impending elective
replacement indicator) will be transmitted.
Battery depletion is currently identified by standard
device surveillance and by shortening of follow-up intervals
when the ICD approaches end-of-life [23]. This accelera-
tion of the rate of ambulatory visits could be obviated by
remote monitoring.
4.1 Limitations
The main limitation of present study is the lack of a control
group of patients managed by traditional methods. Al-
though our findings suggest that remote monitoring may
improve the clinical management of CRT-D patients,
randomized controlled trials are warranted to evaluate the
clinical impact of remote monitoring when compared with
standard method.
5 Conclusions
Our study demonstrates that remote monitoring may
improve clinical management of tachyarrhythmias and
heart failure in patients implanted with CRT-D devices
and that it may lead to a reduction of health care
utilizations, if included in a disease management program.
Early detection and review of device and clinical events,
allowed by the diagnostic features of current ICDs and by
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61
59
59

remote follow-up systems, suggest the potential impact of
this technology on overall patient care. Controlled studies
are needed to demonstrate if such a new approach to patient
care may improve overall clinical outcome.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Walter
Bernardini and Marco Vimercati (clinical service team, Medtronic
Italy) for the data management, and Jane Moore for her assistance in
the editing of this manuscript.
Conflict of Interest Disclosure
Serena Gilardi and Sergio Valsecchi
are employees of Medtronic, Inc.
No other conflicts exist.
References
1. Moss, A. J., Hall, W. J., Cannom, D. S., Daubert, J. P., Higgins, S.
L., Klein, H., et al. (1996). Improved survival with an implanted
defibrillator in patients with coronary disease at high risk for
ventricular arrhythmia. Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Im-
plantation Trial Investigators. New England Journal of Medicine,
335, 1933–1940.
2. Buxton, A. E., Lee, K. L., Fisher, J. D., Josephson, M. E.,
Prystowsky, E. N., & Hafley, G. (1999). A randomized study of
the prevention of sudden death in patients with coronary artery
disease. Multicenter Unsustained Tachycardia Trial Investigators.
New England Journal of Medicine, 341, 1882–1890.
3. Moss, A. J., Zareba, W., Hall, W. J., Klein, H., Wilber, D. J.,
Cannom, D. S., et al. (2002). Multicenter automatic defibrillator
implantation trial II investigators. Prophylactic implantation of a
defibrillator in patients with myocardial infarction and reduced
ejection fraction. New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 877–
883.
4. Bardy, G. H., Lee, K. L., Mark, D. B., Poole, J. E., Packer, D. L.,
Boineau, R., Domanski, M., et al. (2005). Sudden Cardiac Death
in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-HeFT) Investigators. Amiodarone or
an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for congestive heart
failure. New England Journal of Medicine, 352, 225–237.
5. Cleland, J. G., Daubert, J. C., Erdmann, E., Freemantle, N., Gras,
D., Kappenberger, L., et al. (2005). Cardiac Resynchronization-
Heart Failure (CARE-HF) Study investigators. The effect of
cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mortality in heart
failure. New England Journal of Medicine, 352, 1539–1549.
6. Bristow, M. R., Saxon, L. A., Boehmer, J., Krueger, S., Kass, D.
A., De Marco, T., et al. (2004). Comparison of Medical Therapy,
Pacing, and Defibrillation in Heart Failure (COMPANION)
Investigators. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy with or without
an implantable defibrillator in advanced chronic heart failure. New
England Journal of Medicine, 350, 2140–2150.
7. Hunt, S. A., Abraham, W. T., Chin, M. H., Feldman, A. M.,
Francis, G. S., Ganiats, T. G., et al. (2005). American College of
Cardiology; American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines; American College of Chest Physicians; International
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation; Heart Rhythm
Society. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline update for the diagnosis and
management of chronic heart failure in the adult: summary article:
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Commit-
tee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and
Management of Heart Failure). Circulation, 112, 1116–1143.
8. Swedberg, K., Cleland, J., Dargie, H., Drexler, H., Follath, F.,
Komajda, M., et al. (2005). Task force for the diagnosis and
treatment of chronic heart failure of the European society of
cardiology. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of chronic
heart failure: executive summary (update 2005): The task force for
the diagnosis and treatment of chronic heart failure of the
European society of cardiology. European Heart Journal, 26,
1115–1140.
9. Schoenfeld, M. H., Compton, S. J., Mead, R. H., Weiss, D. N.,
Sherfesee, L., Englund, J., et al. (2004). Remote monitoring of
implantable cardioverter defibrillators: a prospective analysis.
Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 27(6 Pt 1), 757–763.
10. Lazarus, A. (2007). Remote, wireless, ambulatory monitoring of
implantable pacemakers, cardioverter defibrillators, and cardiac
resynchronization therapy systems: analysis of a worldwide
database. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 30(Suppl 1),
S2–S12.
11. Saxon, L. A., Boehmer, J. P., Neuman, S., & Mullin, C. M.
(2007). Remote Active Monitoring in Patients with Heart Failure
(RAPID-RF): design and rationale. Journal of Cardiac Failure,
13, 241–246.
12. Rosenqvist, M., Beyer, T., Block, M., den Dulk, K., Minten, J., &
Lindemans, F. (1998). Adverse events with transvenous implant-
able cardioverter-defibrillators: a prospective multicenter study.
European 7219 Jewel ICD investigators. Circulation, 98, 663–
670.
13. Theuns, D. A., Klootwijk, A. P., Goedhart, D. M., & Jordaens, L.
J. (2004). Prevention of inappropriate therapy in implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators: results of a prospective, randomized
study of tachyarrhythmia detection algorithms. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology, 44, 2362–2367.
14. Perings, C., Klein, G., Toft, E., Moro, C., Klug, D., Bocker, D., et
al. (2006). RIONI Investigators. The RIONI study rationale and
design: validation of the first stored electrograms transmitted via
home monitoring in patients with implantable defibrillators.
Europace, 8, 288–292.
15. Koos, R., Sinha, A. M., & Stellbrink, C. (2005). Home
Monitoring in an ICD patient with incessant ventricular tachycar-
dia. Zeitschrift fuÉr Kardiologie, 94, 461–464.
16. Lunati, M., Gasparini, M., Santini, M., Landolina, M., Perego, G. B.,
Pappone, C., et al. (2008). on behalf of the InSync ICD Italian
Registry Investigators. Follow-Up of CRT-ICD: Implications for the
Use of Remote Follow-Up Systems. Data from the InSync ICD
Italian Registry. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 31, 38–46.
17. Varma, N., Stambler, B., & Chun, S. (2005). Detection of atrial
fibrillation by implanted devices with wireless data transmission
capability. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 28(Suppl 1),
S133–S136.
18. Ricci, R. P., Morichelli, L., & Santini, M. (2008). Home
monitoring remote control of pacemaker and ICD patients in
clinical practice. Impact on medical management and health care
resource utilization. Europace, 10, 164–170.
19. Yu, C. M., Wang, L., Chau, E., Chan, R. H., Kong, S. L., Tang, M.
O., et al. (2005). Intrathoracic impedance monitoring in patients
with heart failure: correlation with fluid status and feasibility of
early warning preceding hospitalization. Circulation, 112, 841–848.
20. Vollmann, D., Nagele, H., Schauerte, P., Wiegand, U., Butter, C.,
Zanotto, G., et al. (2007). European InSync Sentry Observational
Study Investigators. Clinical utility of intrathoracic impedance
monitoring to alert patients with an implanted device of
60
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61

deteriorating chronic heart failure. European Heart Journal, 28,
1835–1840.
21. Knackstedt, C., Mischke, K., Schimpf, T., Waringer, J., Fache, K.,
Frechen, D., et al. (2008). Integration of automatic intrathoracic
fluid content measurement into clinical decision making in
patients with congestive heart failure. Pacing and Clinical
Electrophysiology, 31, 961–967.
22. Scholten, M. F., Thornton, A. S., Theuns, D. A., Res, J., &
Jordaens, L. J. (2004). Twiddler’s syndrome detected by home
monitoring device. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 27,
1151–1152.
23. Schoenfeld, M. H., & Markowitz, H. T. (2000). Device follow-up
in the age of automaticity. Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology,
23, 803–806.
J Interv Card Electrophysiol (2009) 24:53–61
61
61

