


Pilot randomized controlled trial of a Spanish-language 
Behavioral Activation mobile app (¡Aptívate!) for the treatment of 
depressive symptoms among united states Latinx adults with 
limited English proficiency 
Jennifer Dahnea,b,*, Anahi Colladoc,d, C.W. Lejuezd, Cristina M. Riscoe, Vanessa A. Diazf, 
Lisa Colesa, Jacob Kustanowitzg, Michael J. Zvolenskyh,i, and Matthew J. Carpentera,b 
aDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 67 
President Street, Charleston, SC 29425, United States 
bHollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 171 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, 
SC 29425, United States 
cAlvord, Baker, and Associates, LLC, 3200 Tower Oaks Blvd, Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20852, 
United States 
dDepartment of Psychology and Cofrin Logan Center for Addiction Research and Treatment, The 
University of Kansas, 1000 Sunnyside Ave, Lawrence, KS 66045, United States 
eDepartment of Psychology and Office of the Senior Vice President and Provost, University of 
Maryland, College Park, 2131 Biology-Psychology Building, College Park, MD 20742, United 
States 
fDepartment of Family Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, 5 Charleston Center, Suite 
263, Charleston SC 29425, United States 
gMountainPass Technology, 2 Wisconsin Circle, Suite 700, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, United 
States 
hDepartment of Psychology, University of Houston, Fred J. Heyne Building, Suite 104, Houston, 
Texas 77204, United States 
iDepartment of Behavioral Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1155 
Pressler Street, Houston, Texas 77030, United States 

Background: To address the need for disseminable, evidence-based depression treatment options 
for Latinx adults with limited English proficiency (LEP), our team developed ¡Aptívate!, a 
Spanish-language Behavioral Activation self-help mobile application. Primary aims of this study 
*Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Medical 
University of South Carolina, 67 President Street, Charleston, SC 29425, United States. dahne@musc.edu (J. Dahne). 
Conflict Of Interest Statement 
Declaration of Interest: The authors (JD, JK, CWL) are co-owners of Behavioral Activation Tech, LLC which owns the rights to 
¡Aptívate!. The authors report no other actual or potential conflicts of interest that may bias the present work. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Affect Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01. 
J 
 
 


were to: 1) examine feasibility and uptake of ¡Aptívate! among depressed Latinx adults with LEP 
and 2) preliminarily examine ¡Aptívate! efficacy for depression treatment. 
Methods: Participants (N=42) with elevated depressive symptoms were randomized 2:1:1 to: 1) 
¡Aptívate! (n=22), 2) an active control Spanish-language app (“iCouch CBT”; n=9), or 3) 
Treatment As Usual (i.e., no app; n=11). Feasibility was assessed via self-reported app utilization 
and app analytics data. Depressive symptoms were assessed weekly for eight weeks via self report. 
Results: All ¡Aptívate! participants used the app at least once, 81.8% of participants used the app 
≥8 times, and 36.4% of participants used the app ≥56 times. Weekly retention was strong: 72.7% 
and 50% of participants continued to use the app at one- and two-months post-enrollment, 
respectively. Generalized Estimating Equation models indicated a significant interaction between 
time and treatment, such that ¡Aptívate! participants reported significantly lower depressive 
symptoms over time than TAU. Depressive symptoms did not differ on average across time 
between the iCouch and TAU conditions, nor between iCouch and ¡Aptívate!. 
Limitations: Limitations include small sample size, limited follow-up, and lack of analytics data 
for the active control condition. 
Conclusions: With further research, ¡Aptívate! may offer a feasible, efficacious approach to 
extend the reach of evidence-based depression treatment for Latinx adults with LEP. 




United States Latinx adults experience similar or higher rates of depression as non-Latinx 
White adults (Pratt and Brody, 2016), but are less likely to engage in treatment (Lagomasino 
et al., 2005). Language proficiency is one key barrier to the receipt of evidence-based 
depression treatment. In the United States, more than 37 million individuals speak Spanish 
at home and 16.3 million of these individuals report speaking English less than very well 
(US Census Bureau, 2013). As compared to their English proficient counterparts, Latinx 
adults with limited English proficiency (LEP) have significantly lower odds of receiving 
mental health treatment (Bauer et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2011; Sentell et al., 2007). When 
treatment is received, Latinx adults with LEP tend to receive lower quality care and are 
subsequently at increased risk for treatment dropout (Cabassa et al., 2012). mHealth 
platforms, and specifically mobile applications (apps) that can be delivered via smartphone, 
can be leveraged to disseminate evidence-based psychological depression treatments in 
Spanish to Latinx adults (Muñoz et al., 2018). Smartphone ownership rates among Latinx 
adults now mirror that of the general population such that 77% of this group own 
smartphones (Pew Research Center, 2018). As compared to other racial/ethnic groups, 
Latinx individuals are more likely to be smartphone dependent (i.e., reliance on smartphones 
for online access), suggesting that mHealth interventions delivered via smartphone, rather 
than via computer or tablet, may hold greatest promise (Pew Research Center, 2018). Yet, 
few studies to date have developed and/or tested psychological depression interventions 
delivered via mobile app for this population. One recent study that did examine the 


 


feasibility and efficacy of several available depression treatment apps among this group 
found poor treatment engagement and limited efficacy (Pratap et al., 2018). Clearly, there is 
need for additional research focused on development and testing of app-based depression 
treatments for Latinx adults with LEP. 
Because U.S. Latinx are a highly heterogeneous group with varied sociocultural and 
historical origins (González Burchard et al., 2005), an appropriate depression psychotherapy 
to adapt for mobile app delivery must be idiographic to accommodate personal beliefs/ 
values on a case-by-case basis. Brief Behavioral Activation Treatment for Depression (Brief 
BA; Collado et al., 2014b; Lejuez et al., 2011) is an idiographic, straightforward, concise, 
yet evidence-based psychotherapy for depression. Collado et al. (2014a; 2014b) developed a 
direct Spanish language translation of Brief BA, delivered in person using paper forms, for 
Latinx adults with LEP. Treatment efficacy was evaluated as compared to a supportive 
counseling control condition, also delivered in Spanish. As compared to supportive 
counseling, Spanish-language Brief BA led to significantly greater decreases (68% vs. 59%) 
in depressive symptoms as well as greater remission of Major Depressive Disorder (93% vs. 
50%) by treatment end, with treatment gains sustained through one-month post-treatment 
follow-up. However, this treatment approach is limited because public health need exceeds 
the number of mental health treatment providers who are trained in evidence-based practice 
and can deliver services in Spanish (Alegria et al., 2002; Aponte-Rivera et al., 2014). 
Adapting and testing Brief BA, delivered in Spanish, for mobile app delivery holds promise 
for reaching those Latinx individuals with LEP in need of evidence-based depression 
treatment who do not access traditional services. 
To address this need, our group developed a Spanish language mobile app (“¡Aptívate!”; 
Dahne et al., 2018) informed by Brief BA. Although ¡Aptívate! is based on an evidence- 
based treatment for depression, the feasibility and efficacy of the app has not yet been 
examined. The aims of the present study were two-fold: 1) to examine the feasibility and 
uptake of ¡Aptívate! among Latinx adults with LEP and elevated depressive symptoms and 
2) to preliminarily examine the efficacy of ¡Aptívate! as compared to both an active control 
depression treatment mobile app and to treatment as usual (TAU). 


Study participants were recruited between September 2017 and June 2018. Participants were 
initially recruited locally via primary care/family medicine clinics and community centers 
that serve the Charleston, South Carolina Latinx community. Because of slow recruitment, in 
January 2018 we expanded to remote recruitment and recruited study participants 
nationwide using postings in Spanish on websites including Craigslist, Facebook, and 
Twitter. Those interested completed a brief screening either via phone or online via REDCap 
to establish preliminary study eligibility. All participants who screened eligible following the 
preliminary screening were contacted to schedule a time for a baseline visit, at which time 
final study eligibility was confirmed. Participants who scheduled a baseline visit but did not 
attend were given one opportunity to reschedule before being considered lost to follow-up. 
Baseline visits occurred in-person for those recruited locally and via doxy.me video (Welch 


 


et al., 2016) for those recruited remotely. Study participants had to meet the following 
criteria: 1) age 18+, 2) currently own a smartphone, 3) if not an iPhone owner, report 
willingness to utilize a study iPhone, 4) report willingness to utilize a mobile app for the 
treatment of depressed mood, 5) have a current, valid e-mail address that is checked at least 
once per day, 6) report Spanish language preference, 7) able to read fluently in Spanish, 8) 
score of ≥ 10 on the Patient Health Questionnaire-8, Spanish language version at screening 
(PHQ-8; Kroenke et al., 2009), and 9) have been seen by a doctor within the last year. The 
criterion of being seen by a doctor within the last year was included because we view 
primary care as one potential avenue for future treatment dissemination (Dahne et al., 2018). 
Participants were excluded if they were currently receiving psychotherapy, if they were 
visually impaired, if they scored ≤ 13 on the Spanish language Beck Depression Inventory-II 
(BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996; Wiebe and Penley, 2005) at baseline, and/or if they endorsed 
suicidality during the baseline visit. Because both apps utilized in this trial were only 
accessible via iOS, participants who lived local to the Charleston area but did not own an 
iPhone capable of running iOS 8 or higher were lent one for the duration of the trial. 
Participants recruited remotely were required to own a study compatible iPhone in order to 
be included in the trial. Remote participants were also required to have capacity for doxy.me 
(used for the baseline video session and consent), specifically 1) access to a computer with a 
webcam and speakers and 2) a compatible internet browser (at the time of this trial, doxy.me 
was optimized for Google Chrome and Firefox). See Fig. 1 for CONSORT diagram. 

All study procedures were approved by the Medical University of South Carolina 
Institutional Review Board. Upon consent, participants completed self-report assessments 
and were subsequently randomized 2:1:1 to receive either the Spanish language Behavioral 
Activation mobile app (¡Aptívate!), an active control Spanish language Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy (CBT) mobile app (iCouch CBT), or Treatment as Usual (i.e., no app). We utilized 
2:1:1 randomization because a primary aim of this trial was to examine ¡Aptívate! 
feasibility. Thus, we wanted to ensure enough participants within that arm while still 
keeping sample size fairly low ( ~ 20 participants in the ¡Aptívate! condition), consistent 
with a pilot trial. Randomization was stratified based on whether the participant reported 
currently taking psychiatric medications for the treatment of mental/emotional problems. 
Because clinical data are limited on other available mobile apps that purport to treat 
depressive symptoms (Chan et al., 2015; Leigh and Flatt, 2015; Neary and Schueller, 2018; 
Price et al., 2014), we opted to compare ¡Aptívate! efficacy to a commercially available 
active control mobile app in addition to TAU to extend the literature on efficacy data for 
other clinical apps. We selected iCouch CBT as the active control app because, at the time of 
trial onset, it was one of the only existing mobile apps that was available in Spanish and 
informed by Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), the most evaluated depression treatment 
among Latinx adults (Collado et al., 2016). 
¡Aptívate! and iCouch CBT were provided to study participants at no cost. At the time of 
this study, ¡Aptívate! was available via the iTunes App Store (United States) for $4.99 and 
iCouch CBT was available for $2.99. If randomized to either mobile app condition, study 


 


staff helped the participant download the app and provided a brief, scripted overview ( ~ 10 
min) on how to use the app. Following this overview, participants were provided with time 
( ~ 5 min) to use the app freely and ask any questions. App proficiency was not formally 
evaluated. Those provided with an app were instructed to use the app regularly, at least once 
per day, for the duration of the study. Following the baseline visit, participants were e-mailed 
assessment measures weekly for eight weeks. Thus, participants completed study 
assessments at nine time-points in total (i.e., baseline and eight weekly follow-up 
assessments). Participants were compensated for any follow-up assessments completed 
within 72 h of receiving the e-mailed link. All measures were completed via REDCap, a 
secure, web-based research data capture system (Harris et al., 2009). Participants were 
compensated up to $250 for completion of all assessments. Participants who borrowed an 
iPhone as part of the trial were compensated an additional $50 for return of the iPhone in 
working, non-damaged order within two-weeks of their trial completion date. 


Spanish Language Behavioral Activation Mobile App (¡Aptívate!).—Details of 
the ¡Aptívate! app have been published previously, including suggested instructions for 
integrating the app into primary care practice (Dahne et al., 2018). Briefly, ¡Aptívate! is a 
self-help Spanish language adaptation of Brief BA (Collado et al., 2014b; Lejuez et al., 
2011). Within ¡Aptívate!, the user identifies individualized values and associated activities 
across five life areas, including relationships, daily responsibilities, recreation, career and 
education, and health. Values then become a framework for generating activities. For 
example, within the relationships life area, a user might create a value of “develop a strong 
family unit.” Activities consistent with this value might include “have family dinners twice a 
week” and “call my children three times a week” (Dahne et al., 2018). These activities are 
scheduled and tracked within a daily calendar and users can view fluctuations in mood as a 
function of changes in activity level. For activities that are difficult to complete, the user can 
identify an individual who may assist in completing that activity and ways to ask that person 
to help complete the activity. Users are provided with psychoeducation regarding the 
association between mood and activity and are reinforced for continued app utilization and 
completion of activities via badges that can be earned within the app. 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Spanish Language Mobile App (iCouch 
CBT; active control).—iCouch CBT prompts users to explain distressing situations and 
associated emotions, identify corresponding thoughts and cognitive distortions, and 
ultimately identify alternative thoughts and corresponding emotions. These logs can be 
saved so that the user can review them at a later time. A prior review of mental health mobile 
apps which included iCouch CBT noted that the app is CBT-based, addresses both low mood 
and anxiety, includes reporting of thoughts, feelings, or behaviors, and includes a log of past 
app use (Bakker et al., 2016). To our knowledge, there are no published efficacy studies of 
iCouch CBT for the treatment of depression. 
Treatment as Usual (TAU; inactive control).—Participants randomized to the TAU 
condition did not receive a mobile app. However, they were not precluded from seeking out 


 


additional mental health care (i.e., the care they would have received had they not been 
enrolled in the trial). 

Primary outcomes for this trial include: 1) feasibility of ¡Aptívate! as indicated by self-report 
and app utilization analytics and 2) change in depressive symptoms over time as a function 
of treatment condition. 
App Feasibility.—Participants in both app conditions self-reported on a weekly basis 
whether they used the app they were assigned during the prior week. Those who did not 
complete the follow-up assessment were coded as having not used the app during the 
preceding week. In addition to self-report data, user analytics data for participants 
randomized to the ¡Aptívate! condition were available via Yahoo's Flurry Analytics system. 
Specific analytics data captured included: 1) total number of app sessions across the trial 
duration and within each trial week, 2) average time per app session, 3) total time spent 
using the app across the trial duration, 4) number of times the participant added a new value 
within the app, 5) number of times the participant created a value-driven activity within the 
app, 6) number of activities completed across the trial duration, 7) badges earned across the 
trial duration, 8) number of times the participant rated their daily mood across the trial 
duration, and 9) weekly retention, defined as the percentage of study participants who 
utilized ¡Aptívate! at least once during each week after study enrollment. We did not have 
access to similar data for participants randomized to the iCouch CBT condition because this 
app was not developed by our research team. 
Depressive Symptoms.—A Spanish language version of the PHQ-8 (Kroenke et al., 
2009; Wulsin et al., 2002) was utilized as a preliminary study screening measure to 
determine whether participants were experiencing at least minimal symptoms of depression. 
The PHQ-8 was selected as the initial study screening measure because it is brief and can be 
quickly completed either via phone or online. Across the study follow-up (including 
baseline), depressive symptoms were assessed via the Spanish language BDI-II (Beck et al., 
1996; Wiebe and Penley, 2005). Scores on the BDI-II are interpreted as follows: 0– 
13=minimal depression, 14–19=mild depression, 20–28=moderate depression, 29– 
63=severe depression. The BDI-II was also used as a study screening measure at baseline to 
exclude those with current suicidality, defined as response of “I would like to kill myself’ or 
“I would kill myself if I had the chance” on the suicidal thoughts or wishes item of the BDI- 
II, although no participants were excluded at baseline due to this criterion. 

Chi-square and ANOVA analyses were used to determine baseline differences in participant 
demographics as a function of treatment condition. Chi-square analyses were utilized to 
compare self-reported app utilization across groups and descriptive statistics were utilized to 
examine ¡Aptívate! feasibility and acceptability as indicated by app analytics data. 
Subsequently, a generalized estimating equation (GEE) model assuming a normal 
distribution, identity link function, and exchangeable correlation matrix (i.e., within-subject 
observations are equally correlated) was used to examine the interaction between time and 


 


treatment condition on BDI-II depressive symptoms adjusting for the main effects of 
baseline depressive symptoms, time, treatment condition, and whether the participant was 
recruited locally or remotely. Baseline depressive symptoms were included as a covariate in 
order to adjust for between-group differences in depression that may have existed prior to 
the study being implemented. As GEE was utilized to examine change in depression over 
time as a function of treatment condition, participants were only included in the GEE model 
if at least one follow-up assessment was completed (n=2 excluded from GEE model). 
Because GEE accommodates within-subject correlations across repeated measures, 
unbalanced designs, and incomplete data, it provides less biased estimates than traditional 
regression approaches in analyzing longitudinal data (Hardin and Hilbe, 2002). 


In total, 42 participants were enrolled in the trial (1=22 ¡Aptívate!, n=9 iCouch CBT, n=11 
TAU). See Table 1 for participant demographics for the full sample as well as by treatment 
group. There were no significant demographic differences as a function of treatment 
condition. At baseline, participants on average reported experiencing depressive symptoms 
in the moderate to severe depression range [BDI-II baseline M(SD)=31.24(9.71); ¡Aptívate! 
=32.18(9.22), iCouch CBT=28.33(7.71), TAU=31.73(12.27)]. Study retention was high, 
with 90.5% of participants across treatment groups completing at least six of the eight 
follow-up assessments. There were no significant differences in study retention between 
treatment groups. 

Self-Reported App Utilization.—See Fig. 2 for self-reported app utilization rates (i.e., 
whether the assigned app was used during the week prior) as a function of treatment 
condition. Self-reported incidence of app utilization was significantly higher for the 
¡Aptívate! as compared to the iCouch CBT condition at Week 3, χ2=6.87, p=0.009, with a 
trend toward significance at Week 2, χ2=3.47, p=0.06. 
¡Aptívate! Analytics.—As indicated by analytics data, all ¡Aptívate! participants used the 
app at least once during the trial, 81.8% of participants used the app at least 8 times (i.e., at 
least once per week on average), 45.5% of participants used the app at least 28 times (i.e., 
every other day on average), and 36.4% of participants used the app 56 or more times (i.e., at 
least once per day on average). Participants on average had 61.41(91.73) app sessions 
throughout the eight-week trial duration, spent 87.73(63.08) seconds using the app per 
session, and spent 65.77(82.76) minutes using the app in total throughout the trial. 
Participants created on average 4.68(3.54) unique values within the app, 11.77(17.02) 
activities across values, and completed 21.73(45.60) activities (Table 2). 
Some analytics outcomes significantly differed as a function of whether a participant was 
recruited locally vs. remotely. Local participants as compared to remote participants had a 
significantly greater number of app sessions during Week 2 of the trial (Local 
(M(SD)=18.00(25.61), Remote=4.13(4.30); F(1, 20)=4.73, p=0.04), spent on average more 


 


time per session using the app (Local (M(SD)=149.83(77.57) seconds, 
Remote=64.44(38.00) seconds; F(1, 20)=12.30, p=0.002), spent more time in total using the 
app (Local (M(SD)=147.50(119.65) minutes, Remote=35.13(33.80) minutes; F(1, 
20)=12.42, p=0.04), and scheduled more activities on average (Local (M(SD)=51.83(57.33), 
Remote=9.75(18.37); F(1, 20)=7.19, p=0.01). 
¡Aptívate! Retention.—Weekly app retention, defined as any app use within each week 
following trial enrollment, was examined for ¡Aptívate! participants. No procedures to 
increase app retention (e.g., contacting participants who were not using the app to remind 
them to login) were instituted by the study team during the trial. In general, retention was 
high across the study duration: 100% of participants utilized ¡Aptívate! at least once during 
the first week following trial enrollment, 77.3% during the second week, 77.3% during the 
third week, 72.7% during the fourth week, 59.1% during the fifth week, 54.5% during the 
sixth week, 59.1% during the seventh week, and 50.0% during the eighth week. Chi-square 
analyses revealed no significant differences in study retention across weeks as a function of 
whether study participants were recruited locally vs. remotely. 

The GEE model indicated a significant main effect of baseline depressive symptoms 
(χ2=34.66, df=1, p<0.001) as well as a significant interaction between time and treatment 
condition (χ2=35.06, df=14, p=0.001). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons both within- and 
between-groups were utilized to understand the nature of the significant time by treatment 
interaction. Regarding within-group comparisons, adjusting for baseline, depressive 
symptoms among participants in the ¡Aptívate! condition were significantly lower as 
compared to the Week 1 assessment (i.e., the first follow-up) at Weeks 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
Depressive symptoms among participants in the iCouch CBT condition were significantly 
lower as compared to the Week 1 assessment at Weeks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Depressive 
symptoms among participants in the TAU condition were only significantly different from 
the Week 1 assessment at Week 8. When comparing follow-up BDI scores to baseline BDI 
scores, among those in the ¡Aptívate! and iCouch CBT conditions, all follow-up BDI scores 
were significantly lower than baseline BDI scores, whereas among those in the TAU 
condition, BDI scores at Weeks 3 through 8 were significantly lower than baseline BDI 
scores. 
Between-group mean differences when adjusting for baseline depressive symptoms and 
remote vs. local were significantly different on average across time points only between the 
¡Aptívate! and TAU conditions (¡Aptívate! vs. TAU mean difference across time= 
−5.39(2.11), p=0.01). Within time points, significant mean group differences between 
¡Aptívate! vs. TAU were evident at Week 2 (¡Aptívate! vs. TAU mean difference= 
−10.17(3.26), p=0.002), Week 6 (¡Aptívate! vs. TAU mean difference=−7.48(3.24), p=0.02), 
and Week 7 (¡Aptívate! vs. TAU mean difference=−8.08(3.80), p=0.03). There were no 
significant mean differences in depressive symptoms between the iCouch CBT and TAU 
conditions or between the iCouch CBT and ¡Aptívate! conditions across time points (iCouch 
CBT vs. TAU p=0.16; iCouch CBT vs. ¡Aptívate! p=0.66) or within any individual follow- 
up week (all p’s > 0.08). 


 


On average, participants in the ¡Aptívate! condition had a 13.79(12.33)-point decrease on the 
BDI-II from pre- to post-treatment, participants in the iCouch CBT condition had a 
11.25(8.19)-point decrease, and participants in the TAU condition had a 8.00(5.44) point 
decrease. In addition, 54.5% of participants in the ¡Aptívate! condition, 77.8% of 
participants in the iCouch CBT condition, and 36.4% of participants in the TAU condition 
evidenced less than minimal symptoms of depression on the BDI-II (i.e., score ≥ 13) at some 
point during the study. Among those who completed the Week 8 assessment (n=19 
¡Aptívate!, n=8 iCouch CBT, n=6 TAU), 42.1% of ¡Aptívate! participants, 25.0% of iCouch 
CBT participants, and 16.7% of TAU participants had less than minimal symptoms of 
depression at that time. See Fig. 3 for a graph of depressive symptoms by time as a function 
of treatment condition. 

This study offers preliminary feasibility and efficacy of ¡Aptívate! for the treatment of 
depressive symptoms among Latinx adults with LEP. Nearly all participants used the app on 
average at least once per week and a third of participants used the app on average once per 
day. Although these utilization rates are promising, particularly as compared to prior 
research (Arean et al., 2016; Pratap et al., 2018; Rosa et al., 2015), most participants utilized 
the app less frequently than instructed (at least once per day). Thus, future studies might 
consider additional support to promote more frequent app utilization among study 
participants, such as by sending additional reminders to continue to use the app, 
implementing a contingency management approach to reinforce continued app engagement, 
or integrating with existing care sites, such as primary care. 
Retention was high across the eight-week trial duration, with 72.7% and 50% of participants 
continuing to use the app one- and two-months following trial enrollment respectively. Self- 
reported retention was also generally higher for the ¡Aptívate! condition as compared to the 
iCouch CBT condition. These retention rates are in contrast to most app-based mental health 
treatment trials in the general population, wherein few users continue to use the app beyond 
two-weeks (Arean et al., 2016; Rosa et al., 2015). 
¡Aptívate! participants utilized all core app features, including mood monitoring, values 
identification, and activity selection, scheduling, and completion. However, there was 
considerable variability across participants in frequency of app use and specific app features 
utilized. Some of this variability is explained by local vs. remote recruitment: those who 
were recruited locally and attended in person baseline visits used the app with greater 
frequency, for longer duration, and scheduled more activities. Reduced mHealth engagement 
among remotely recruited Latinx adults with depressive symptoms has been found by other 
research groups as well. For example, one recent study found that only 18.7% of Latinx 
participants with depressive symptoms who enrolled in a remote app-based intervention 
study actually downloaded their assigned treatment app (Pratap et al., 2018). Thus, for this 
population, and perhaps for other populations, in person recruitment via community centers, 
primary care, or other venues may be associated with higher app utilization. Our team's 
original recruitment plan was to recruit in person, locally via primary care/family medicine 
clinics and community centers that serve the Charleston, South Carolina Latinx community. 


 


However, recruitment via these outlets was slow, which may speak to limited feasibility of 
this intervention within Charleston primary care/family medicine clinics and community 
centers. Future studies should examine the feasibility of recruiting LEP Latinx adults with 
depressive symptoms from these venues in areas that have larger Latinx populations. Future 
studies may also consider further evaluating the impact of remote vs. local recruitment on 
mHealth treatment utilization. Prioritization of in person recruitment via either single- or 
multi-center study designs may maximize participant engagement with a mobile app 
treatment among this population. 
Regarding efficacy, this pilot trial suggests preliminary efficacy for ¡Aptívate! among a 
sample of Latinx adults with LEP recruited nationwide. After accounting for baseline 
depressive symptoms as well as local/remote recruitment, participants in the ¡Aptívate! 
condition had significantly lower symptoms of depression over time relative to TAU 
participants. Within treatments, as compared to depressive symptoms at Week 1, participants 
in both the ¡Aptívate! and iCouch CBT conditions had significantly lower symptoms at most 
follow-up assessment time points. In comparison, symptoms of depression among TAU 
participants were only lower at Week 8 as compared to Week 1. Participants in both the 
¡Aptívate! and iCouch CBT conditions also had clinically significant decreases in depressive 
symptoms on average (i.e., BDI-II decrease of ≥ 10 points) from pre- to post-treatment. 
Thus, both ¡Aptívate! and iCouch CBT may be associated with more rapid and more 
clinically significant decreases in depression over time relative to TAU. 
Results of this study should be interpreted with limitations in mind. This was a small pilot 
study and the sub-samples within the iCouch and TAU conditions were particularly small. 
Although there were no baseline demographic differences between groups, it is possible that 
outcomes may have been unduly influenced by outliers. Remotely recruited participants 
were required to own an iPhone capable of running ¡Aptívate! or iCouch CBT and were also 
required to have capacity for teleconsent procedures. Thus, this sample may not be 
representative of all Latinx adults with LEP and depressive symptoms. Analytics data were 
not available for iCouch CBT because this app was not developed by our team. Thus, we 
could not compare app feasibility using analytics data between the two app conditions. 
However, this is a limitation that would be faced by any research team that uses a 
commercially available mobile app as an active control treatment condition. Finally, 
participants did not complete follow-up assessments beyond eight-weeks and as such it is 
unclear whether treatment gains would be sustained beyond this timeframe. An eight-week 
assessment period was selected for this trial because Brief BA is typically delivered over the 
course of eight-to twelve-sessions (Lejuez et al., 2011). Identifying the appropriate length of 
follow-up duration for any app-based mental health treatment study is difficult because, 
unless app use is somehow restricted, participants can continue to have access to treatment 
content beyond the initially prescribed period of time. 
This trial extends the literature on app-based interventions for depression treatment among 
United States Latinx adults with LEP and elevated depressive symptoms. App-based 
interventions such as ¡Aptívate! may help to address the currently unmet need for evidence- 
based, disseminable psychological treatments delivered in Spanish for this population. 
Future larger scale examinations of ¡Aptívate! efficacy and effectiveness as well as 


 


examination of treatment outcomes beyond the eight-week window studied herein will be 
needed prior to broad recommendation of this app as a treatment for depression among 
Latinx adults with LEP. Furthermore, although a strength of app-based psychological 
interventions is that there are fewer barriers to use as compared to traditional in-person 
psychological treatment, not all Latinx adults with LEP and elevated depressive symptoms 
will respond to a self-help depression treatment app such as ¡Aptívate!. Future research 
should consider examinations of moderators of treatment response (e.g., severity of 
depressive symptoms, comfort with technology) which may help to determine which 
subpopulations may benefit the most from ¡Aptívate!. With further research, ¡Aptívate! may 
offer a feasible and efficacious approach to extend the reach of evidence-based depression 
treatment for this undertreated group. 

The authors would like to thank MountainPass Technology LLC, including Zachary Gavin, Jim Nichols, Bryan 
Hobbs, Brian Cordyack, and Tamara Wiesen, for their contributions to the development of ¡Aptívate!. 

Funding for this research was provided by the National Institute of Minority Health and Health Disparities(R41 
MD010491) and by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (T32 DA007288, K23 DA045766). The funding sources 
had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, in writing this report, or in the 
decision to submit this article for publication. 

Alegria M, Canino G, Rios R, Vera M, Calderon J, Rusch D, Ortega AN, 2002 Inequalities in use of 
specialty mental health services among Latinos, African Americans, and non-Latino whites. 
Psychiatry Serv. 53, 1547–1555. 

Mayberg H, Craighead WE, 2014 Enhancing Hispanic participation in mental health clinical 
research: development of a Spanish-speaking depression research site. Depress. Anxiety 31, 258– 
267. [PubMed: 23959771] 
Arean PA, Hallgren KA, Jordan JT, Gazzaley A, Atkins DC, Heagerty PJ, Anguera JA, 2016 The use 
and effectiveness of mobile apps for depression: results from a fully remote clinical trial. J. Med. 
Internet Res 18, e330. [PubMed: 27998876] 
Bakker D, Kazantzis N, Rickwood D, Rickard N, 2016 Mental health smartphone apps: review and 
evidence-based recommendations for future developments. JMIR Ment. Health 3, e7. [PubMed: 
26932350] 

among Latino and Asian Americans with mental disorders. Med. Care 48, 1097. [PubMed: 
21063226] 


Cabassa LJ, Molina GB, Baron M, 2012 Depression fotonovela: development of a depression literacy 
tool for Latinos with limited English proficiency. Health Promot. Pract. 13, 747–754. [PubMed: 
21051325] 



treatment for depression in Latinos with limited English proficiency: preliminary evaluation of 
efficacy and acceptability. Behav. Therapy 45, 102–115. 


 




Collado A, Long KE, MacPherson L, Lejuez CW, 2014b The efficacy of a behavioral activation 
intervention among depressed US Latinos with limited English language proficiency: study 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 15, 231. [PubMed: 24938081] 
Dahne J, Collado A, Lejuez CW, Risco C, Diaz VA, Kustanowitz J, Zvolensky M, Carpenter MJ, 2018 
¡Aptívate!: a Spanish-language behavioral activation mobile application for delivery via primary 
care. Psychol. Serv. 10.1037/ser0000304. in press. 
González Burchard E, Borrell LN, Choudhry S, Naqvi M, Tsai H-J, Rodriguez-Santana JR, Chapela R, 
Rogers SD, Mei R, Rodriguez-Cintron W, 2005 Latino populations: a unique opportunity for the 
study of race, genetics, and social environment in epidemiological research. Am. J. Public Health 
95, 2161–2168. [PubMed: 16257940] 
Hardin JW, Hilbe JM, 2002 Generalized Estimating Equations. Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG, 2009 Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap)–a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing 
translational research informatics support. J. Biomed. Inf 42, 377–381. 
Kim G, Loi CXA, Chiriboga DA, Jang Y, Parmelee P, Allen RS, 2011 Limited English proficiency as a 
barrier to mental health service use: a study of Latino and Asian immigrants with psychiatric 
disorders. J. Psychiatry Res 45, 104–110. 

measure of current depression in the general population. J. Affect. Disord 114, 163–173. [PubMed: 
18752852] 





behavioral activation treatment for depression: revised treatment manual. Behav. Modif. 35, 111– 
161. [PubMed: 21324944] 
Munoz RF, Chavira DA, Himle JA, Koerner K, Muroff J, Reynolds J, Rose RD, Ruzek JI, Teachman 
BA, Schueller SM, 2018 Digital apothecaries: a vision for making health care interventions 
accessible worldwide. mHealth 4, 18. [PubMed: 30050914] 


Pew Research Center, 2018 Mobile Fact Sheet. Pew Internet & American Life Project. 
Pratap A, Renn BN, Volponi J, Mooney SD, Gazzaley A, Arean PA, Anguera JA, 2018 Using Mobile 
Apps to Assess and Treat Depression in Hispanic and Latino Populations: fully Remote 
Randomized Clinical Trial. J. Med. Internet Res. 20. 



mechanism to deliver more accessible, more effective mental health care. Clin. Psychol. 
Psychother 21, 427–436. [PubMed: 23918764] 




US Census Bureau, 2013 Detailed languages spoken at home and ability to speak English for the 
population 5 years and over: 2009–2013. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2013/demo/ 
2009-2013-lang-tables.html. 
Welch BM, Marshall E, Qanungo S, Aziz A, Laken M, Lenert L, Obeid J, 2016 Teleconsent: a Novel 
approach to obtain informed consent for research. Contemp. Clin. Trials Commun. 3, 74–79. 
[PubMed: 27822565] 


 





depression in primary care in Honduras. Prim. Care Companion J. Clin. Psychiatry 4, 191. 
[PubMed: 15014707] 


 


Fig. 1. 
CONSORT Flow Diagram. 


 


Fig. 2. 
Self-Reported App Utilization as a Function of Treament Group. 
Note: Self-reported app utilization was defined as any app use within the preceding week. 
Those who did not complete the weekly assessment were coded as not using the app. *p < 
0.10; **p < 0.05. 


 


Fig. 3. 
BDI-II Depressive Symptoms by Treatment Condition. 
Note: Mean BDI-II scores with corresponding standard errors are plotted above on the y- 
axis. 


 
































Full Sample 
(N=42) 
¡Aptívate! 
(n=22) 
iCouch 
CBT 
(n=9) 
TAU 
(n=11) 





































































































 
 
 









































































 
