
















Columbia, SC, United States 
8 






 Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, United States 
0 


















 Y Alicia Hong, PhD, 
6 


















People living with HIV (PLWH) have high rates of depressive symptoms. However, only a few effec- 
tive mental health interventions exist for this vulnerable population. 

The aim of this study was to assess the eficacy of a WeChat-based intervention, Run4Love, with a 
randomized controlled trial among 300 people living with HIV and depression (PLWHD) in China. 

We recruited PLWH from the HIV outpatient clinic in South China. Participants were screened 
based on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression (CES-D) scale. Those who scored 16 or 
higher were eligible to participate. A total of 300 eligible patients were enrolled. After obtaining in- 
formed consent from the participants, completion of a baseline survey, and collection of partici- 
pants’ hair samples for measuring cortisol, the participants were randomly assigned to an inter- 
vention or a control group in a 1:1 ratio. The intervention group received the Run4Love program, 
delivered via the popular social media app WeChat. Cognitive behavioral stress management cour- 
ses and weekly reminders of exercise were delivered in a multimedia format. Participants’ 
progress was monitored with timely and tailored feedback. The control group received usual care 
and a brochure on nutrition for PLWH. Data were collected at 3, 6, and 9 months. The primary 
outcome was depression, which was measured by a validated instrument. 

Participants in the intervention and control groups were comparable at baseline; about 91.3% 
(139/150), 88.3% (132/150), and 86.7% (130/150) participants completed the 3-, 6-, and 9- 
month follow-ups, respectively. At the 3-month follow-up, a signiicant reduction in CES-D score 
was observed in the intervention group (from 23.9 to 17.7 vs from 24.3 to 23.8; mean 
difference=−5.77, 95% CI −7.82 to −3.71; P<.001; standard effect size d=0.66). The mean changes 
in CES-D score from baseline to the 6- and 9-month follow-ups between the two groups remained 
statistically signiicant. No adverse events were reported. 

The WeChat-based mobile health (mHealth) intervention Run4Love signiicantly reduced depres- 
sive symptoms among PLWHD, and the effect was sustained. An app-based mHealth intervention 
could provide a feasible therapeutic option for many PLWHD in resource-limited settings. Further 
research is needed to assess generalizability and cost-effectiveness of this intervention. 





Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ChiCTR-IPR-17012606; http://www.chictr.org.cn/showproj.aspx? 
proj=21019 (Archived by WebCite at https://www.webcitation.org/78Bw2vouF) 


People living with HIV (PLWH) are twice as likely to have depressive symptoms than the general 
population [1], and nearly 1 in 3 PLWH meet the criteria for depression [2]. Of the 36.7 million 
PLWH in the world, more than 12 million are people living with elevated depressive symptoms or 
people living with HIV and depression (PLWHD) [3]. The World Health Organization (WHO) rec- 
ommends mental health services for all PLWH [4]. However, only a few effective mental health in- 
terventions exist for this vulnerable population, especially in middle- and low-income countries, 
where more than 90% of PLWH live [5]. In China, because of a shortage of mental health profes- 
sionals, more than half (52%) of the people with mental disorders have never used mental health 
services [6]. Furthermore, because of a high level of HIV-related stigma, very few PLWHD have 
ever received any treatment or care for their depressive symptoms [7]. 
Widely accessible mobile tools offer a promising intervention delivery mode to serve a large num- 
ber of PLWHD. In China, more than 95% of adults own a mobile phone and over 1 billion access 
WeChat, a popular mobile app, at least once a day [8]. However, existing mobile health (mHealth) 
interventions for PLWH were mostly feasibility studies with small samples and pre-post designs or 
those typically used phone calls or SMS with a focus on medication adherence [9-12]. Despite a 
growing interest in mHealth interventions among PLWH, especially their initial eficacy in improv- 
ing medication adherence [12,13], few mHealth interventions exist for improving mental health 
outcomes of PLWHD. Data are further scarce from such studies based on a randomized controlled 
trial (RCT) [14]. 
We conducted an RCT (Chinese Clinical Trial Registry: ChiCTR-IPR-17012606) of Run4Love, a 
WeChat-based mHealth intervention aimed to reduce depressive symptoms among PLWHD, with 
3-, 6-, and 9-month follow-ups. In the Run4Love study, we used an enhanced WeChat platform to 
deliver a culturally adapted, evidence-based cognitive behavioral stress management (CBSM) 
course and to promote regular physical activity in PLWHD [15]. We hypothesized that the inter- 
vention group would have greater improvement in the measures of depressive symptoms, quality 
of life (QOL), and other psychosocial outcomes, compared with the control group in usual care. 






The study was a parallel-group RCT. It was conducted in Guangzhou, China, from September 2017 
to October 2018. Participants were randomized into two groups in a 1:1 ratio: a WeChat-based 
mHealth intervention group or a usual care waitlist control group. The study design was detailed 
in the Consolidated Standards Of Reporting Trials–eHealth checklist in the Multimedia Appendix 1. 
The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Sun Yat-sen University. 

Participants were recruited from the outpatient clinic of the only hospital designated for HIV treat- 
ment in Guangzhou, the third largest city in China. The hospital treated over 14,000 PLWH. 
Patients in the waiting area were invited by the research staff to participate in the study. Patients 
irst completed a brief screening questionnaire in a private space; those who met the eligibility cri- 
teria (see below) were provided with a pamphlet describing the Run4Love study and were then 
invited to join the study. Patients interested to participate were given further information about 
the study. After providing the written informed consent, eligible patients completed a baseline sur- 
vey on a tablet and provided their hair samples. 
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) being 18 years or older, (2) being HIV seropositive, (3) 
having elevated depressive symptoms (measured by the Center for Epidemiologic Studies- 
Depression Scale [CES-D] ≥16), (4) willing to provide hair samples, and (5) using WeChat. 
The criteria for exclusion were as follows: (1) currently on psychiatric treatment, (2) unable to in- 
ish the screening or baseline survey, (3) unable to read or listen to the materials sent via WeChat 
(ie, short articles, audio, and posters), and (4) unable to engage in physical activities because of 
medical reasons. 

The intervention protocol has been detailed elsewhere [15]. Briely, participants in the interven- 
tion group received a 3-month Run4Love program, comprising two major components: the 
adapted CBSM course [16] and physical activity promotion. The adapted CBSM course included 
nine sessions and three review sessions on stress reduction management and coping skills such as 
muscle relaxation, breathing, and meditation, which was in a multimedia format and sent 3 to 5 
times weekly. The articles were on average of 1300 words and took about 5 min to read; the au- 
dios took 5 to 10 min to listen to. The physical activity promotion program comprised goal setting 
and personalized feedback in addition to information on beneits of and guidance for regular ex- 
ercise and healthy diet. The program was delivered via the enhanced WeChat platform with added 
functions of automated information sending, progress tracking on course completion and physical 
activity, and weekly personalized feedback. The most read articles were selected and sent to the 
participants weekly as a booster in the 3 months postintervention. 
Participants in the waitlist control group received a brochure on nutrition in addition to usual care 
for HIV treatment. The design of the Run4Love intervention and the control condition was based 
on our previous research on PLWH and a pilot mHealth intervention [17-19]. 





Allocation to the treatment group was carried out by a computer-generated randomization list 
with a block size of 4, using SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc). By the nature of the trial 
design, neither the research staff nor the participants were blinded to the intervention. 

We used multiple means for quality control and participant retention. The back end of the 
Run4Love account could track the course completion, which allowed us to send personalized 
feedback and reminders based on the participants’ progress. Participants in the intervention 
group also received up to 5 phone calls from the research staff at week 1 and month 1, 2, 5, and 8 
after enrollment. The phone call in the irst week was to conirm participation and ensure partici- 
pants’ proper use of the Run4Love WeChat account. The other phone calls were to identify the 
barriers to intervention adherence, provide feedback, and remind the participants of regular med- 
ical checkups. 

All outcomes were measured at baseline before randomization and at follow-ups. The self-report 
psychosocial measures were collected at baseline, and at 3-, 6-, and 9-month follow-ups using elec- 
tronic questionnaires on a tablet. The hair samples were collected at baseline and the 3-month fol- 
low-up. 
Primary Outcome The primary outcome was the change in depressive symptoms based on CES-D, 
Chinese version, measured at baseline, and at the 3-, 6-, and 9-month follow-ups. CES-D is a vali- 
dated instrument for assessing depressive symptoms, and it has been used in various contexts and 
populations, including the Chinese PLWH [20]; it assesses participants’ depressive symptoms in 
the past week, with 20 items measuring 4 dimensions (ie, positive affect, depressed affect, inter- 
personal relationship, and somatic and retarded activity) [20]. The scores of CES-D range from 0 
to 60, with CES-D scores ≥16 being considered as possible clinical depression and higher scores 
indicating more severe depressive symptoms [21]. 
Secondary Outcomes Secondary outcomes included 3-, 6-, and 9-month changes in QOL, 9-item 
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), self-eficacy, perceived stress, positive and negative coping, 
HIV-related stigma, and physical activity. All these outcomes were measured with surveys adminis- 
tered on a tablet. The last secondary outcome was chronic stress measured by cortisol in hair 
samples. 
QOL was measured by the World Health Organization Quality of Life HIV short version (WHOQOL- 
HIV BREF) for PLWH, with 31 items assessing six domains (ie, physical, psychological, level of in- 
dependence, social relationships, environment, and beliefs) [22]. The scores of WHOQOL-HIV 
BREF range from 24 to 120, with higher scores indicating better QOL. PHQ-9 is a 9-item validated 
instrument for major depressive disorder based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 




Disorders, with 10 as a cutoff point for depression and a higher score indicating a higher level of 
depression [23-25]. Self-eficacy was measured by the 10-item General Self-Eficacy Scale (GSES), 
Chinese version (range 10-40, a higher score indicates a higher level of self-eficacy) [26]. A mea- 
sure of stress was the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), with a range of 0 to 40 and a higher 
score indicating more stress [27]. Coping was assessed by the Simpliied Ways of Coping 
Questionnaire (SWCQ), Chinese version, with 12 items (score range 0-36) measuring positive cop- 
ing and 8 items measuring negative coping (score range 0-24); higher scores indicate higher levels 
of positive or negative coping [28]. HIV-related stigma was assessed by 14 items derived from the 
HIV Stigma Scale measuring internalized and perceived stigma, with higher scores representing 
higher levels of stigma [29]. Physical activity was measured by the Chinese version of the Global 
Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ), which is widely used in people with chronic diseases [30]. 
Metabolic equivalents (METs) calculated from GPAQ were used to measure the intensity of physical 
activities, with METs ≥600 indicating that individuals meet the minimum requirement of the WHO’s 
recommendation of weekly exercise intensity. 
We also collected participants’ hair samples to test the cortisol content in the past month as a 
biomarker of chronic stress at baseline and the 3-month follow-up [15]. However, hair samples 
were not collected properly, resulting in insuficient weight for machine reading; therefore, corti- 
sol data were not available. 
Exploratory Outcomes The outcome not prespeciied in the protocol was change of proportion of 
clinical depression (Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression >16) from baseline to 3, 6, and 
9 months. We also assessed patient satisfaction for participating in the program. 

The intention-to-treat principle was applied to all analyses [31]. Baseline characteristics were sum- 
marized as means and SDs for continuous measures and as numbers and percentages for categor- 
ical measures in each group. Baseline characteristics were compared between the groups using 
two-sample two-tailed t tests for continuous measures and using chi-square (χ ) tests for categori- 
cal measures. For between-group differences, 95% CIs were calculated for continuous measures. 
Analyses for changes in outcomes between baseline and each follow-up were performed using 
multiple imputations for the missing data [31]. The R package mice (R Foundation, version 3.4.2) 
was used to obtain 80 imputed data sets. Variables used for imputation included age, gender, mari- 
tal status, sexual orientation, education, BMI, family monthly income, household registration, dura- 
tion of HIV infection, and outcome values. 

For the primary outcome, group differences in CES-D scores over the 9 months of the trial were 
estimated using a linear mixed-effect model (LMM) with repeated measures, adjusting for baseline 
CES-D score, time, and other baseline characteristics, including age, gender, BMI, education, sexual 
orientation, family monthly income, marital status, duration of HIV infection, and employment 
[32]. In addition, interactions between group and time were also examined in LMM. R package 
nlme (R Foundation, version 3.4.2) was used to conduct the LMM analysis. 




Similar analyses were repeated for secondary outcomes. In post hoc exploratory analyses, the ef- 
fect of the intervention on the 3-month change in the CES-D score was evaluated using tests for in- 
teraction to determine statistical signiicance in subsets of participants grouped by baseline 
characteristics. 
Analyses were performed using R version 3.4.2, and a two-sided P<.05 was considered as statisti- 
cally signiicant. As multiple secondary outcomes were compared, a two-sided P<.005 was consid- 
ered statistically signiicant for secondary outcomes. 


Figure 1 summarizes the low of participants through the study. Of the 1555 patients who were 
screened and provided information about the depressive symptoms measured by the CES-D scale, 
1067 patients were excluded as their scores were lower than 16, and 488 patients were eligible 
for further interview. In the end, a total of 300 patients met the eligibility criteria and completed 
the baseline assessment before being randomized into the trial with 150 patients in each group ( 
Figure 1). The mean (SD) age of the participants was 28.3 (5.8) years. Of the 300 participants, 277 
(92.3%) were men and 245 (81.7%) were homosexual or bisexual or uncertain of their sexual ori- 
entation. The follow-up rates were 91.3% (92.7% in the intervention group and 90.0% in the con- 
trol group), 88.3% (88.0% in the intervention group and 88.7% in the control group), and 86.7% 
(88.7% in the intervention group and 84.7% in the control group) at 3, 6, and 9 months, respec- 
tively. Moreover, participants in the intervention group completed, on average, 55% of the CBSM 
coursework at 3 months. 
Except for the fact that the intervention group had a slightly higher proportion of participants with 
homosexual or bisexual or uncertain sexual orientation, the baseline characteristics were bal- 
anced between the two groups (Table 1). Those lost to follow-up were older than those who com- 
pleted the trial; however, other characteristics were balanced between nonrespondents and re- 
spondents (see Multimedia Appendix 2). 

The results of changes in depression are summarized in Table 2. At the 3-month follow-up, partici- 
pants in the intervention group had signiicantly reduced depression severity (CES-D) compared 
with the control group (from 23.9 to 17.7 vs from 24.3 to 23.8; mean difference=−5.77, 95% CI 
−7.82 to −3.71; P<.001), with a standard effect size (Cohen d) of 0.66 in favor of the Run4Love in- 
tervention (Multimedia Appendix 2). At the 6- and 9-month follow-ups, between-group differences 
in the CES-D score remained statistically signiicant (6-month follow-up: −6.08, 95% CI −8.33 to 
−3.83; P<.001; Cohen d=0.63; and 9-month follow-up: −5.30, 95% CI −7.77 to −2.83; P<.001; 
Cohen d=0.51). LMM indicated signiicant interactions between the groups and at each follow-up 
time (at 3, 6, and 9 months), with statistically signiicant between-group differences in the CES-D 




score for mean change from baseline, controlling for baseline characteristics (P<.001; Table 2). 
Changes over time are presented in Figure 2. The results were not substantially different from 
data gathered before multiple imputations of missing data (Multimedia Appendix 2). 

At the 3-month follow-up, participants in the Run4Love intervention group, when compared with 
the control group, had signiicantly improved QOL (WHOQOL-HIV BREF: from 77.4 to 82.6 vs 76.6 
to 77.0; mean difference=4.79, 95% CI 2.72 to 6.87; P<.001), self-eficacy (GSES: from 24.4 to 26.6 
vs from 23.3 to 23.4; mean difference=2.16, 95% CI 0.92 to 3.40; P<.001), and SWCQ positive cop- 
ing (from 18.4 to 20.7 vs from 18.3 to 17.8; mean difference=2.91, 95% CI 1.39 to 4.43; P<.001; 
Table 3, for more details, see Multimedia Appendix 2). In comparison with the control group, par- 
ticipants in the intervention group also had signiicantly reduced perceived stress (PSS: from 20.0 
to 15.7 vs from 20.7 to 18.9; mean difference=−2.45, 95% CI −3.63 to −1.27; P<.001) and depres- 
sion severity (PHQ-9: from 10.2 to 6.8 vs from 10.7 to 8.9; mean difference=−1.56, 95% CI −2.63 
to −0.50; P=.004). There were no signiicant between-group differences in changes in SWCQ nega- 
tive coping, HIV-related stigma (HIV Stigma Scale), physical activity (METs; P>.005; Table 3; for 
more details, see Multimedia Appendix 2). 
At the 6- and 9-month follow-ups, the between-group differences remained statistically signiicant 
for QOL (6-month follow-up: 6.6, 95% CI 4.24 to 8.87; P<.001 and 9-month follow-up: 5.84, 95% CI 
2.76 to 8.31; P<.001) and SWCQ positive coping (6-month follow-up: 3.41, 95% CI 1.80 to 5.02; 
P<.001 and 9-month follow-up: 2.53, 95% CI 0.85 to 4.21; P=.003) but not for self-eficacy (GSES at 
the 6-month follow-up: 1.86, 95% CI 0.50 to 3.22; P=.007 and GSES at the 9-month follow-up: 1.55, 
95% CI 0.19 to 2.91; P=.03). At 6 months, between-group differences remained statistically signii- 
cant for perceived stress (PSS: −1.88, 95% CI −3.10 to −0.67; P=.003) and depression severity 
(PHQ-9: −2.01, 95% CI −3.20 to −0.83; P<.001) but not for the 9-month follow-up (perceived 
stress: −1.79, 95% CI −3.06 to −0.53, P=.006; PHQ-9: −1.17, 95% CI −2.46 to 0.13; P=.08). At 9 
months, participants in the intervention group had signiicantly reduced HIV-related stigma com- 
pared with the control group (HIV Stigma Scale between-group difference: −2.87, 95% CI −4.71 to 
−1.03; P=.002), which did not occur at 3 months (between-group difference: −2.29, 95% CI −3.93 
to −0.65; P=.006) or 6 months (between-group difference: −2.05, 95% CI −3.83 to −0.28; P=.02). 
There were no statistically signiicant between-group differences in change in SWCQ negative cop- 
ing and physical activity (METs) from baseline to the 3-, 6-, and 9-month follow-ups (Table 3; for 
more details, see Multimedia Appendix 2). The results from LMM did not substantially change af- 
ter controlling for baseline characteristics (Multimedia Appendix 2). 
As reported in the Methods section, hair samples were not properly collected; therefore, we did 
not have cortisol data. No adverse events were reported. 

In the post hoc exploratory analyses, the proportion reduction in depression measured by CES-D 
≥16 was greater in the intervention group than in the control group (Table 2). The between-group 
differences in the proportion reduction in depression (CES-D ≥16) were 23.3%, 25.3%, and 27.3% 




at 3, 6, and 9 months, respectively, in favor of the Run4Love intervention (3-month proportion re- 
duction: 44.0% vs 20.7%; P<.001; 6-month proportion reduction: 48.7% vs 23.3%; P<.001; 9- 
month proportion reduction: 51.3% vs 24.0%; P<.001; Table 4). In addition, patients in the inter- 
vention and control groups reported high levels of satisfaction (92%-97%) at all three assess- 
ments, and there were no signiicant differences between the groups (see Multimedia Appendix 2 
for details). 

Except for age and marital status, there were no statistically signiicant interactions in the post hoc 
exploratory analyses, including gender, education, sexual orientation, family income, duration of 
HIV infection, or baseline CES-D score (Table 5). Those who were younger and not married had 
statistically signiicant improvement (between-group differences) in the CES-D score than those 
who were older or married (Table 5). 


The WeChat-based mHealth intervention Run4Love signiicantly reduced depression severity mea- 
sured by CES-D by 5.77 points at 3 months compared with usual care, and the improvement sus- 
tained at 6- and 9-month follow-ups, with a medium-to-large effect size of 0.66 at 3 months [33]. 
Between-group differences in depression (CES-D ≥16) proportion reduction were consistently 
more than 20% at the 3-, 6-, and 9-month follow-ups, in favor of the intervention group. The inter- 
vention also improved QOL, self-eficacy, SWCQ positive coping, reduced perceived stress, and de- 
pression severity (PHQ-9), compared with the control group at 3 months. The improvements in 
secondary outcomes such as QOL and SWCQ positive coping remained signiicant at the 6- and/or 
9-month follow-ups. In addition to good eficacy, the Run4Love intervention demonstrated good 
feasibility as all participants reported a high level of satisfaction. 

The good effect sizes in the primary outcome and most secondary outcomes could be attributed 
to the following reasons. First, the study design was informed by extensive previous work, includ- 
ing a pilot mHealth intervention among PLWH [17-19]. Second, we culturally adopted the evi- 
dence-based CBSM, which had proven effect on stress management and positive coping [21]. 
Third, the Run4Love intervention was built on the enhanced WeChat platform, with functions of 
automatic distribution of multimedia programs, tracking of CBSM completion and physical activity, 
and personalized feedback and incentives. Fourth, we built our Run4Love mHealth intervention 
on a popular social media platform WeChat, used daily by most participants; it is easy for partici- 
pants to join and use it continuously. Fifth, we established trust with participants at recruitment 
and continuously engaged them via tailored reminders, feedback, and incentives. Finally, the elec- 
tronic questionnaire used for data collection ensured minimum missing values [34]. 




We also noted that older participants were also more likely to drop out of the study despite the 
high retention rate, suggesting a possible digital divide [34]. Our subgroup analyses showed that 
younger and unmarried participants beneited more from the intervention than their counter- 
parts. Further research is required on the effective strategies to deliver mental health services to 
older PLWHD. 
The literature documents that elevated depressive symptoms experienced by the PLWH are asso- 
ciated with the deteriorated immune system, worsened disease progression, poor QOL, increased 
risky behaviors, and increased mortality [35,36]. CBSM has been effective in improving mental 
health outcomes in PLWH [37]. However, the effects of these interventions delivered via mobile 
tools are understudied. A recent study by Schnall et al [10] randomized 80 low-income PLWHD 
who experienced at least two out of the 13 prespeciied symptoms in the week before the mHealth 
intervention of “mobile Video Information Provider” with self-care strategies or a control group. 
At 12 weeks, participants in the intervention group showed improvements in 5 symptoms, includ- 
ing depression. However, this was a small-scale feasibility study conducted in New York City with- 
out follow-ups to examine long-term effects. To the best of our knowledge, the Run4Love interven- 
tion is one of the irst RCTs of mobile app–delivered mHealth interventions among PLWHD with 
long-term and multiple follow-ups. It is also among the irst efforts that adapted CBSM to a social 
media app and delivered it via a social media app to PLWHD. The indings of this study suggest 
that mHealth interventions could provide a feasible therapeutic option for many PLWHD in re- 
source-poor settings where mental health services are limited but smartphones are widely 
accessible. 

This RCT has several major limitations. First, most participants were young men who have sex 
with men recruited from a large hospital in South China. The indings from this study might not be 
generalizable to other PLWH, especially older PLWH, those living in rural areas, or those not in- 
fected through homosexual transmission. Second, intervention contamination was possible, and 
some participants might have shared the Run4Love information via their private WeChat accounts. 
However, the effect of such contamination was limited and, if any, only might have diluted the ob- 
served effect. Third, the intervention completion rates were suboptimal, but these were compara- 
ble with other internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy interventions [38]. With improved 
completion rates, intervention effects might be more pronounced. Fourth, the research staff was 
not blind to group allocation; however, the use of an electronic questionnaire on a tablet may limit 
the bias introduced by assessors. Finally, the improper collection of hair samples led to insuficient 
weight of hair and invalid readings. We therefore did not have cortisol data, which were planned 
for measuring chronic stress in our study protocol. More rigorous training and laboratory proce- 
dures are needed to ensure quality data collection. Future studies also need to include a robust 
biomarker to measure changes in mental health outcomes. 





The WeChat-based mHealth intervention Run4Love effectively reduced depressive symptoms in 
PLWHD, and the effect was sustainable at the 9-month follow-up. QOL and other psychosocial 
measures were also signiicantly improved at follow-ups. This RCT suggested that mHealth inter- 
ventions to deliver mental health services to PLWH were feasible and effective, even in resource- 
limited settings, such as China. Further research is needed to assess the generalizability, biomark- 
ers, and cost-effectiveness of such interventions. 

This study was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the 
China Medical Board, and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China. The funder of the 
study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of 
the report. The authors had the inal responsibility for the decision to submit this manuscript for 
publication. 
















































































































































































































































d 
Quality of life , mean (SD) 







































d 
Baseline 

















































c 
Perceived stress (Perceived Stress Scale ) 































b 
Physical activity (metabolic equivalents ) 









b 
Self-eficacy (General Self-Eficacy Scale ) 





















































a 
CES-D: Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression. 






































































































