
























































In the treatment of major depression, antidepressants are effective but not curative. Cognitive be- 
havioral therapy (CBT) is also effective, alone or in combination with pharmacotherapy, but acces- 
sibility is a problem. 

The aim is to evaluate the effectiveness of a smartphone CBT app as adjunctive therapy among pa- 
tients with antidepressant-resistant major depression. 

A multisite, assessor-masked, parallel-group randomized controlled trial was conducted in 20 psy- 
chiatric clinics and hospitals in Japan. Participants were eligible if they had a primary diagnosis of 
major depression and were antidepressant-refractory after taking one or more antidepressants at 
an adequate dosage for four or more weeks. After a 1-week run-in in which participants started 
the medication switch and had access to the welcome session of the app, patients were random- 
ized to medication switch alone or to medication switch plus smartphone CBT app via the central- 
ized Web system. The smartphone app, called Kokoro-app (“kokoro” means “mind” in Japanese), 
included sessions on self-monitoring, behavioral activation, and cognitive restructuring presented 
by cartoon characters. The primary outcome was depression severity as assessed by masked tele- 
phone assessors with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) at week 9. The secondary out- 
comes included the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of 
Side Effects Ratings (FIBSER). 

In the total sample (N=164), 81 participants were allocated to the smartphone CBT in addition to 
medication change and 83 to medication change alone. In the former group, all but one participant 
(80/81, 99%) completed at least half, and 71 (88%) completed at least six of eight sessions. In the 
intention-to-treat analysis, patients allocated the CBT app scored 2.48 points (95% CI 1.23-3.72, 
P<.001; standardized mean difference 0.40) lower on PHQ-9 than the control at week 9. The for- 
mer group also scored 4.1 points (95% CI 1.5-6.6, P=.002) lower on BDI-II and 0.76 points (95% 
CI –0.05 to 1.58, P=.07) lower on FIBSER. In the per-protocol sample (comfortable with the smart- 
phone app, still symptomatic, and adherent to medication with mild or less side effects after run- 
in), the intervention group (n=60) scored 1.72 points (95% CI 0.25-3.18, P=.02) lower on PHQ-9, 
3.2 points (95% CI –0.01 to 6.3, P=.05) lower on BDI-II, and 0.75 points (95% CI 0.03-1.47, P=.04) 
lower on FIBSER than the control (n=57). The treatment beneits were maintained up to week 17. 





This is the irst study to demonstrate the effectiveness of a smartphone CBT in the treatment of 
clinically diagnosed depression. Given the merits of the mobile mental health intervention, includ- 
ing accessibility, affordability, quality control, and effectiveness, it is clinically worthwhile to con- 
sider adjunctive use of a smartphone CBT app when treating patients with antidepressant-resis- 
tant depression. Research into its effectiveness in wider clinical contexts is warranted. 

Japanese Clinical Trials Registry UMIN CTR 000013693; https://upload.umin.ac.jp/cgi-open- 
bin/ctr_e/ ctr_view.cgi?recptno=R000015984 (Archived by WebCite at 
http://www.webcitation.org/6u6pxVwik) 
Keywords: major depressive disorder, pharmacotherapy-resistant depression, mobile phone app, 
cognitive behavioral therapy, eHealth 

Major depression is highly prevalent, debilitating, and costly [1-3]. It is predicted to be the leading 
cause of premature mortality and disability in high-income countries by 2030, and the third-lead- 
ing cause in low- and middle-income countries [4]. Resources for and access to care by those who 
suffer remain constrained in high-income countries, and severely so in low- to middle-income 
ones [5,6]. 
Although antidepressant pharmacotherapy represents the mainstay of treatment of major depres- 
sion [7], after several weeks of treatment only 50% show reduction by half or more in their de- 
pression severity and only 30% return to a euthymic state [8]. No standard approach in the man- 
agement of treatment-refractory depression exists. Guideline recommendations include increasing 
the dose, switching to another antidepressant, or augmenting treatment with another pharmaco- 
logical or psychological therapy [9,10]. 
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has proved an effective treatment of major depression either 
alone [11] or in combination with pharmacotherapy [12,13]. A standard course of CBT, however, 
requires 10 to 20 sessions, each lasting 45 to 60 minutes, with an adequately qualiied profes- 
sional. Therefore, its availability is limited everywhere in the world [14,15]. Telephone or video- 
conference CBT eliminates the burden of in-person visits, but requires approximately equal thera- 
pist time and equal competence. 
Guided self-help CBT requires minimal to no clinician time and has proved of comparable effec- 
tiveness to its face-to-face versions [16]. Information and communication technologies (ICT) for 
self-help CBT, including computerized stand-alone software and Internet-based webpages, have 
shown promising results in initial trials [17]. However, one recent pragmatic trial using two widely 
known online Web-based CBT packages failed to demonstrate added value over usual care in pri- 
mary care likely because adherence to the program was very low [18]. 




The dominant modality of ICT is evolving rapidly and the smartphone is now transforming 
people’s lives across the world. In comparison with stand-alone or Internet-connected computers, 
the smartphone enhances portability and immediacy, making CBT fully accessible and therefore 
promising new dimensions of guided self-help. Mobile health apps are currently proliferating in 
the electronic world, with more than 165,000 health apps available online [19-21]. However, few 
apps have demonstrated quality [22,23] and no randomized controlled trial (RCT) has yet proved 
the beneits of a smartphone app in comparison with a control condition in the treatment of clini- 
cally diagnosed major depressive disorder. Several trials have examined the use of smartphone to 
monitor symptoms [24-26] or smartphone apps applying the CBT principles, but only among par- 
ticipants recruited from the general population who had reported elevated levels of depressive 
symptoms on self-reports [27-33]. A few have examined participants with diagnosed major de- 
pression, but only against active controls. One pilot RCT compared the original Web-based CBT 
against its smartphone version in 35 participants with depression conirmed through telephone 
diagnostic interview [34]. Another group of researchers developed a smartphone app for behav- 
ioral activation and tested it against its face-to-face full version [35] or against a mindfulness- 
based program [36] among 93 and 81 patients, respectively, who were recruited through adver- 
tisements in mass media but whose diagnosis of major depression was conirmed through tele- 
phone interview. In these studies, results did not differ signiicantly between the intervention and 
control groups. 
Whether smartphone-based CBT can have any demonstrable value in the treatment of clinically di- 
agnosed major depression is a pressing issue for patients, clinicians, and policy makers around 
the world [22,23]. We have developed and pilot-tested a smartphone app, called Kokoro-app 
(kokoro means “mind” in Japanese), that is based on a CBT manual with demonstrated effective- 
ness in remote telephone or group formats in several RCTs either alone [37,38] or in combination 
with antidepressants [39]. This study represents the irst RCT to examine adjunctive smartphone- 
based CBT to medication change among patients with major depression unresponsive to prior an- 
tidepressant treatments. 




A detailed description of the study protocol has been reported elsewhere [40] and is attached as 
Multimedia Appendix 1. The study, which was approved by the ethics committees of the participat- 
ing centers and registered in the Japanese clinical trials registry (UMIN CTR 000013693), took 
place in 20 psychiatric clinics and hospitals across Japan between September 2014 and October 
2016. Multimedia Appendix 2 provides the complete list of trial sites and investigators. 




Eligible participants (1) were aged between 25 and 59 years, (2) had a primary diagnosis of major 
depressive disorder without psychotic features according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition) [41] as ascertained by using the Primary Care Evaluation of 
Mental Disorders procedure [42], (3) were antidepressant-resistant, deined as scoring 10 or 
more on the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) [37,43] after taking one or more antidepres- 
sants at an adequate dosage for four or more weeks (stage I, II, or III according to the criteria by 
Thase and Rush [44]), (4) had not been prescribed escitalopram or sertraline, or received CBT or 
interpersonal therapy for the index episode. 
The study psychiatrists introduced the trial to the potentially eligible patients from among the pa- 
tients they were seeing and invited them to participate voluntarily. After full disclosure of the trial 
contents and procedures, all participants provided written informed consent. No advertisement 
through the media was used. 

On entry, all participants started switching their antidepressant, had the Kokoro-app installed onto 
their iPhone, and had access to the welcome session, which mainly aimed at, after a brief descrip- 
tion of CBT, training the participants in the use of the smartphone and its speech recognition. 
(When the participants did not own an iPhone, we lent one to them for the duration of the trial.) 
After this 1-week run-in, they had a telephone interview with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 
(PHQ-9) and the Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Ratings (FIBSER) and were clas- 
siied into one of two samples. The per-protocol sample comprised those who had not or only 
partially responded since week 0 (PHQ-9 scores ≥5 [45] at week 1), who tolerated and adhered to 
the new antidepressant, and had no problem using the smartphone and Kokoro-app. The auxiliary 
sample included all others. The total sample (the per-protocol sample plus the auxiliary sample) 
would answer the real-world question of the value of smartphone CBT among the patients for 
whom the clinicians would initially consider prescribing the smartphone CBT, including those who 
would not tolerate the new medication or who may have some dificulty using the smartphone 
app, whereas the per-protocol sample would answer the question of the value of smartphone CBT 
under the narrower circumstances (ie, among patients who were able to follow the protocol and 
for whom the app would be expected to demonstrate its full effects). 
After stratiication by group, the participants were randomized 1:1 to the combined antidepres- 
sant switch plus smartphone CBT arm (intervention arm) or the antidepressant switch alone arm 
(control arm) using an automated Web program implementing the method of minimization. 
Therefore, the randomization was concealed. Clinics, number of antidepressants previously pre- 
scribed for the index episode (≥3 vs <3), and a total score of the PHQ-9 at week 1 (≥10 vs <10) 
were used as minimization variables. 
During the telephone interview for the PHQ-9, if participants reported suicidal ideation for more 
than half the days or nearly every day of the previous 2 weeks, the interviewer immediately noti- 
ied the staff in the central ofice, who then notiied the responsible psychiatrist. 





The intervention group received both the antidepressant switch and the smartphone CBT, whereas 
the control group received only the antidepressant switch during the intervention period up to 
week 9. Details of each intervention are described subsequently. 
Antidepressant Switch All study participants started switching their antidepressant either to esci- 
talopram (5-10 mg/day) or to sertraline (25-100 mg/day) at week 0. The previous antidepressant 
was tapered off by week 5. We limited choice of antidepressants to escitalopram and sertraline, 
which showed a favorable proile in eficacy and acceptability in a previous systematic review 
[46], to ensure balance in antidepressant treatments during the trial. If the participants did not tol- 
erate escitalopram or sertraline, the physician could revert to the previous antidepressant or start 
a new one. Only anxiolytics and hypnotics were allowed as coprescribed psychotropics. The fre- 
quency of visit was set at least once in four weeks, with additional visits as judged necessary by 
the study physician. 
Smartphone Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Kokoro-app is a self-help smartphone app consisting of 
eight sessions, including one welcome session, two sessions on self-monitoring, two sessions on 
behavioral activation, two sessions on cognitive restructuring, and an epilog focusing on relapse 
prevention. In each session, explanation of the principles and skills of CBT is provided in the for- 
mat of instant messenger exchanges among cartoon characters (Figure 1). In the self-monitoring 
sessions, patients learn how to monitor their reactions to situations in terms of feelings, thoughts, 
body reactions, and behaviors and describe them in “mind maps.” In the behavioral activation ses- 
sions, patients learn to engage in “personal experiments” of small pleasurable actions according to 
the principle “When your body moves, so does your mind.” 
To help patients broaden their thoughts, the cognitive restructuring sessions provide four tools, 
each of which guides the patients to alternative thoughts through interaction with the characters. 
Each session is supposed to take 1 week: participants can proceed to the next session only after 1 
week and only after they have completed one homework from that session. See Multimedia 
Appendix 3 for more details. One session requires approximately 20 minutes to complete. 
The progress of each participant on Kokoro-app could be monitored at “Kokoro-Web.” 
Participants and their treating psychiatrists could access their records using a unique identiica- 
tion number and password. Secure Sockets Layer certiied security of the data exchanged through 
the Internet. 
Every week, the central ofice sent an email to participants to congratulate them on their progress. 
The message was templated but individually modiied based on the progress of participants and 
the comments they uploaded at the end of each session. Writing one such email took 3 to 10 
minutes. 
All study participants had access to the welcome session at week 0. After randomization at week 1, 
the intervention group received another password and continued with further sessions. The con- 
trol group continued with the medication change only. Face-to-face CBT or interpersonal therapy 
were prohibited for either group. 




Follow-Up Period After 9 Weeks After assessments at week 9, there were no further restrictions in 
medications or psychotherapies. The participants in the control arm received a password to begin 
the Kokoro-app; follow-up assessments took place at week 17. 

The masked assessors interviewed the participants by telephone with PHQ-9 and FIBSER at weeks 
0, 1, 5, 9, and 17. 
The primary outcome was the PHQ-9 at week 9. It consists of the nine diagnostic criteria items of 
major depression [47]. Each item is rated between 0=“not at all” through 3=“nearly every day.” 
The total score ranges between 0 and 27. The instrument has excellent reliability, validity, and re- 
sponsiveness [48]. Remission was deined as scoring four or less on PHQ-9, and response as 50% 
or greater reduction from baseline. 
Secondary outcomes included the FIBSER, which assesses the frequency, intensity, and burden of 
side effects, each on a 7-point scale, with a total score between 3 and 27, [49] and the BDI-II [43], 
a self-report measure of depression severity that asks about 21 symptoms of depression, each on 
a scale between 0 and 3, with the total score between 0 and 63. 
The study participants and the psychiatrists in charge of medication change were aware of the 
treatment allocation. The outcome assessors conducting telephone interviews were unaware of al- 
location. The success of this masking was evaluated by calculating the Bang Index [50] of asses- 
sors’ treatment guesses after each telephone assessment. The Bang Index is scaled to an interval 
of –1 to 1, 1 being complete lack of blinding, 0 being consistent with perfect random guessing, and 
–1 indicating opposite guessing. 

The study was powered to detect a moderate effect size of 0.5 in terms of standardized mean dif- 
ference between the two treatments for the primary outcome at week 9, with 80% power at two- 
sided alpha level of .05. Assuming that 30% would leave the study or be classiied into the auxil- 
iary group at week 1, the required total sample size was 164 participants. 

All analyses were undertaken according to the intention-to-treat principle, including all the ran- 
domized participants for the total sample as well as for the per-protocol sample. 
For each continuous outcome up to week 9, we used a linear mixed model including sites and pa- 
tients as random effects and time (5 and 9 weeks), treatment, and time*treatment interaction, ad- 
justing for its baseline score and the stratiication variables, as ixed effects. The primary endpoint 
was the estimate of the least squares mean difference along with the 95% conidence interval 
(95% CI) at week 9. For the continuous outcome at week 17 follow-up, we used the similar linear 




mixed model but without the time*treatment interaction because this was a one-time comparison 
after all the participants received the smartphone CBT both in the intervention and the control 
groups. For the dichotomous outcomes, we used a generalized linear mixed model with the same 
random effects and the ixed effects. We chose odds ratios as the measure of effect. We used SAS 
version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA). Multimedia Appendix 1 provides the statistical analy- 
sis plan. 

The statistician (QZ), blinded to allocation, conducted the statistical analyses. The writing commit- 
tee reviewed a statistical report in which the two treatment arms were designated A and B, and 
developed interpretation of the results and associated conclusions under two different scenarios, 
one assuming A to be the smartphone CBT plus medication change arm and B to be the medica- 
tion change alone arm, and another alternative scenario. The code was broken only after the writ- 
ing committee signed off on the agreed-on interpretations (see Multimedia Appendix 4). 


Figure 2 shows the low of participants through the study. Between September 2, 2014, and July 1, 
2016, 323 patients were assessed for eligibility; 166 patients provided informed consent and 
started medication change. Two withdrew consent before randomization at week 1. Therefore, we 
recruited 164 patients, of whom 117 found no dificulty with the smartphone, were adherent to 
the protocol treatment, remained at least moderately symptomatic, and constituted the per-proto- 
col sample; 60 were allocated to the smartphone CBT and 57 to medication change alone. Of the 
remaining 47 participants in the auxiliary group, 21 were allocated to the intervention group and 
26 to control. Primary outcome data at 9 weeks were obtained from all but one randomized par- 
ticipant (163/164, 99.4%). 
Table 1 shows that the baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the treatment groups 
were well balanced. Typically, patients were in their thirties to forties, had three previous episodes, 
were in the current episode for nearly 2 years, and were severely to moderately depressed. 

In the total sample, 16 of 81 participants (20%) stopped the protocol antidepressant treatment by 
escitalopram or sertraline in the intervention arm, as did 14 of 83 (17%) in the medication only 
arm (Table 2). Some received augmentation drugs, such as antipsychotics or lithium, which were 
not allowed in the protocol for the antidepressant switch (n=15 in the total sample), a few had de- 
terioration or side effects and could not continue the protocol treatment (n=5), and a few others 
got so well and did not want to continue with the protocol medication (n=2). The medication 
dosages were comparable between the arms. 




For the smartphone CBT, all but one participant (80/81, 99%) completed at least half the sessions 
of the program, and 71 of 81 (88%) completed at least six of eight sessions. It took the patients, 
on average, 10.8 (SD 4.2) days to complete one session. The patients illed in a mean 11.2 (SD 
11.4) “mind maps” for self-monitoring, conducted a mean 14.4 (SD 17.1) behavioral activation 
“personal experiments,” and generated a mean 6.1 (SD 6.0) alternative thoughts for cognitive re- 
structuring (Table 2). 

In the intention-to-treat analysis of the total sample, patients who were allocated the CBT app 
(n=81) scored 2.48 points (95% CI 1.23-3.72, P<.001; standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.40) 
lower on PHQ-9 than those who were not (n=83) at week 9 (Table 3, Figure 3). The former group 
also scored 4.1 points (95% CI 1.5-6.6, P=.002) lower on BDI-II. Signiicantly more participants 
showed response (OR 2.73, 95% CI 1.35-5.53, P=.005). However, the increase in remission did not 
reach statistical signiicance (OR 2.02, 95% CI 0.93-4.42, P=.08). 
With regard to the harm outcomes, patients using the smartphone CBT reported somewhat less 
overall burden of side effects, but the difference was not statistically signiicant (FIBSER mean 
difference=–0.76, 95% CI –1.58 to 0.05, P=.07). There was one report of suicidality (self-injurious 
behavior without suicidal intent) in the combined treatment arm and one report of a serious ad- 
verse event in the control arm (brief hospital admission for examination of preexisting spinal 
canal stenosis). 

In the per-protocol sample, who were comfortable with the smartphone app, were still sympto- 
matic, and were adherent to medication with mild or less side effects after the run-in, the patients 
who received smartphone CBT in addition to medication change (n=60) scored mean 1.72 (95% 
CI 0.25-3.18, P=.02; SMD 0.28) points lower on PHQ-9 than those undergoing medication change 
alone (n=57) at week 9. The combined treatment arm was superior to the control arm in terms of 
BDI-II (difference=–3.2, 95% CI –6.3 to 0.0, P=.05, not statistically signiicant), but not in terms of 
remission (OR 1.99, 95% CI 0.74-5.38, P=.17) or response (OR 2.11, 95% CI 0.92-4.85, P=.08). 
In terms of the harm outcome, the combination treatment arm reported signiicantly less overall 
burden of side effects (FIBSER mean difference=–0.75, 95% CI –1.47 to –0.03, P=.04) (Table 4, 
Figure 3). 

The participants who had access to the smartphone app in the irst 9 weeks maintained their gains 
for a further 8 weeks. At week 17, when the participants in the control arm also had access to the 
smartphone app, the results were comparable between the two groups in terms of PHQ-9, BDI-II, 
and FIBSER, both for the total sample and for the per-protocol sample (Tables 3 and 4). 
 






The Bang Index of the treatment guesses by the masked assessors at weeks 5, 9, and 17 was 0.10 
(95% CI –0.13 to 0.33), 0.29 (95% CI 0.06-0.51), and 0.30 (95% CI 0.08-0.52) for the intervention 
arm and –0.21 (95% CI –0.45 to 0.03), –0.18 (95% CI –0.41 to 0.06), and –0.30 (95% CI –0.53 to – 
0.07) for the control arm, respectively. The observed patterns indicate that the raters guessed the 
treatment allocation haphazardly or guessed it to be the smartphone CBT arm more often regard- 
less of the actual allocation, resulting in ideally unbiased assessment of outcomes in the trial [51]. 

In patients with major depression who had not responded to one or more antidepressants, adding 
smartphone CBT to medication change was more effective than treatment by medication change 
alone. The smartphone CBT also decreased the overall side effect burden of the pharmacotherapy. 
The magnitude of beneit of the adjunctive mobile CBT was approximately 2 points on the PHQ-9 
and 3 to 4 points on the BDI-II. Using the observed standard deviation at week 9, these differences 
translate into standardized mean differences of 0.28 to 0.40 and are comparable to that of 0.31 
for antidepressants over placebo reported in a comprehensive systematic review of phase II or III 
RCTs [52]. The remission and response rates almost doubled, corresponding with numbers 
needed to treat between 5 and 12. 
Although several smartphone CBT apps have been experimented among general population par- 
ticipants with elevated self-reported symptoms [27-33], Kokoro-app is the irst smartphone CBT 
app to prove to be effective in a RCT in comparison with an alternative treatment for patients suf- 
fering from clinically diagnosed major depression. Advantages of smartphone CBT include high ac- 
cessibility, eficiency, and affordability. Further, it is less susceptible to quality control problems 
that may plague face-to-face therapies [53]. 
Unexpectedly, Kokoro-app also reduced the global burden of side effects due to pharmacotherapy. 
We speculate that the smartphone CBT, through which the patient actively searches for ways to 
overcome their depression, may increase their sense of self-control and decrease the subjective 
burden of side effects in comparison with standard pharmacotherapy. 
All beneits were larger in the total sample than in the per-protocol comparison, where we had an- 
ticipated a larger effect at the protocol stage. Participants were not included in the per-protocol 
sample mainly because they suffered from side effects from the medication change (31 of 47, see 
Figure 1). The CBT app may be particularly beneicial to those patients who experience signiicant 
side effects with medication. 
Strengths of this study include the concealed randomization, the successful masking of the out- 
come assessors, the close to 100% follow-up, the stratiied randomization that allowed assess- 
ment of intervention impact in two key samples, and corroboration of the secondary outcomes in- 
cluding patients’ self-reports. We followed the participants for 8 weeks after the end of the ran- 
domized comparison: the participants in the active intervention arm maintained the beneits, and 




the participants in the control arm who had access to Kokoro-app improved. Finally, the uptake of 
the CBT sessions via smartphone was satisfactory, with close to 90% of the participants inishing 
at least six of eight program sessions and actively engaging in homework tasks. 
This study is not without limitations. First, it is possible that participants in the control condition, 
who were not allowed access to CBT sessions at the beginning but only after the waiting period, 
may have suffered “disappointment effect” through the intervention period. We tried to mitigate 
this limitation that may be common to many waiting list-controlled trials by not making our con- 
trol condition a simple waiting list control in which the participants are not allowed to change 
their treatment [54], but an active medication change, which is one of the recommended treatment 
options for antidepressant-refractory patients. Nonetheless, the possibility of some contribution 
of disappointment effect among the control group cannot be negated. Secondly, it was impossible 
to mask the participants and the clinicians administering drug treatment to the treatment alloca- 
tion. However, we employed the remote telephone assessors to conduct assessments of the pri- 
mary outcome, which resulted in successful masking. Lastly, it must be pointed out that in this re- 
fractory population, although the smartphone CBT in conjunction with medication switch substan- 
tively decreased depression severity, approximately 70% to 80% were still not remitted after 2 
months of the combined treatment; additional face-to-face standard CBT may be helpful for these 
remaining patients. 
These indings have demonstrated the effectiveness of smartphone CBT as an adjunctive interven- 
tion for antidepressant-resistant major depression. Given the merits of the mobile mental health 
intervention, including accessibility, affordability, quality control, and effectiveness, patients and 
clinicians may wish to use smartphone CBT as an adjunctive intervention when their depression 
does not respond adequately to antidepressant treatment alone. Further research of its effective- 
ness in wider clinical contexts, including its use as a stand-alone treatment in major depression 
and its role in relapse prevention, and in public health contexts such as its use for subthreshold 
depressive states or its utility in low- and middle-income countries is warranted. Elucidation of the 
effective components of the smartphone CBT package and their appropriate dosages and their in- 
tegration within the existing health care systems also constitute areas needing further research. 

The study was funded by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan (H-22-Seishin-Ippan- 
008) from April 2013 through March 2014, and thereafter by the Japan Foundation for 
Neuroscience and Mental Health (JFNMH). The JFNMH received donations from Asahi Kasei, Eli 
Lilly, GSK, Janssen, MSD, Meiji Seika, Mochida, Otsuka, Pizer, Shionogi, Taisho, and Mitsubishi- 
Tanabe. The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, 
analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and 
decision to submit the manuscript for publication. 



















































































































































































































































































































































































a 
BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory-II; FIBSER: Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Ratings; PHQ-9: Patient 















































































































a 
BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory-II, FIBSER: Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Ratings, PHQ-9: Patient 






















































a 
BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory-II; FIBSER: Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Ratings; PHQ-9: Patient 
Health Questionnaire 9. 
b 





BDI-II, and FIBSER, and are odds ratios for remission and response. 
c 



