


Effects of Multiple Cleaning and Disinfection Interventions on 
Infectious Diseases in Children: A Group Randomized Trial 
in China* 

1. Institute of Environment Health and Related Product Safety, Center for Disease Control and Prevention of China, 
Beijing 100021, China; 2. Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Xiantao city, Xiantao 433000, Hubei, China 



cute 
and 
gastrointestinal diseases are the leading 
causes of child mortality. The World 
Health Organization estimated that more than 3.5 
million children under the age of 5 died of diarrhea 

infectious diseases 
and acute respiratory-related 
in WHO regions from 2000-2003[1]. 
each year 
Diarrhea and respiratory diseases are caused by a 
variety of pathogens transmitted by the fecal-oral 
including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and 
route, 
viruses. Contaminated surfaces or hands play key 
roles in the route of contact transmission of these 
This study received approval by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Environmental Health and Related Product 
Safety, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention [No. 2011001] and registered with the ChiCTR. [Reg. No. 
ChiCTR-ONRC-12002542] 
^These authors contributed equally to this work. 
#Correspondence should be addressed to ZHANG Liu Bo, Tel: 86-10-50930190, E-mail: zlbxj@263.com 
Biographical notes of the first authors: BAN Hai Qun, male, born in 1979, PhD candidate, majoring in disinfection and 

Objective To assess the effectiveness of multiple cleaning and disinfection interventions in the homes 
and kindergartens, in reducing gastrointestinal and respiratory illnesses of children. 
Methods From October 2010 to September 2011, we performed a prospective, controlled study in 
China. 408 children under 5 years old were recruited and group randomized into intervention and 
control groups. Families and kindergartens in the intervention group were provided with antibacterial 
products for hand hygiene and surface cleaning or disinfection for one year. Each child’s illness 
symptoms and sick leave were recorded every day. 
Results A total of 393 children completed the study, with similar baseline demographics in each of the 
2 groups. Except for abdominal pain, the odds of symptoms (fever, cough and expectoration, runny nose 
and nasal congestion, diarrhea), illness (acute respiratory illness and gastrointestinal illness), and sick 
leave per person each month were significantly reduced by interventions. The rates of fever, diarrhea, 
acute respiratory illness, gastrointestinal illness and sick leave per person per year were significantly 
decreased as well. 
Conclusion Not only the acute respiratory and gastrointestinal illness but the sick leave rate in 
children were significantly reduced by multiple interventions. 
Key words: Communicable disease control; Child daycare centers; Sick leave; Antibacterial agents; Hand 
hygiene; Domestic hygiene; Surface cleaning; Surface disinfection 



 



infectious diseases[2]. During the past few decades, 
research on the epidemiology of infectious disease 
has focused on hand hygiene in hospitals, day care 
facilities, schools and homes. In contrast to hand 
hygiene, surface cleaning or disinfection has recently 
begun to gain a better 
in healthcare 
settings[3], but contaminated surfaces and integrated 
interventions in community and non-acute settings 
remain to be little studied[4-6]. Does hand hygiene 
and surface cleaning or disinfection through multiple 
interventions affect the risk of infectious disease 
transmission more efficiently? Therefore, in order to 
assess the effects of multiple interventions on the 
prevention of 
infectious disease, we selected 
children (under 5 years old) from kindergartens in 
central China, carried out multiple interventions 
(hand hygiene and surface cleaning or disinfection) 
in the kindergartens and homes, and monitored 
infectious illnesses for the course of one year. 



involved a prospective, group 
randomized, controlled design. Two kindergartens 
were identified from Xiantao city, Hubei province 
of China. Both of them are located in the downtown 
area, and managed by the same committee. The 
distance between the two kindergartens is 3 km. 
One of the kindergartens has 14 classes (589 
children), the other has 16 classes (660 children). 
Due to the third grade children generally more than 
5 years, from the grade one and grade two classes, 
we randomly selected 5 classes (221 children) and 6 
classes (244 children) respectively at the two 
kindergartens. Questionnaires requesting the basic 
information of the children and the families involved, 
informed consent forms, were 
along with the 
distributed to parents or guardians before the study 
began, and all forms were required to be filled out 
and signed by the parents or guardians. All the 
families declared their written consent to participate 
in the study. Considering that the children played 
together in the same kindergartens, shared the same 
transmission routes, we did not adopt the use of 
individual randomized design. Randomization was 
based on the kindergarten, 221 children from one 
kindergarten as the intervention group, and 245 
children from the other kindergarten as the control 
group. At the data analysis phase, 48 children were 
excluded because their families already had antiba- 
cterial products or their guardians didn’t complete 
the questionnaire, 9 children were excluded because 
of above 5 years old, 15 children were excluded 
because of losing to follow-up (Figure 1). 

 







The study started in October 2010 and lasted 
until September 2011. Families and kindergartens in 
the 
intervention group were provided with 
antibacterial products for hand hygiene and surface 
the 
cleaning 
Whealthfields Lohmann (Guangzhou) Company Ltd. 
Items distributed included Liquid Antimicrobial Soap 
for hand-washing 
ingredient: 0.2%-0.3% 
parachlorometaxylenol), Instant Hand Sanitizer for 
ingredient: 72%-75% 
hand disinfecting 
ethanol), Antiseptic-Germicide (active 
ingredient: 
4.5%-5.5% parachlorometaxylenol, diluting before 
ingredient: 4.5%-5.0% 
use) and Bleach 
sodium hypochlorite, diluting before use) for surface 
disinfecting. 




in the 
intervention group were instructed, in person on 
proper hand-hygiene techniques and how to use all 
of the antibacterial products which were distributed. 
Children, their family members and teachers were 
advised to wash their hands daily using Liquid 
Antimicrobial Soap, especially before eating, after 
using the bathroom, after blowing their nose, and 
after outdoor activities. Instant Hand Sanitizer was 
instructed to be carried daily and used without 
running water. Hard surfaces in kindergartens were 
to be cleaned or disinfected every day using 
Antiseptic-Germicide or Bleach, in homes were to be 
cleaned or disinfected at least twice every week. 
Items such as children’s toys, house furnishings, 
frequently touched objects (doorknobs, tables or 
desks), 
cutlery, 
surfaces 
countertops, chopping boards, sinks, floors, etc.), 
bathroom surfaces (toilet, sink, floor, etc.), and so 
forth were also included in the weekly cleaning or 
disinfecting practices. 


Families and kindergartens in the control group 
were not provided with any antibacterial products. 
Hand hygiene of children, their family members and 
teachers remained unchanged. Routine surface 
cleaning and disinfection practices in the homes and 
kindergartens also remain unchanged. 

A ‘Children’s Daily Health Calendar’ was sent to 
families of both groups to collect daily data on illness 
symptoms (fever, cough and expectoration, runny 
nose and nasal congestion, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain). Fever was defined as when the axillary 
temperature is higher than 37.3 °C or the range of 
temperature fluctuation is more than 1 °C. Cough 
and expectoration were defined as three or more 
coughs in a single hour and lasting for 4 or more 
hours in a single day, with or without expectoration. 
Runny nose and nasal congestion were defined as a 
runny nose lasting for 4 or more hours in one day, 
with or without nasal congestion. Diarrhea was 
defined as three or more bowel movements in one 
day, watery or loose stools, with or without blood in 
the stool. Abdominal pain was defined as an ache or 
pain in the stomach lasting for 1 hour or more. 


Definitions of symptoms were printed on the 
Calendar and given to the parents or guardians at 
the beginning of the study. The symptom ‘fever’ 
required 
using 
thermometers, which were provided for by the study 
team. All of the symptoms of illness were diagnosed 
and filled out by the parents or guardians based on 
the stated definitions. Every month upon completion, 
the Calendars were collected by the teachers of each 
classroom. The teachers checked the completeness 
and accuracy of the Calendars and made corrections 
with the parents or guardians according to the 
children’s morning checking and medicine taking log. 
A ‘Children’s Daily Sick Leave Calendar’ was sent 
to the classroom teachers of both groups to collect 
daily data on sick leave (SL), and were filled out by 
the teachers. 
During the whole year of this study, close 
contact was maintained with parents or guardians 
and teachers of both groups, including unscheduled 
parents’ meetings, quarterly home visits, phone 
interviews, and monthly cell phone messages. All 
families and teachers were provided with contact 
details and could contact the study’s management at 
any 
compliance with 
interventions was assessed every month by way of 
surveying the consumption of products. If the 
products provided became empty, the empty bottles 
could be exchanged for new ones at any time. 



All data were collected in a database (EpiData 
3.1, EpiData Association, Odense, Denmark) and 
analyzed in SPSS 11.5 (SPSS Chicago Inc.). Baseline 
demographic characteristics of the intervention and 
control groups were compared using the χ2-Test for 
categorical variables and the Wilcoxon rank sum test 
for continuous variables. Acute respiratory illness (RI) 
was classified as the appearance of two or more of 
cough and 
the 





expectoration, runny nose and nasal congestion. 
Gastrointestinal illness (GI) was classified as the 
appearance of diarrheal symptoms or two or more 
of the following symptoms: diarrhea, fever, and 
abdominal pain. 

p1 and p2 means the incidence rate of control 
and 
respectively; q1=1-p1, 
q2=1-p2; n1 and n2 means the number of children in 
the control and intervention group, respectively. 
In order to analyze the number of RI, GI and SL, 
the number of person months with and without 
symptoms or SL were determined. The odds ratio 
(OR) and ±95% Confidence Intervals (CI) between the 
two groups were calculated and the χ2-Test was used 
to detect any statistically significant differences 
between the groups. To analyze the frequency of 
symptoms, illness and SL, during all 12 months, 
illnesses or absences occurring 0, 1, 2, 3 or more 
times were determined for each child. The χ2-Test 
was used to detect statistically significant differences 
between groups. To assess the preventive effect of 
interventions, the protective rate (PR) and ±95% CI 
non-parametric 
and 
were 
Mann-Whitney Test used to detect statistically 
significant differences between groups. 


p 
1 

p 
2 


p 
1 
PR 




p 
1 
n 
2 
2 
p 
1 
n 
1 





Before completion of the one year timeframe, a 
total of 15 children (6 and 9 from the intervention and 
control group, respectively) withdrew, because of 
transferring to other classrooms or kindergartens. The 
percentage of participants withdrawing from the 
study was less than 5% per group, and did not 
significantly affect the outcome of the study (P=0.60, 
χ2-Test). 



The data of 393 children and their families were 
analyzed in this study. There were no significant 
demographic 
differences 
characteristics between the control and intervention 
group, except for the number of smoker families 
(Table 1). 61.8% of the children are boys. 86.8% of 
least a senior middle school 
mothers have at 
education. 84.4% of 
families have an annual 
household income between ¥10,000-¥100,000. 29.0% 
of families have smoker, the control group have more 
smoker families (P=0.004). 
Table 1. Baseline Demographic Characteristics of Enrolled Families, Xiantao city, 
Hubei Province of China, 2010-2011 

Age, Mean (SD) 
Size of household, Mean (SD) 
Sex, n (%) 
Male 
Female 

≤Junior middle school 
Senior middle school 
≥Junior college 

Yes 
No 

<¥10,000 
¥10,000–¥50,000 
¥50,000–¥100,000 
≥¥100,000 


3.7 (0.5) 
4.2 (1.2) 
119 (59.8) 
80 (40.2) 
33 (16.6) 
77 (38.7) 
89 (44.7) 
71 (35.7) 
128 (64.3) 
9 (4.5) 
105 (52.8) 
64 (32.2) 
21 (10.6) 
3.7 (0.4) 
4.1 (1.2) 
124 (63.9) 
70 (36.1) 
19 (9.8) 
80 (41.2) 
95 (49.0) 
43 (22.2) 
151 (77.8) 
8 (4.1) 
121 (62.4) 
50 (25.8) 
15 (7.7) 
P value* 
0.721 
0.341 



















p 
1 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Effect on the Month Incidence Rate of Illness or 
Absence The incidence rates per month of the 
control group for fever (0-26.1%), RI (0-27.6%) and 
GI (0-7.0%) shown two seasonal peaks, which were 
autumn (October) and spring (April) for fever, 
autumn (October) and spring (March) for RI, autumn 
(November) and summer (August) for GI (Figure 
2A-2C). Overall, 
the 
intervention group decreased compared to the 
control group, especially for the seasonal peaks. The 
range of incidence rates in the intervention group 
per month were 0-17.0% (fever), 0-21.6% (RI), 
0-4.6% (GI), respectively. There was only one 
seasonal peak at the beginning of the study, and a 
decline of incidence rates could be seen. 




The incidence rates for SL of the intervention 
group (4.1%-9.5%) decreased compared to the 
control 
the 
(0.5%-11.9%), 
intervention group was higher than the control 
group at the beginning of the study (Figure 2D). A 
decline of incidence rates could be seen in the 
intervention group. 



Effect on the Frequency of Illness or Absence in 12 
Months The frequency (occurring 0, 1, 2, 3 or 
more times) of fever, diarrhea, RI, GI, and SL were 
determined for each child (Table 4). The constitution 
ratios of 1, 2, 3 or more times for fever, diarrhea, RI 
and GI in intervention group are higher than control 
group. The constitution ratios of 1, 2 for SL in 
intervention group are higher than control group. 
There 
significant differences 
between the two groups. Interventions reduced the 
frequency of fever, diarrhea, RI, GI and SL. 
Preventive effect on the prevalence of illness or 
absence The rates of fever, diarrhea, RI, GI, and 
SL per person year in control group were 1.41, 0.28, 
1.21, 0.29, and 0.59, in intervention group were 0.62, 
0.11, 0.59, 0.13, and 0.37, respectively (Table 5). 
Interventions reduced the rates of fever, diarrhea, RI, 
GI, and SL. There were statistically significant 
differences between two groups. The protection 
rates of multiple interventions on fever, diarrhea, RI 
and GI is more than 50%. The protection rate of 
multiple interventions on SL is almost 40%. 
Figure 2. Month incidence rates (95% CI) for fever, RI, GI, and SL. MIR, Month incidence rate; IG, 
Intervention group; CG, Control group. (A) Fever; (B) RI; (C) GI; (D) SL. The horizontal axis started in Oct 
2010 and lasted until Sep 2011. Jul and Aug was summer holiday. 
 





the past few decades, most of the research has paid 
attention to the effects of hand hygiene on 
infectious diseases in hospitals, day care centers, and 
schools. A lot of researches has shown that hand 
hygiene, consisting of hand washing or disinfection, 
could reduce nosocomial infections in hospitals[12-13], 
reduce the acute respiratory and gastrointestinal 
illness and the sick leave rate in day care facilities, 
schools and workplaces[14-17], as well as help to 
reduce the amount of acute respiratory and 
illnesses spread between family 
gastrointestinal 
members[18-19]. Based on papers published from 
January 1960 through May 2007, a Meta-Analysis 
showed that improvements in hand hygiene resulted 
in reductions in gastrointestinal illness by 31% [(CI) 
19%, 42%] and reductions in respiratory illness by 
21% [(CI) 5%, 34%]. Hand hygiene is clearly effective 
against gastrointestinal and, to a lesser extent, 
respiratory infections[19]. Sandora et al[4] had taken a 
study placed over an 8-week period (March to May 
2006). A multifactorial intervention including hand 
sanitizer 
reduced 
absenteeism caused by gastrointestinal illness in 
elementary school students. The absenteeism rate 
for respiratory illness was not reduced by this 
intervention which is different from our study. Our 
study showed that multiple interventions not only 
reduced gastrointestinal illness, but also reduced 
acute respiratory 
is 
55.79% [(CI) 36.99%, 74.59%] and 50.85% [(CI) 
45.86%, 55.84%], which illustrated that contaminat- 
ed surfaces may play an important role in infectious 
disease 
children. 
Children spend most of their time indoors such as 
homes, day care centers, kindergartens and schools. 
Because children under 5 years old likely have not 
developed good hand hygiene habits, contaminated 
surfaces threaten their health more than adults. 
Poorly sanitized surfaces don’t only allow for the 
transference of infectious disease to one child but 
also between children and family members. Field 
and laboratory studies have repeatedly shown the 
importance of environmental disinfection as part of 
infectious disease 
an 
control[2]. And we think that multiple interventions 
are more effective than 
intervention. 
Multiple interventions (hand hygiene and surface 
cleaning or disinfection) should be taken at homes, 
day care centers, kindergartens and schools. 






Our study may have several limitations. We did 
not adopt the use of individual randomized design. 
The symptoms of illnesses were diagnosed by the 

parents or guardians 
(based on the provided 
definitions) rather than a clinical diagnosis or 
microbiologic confirmation. Sick leave was due to 
infectious 
any of the 
diseases. Neither 
the 
investigators were blinded. However, keeping these 
in mind we attempted to reduce 
limitations 
ascertainment bias, through the use of Daily Record 
Calendars for both the homes and kindergartens 
while maintaining close contact with the parents, or 
guardians, and teachers from both groups. 

Received: February 27, 2015; 
Accepted: November 3, 2015 










































































 
