AMERICAN JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Copyright © 1988 by The Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health 
All rights re*erved 
Vol. 127, No. 4 
Printed m U.S.A. 
DIARRHEAL ILLNESS AMONG INFANTS AND TODDLERS IN DAY 
CARE CENTERS: EFFECTS OF ACTIVE SURVEDLLANCE AND STAFF 
TRAINING WITHOUT SUBSEQUENT MONITORING 
ALFRED V. BARTLETT,1 BETTY A. JAR VIS,1 VIRGINIA ROSS,' 
THEODORE M. KATZ,4 MARGARET A. DALIA/ STEVEN J. ENGLENDER,8 AND 
LARRY J. ANDERSON8 
Bartiett, A. V. (Oept of Internationa) Health, Johns Hopkins U. School of Hygiene 
and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205), B. A. Jarvla, V. Ross, T. M. Katz, M. A. 
Dalia, S. J. Englender, and l_ J. Anderson. Diarrheal illness among infants and 
toddlers in day care centers: effects of active surveillance and staff training 
without subsequent monitoring. Am J EpUemM 1988;127:808-17. 
From October 1981 to September 1984, the authors conducted a three-year 
longitudinal study of diarrhea among infants and toddlers attending day care 
centers In Maricopa County, Arizona. In the third year of study, they evaluated 
the effects on diarrhea rates of staff training without external monitoring and of 
active surveillance conducted throughout the study. From 21 study day care 
centers, they randomly selected 10 ("intervention day care centers") to receive 
staff training in procedures to reduce transmission of Infectious diarrhea. Contin- 
uing active surveillance in the 10 intervention and 11 control day care centers 
found no difference between diarrhea rates in intervention day care centers in 
the pre- and posttraining years and no difference between diarrhea rates in the 
two groups of centers either before or after the training intervention. Biweekly 
family-based surveys during the two months after training also demonstrated no 
difference between infant-toddler diarrhea rates in intervention and control day 
care centers. These surveys found the 21 study day care centers to have 
significantly higher diarrhea rates than did day care homes or households not 
using day care, but significantly lower rates than day care centers not included 
In the active surveillance. Continuous surveillance without training was associ- 
ated with a significant decrease in diarrheal illness during the course of longitu- 
dinal study. One-time staff training without subsequent monitoring did not result 
in additional decreases and did not lower day care center diarrhea rates to the 
levels observed in day care homes and households not using day care. 

Infectious diarrhea is an important prob- 
lem in child day care centers, particularly 
those caring for children who are not yet 
toilet trained (1, 2). In such centers, many 


1 Department of International Health, The Johns 
Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD. 

4 National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, Centers for Disease Control, US Public Health 
Service, US Department of Health and Human Serv- 
ices, Atlanta, GA. 



" Division of Viral Diseases, Center for Infectious 
s Training and Laboratory Program Office, Centers Diseases, Centers for Disease Control, US Public 
for Disease Control, Public Health Services, US De- Health Service, US Department of Health and Human 
partment of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, 
GA. 


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 



opportunities exist for introduction and 
transmission of enteric pathogens. From 
1981-1984, we conducted a three-year lon- 
gitudinal study of diarrheal illness among 
infants and toddlers attending day care 
centers in Maricopa County (metropolitan 
Phoenix), Arizona. Using continuous active 
surveillance for infant-toddler diarrhea, in 
the first two years of study we found that 
day care centers adhering to specific hy- 
giene procedures, especially child and staff 
handwashing, had lower risk of diarrheal 
illness than those that did not (2). In the 
second year, we also compared the rates of 
infant-toddler diarrhea in our day care cen- 
ter sample with those among age-matched 
children in day care homes and others cared 
for at home and found the rate of infant- 
toddler diarrhea to be significantly higher 
in day care centers than in the other set- 
tings (3). 
Black et al. (4), in a study of four Atlanta 
day care centers, have shown that staff 
training in handwashing and hygiene, com- 
bined with close monitoring of staff com- 
pliance, is associated with a significant de- 
crease in infant-toddler diarrhea. However, 
monitoring day-to-day staff practices in the 
more than 20,000 day care centers in the 
United States would clearly exceed the re- 
sources of public health agencies. There- 
fore, in the third year of study, we con- 
ducted a controlled trial of day care center 
staff training in handwashing and other 
hygiene practices without monitoring staff 
practices after training. We then evaluated 
the effect of this training using two ap- 
address: Division de Nutricion y Salud, INCAP, Apar- 
tado Postal 1J88, Guatemala, Guatemala, C.A. 


Presented in part at the 26th Interscience Confer- 
ence on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 
Minneapolis, MN, September 29 to October 2, 1985. 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance 
of Beraita M. Steffi and of each of the nurses and 
student nurses from Arizona State University School 
of Nursing who participated in this study. They also 
thank Lois Vernon, Mary Felker, and Dr. Robert 
Parker for statistical assistance, and Barbara Nemitz, 
Anne Wright, and Krysti Clemons for preparing the 
manuscript. 
proaches, active day care center-based sur- 
veillance and family-based surveys. The 
purpose of this phase of study was to deter- 
mine whether this training strategy would 
result in a significant reduction of the 
infant-toddler diarrhea rate and whether 
this rate could be reduced to levels experi- 
enced by children in day care homes and in 
households not using day care. This study 
phase also permitted assessment of the im- 
pact of surveillance itself on day care center 
diarrhea rates. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Study populations 
Day care centers. For the first two years, 
our study was conducted in 22 day care 
centers randomly selected from the 108 day 
care centers in Maricopa County licensed 
to care for infante and toddlers. To conduct 
the training intervention study, we divided 
these 22 study day care centers into three 
strata, based on surveillance rates of 
infant-toddler diarrhea in the preceding 12 
months. Half of the centers in each stratum 
were then randomly assigned to the inter- 
vention group. After this procedure, one of 
the centers in the high-rate stratum ran- 
domized to the intervention group with- 
drew from the study and was not replaced. 
Because all day care centers in the inter- 
vention and control groups had already par- 
ticipated in study of diarrheal disease for 
at least one year before the intervention 
study, we also created a third comparison 
group ("new" day care centers) of four cen- 
ters randomly selected from infant-toddler 
day care centers that had never partici- 
pated in our surveillance. The three groups 
of day care centers did not differ signifi- 
cantly in several important characteristics 
including mean total enrollment, mean 
infant-toddler enrollment, operating hours, 
percentage accepting drop-in children, per- 
centage accepting public agency payment, 
and percentage of study children enrolled 
for six months or less at the beginning of 
study year 3. At the beginning of study year 
3, there were 196 infants and toddlers en- 
rolled in intervention day care centers and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


178 in control day care centers. Based on 
surveillance rates of diarrhea in the preced- 
ing year, this sample was adequate to detect 
a 25 per cent reduction, with alpha = 0.05, 
power of a test = 0.90. Infant-toddler en- 
rollment in the new day care centers was 
75. 
Day care homes A total of 30 day care 
homes were randomly selected from listings 
compiled by private, nonprofit, and public 
agencies. Each day care home cared for two 
or more children aged 0-36 months. The 
day care home sample was matched geo- 
graphically to the day care center sample 
by zip code to provide socioeconomic com- 
parability. If a day care home closed, with- 
drew from the study, or ceased to have two 
or more children in the study age group, we 
recruited a replacement using the same se- 
lection process. At the beginning of study 
year 3, the day care home sample included 
a total of 85 infants and toddlers. 
Households not using day care. A sample 
of children aged 0-35 months who did not 
attend day care and whose parents did not 
provide child care in their home was en- 
rolled by random selection from county 
birth records combined with random tele- 
phone calling. This sample was geographi- 
cally matched to the day care center and 
day care home samples by zip code. At the 
beginning of study year 3, the household 
sample included 111 infants and toddlers 
in 97 households. 
Day care center staff training 
The training program was implemented 
in the intervention day care centers during 
the last two weeks of September 1983. 
Training provided background information 
on infectious diarrhea and fecal-oral trans- 
mission and participatory learning of spe- 
cific tasks for diarrheal disease prevention 
and control. The training sessions, using a 
standard protocol, were conducted by the 
principal investigator (A. V. B.) and study 
nurses with the assistance of training spe- 
cialists. 
In the first phase of training, day care 
center directors were taught management 
procedures for disease control including 
separation of child groups, physical orga- 
nization of diapering and toilet areas, re- 
quirements for environmental cleaning, 
management of ill children, communication 
of policies to parents, supervision of staff 
practices, and training of new workers. Di- 
rectors were also taught the hygiene-related 
tasks their classroom staffs would learn. 
The directors then participated in the 
training sessions for their infant-toddler 
classroom staffs. These sessions taught 
schedules and procedures for caregivere' 
tasks, including staff and child handwash- 
ing, diapering, food handling, environmen- 
tal cleaning, and other child care hygiene 
practices. Posters depicting the handwash- 
ing and diapering procedures were provided 
to each intervention center, and handouts 
describing the caregivers' tasks and sched- 
ules for performance of the tasks were pro- 
vided to each participant. 
One week after training, an examination 
was administered to all trained staff. Cor- 
rect description of 80 per cent of the care- 
givers' tasks and correct execution of all 
steps of the handwashing and diapering 
procedures were required to pass this ex- 
amination. New workers in intervention 
centers were trained at the time of employ- 
ment and required to pass the same exam- 
ination. This examination was also re- 
peated unannounced eight months after the 
original training. 
Since training might result in an increase 
in diarrhea reporting in intervention cen- 
ters, during the last half of September 1983 
we visited each control day care center to 
give a presentation reviewing surveillance 
procedures already in place, but providing 
no instruction in disease prevention or 
management. 

In both the day care center-based sur- 
veillance and the family-based survey, a 
case of diarrhea was defined as occurrence 
in a study child of stools that were unusu- 
ally loose or frequent compared with the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


usual pattern for that child, as determined 
by the respondent caregiver. 



ods of active surveillance in our interven- 
tion and control day care centers were iden- 
tical with those used during the first two 
years of study (2). Briefly, this surveillance 
included weekly visits and daily telephone 
calls to each center on Monday through 
Thursday 
illness 
among children present that day and to 
record attendance in each age group. In- 
formed consent was obtained from a parent 
of each child involved in the study. Stool 
specimens and epidemiologic data were ob- 
tained from all children with sporadic cases 
of diarrhea and from all ill and well children 
in groups experiencing diarrhea outbreaks 
(three or more cases in one day or five or 
more cases in any seven-day period in the 
same day care center). Stool specimens 
were tested for Salmonella, Shigella, Cam- 
pylobacter, rotavirus, and Giardia lamblia 
by methods previously described (2). If a 
pathogen was identified in a sporadic case, 
all asymptomatic children in the same 
group were tested for that pathogen. In 
both intervention and control day care cen- 
ters, management of infected children was 
mandated by state regulation and county 
policy, which required excluding such chil- 
dren from the day care center until negative 
stool specimens were documented after the 
end of symptoms and treatment (if appro- 
priate). 
Family-based survey. This survey was de- 
veloped and used in study year 2 to provide 
uniform ascertainment of illness among 
children attending different types of child 
care facilities. After day care center staff 
training, student nurses trained to admin- 
ister the family questionnaire surveyed the 
families of all children aged 0-36 months 
in each of the 25 day care centers, the 30 
day care homes, and the 97 households that 
did not use day care. These questionnaires 
were administered every two weeks during 
October and November 1983, the time of 
highest diarrhea incidence in our previous 
two years of study. Student nurses were 
blinded in regard to "intervention" or "con- 
trol" status of the day care centers. 
Survey questionnaires identified diar- 
rheal illness in each study child and ob- 
tained information on the number and ages 
of other family members and the occupa- 
tion of the principal wage earner. If illness 
occurred, information was obtained regard- 
ing specific effects of that illness on the 
family. The questionnaires for the house- 
hold sample also asked whether the study 
child had begun out-of-home care during 
that two-week period; if so, that family 
continued to be surveyed, but question- 
naires administered after the child began 
day care were excluded from comparisons 
with children in day care centers and day 
care homes. 
In the day care centers and day care 
homes, the survey included the families of 
all infants and toddlers actively enrolled. 
Study children who left a day care center 
or day care home during the survey period 
no longer participated in the survey; ques- 
tionnaires completed for such children be- 
fore they left were included in the analysis. 
Children newly enrolled in a day care center 
or day care home in the sample were en- 
tered in the survey at the time of the next 
questionnaire. In day care centers and day 
care homes, questionnaires were distrib- 
uted and collected at the facility; question- 
naires were administered by telephone to 
families of study children not in attendance 
on the days of the survey. Biweekly ques- 
tionnaires were distributed directly to in- 
dividual families in the household sample. 
Based on actual attendance records, com- 
pletion rates for these surveys were greater 
than 95 per cent in all three groups of day 
care centers and in day care homes and 93 
per cent in households not using day care. 
Statistical analysis 
The proportions of specimens with path- 
ogens identified and the attack rates in 
outbreaks were compared using the chi- 
square test. Illness rates were calculated for 
actual child-months of observation and 
compared using the z test for differences in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 
ti t- io 
a> ec t- 
CO (O CO 
o d o 
c* S P 
o o o 
S t> oq 
o dd 
aq •* CN 
CO Qi CO 
t- CO «-H 
c^ oo 
C^ »"H 
^ 
-*• 


1-9-3 8 
3 






CO CO O 
I> Cfl 
t- 
d o S 








proportions, with correction for the number 
of groups compared. Results of the post- 
training family-based survey were also ana- 
lyzed in stepwise logistic regression models 
(BMDP Statistical Software, Inc., Los 
Angeles, CA). 


Day care center-based surveillance. The 
rates of infant-toddler diarrhea identified 
by surveillance in intervention and control 
day care centers during the pre- and post- 
training years are shown in table 1. There 
were no significant changes in overall 
infant-toddler diarrhea rates or in rates in 
the infant or toddler stratum from the pre- 
training to the posttraining year and no 
significant differences in these rates be- 
tween intervention and control day care 
centers in either year. 
Pathogen testing of children revealed dif- 
ferences suggestive of impact of staff train- 
ing. In the pretraining year, the percentages 
of infant-toddler diarrhea cases in which 
one or more pathogens were identified were 
almost identical in the intervention and 
control day care centers (14.5 per cent of 
138 cases vs. 16.0 per cent of 144 cases). In 
the posttraining year, the percentage of 
pathogen-positive cases declined substan- 
tially in the intervention day care centers 
(9.2 per cent of 152 cases), while it re- 
mained essentially unchanged in the con- 
trol day care centers (16.9 per cent of 154 
cases). This posttraining difference 
in 
ap- 
pathogen-positive 
proached but did not achieve statistical sig- 
nificance (p = 0.07). However, in the post- 
training year, intervention day care centers 
experienced a significant decrease in the 
number of infections by Giardia lamblia, 
the most commonly identified enteric path- 
ogen in our study. This decrease resulted 
in the Giardia identification rates among ill 
study children and their asymptomatic con- 
tacts being significantly lower in interven- 
tion day care centers than in control day 


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


care centers in the posttraining year (table 
2). 
Surveillance identified an additional dif- 
ference between intervention and control 
day care centers in diarrhea outbreaks. 
There were nine outbreaks in study day 
care centers in both the pre- and posttrain- 
ing years; three outbreaks in the pretrain- 
ing year and five in the posttraining year 
occurred in intervention day care centers. 
In the pretraining year, the attack rate in 
outbreaks did not differ significantly be- 
tween intervention and control day care 
centers: 11 of 24 children (46 per cent) 
became ill in groups experiencing outbreaks 
in intervention day care centers versus 36 
of 97 (37 per cent) in control day care 
centers. In the posttraining year, the attack 
rate in intervention day care centers was 
significantly lower than in control day care 
centers: 50 of 91 children (55 per cent) 
versus 67 of 81 children (83 per cent). How- 
ever, this difference was due to a significant 
increase in attack rate in control centers, 
rather than to a decline in attack rate in 
intervention centers. 
higher than that in day care homes (p < 
0.01) and in households not using day care 
(p < 0.001). However, the highest rate oc- 
curred in the four new day care centers 
which had not previously been part of our 
study, their rate was significantly higher 
than that in the centers participating in 
ongoing surveillance (p < 0.001). 
The proportion of family survey child- 
months of observation accounted for by 
infants was 20 per cent in intervention day 
care centers, 16 per cent in control day care 
centers, 18 per cent in day care centers not 
previously studied, and 20 per cent in 
households not using day care. In day care 
homes, infants accounted for a significantly 
greater percentage of family survey child- 
months (38 per cent). However, in day care 
homes, there was no significant difference 
in diarrhea rates in the infant and toddler 
strata (24.2 vs. 27.0 cases per 100 child- 
months), and the different age distribution 
in day care homes therefore did not con- 
tribute significantly to the differences in 
diarrhea rates between day care homes and 
other settings. 
Family-based survey. Consistent with the 
surveillance data, the biweekly family- 
based survey conducted during the two 
months after training also found the rates 
of infant-toddler diarrhea in intervention 
and control day care centers to be virtually 
identical (figure 1). When considered as a 
group, the 21 study day care centers had an 
infant-toddler diarrhea rate significantly 
The surveys revealed significant differ- 
ences in the number and ages of other 
children in families using different types of 
child care. We therefore examined these 
surveys in a multivariate logistic regression 
model with occurrence of diarrhea! illness 
as the dependent variable and with type of 
child care and presence of other children 
by age group as the independent variables. 
Identification of Giardia lamblia among study children with diarrhea and their asymptomatic contacts in 
intervention and control day care centers, Maricopa County, AZ, October 1982 to September 1984 


Intervention day care centers 
Control day care centers 

Intervention day care centers 
Control day care centers 

Asymptomatic children 
in contact with ill child 
No. positive/ 
no. tested 
15/149 
20/203 
11/189 
27/167 

10 
10 
6 
16 
No. positive/ 
no. tested 
35/168 
23/127 
4/50 
9/94 

22 
18 
8 
10 

No. positive/ 
no. tested 
50/307 
43/330 
15/239 
36/261 
16* 
13 
6*t 
14t 
* Comparison of pre- and posttraining year intervention day care centers, p < 0.001, chi-square test 
t Comparison of posttraining year intervention and control day care centers, p < 0.001, chi-square test. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 



90n 
80- 
70- 
60- 
50- 
40- 
30- 
20- 
10 
0 


NOT USING 
DAY CARE 



DCCS NOT 
PREVKXJSLY 
STUDIED 


In this model, risk of diarrhea was still 
significantly associated with type of child 
care. Compared with occurrence of diarrhea 
among children in households not using day 
care, in day care homes the odds ratio was 
1.33 (95 per cent confidence interval (CI) 
= 0.73-2.40), in control day care centers 
the odds ratio was 2.12 (95 per cent CI = 
1.30-3.48), in intervention day care centers 
it was 2.23 (95 per cent CI = 1.37-3.63), 
and in day care centers not previously stud- 
ied it was 4.88 (95 per cent CI = 2.92-8.17). 
Risk of diarrhea in the 21 study day care 
centers was significantly greater than that 
in day care homes (p < 0.02) and in house- 
holds not using day care (p < 0.01) and 
significantly less than in day care centers 
not previously studied (p < 0.01). In this 
model, again there was no significant dif- 
ference in risk of diarrhea between day care 
homes and households not using day care. 
These surveys also assessed the impact 
on the family of diarrheal illness in a study 
child. The rates of physician visits, medi- 
cation usage, and subsequent diarrheal ill- 
ness in other household members were ac- 
tually higher in intervention than in con- 
trol day care centers, although these differ- 
ences were not significant (table 3). In day 
care centers not previously studied, each of 
these effects occurred at a rate significantly 
higher than in either of the other two 
groups of day care centers (p = 0.001- 
0.015). With the exception of physician vis- 
its, rates in day care homes were lower than 
in any of the day care center groups; rates 
were generally lowest in households not 
using day care. 
Staff recall of training content 
In accordance with our study protocol, 
we did not monitor staff compliance with 
the procedures taught in the training. To 
assess recall of these procedures during the 
posttraining year, we compared the results 
of the examination administered one week 
after training with those of the same ex- 
amination administered eight months later. 
A total of 41 of 44 originally trained work- 
ers passed the initial examination on their 
first attempt. Eight months later, none of 
the remaining 28 originally trained workers 
and none of 14 subseijuently trained work- 
ers passed the same examination. However, 
in the second examination, 17 of 42 workers 
correctly demonstrated the handwashing 
procedure taught in the training, and 15 of 
42 correctly demonstrated the diapering 
procedure. 
Impact of surveillance on diarrhea rates 
The finding that the rate of diarrheal 
illness was significantly higher in day care 
centers not previously included in our study 
than in those previously included was con- 
sistent with the hypothesis that two pre- 
vious years of surveillance had affected the 
rate of infant-toddler diarrhea in our day 
care center sample. To evaluate this hy- 
pothesis, we compared the yearly rates of 
infant-toddler diarrhea identified by active 
surveillance in the day care centers. The 
surveillance rates of diarrhea in the pre- 
training year (0.80 cases per child-year, 95 
per cent CI = 0.76-0.84) and the posttrain- 
ing year (0.76 cases per child-year, 95 per 
cent CI = 0.72-0.80) were not significantly 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


Rates of occurrence of household effects associated with diarrheal illness in study child, by type of child care 
used, posttraining family-based survey, Maricopa County, AZ, October to November 1983 



Intervention 
day care 
centers 
Control day 
care centers 
Day care 
centers not 
previously 
studied 
Day care 
homes 
Households 
not using 
day care 
Adult missed work 
Child required visit to physician 
Child required medication 
Other household members with diar- 
rhea or vomiting (£14 days after 
study child) 
7.0 
10.4 
10.4 

7.0 
4.3 
5.0 

13.6 
21.7 
16.7 

3.0 
5.4 
3.0 

0 
0.5 
0.5 

different. However, both these rates were 
significantly lower than that in our first 
year of surveillance (1.20 cases per child- 
year, 95 per cent CI = 1.16-1.24). 

The trend toward increasing utilization 
of group day care for young children has 
caused concern about the potential for 
transmission of infectious diseases in day 
care settings. Staff training has frequently 
been proposed as one of the principal meth- 
ods for reducing such disease spread. How- 
ever, previous studies of the impact of 
training day care center workers have not 
separated the effect of training from that 
of monitoring or have not evaluated the 
impact of training and monitoring on mor- 
bidity (4,5). Thus, the approach and results 
of our study differ importantly from those 
of previous investigations. 
In 1976-1977, Black et al. (4) determined 
diarrhea rates among infants and toddlers 
in four Atlanta day care centers over a two- 
month period. Two of these day care cen- 
ters then received staff training in hand- 
washing and hygiene, and staff practices in 
these two centers were "rigorously moni- 
tored" (p. 446). During a nine-month fol- 
low-up period, the diarrhea rate in the in- 
tervention day care centers declined signif- 
icantly, becoming significantly lower than 
that in the control day care centers. In 
1974-1975, Aronson and Aiken (5) trained 
selected staff members from 123 day care 
programs (at least 120 of which were day 
care centers) to modify health and safety 
practices in their respective settings by act- 
ing as "health advocates" (5, p. 318). Sys- 
tematic evaluation of practices in the ad- 
vocates' child care settings and in 19 com- 
parable settings in which training did not 
occur was conducted before and one year 
after 
training. The periodic evaluation 
process alone was associated with signifi- 
cant improvement in the practices under 
study; training combined with the evalua- 
tion process was associated with additional 
significant improvement. Rates of disease 
and accident occurrence in the children 
before and after training were not mea- 
sured. 
These studies have suggested that train- 
ing combined with outside monitoring of 
child care practices can modify staff behav- 
ior as well as disease occurrence. However, 
neither study addresses the impact of train- 
ing in the absence of such monitoring. Our 
approach avoided external monitoring after 
training; we initially trained directors of 
our intervention day care centers and had 
them participate as cotrainere of their own 
workers so that they might provide internal 
monitoring of the practices of their staff. 
However, in terms of the principal outcome 
variable of our study—occurrence of 
infant-toddler diarrhea—both day care 
center-based active surveillance and 
family-based survey found no overall im- 
pact of this training strategy in day care 
centers that had already participated in two 
years of surveillance. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


Our results suggest possible impact of 
training on certain aspects of infectious 
diarrhea transmission. The significant re- 
duction in identification of G. lamblia in 
intervention centers may reflect the com- 
plex epidemiology of this pathogen in day 
care centers; Giardia can be transmitted by 
children with diarrhea, but also by asymp- 
tomatic shedding of cysts in stools or by 
cysts surviving in a contaminated environ- 
ment (6-8). In addition, the posttraining 
year attack rates in diarrhea outbreaks in 
intervention day care centers were signifi- 
cantly lower than in control day care cen- 
ters; it is possible that, during a time when 
diarrheal illness was prominent in inter- 
vention centers, the procedures learned 
during training were more effective or more 
consistently practiced. However, this find- 
ing is difficult to interpret because of the 
increased attack rate in control day care 
centers. 
Although this study indicates a failure of 
staff training without subsequent monitor- 
ing to reduce diarrhea rates, it does not 
differentiate between failure of the training 
to modify staff practices and failure of mod- 
ified practices to reduce diarrhea occur- 
rence. The fact that none of the trained 
workers passed the eighth month follow-up 
examination suggests that these workers 
were not using the practices learned in 
training, although the examination results 
may not reflect modifications in their ac- 
tual child care procedures. This failure to 
retain training content contrasts with the 
study of Aronson and Aiken (5), in which 
the performance of the trained health ad- 
vocates on a seventh month follow-up ex- 
amination nearly equaled that immediately 
posttraining. This difference might be ex- 
plained by differences between the health 
advocate trainees—who were selected for 
interest in health issues and many of whom 
had training in child development, educa- 
tion, social work, or nursing—and more 
typical child care staff. The fact that our 
trainees did not know that they would be 
reexamined might also explain these differ- 
ent findings. Failure of training to modify 
unmonitored behavior is perhaps not sur- 
prising since one study has documented 
failure of physicians and hospital staff to 
practice handwashing, even in medical in- 
tensive care units (9). 
While our training intervention did not 
lower diarrhea rates, several lines of evi- 
dence suggest that surveillance itself did. 
First, the infant-toddler diarrhea rate in 
study day care centers was significantly 
higher in the first study year than in years 
2 and 3. A similar decline in diarrhea rates 
during the course of surveillance without 
training was observed by Sullivan et al. (10) 
in a longitudinal study of 60 day care cen- 
ters in Houston. Second, diarrhea rates in 
our original study day care centers were 
significantly lower than in day care centers 
not previously studied. 
The finding that the day care centers 
under our active surveillance, like the day 
care centers trained and monitored by 
Black et al. (4), experienced a significant 
reduction in diarrhea rate indicates that 
this rate can be lowered. In day care centers 
not participating in surveillance, training 
alone without 
subsequent monitoring 
might contribute to reduction of diarrheal 
illness. However, even with training added 
to the effect of surveillance, infant-toddler 
diarrhea rates in study day care centers 
were not as low as those in the small group 
settings of family day care homes; rates of 
diarrhea in day care homes did not differ 
significantly from those of children cared 
for at home. This result is consistent with 
findings in our second year of study (3), 
and with other studies which have found 
diarrheal illness (11), respiratory infection 
(11, 12), and invasive Haemophilus influ- 
enzae type b disease (13) to be significantly 
more common in the large child groups 
associated with day care centers than in the 
smaller groups characteristic of day care 
homes. The findings of our family survey 
that diarrheal illness among approximately 
500 infants and toddlers in 25 day care 
centers during two months resulted in 88 
adults missing work, 108 physician visits, 
and 100 courses of medication indicate that 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 


diarrheal illness in day care centers is a 
substantial medical and public health con- 
cern. 
These results may have important impli- 
cations for the direction of infant-toddler 
care. They indicate that type of day care 
and size of child groups deserve attention 
in future studies of infectious diseases 
among young children receiving out-of- 
home day care. In addition, they suggest 
that further attention must be directed to 
effective promotion of hygienic practices 
among day care center workers without ex- 
ternal monitoring. Finally, additional study 
is needed to identify specific practices other 
than handwashing that reduce introduction 
and transmission of infectious agents in 
child care groups. 

1. Pickering LK, Evana DG, DuPont HL, et al. Diar- 
rhea caused by Shigella, rotavirus, and Giardia in 
day-care centers: prospective study. J Pediatr 
1981;99;51-6. 
2. Bartlett AV, Moore M, Gary GW, et al. Diarrheal 
illness among infants and toddlers in day care 
centers. I. Epidemiology and pathogens. J Pediatr 
1985;107:495-502. 
3. Bartlett AV, Moore M, Gary GW, et al. Diarrheal 
illness among infants and toddlere in day care 
centers. II. Comparison with day care homes and 
households. J Pediatr 1985;107:503-9. 
4. Black RE, Dykes AC, Anderson KE, et al. Hand- 
washing to prevent diarrhea in day-care centers. 
Am J Epidemiol 1981;113:445-51. 
6. Aronson SS, Aiken LS. Compliance of child-care 
programs with health and safety standards: im- 
pact of program evaluation and advocate training 
Pediatrics 1980-,65:318-25. 
6. Black RE, Dykes AC, Sinclair MS, et al. Giardiasis 
in day care centers: evidence of person-to-person 
transmission. Pediatrics 1977;60:486-91. 
7. Pickering LK, Woodward WE, DuPont HL, et al. 
Occurrence of Giardia lamblia in children in day 
care centers. J Pediatr 1984;104:522-6. 
8. Centers for Disease Control. Child Day Care In- 
fectious Disease Study Group. Public health con- 
siderations of infectious diseases in child day care 
centers. J Pediatr 1984;105:683-701. 
9. Albert RK, Condie F. Hand-washing patterns in 
intensive-care units. N Engl J Med 
medical 
1981;304:1465-€. 
10. Sullivan P, Woodward WE, Pickering LK, et aL 
A longitudinal study of the occurrence of diarrheal 
disease in day care centers. Am J Public Health 
1984;74:987-91. 
11. Doyle AB. Incidence of illness in early group and 
family day-care. Pediatrics 1976;58:607-13. 
12. Stahlberg M-R. The influence of form of day care 
on occurrence of acute respiratory tract infections 
among young children. Acta Paediatr Scand 
1980;(Suppl.)282:1-87. 
13. Istre G, Conner J, Broome CV, et al. Risk factors 
for primary invasive Haemophilus influenzas dis- 
ease: increased risk from day care attendance and 
school-aged household members. J Pediatr 1985; 
106:190-5. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/127/4/808/46952 
by University of Durham user 
on 03 January 2018 
