











All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, 
letting you access and read them immediately. 
Available from: Bruce Keswick 
Retrieved on: 19 September 2016 



Delayed effectiveness of home-based 
interventions in reducing childhood diarrhea, 
Karachi, Pakistan 





Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 71(4), 2004, pp. 420–427 
Copyright © 2004 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 
DELAYED EFFECTIVENESS OF HOME-BASED INTERVENTIONS IN REDUCING 
CHILDHOOD DIARRHEA, KARACHI, PAKISTAN 
STEPHEN P. LUBY, MUBINA AGBOATWALLA, ROBERT M. HOEKSTRA, MOHAMMAD H. RAHBAR, 
WARD BILLHIMER, AND BRUCE H. KESWICK 
Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases, National Centers for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia; Health Oriented Preventive Education, Karachi, Pakistan; Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA 
Community Health Sciences, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan; College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan 
Abstract. We introduced home drinking water disinfection and handwashing with soap in Karachi squatter settle- 
ments to evaluate their effect on diarrhea. In April 2000, 150 households received soap, 76 received dilute bleach and 
a water storage vessel, and 76 were enrolled as controls. In 2000, among households wealthy enough to own a refrig- 
erator, children in households that received bleach and a vessel had a 73% lower incidence of diarrhea than controls; 
those that received soap had a 56% lower incidence. There was no reduction in diarrhea in intervention households 
without a refrigerator. In 2001, households that received bleach and a vessel had a 71% lower incidence of diarrhea and 
children in households that received soap had a 35% lower incidence than controls. In 2001, the interventions were 
equally effective in households that had a refrigerator and those that did not. Both of these home-based interventions 
were ultimately effective in preventing diarrhea, but only households of slightly higher socioeconomic status changed 
their behavior quickly enough to benefit during the first summer. 

Diarrhea is a leading cause of childhood death globally. 
The World Health Organization estimates that two million 
children died of diarrheal disease in 2001.1 These deaths were 
concentrated among low income families living in low income 
countries.2 
Two home-based interventions, disinfecting drinking water 
with bleach and washing hands with soap, have been proven 
in multiple small-scale evaluations to decrease the incidence 
of diarrhea.3–6 Water disinfectant and soap are inexpensive 
commodities that the private sector can manufacture and sell 
to at-risk families, thereby furthering sustainable interven- 
tions to prevent diarrhea. However, motivating at-risk fami- 
lies to change their behavior and adopt in-home water treat- 
ment and handwashing as routine practice is a substantial task 
that typically requires more resources than businesses can 
recover through product sales, especially in those communi- 
ties where diarrheal mortality is highest. Understanding the 
pace and process through which families adopt home drinking 
water treatment and handwashing may provide insight on 
how to promote behavior change more efficiently. 
In Karachi, Pakistan, 40% of the population lives in squat- 
ter settlements where water and sanitary infrastructure is lim- 
ited.7 In these communities, infant mortality is high, and 40% 
of all deaths among children less than five years of age are 
due to diarrhea.8 In prior studies, households in these com- 
munities that added dilute bleach to their highly contami- 
nated drinking water and stored it in vessels that prevented 
re-contamination had markedly less contaminated water than 
households with standard water handling practices.9 Even 
households that transferred bleach-treated water to locally 
purchased insulated vessels and added highly contaminated 
ice, had markedly cleaner water. Families that received soap 
and were encouraged to wash their hands had lower concen- 
trations of thermotolerant coliforms detected on their hands 
at unannounced follow-up visits compared with families that 
did not receive soap and handwashing instructions.10 
These promising microbiologic results suggested that these 
two household level interventions would yield health benefits 
to families that adopt them. To test this hypothesis, we intro- 
duced home drinking water treatment and handwashing with 
soap in separate neighborhoods in Karachi squatter settle- 
ments. We evaluated the impact these interventions had on 
the incidence of diarrhea and the time required to change 
household behavior to make these interventions effective. 

Setting. This study was conducted in adjoining multi-ethnic 
squatter settlements in central Karachi, Manzoor Colony and 
Mujahid Colony, in collaboration with Health Oriented Pre- 
ventive Education (HOPE), a non-governmental organiza- 
tion that provides community-based health and developmen- 
tal assistance in these communities. HOPE field workers were 
trained women and men who have completed at least eight 
years of education, represented a variety of ethnic and lin- 
guistic groups, and lived either in the study communities or 
nearby communities. 
Only some of the households in these communities had 
access to the municipal water supply system. The municipal 
system supplied water intermittently, typically for 1–2 hours 
per day. At those times, residents turned on electric pumps to 
draw the maximum amount of water through rubber hoses 
connected to community water taps into their household stor- 
age tanks. Some households had their own pump with a rub- 
ber hose always connected to a tap so that they could collect 
water whenever it was available. More commonly, households 
shared a municipal tap with neighboring households, and so 
used their own pump to collect water only on alternate days. 
Households with no municipal water connection typically 
purchased water from commercial water sellers who sold wa- 
ter by the tanker truck or in smaller volumes. 
Bar soap was commonly sold in the small stores throughout 
these communities. Handwashing, typically with water alone, 
is part of regular ritual preparation for prayer, though thor- 
ough washing of hands with soap is less common. Children in 
these communities routinely bathe daily using a bucket bath. 
They remove their clothing, take one or two cups of water, 
pour it over their head and skin, lather with soap, and use 
another cup or two of water to rinse off. 



This study was primarily designed to evaluate whether 
bathing with antibacterial soap would reduce the incidence of 
impetigo compared with bathing with plain soap. Other ele- 
ments were added to the study to evaluate the role of water 
treatment and handwashing on the rate of diarrhea. The im- 
petigo results have been reported.11 This analysis focuses on 
diarrhea outcomes. 
Interventions. Bleach. Field workers diluted three parts of 
locally manufactured bleach (4.4 mg% sodium hypochlorite) 
with 17 parts distilled water, and packaged the dilute hypo- 
chlorite into 10-mL reusable plastic bottles. One plastic bottle 
of dilute bleach added to 20 liters of locally available water 
typically produced a free chlorine residual between 0.5 mg/L 
and 2.0 mg/L. 
Imported vessel. The imported water vessel was a 20-liter 
plastic container with a narrow mouth (8 cm), lid, and tap that 
allowed easy drawing of stored water while protecting it from 
contaminated hands. 
Local vessel. The locally manufactured water vessel was a 
20-liter insulated plastic container with a wider mouth (15 
cm), lid, and a tap. During summer months, participants com- 
monly added ice to the water stored in the insulated vessel. 
Soap. Three different variations of Safeguard(cid:1) (Procter & 
Gamble Company, Cincinnati, OH) bar soap were used dur- 
ing the study, but since they would be equally effective in 
preventing diarrhea, all households receiving soap were ana- 
lyzed together. At the initiation of the study, half of the fami- 
lies in the soap group received generically packaged, un- 
branded soap that contained 1.2% triclocarban as an antibac- 
terial agent; this soap was chemically identical to the 
commercial Safeguard(cid:1) product. The other half of the fami- 
lies in the soap group initially received generically packaged 
soap that was identical to the first soap, except that it con- 
tained no triclocarban. Triclocarban is a bacteriostatic com- 
pound that inhibits the growth of some gram-positive bacte- 
ria, and so was relevant for comparing impetigo rates, but 
triclocarban is not effective against gram-negative bacteria, 
viruses, or parasites that cause infectious diarrhea.12,13 When 
supplies of the generically packaged soap were exhausted in 
the winter of 2001, and the impetigo evaluation was complete, 
commercially packaged Safeguard(cid:1) was substituted and the 
diarrhea evaluation was continued. 
Behavior change. Field workers arranged neighborhood 
meetings and used slide shows, videotapes, and pamphlets to 
illustrate health problems resulting from hand and water con- 
tamination and to provide specific instructions on how to use 
the study intervention. Field workers visited each participat- 
ing house at least weekly. In visits to intervention households, 
they promoted discussion and answered questions about the 
intervention, re-supplied families with bleach or soap, and 
encouraged regular use of the interventions. 
Study groups in 2000. The study began in May 2000 in three 
different neighborhoods. Participants in one neighborhood 
received bleach and the imported vessel. Study workers en- 
couraged this group to regularly treat their drinking water, 
but did not encourage or instruct them to wash their hands. 
Participants in the second neighborhood received soap. 
They were instructed to continue their regular routine of 
bathing and hand washing, but to substitute their usual soap 
with the study soap. No specific instructions on how or when 
to wash hands were provided. 

and practices control group, received a regular supply of chil- 
dren’s books, notebooks, pens, and pencils to help with their 
children’s primary education. They received no products or 
specific instructions expected to affect their risk of diarrhea. 
Study groups in 2001. The intervention continued longer 
than originally envisioned. Families who moved out of the 
study area or dropped out of the study for other reasons were 
replaced with neighbors who consented to participate. To in- 
crease statistical power, additional control households were 
recruited. 
Beginning in December 2000, the behavior change mes- 
sages to households in the soap group were revised to encour- 
age handwashing to prevent diarrhea. Specifically, household 
residents were encouraged to wash their hands thoroughly for 
at least 45 seconds to remove all visible dirt. They were also 
encouraged to wash hands at key times: before cooking, be- 
fore eating, before feeding a child, after defecation, and after 
children came inside from playing outside. 
A fourth intervention group was added in a fourth neigh- 
borhood in June 2001. This group received dilute bleach and 
a locally manufactured insulated vessel. Households typically 
added ice to the insulated vessel to keep water cold. Study 
workers visited weekly, encouraged regular treatment of 
drinking water, and re-supplied the households with dilute 
bleach. 
Eligibility. Eligible households were located in Manzoor 
Colony or Mujahid Colony, provided informed consent, in- 
cluded at least one child less than five years of age and two 
children less than 15 years of age, had sufficient water supply 
for the children to bathe daily, and planned to continue to 
reside in their homes for at least the ensuing four months. 
Only children less than 15 years of age were followed in the 
study. 
Measurements. Trained field workers conducted a pre- 
intervention baseline survey to characterize hand washing 
and bathing practices, soap consumption, and drinking water 
storage and purification practices. Field workers then visited 
participating households each week to collect information on 
disease occurrence and, in intervention households, to en- 
courage regular and appropriate use of the intervention. 
Diarrhea was defined as three or more loose stools in a 
24-hour period. Each week was classified as either a week 
with or without diarrhea. A child was considered at risk for a 
new episode of diarrhea if they had reported no diarrhea in 
the preceding week. 
Laboratory analysis. Baseline drinking water samples were 
collected from the bleach plus imported vessel and the control 
households at baseline and evaluated for the presence of ther- 
motolerant coliforms and Escherichia coli using standard 
membrane filtration methods.9 
Sample size. We calculated a sample size of 75 households 
per group for six months of observation assuming seven epi- 
sodes of diarrhea per 100 child-weeks in children less than 
five years of age in the control group, a 25% reduction in 
diarrhea incidence for children in intervention households, 
two children less than five years of age per household, a 20% 
loss of statistical power from household clustering and re- 
peated weekly measurements, 95% confidence, and 80% 
power. 
Statistical analysis. Because the interventions differed at 
different times and because diarrhea incidence varies by sea- 
son in Karachi, the data were analyzed during two similar 


time periods May 1–October 31, 2000 and June 1–October 31, 
2001. Analysis for 2001 began one month later because the 
intervention did not begin in the insulated vessel group until 
June 2001. 
Diarrhea incidence was calculated as the number of new 
episodes of diarrhea divided by the number of child weeks at 
risk. Rates were compared between intervention groups ver- 
sus control and by household and child characteristics using 
rate ratios. 
The data were modeled using generalized estimating equa- 
tions to control for confounding and to account for the de- 
pendence of the repeated measures of the same individual.14 
The dependent variable was the presence or absence of diar- 
rhea in a child week at risk for a new episode of diarrhea. 
Model building began with the intervention group predicting 
diarrhea, and then other characteristics of the study popula- 
tion associated with diarrhea in the bivariate analysis (rate 
ratio <0.8 or >1.2) were added to the model. Only those char- 
acteristics that both significantly improved fit and were inde- 
pendently associated with the outcome were retained in the 
model. A strong interaction was noted with refrigerator own- 
ership in the 2000 data, so separate models were developed 
for households with and without refrigerators. For the 2001 
data, a nested correlation structure was imposed where the 
correlation of repeated observations of an individual were 
treated as a subset of the correlation structure of the house- 
hold. For the 2000 data, the added complexity of the nested 
correlation led to even the simplest models failing to con- 
verge. Thus, we used an exchange correlation structure of the 
repeated measures of the individual child. We used SAS soft- 
ware for data analysis (SAS System for Windows, Version 8; 
SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). 
Ethics. Community leaders and heads of households pro- 
vided informed consent. The study protocol was reviewed and 
approved by the Ethics Review Committee of the Aga Khan 
University and an Institutional Review Board of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention. 

Baseline. The three study groups were broadly similar in 
April 2000 (Table 1). However, households that received 
bleach and an imported vessel were much less likely to have 
purchased hand soap in the preceding two weeks, and to have 
used municipally supplied water as their principle source of 
drinking water compared with households that received soap 
or were in the control group (Table 1). The level of bacterial 
contamination of drinking water was similar between house- 
holds in the control and bleach group. Households in the 
control group were less likely to have a flush toilet. 
Most of the participating households in June 2001 were the 
same households from the summer of 2000 that had partici- 
pated continuously. Of the 148 households that received soap 
in June 2001, 126 (85%) were households that had received 
soap since April 2000. Of the 80 households that received 
bleach and an imported vessel in June 2001, 51 (64%) were 
households that had enrolled in April 2000 and of the 130 
control households in June 2001, 72 (55%) had been control 
households since April 2000. 
In June 2001, the groups were again broadly similar, but 
with differences similar to those noted in April 2000 (Table 
1). Households that received bleach and an imported vessel 
were less likely to have purchased hand soap in the preceding 
two weeks compared with the other groups. Households in 
both of the bleach groups were less likely to receive their 
drinking water from the municipal supply than households in 
the soap or control group. 
2000 rates. Between May and November 2000, field work- 
ers collected the mothers’ report on diarrhea for 27,348 child 
weeks of observation; 26,545 child weeks were at risk for a 
new episode of diarrhea. There were 352 new episodes of 
diarrhea (1.32 episodes/100 child weeks). Younger children 
had more episodes of diarrhea than older children (7.5 epi- 
sodes/100 child weeks among children <1 year of age, 3.8 
episodes/100 child weeks among children 1 to <2 years of age, 
TABLE 1 
Baseline household characteristics by intervention group, Karachi, Pakistan 



Bleach and 
imported 
vessel 
(n (cid:2) 76) 
Soap 
(n (cid:2) 150) 

Control 
(n (cid:2) 76) 
Soap 
(n (cid:2) 148) 
Bleach and 
imported 
vessel 
(n (cid:2) 80) 
Bleach and 
local vessel 
(n (cid:2) 75) 
Control 
(n (cid:2) 130) 
Persons per household 
Age of children (years) 
Thermotolerant coliforms per 100 mL of drinking water 
7.9 
6.3 
7.7 
6.6 
2.0 × 104 
8.0 
6.0 
1.6 × 104 
8.5 
7.4 
8.0 
7.4 
9.3 
5.7 
7.9 
7.1 

Study children <2 years old 
Households owning a refrigerator 
Maternal literacy 
Paternal literacy 
Household income >70 US$/month 
Households that bought soap in the 2 weeks before the study 
Principle source of household water* 
Municipal supply within the house 
Municipal supply at a community tap 
Tanker truck 
Other 
Report treating drinking water 
Flush toilet in the home 
0 thermotolerant coliforms per 100 mL of stored drinking water 
0 Escherichia coli per 100 mL of stored drinking water 

12 
37 
42 
72 
25 
64 
11 
26 
55 
9 
25 
37 
12 
46 
47 
86 
40 
9 
1 
0 
99 
0 
50 
29 
4 
62 
13 
38 
46 
68 
33 
53 
29 
39 
32 
0 
39 
1 
0 
61 
6 
41 
36 
72 
23 
62 
12 
26 
52 
10 
27 
35 
8 
51 
54 
84 
40 
15 
2 
0 
98 
0 
53 
25 
18 
47 
61 
67 
27 
37 
1 
11 
86 
1 
52 
9 
9 
33 
47 
70 
23 
47 
16 
41 
43 
0 
33 
4 


1.5 episodes/100 child weeks among children 2–<5 years of 
age, and 0.5 episodes/100 child weeks among children 5–15 
years of age). 
Compared with children living in control households, chil- 
dren living in households that received bleach and an im- 
ported vessel had a 29% lower incidence of diarrhea, and 
children living in households that received soap had a 13% 
lower incidence (Table 2). 
In 2000, the difference in diarrhea incidence between the 
intervention groups and control occurred almost entirely 
within households wealthy enough to have a refrigerator. 
Compared with children living in control households that had 
a refrigerator, children living in households with a refrigera- 
tor that received bleach and an imported vessel had a 73% 
lower incidence of diarrhea, while children living in house- 
holds with a refrigerator that received soap had 56% lower 
incidence (Table 2). During 2000, intervention households 
without a refrigerator had no reduction in diarrheal incidence 
compared with control households without a refrigerator 
(Table 2). During 2000, households in the control group with- 
out a refrigerator had a somewhat lower rate of diarrhea (1.34 
episodes/100 person weeks) than control households with a 
refrigerator (1.83 episodes/100 person weeks, Table 2). The 
incidence of diarrhea among refrigerator owners who re- 
ceived soap or water treatment was markedly lower than ei- 
ther the refrigerator owners or non-owners in the control 
group (Table 2). 
Compared with households that did not have a refrigerator, 
households that had a refrigerator were more likely to be 
headed by a literate father (85% versus 69%), to have a lit- 
erate mother (52% versus 36%), and to report a household 
income >70 US$/month (46% versus 20%). 
2001 rates. Between June and November 2001, field work- 
ers collected the mothers’ report on diarrhea for 34,066 child 
weeks of observation; 32,533 child weeks were at risk for a 
new episode of diarrhea. There were 446 new episodes of 
diarrhea (1.37 episodes/100 child weeks). Younger children 
had higher rates of diarrhea than older children (4.1 episodes/ 
100 child weeks among children <1 year of age, 4.2 episodes/ 
100 child weeks among children 1–<2 years of age, 2.2 epi- 
sodes/100 child weeks among children 2–<5 years of age, 
and 0.7 episodes/100 child weeks among children 5–15 years 
of age). 
Compared with children living in control households, chil- 
dren living in households that received bleach and an im- 
ported vessel had a 71% lower incidence of diarrhea, children 
living in households that received soap and instructions on 
critical times to wash hands had a 35% lower incidence, and 
children living in households that received bleach and a local 
vessel had a 20% lower incidence (Table 2). In 2001, inter- 
ventions were equally effective in reducing diarrhea whether 
households had a refrigerator (Table 2). In 2001, the inci- 
dence of diarrhea among households with a refrigerator in the 
control group (1.82 episodes/100 person weeks) was similar to 
the incidence of diarrhea among households without a refrig- 
erator (1.99 episodes/100 person weeks). 
Time effects. In September and October of 2000, the point 
estimate of the incidence of diarrhea was substantially lower 
in intervention households with a refrigerator than among 
control households with a refrigerator (Figure 1). In Septem- 
ber and October of 2001, the point estimate of the incidence 
of diarrhea was lower in intervention households compared 
with control households both among households with and 
without refrigerators (Figures 1 and 2). 
In 2001, children living in households that received bleach 
and the imported water vessel and had enrolled in the study 
in April 2000 reported lower diarrhea incidence (0.41/100 
child weeks) than children living in households that received 
the same intervention but had enrolled later (0.87 episodes/ 
100 child weeks). Reported diarrhea in 2001 was similar 
among households that originally received soap in the sum- 
mer of 2000 (1.25 episodes/100 child weeks) and those that 
received soap later (1.32 episodes/100 child weeks). 
Multivariate analysis. Generalized estimating equation 
models of these data, which accounted for repeated measures 
and significant covariates, including age, and where appropri- 
ate, income, confirmed the patterns seen in bivariate and 
stratified analysis. In 2000, compared with children living in 
control households that had a refrigerator, children living in 
households that received bleach plus an imported vessel and 
had a refrigerator had a 59% lower adjusted rate of diarrhea 
(adjusted risk ratio [ARR] (cid:2) 0.41, P (cid:2) 0.006). Children in 
TABLE 2 
Diarrhea incidence by intervention group, year, and refrigerator ownership Karachi, Pakistan 

Imported vessel 
and bleach 



Imported vessel 
and bleach 
Local vessel 
and bleach 



Child weeks of observation* 
No. of new episodes of diarrhea (episodes/100 child 
13,445 
179 (1.33) 
6,032 
65 (1.08) 
7,068 
108 (1.53) 
11,014 
139 (1.26) 
6,105 
34 (0.56) 
6,387 
99 (1.55) 
9,027 
174 (1.93) 










Child weeks of observation* 
No. of new episodes of diarrhea (episodes/100 child 
5,229 
42 (0.80) 
2,818 
19 (0.67) 
2,681 
49 (1.83) 
4,552 
57 (1.25) 
3,224 
16 (0.50) 
3,002 
44 (1.47) 
3,301 
60 (1.82) 










Child weeks of observation* 
No. of new episodes of diarrhea (episodes/100 child 
8,216 
137 (1.67) 
3,214 
46 (1.43) 
4,387 
59 (1.34) 
6,462 
82 (1.27) 
2,881 
18 (0.62) 
3,237 
55 (1.70) 
5,726 
114 (1.99) 









* Restricted to child weeks at risk of a new episode of diarrhea. 
† Reference group. 



households that had a refrigerator and received soap had 
51% lower adjusted rate of diarrhea than controls (ARR (cid:2) 
0.49, P (cid:2) 0.003) (Table 3). Among households that did not 
have a refrigerator, intervention households had no signifi- 
cant difference in diarrhea incidence (ARR (cid:2) 1.1) com- 
pared with control households (Table 3). 
In 2001, all of the children in intervention households had 
an adjusted risk of diarrhea significantly less than children in 
control households. Households receiving soap and hand- 
washing instructions had 29% lower risk (ARR (cid:2) 0.71, P (cid:2) 
0.002); households receiving bleach plus an imported vessel 
had a 70% lower risk (ARR (cid:2) 0.30, P < 0.001), and house- 
holds receiving bleach plus a local vessel had a 40% lower 
risk (ARR (cid:2) 0.60, P < 0.001). In 2001, having a refrigerator, 
either by itself or as an interaction with the intervention 
group, did not significantly improve the fit of the model and 
was not independently associated with diarrhea. 

Preventing diarrhea in settings where it is a leading cause 
of death requires both effective technology and effective 
methods to change behavior. This study suggests when simple 
intervention technologies are rapidly introduced, achieving 
the behavior change necessary to take full advantage of these 
technologies requires considerable time. After introduction 
of each of the interventions, there was a delay of three to four 
months before diarrhea incidence among children in inter- 
vention households was lower than that of children in control 
households. 
The field workers were not surprised by this delayed effec- 
tiveness, and described three phases of communication to en- 
courage behavior change. First, field workers explained to 
participants what the intervention was and why it made sense 
for community residents to use it. After a few weeks, field 
workers focused on the specifics of how to properly use the 
intervention. After a few more weeks, when users both un- 
derstood the value of the intervention and were comfortable 
with using it, the focus of the communication turned to mo- 
tivating every day, every time use. This last phase of habit 
formation required the most time, but these data suggest that 
with continued visits and continued encouragement these 
habits were adopted. 



TABLE 3 
Multivariate analysis of the relationship between intervention groups and diarrhea episodes, Karachi, 2000 and 2001 
May–Nov 2000 
Refrigerator in household 
May–Nov 2000 
No refrigerator in household 
June–Nov 2001 
All households 

Adjusted 
risk ratio* 
95% confidence 
interval 
Soap 
Bleach plus regular vessel 
Bleach plus insulated vessel 
Control 
0.49 
0.41 


0.003 
0.006 
Adjusted 
risk ratio‡ 
95% confidence 
interval 
1.1 
1.1 
0.72, 1.6 
0.64, 1.8 

0.71 
0.77 
0.30, 0.79 
0.22, 0.77 





Adjusted 
risk ratio* 
95% confidence 
interval 
0.71 
0.30 
0.60 
Ref§ 
0.45, 0.96 
0.16, 0.52 
0.37, 0.84 
Ref§ 

0.002 
<0.001 
<0.001 
Ref§ 
* Of episode of diarrhea versus control adjusted through a generalized estimated equation model for age and repeated measures. 
† Difference versus control. 
‡ Of episode of diarrhea versus control adjusted through a generalized estimated equation model for age, income, and repeated measures. 
§ Reference group. 
These results further suggest that some households adopt 
new behaviors sooner than others. In these squatter settle- 
ments, households that had a refrigerator benefited in the 
first summer from either bleach plus the imported vessel or 
soap, while households without a refrigerator that received 
the same interventions had no difference in diarrhea inci- 
dence from controls. Refrigerator ownership is an objective 
marker of socioeconomic status, of success in a difficult en- 
vironment, that is less prone to misclassification than re- 
ported level of literacy or income. A similar pattern of dif- 
ferential effectiveness with the interventions was seen when 
data were stratified by father’s literacy or monthly household 
income >70US$. However, the effect was most pronounced 
with refrigerator ownership, and once this was accounted for, 
reported literacy and income had no further substantive ef- 
fect. Refrigerator owners had a little more wealth than non- 
owners, but their drinking water, and their children’s envi- 
ronment remained heavily contaminated with sewage. In- 
deed, in the control group, children of refrigerator owners did 
not have less diarrhea then children in households without a 
refrigerator. 
Refrigerators do make it easier to keep chlorine-treated 
water cool without adding highly contaminated ice purchased 
in the marketplace, and this may have enhanced the effec- 
tiveness of home water treatment. However, refrigerator 
owners also benefited from receiving soap, even before re- 
ceiving specific instructions on key times to wash hands for 
diarrhea prevention. This further supports the notion that 
refrigerator ownership identified a broader household char- 
acteristic associated with more rapid, effective use of inter- 
ventions. 
Rogers describes the process by which innovation spreads 
through a society.15 First, innovators and earlier adopters, 
who typically have higher socioeconomic status, quickly try 
the innovation. In these Karachi squatter settlements, refrig- 
erator owners behaved like early adopters, that is, their early 
reduction in diarrhea incidence suggests they quickly adopted 
the necessary behavior change to benefit from the interven- 
tions. If early adopters find an innovation useful, they com- 
municate the value of the innovation to other persons in their 
community. As more and more people try the innovation and 
find it useful, there are more change agents in the community 
who can demonstrate the innovation’s effectiveness and en- 
courage others to adopt. The late majority and the laggards 
are the latest groups and the most difficult to change. They 
typically have lower socioeconomic status, and learn about 
new ideas from peers via interpersonal communication. 
Handwashing and home water treatment followed this typical 
diffusion of innovation pattern even when the innovations 
were provided at no cost. One of the core challenges for 
public health is that households that are slowest to adopt 
change are typically those with the most precarious health, 
the group that would most benefit from intervention. In this 
population, the late majority and laggards were ultimately 
reached with both handwashing and home water treatment 
and safe storage, but not until several months of weekly visits, 
and well after the refrigerator owning early adopters had 
changed their behavior and realized the health benefit. 
This study provides further evidence that in communities 
where diarrhea is a leading cause of death, treating drinking 
water with chlorine and storing it safely reduces the incidence 
of diarrhea. Indeed, the 73% reduction in diarrhea illness 
versus control noted in the second summer is a larger reduc- 
tion than reported in all but one of the prior evaluations of 
home water treatment with bleach.3,4,15,16 The most likely 
explanation for this large reduction in diarrhea is that an 
effective behavior change intervention was given sufficient 
time to reach all of the people in targeted households. Indeed, 
if the evaluation had stopped after the first summer, the mea- 
sured effectiveness in preventing diarrhea (41%) would ap- 
pear similar to evaluations in other settings. Of course, in 
these squatter settlements where drinking water is heavily 
contaminated with sewage, an unusually high proportion of 
diarrheal illness may be transmitted through contaminated 
water. Furthermore, the 95% confidence interval is wide, with 
a lower limit corresponding to a 48% reduction in diarrhea, 
which is still quite effective but closer to estimates from other 
settings. 
This study also adds to the considerable body of evidence 
that in settings of high diarrhea incidence hand washing with 
soap reduces diarrhea.6 It suggests that for persons of lower 
socioeconomic status, providing soap is not enough, and that 
specific instruction and encouragement to wash hands at key 
times is crucial to achieving behavior change that leads to 
measurable health benefits. 
In the highly contaminated environment of the Karachi 
squatter settlements, there are multiple opportunities for di- 
arrheal pathogens to enter the alimentary tract of susceptible 
children. This study suggests that either reducing the patho- 
gen load on hands or reducing the pathogen load in drinking 
water will reduce diarrheal disease. This study was not de- 
signed for and does not have the power to assess whether 
home water treatment or handwashing with soap is more ef- 
fective in preventing diarrhea. Future research that combines 
these two interventions and evaluates how much of their ben- 
efit is additive would be helpful. 


There are important limitations to this analysis. First, the 
intervention groups represented three geographically sepa- 
rated neighborhoods. There were differences in these neigh- 
borhoods, most importantly, differences in their water supply, 
differences in the presence of flush toilets, and differences in 
soap buying habits at baseline. It is possible that either these 
or some other unmeasured difference in the communities 
contributed importantly to the difference in diarrhea inci- 
dence noted in the different groups. However, the limited 
available water quality measurements in the control and 
bleach plus imported vessel group in the summer of 2000, as 
well as prior research,9 suggests widespread sewage contami- 
nation of available drinking water in these communities. 
Moreover, the multivariate analysis confirmed the relation- 
ship between intervention group and diarrhea; factors known 
to be associated with diarrhea were either included in or did 
not contribute significantly to the model. 
A second limitation is that the study did not collect data on 
the frequency of appropriate intervention use. Our interpre- 
tation of the data assumed that the reduction in disease re- 
sulted from appropriate use of the intervention. While this 
interpretation would be strengthened by supporting data on 
levels of chlorine in drinking water and microbiologic mea- 
sures of hand cleanliness, it is difficult to imagine a hypothesis 
other than more rapid uptake of the interventions in house- 
holds with refrigerators to explain that 1) in the control group 
households with refrigerators had a similar rate of diarrhea as 
households without refrigerators; 2) in the intervention 
groups households with refrigerators rapidly experienced re- 
duced rates of diarrhea compared with controls and com- 
pared with households without refrigerators in the interven- 
tion groups; and 3) that with time in the intervention group 
the rate of diarrhea was the same in households with and 
without a refrigerator. 
A third limitation is that this study was not originally un- 
dertaken to evaluate the hypotheses that there would be a 
time delay in the effectiveness of interventions, or that some 
sub-group of intervention households would respond sooner 
than other households. Indeed, the study was not originally 
designed to last beyond six months or to add an additional 
intervention group or enroll additional control households. 
Thus, these conclusions while consistent across different ana- 
lytic approaches and consistent with the broader scholarship 
on diffusion of innovations, should be considered preliminary, 
and should be assessed in other settings. 
In these Karachi squatter settlements where diarrhea is a 
leading cause of death, this study demonstrated that with an 
effective strategy for changing behavior, two approaches pre- 
vented diarrheal illness: in-home drinking water treatment 
and safe storage, and handwashing. Weekly interpersonal vis- 
its for more than a year were effective at changing habits in 
nearly all of the study households. Although the intervention 
elements are themselves low cost, this approach to behavior 
change is prohibitively expensive to scale up to the billions of 
persons who live in high risk settings. Thus, the next challenge 
is to optimize the methods for behavior change. These data 
suggest that a focused effort on at-risk households of margin- 
ally higher socioeconomic status might have a more rapid and 
cost-effective health impact. This is a group that private busi- 
ness may be able to reach with targeted marketing programs 
that recover their costs. Diffusion of innovation theory sug- 
gests that innovations with their associated behavior changes 
would then be expected to diffuse through communities, 
though it might be helped by explicit strategies that target 
community opinion leaders.15 The development and evalua- 
tion of this approach holds the potential to extend the ben- 
efits of simple interventions to hundred of millions of at-risk 
households. 

Acknowledgments: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
retained the right to publish results without approval from Procter & 
Gamble. Drs. Eric Mintz and Sureyya Hornston reviewed an earlier 
version of the manuscript and provided useful suggestions. 
Financial support: This study was supported by a grant from the 
Procter & Gamble Company, the manufacturer of Safeguard Bar 
Soap(cid:1). 
Disclaimer: Inclusion of trade names is for identification only and 
does not imply endorsement by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention or the Department of Health and Human Services. 
Disclosure: Stephen P. Luby wishes to disclose that he is currently 
conducting research sponsored by Proctor & Gamble. Proctor & 
Gamble sells Safeguard Soap, the soap used in this study. This state- 
ment is being made in the interest of full disclosure and not because 
the authors consider this to be a conflict of interest. 
Authors’ addresses: Stephen P. Luby, Foodborne and Diarrheal Dis- 
eases, Mailstop A-38, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333, E-mail: sluby@cdc.gov. Mu- 
bina Agboatwalla, Health Oriented Preventive Education, 5 Amir 
Khusro Road, Block 7/8, Overseas Cooperative Housing Society, 
Karachi, Pakistan, E-mail: agboat@gerrys.net. Robert M. Hoekstra, 
Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases, Mailstop C-09, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 
30333, E-mail: rth6@cdc.gov. Mohammad H. Rahbar, Institute for 
Health Care Studies, Michigan State University Room 100, Conrad 
Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824, E-mail: Mohammad.Rahbar@ 
ht.msu.edu. Ward Billhimer, The Procter & Gamble Company, 
Sharon Woods Technical Center 11511 Reed Hartman Highway, Cin- 
cinnati, OH 45241, E-mail: billhimer.wl@pg.com. Bruce H. Keswick, 
Procter & Gamble, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45040, E-mail: Keswick.bh@pg.com. 

1. WHO, 2002. The World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, 
Promoting Healthy Life. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
2. Black RE, Morris SS, Bryce J, 2003. Where and why are 10 
million children dying every year? Lancet 361: 2226–2234. 
3. Quick RE, Venczel LV, Mintz ED, Soleto L, Aparicio J, Gironaz 
M, Hutwagner L, Greene K, Bopp C, Maloney K, Chavez D, 
Sobsey M, Tauxe RV, 1999. Diarrhoea prevention in Bolivia 
through point-of-use water treatment and safe storage: a prom- 
ising new strategy. Epidemiol Infect 122: 83–90. 
4. Semenza JC, Roberts L, Henderson A, Bogan J, Rubin CH, 1998. 
Water distribution system and diarrheal disease transmission: a 
case study in Uzbekistan. Am J Trop Med Hyg 59: 941–946. 
5. Quick RE, Kimura A, Thevos A, Tembo M, Shamputa I, Hut- 
wagner L, Mintz E, 2002. Diarrhea prevention through house- 
hold-level water disinfection and safe storage in Zambia. Am J 
Trop Med Hyg 66: 584–589. 
6. Curtis V, Cairncross S, 2003. Effect of washing hands with soap 
on diarrhoea risk in the community: a systematic review. Lan- 
cet Infect Dis. 3: 275–281. 
7. Planning and Development Corporation and Pakistan Environ- 
mental Planning and Architecture Consultant, 1990. Karachi 
Development Plan 2000. United Nation Centre for Human 
Settlements. United Natons Development Program Project 
Pak/80/019, Karachi Master Plan 1986–2000. 
8. Marsh D, Husein K, Lobo M, Ali Shah M, Luby S, 1995. Verbal 
autopsy in Karachi slums: comparing single and multiple cause 
of child deaths. Health Policy Plann 10: 395–403. 


9. Luby S, Agboatwalla M, Raza A, Sobel J, Mintz E, Baier K, 
Rahbar M, Qureshi S, Hassan R, Ghouri F, Hoekstra R, Gan- 
garosa E, 2001. A low-cost intervention for cleaner drinking 
water in Karachi, Pakistan. Int J Infect Dis 5: 144–150. 
10. Luby S, Agboatwalla M, Raza A, Sobel J, Mintz ED, Baier K, 
Hoekstra RM, Rahbar MH, Hassan R, Qureshi SM, Ganga- 
with soap in an urban squatter settlement, Karachi, Pakistan. 
Epidemiol Infect 127: 237–244. 
rosa EJ, 2001. Microbiologic effectiveness of hand washing

11. Luby S, Agboatwalla M, Schnell BM, Hoekstra RM, Rahbar MH, 
Keswick BH, 2002. The effect of antibacterial soap on impe- 
tigo incidence, Karachi, Pakistan. Am J Trop Med Hyg 67: 
430–435.


soap is unlikely to transfer bacteria. Epidemiol Infect 101: 135– 
142. 
13. Walsh SE, Maillard JY, Russell AD, Catrenich CE, Charbonneau 
DL, Bartolo RG, 2003. Activity and mechanisms of action of 
selected biocidal agents on Gram-positive and -negative bac- 
teria. J Appl Microbiol 94: 240–247. 
14. Zeger SL, Liang K-Y, 1986. Longitudinal data analysis for dis- 
crete and continuous outcomes. Biometrics 42: 121–130. 
15. Rogers EM, 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. Fourth Edition. New 

16. Reller ME, Mendoza CE, Lopez MB, Alvarez M, Hoeskstra RM, 
Olson CA, Baier KG, Keswick BH, Luby SP, 2003. A random- 
ized controlled trial of household based flocculant-disinfectant 
temala. Am J Trop Med Hyg 69: 411–419. 
drinking water treatment for diarrhea prevention in rural Gua-

