


Combining drinking water treatment and hand washing for 
diarrhoea prevention, a cluster randomised controlled trial 
Stephen P. Luby1, Mubina Agboatwalla2, John Painter1, Arshad Altaf3, Ward Billhimer4, Bruce Keswick4 
and Robert M. Hoekstra1 


2 Health Oriented Preventive Education, Karachi, Pakistan 
3 Community Health Sciences, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan 
4 The Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA 

objectives To evaluate the effectiveness of point of use water treatment with ﬂocculent-disinfectant on 
reducing diarrhoea and the additional beneﬁt of promoting hand washing with soap. 
methods The study was conducted in squatter settlements of Karachi, Pakistan, where diarrhoea is a 
leading cause of childhood death. Interventions were randomly assigned to 47 neighbourhoods. 
Households in 10 neighbourhoods received diluted bleach and a water vessel; nine neighbourhoods 
received soap and were encouraged to wash hands; nine neighbourhoods received ﬂocculent-disinfectant 
water treatment and a water vessel; 10 neighbourhoods received disinfectant-disinfectant water treat- 
ment and soap and were encouraged to wash hands; and nine neighbourhoods were followed as con- 
trols. Field workers visited households at least once a week from April to December 2003 to promote use 
of the interventions and to collect data on diarrhoea. 
results Study participants in control neighbourhoods had diarrhoea on 5.2% of days. Compared 
to controls, participants living in intervention neighbourhoods had a lower prevalence of diarrhoea: 
55% (95% CI 17%, 80%) lower in bleach and water vessel neighbourhoods, 51% (95% CI 12%, 76%) 
lower in hand washing promotion with soap neighbourhoods, 64% lower (95% CI 29%, 90%) 
in disinfectant-disinfectant neighbourhoods, and 55% (95% CI 18%, 80%) lower in disinfectant- 
disinfectant plus hand washing with soap neighbourhoods. 
conclusions With an intense community-based intervention and supplies provided free of cost, each 
of the home-based interventions signiﬁcantly reduced diarrhoea. There was no beneﬁt by combining 
hand washing promotion with water treatment. 


Diarrhoea is a leading cause of childhood death globally 
(WHO 1999). When introduced separately, both point-of- 
use drinking water treatment and hand washing with soap 
decrease the frequency of childhood diarrhoea (Mintz et al. 
2001; Curtis & Cairncross 2003). Recent meta-analyses 
estimate a mean 47% reduction in diarrhoea with hand 
washing with soap and a mean 35% reduction with point 
of use water treatment (Curtis & Cairncross 2003; Fewtrell 
et al. 2005). If either of these interventions was actively 
promoted by a public health organisation, the marginal 
cost of promoting the second one would be reduced. 
However, we are unaware of any studies evaluating the 
combined effectiveness of hand washing promotion with 
point-of-use water treatment. 
In Pakistan, diarrhoea is a leading cause of death, 
especially in the squatter settlements of its large cities 
(Marsh et al. 1995; Khan et al. 1993). Previous interven- 
tion studies in squatter settlements in Pakistan have 
demonstrated that both point-of-use drinking water treat- 
ment with sodium hypochlorite and hand washing with 
soap reduced diarrhoea (Luby et al. 2004a, b). We 
introduced a new ﬂocculent-disinfectant for home water 
treatment as part of a neighbourhood-based intervention. 
We evaluated its effect in reducing diarrhoea and the 
added effect of including hand washing promotion with 
soap. 







This study was conducted in adjoining multi-ethnic 
squatter settlements in central Karachi—Bhittaiabad, Bilal 
Colony, Mujahid Colony, Manzoor Colony and Zia 
Colony. The ﬁeld work was done by Health Oriented 
Preventive Education (HOPE), a local non-governmental 
organisation that operates health clinics and undertakes 
community-based health and development initiatives in the 
area. 

The study was a cluster randomised controlled trial. 
Randomisation and intervention assignment was made at 
the neighbourhood level, because important components of 
the efforts to encourage adoption and regular use of the 
intervention occurred at this level. These included formal 
meetings and presentations by study personnel to com- 
munity leaders and community members, lane meetings 
with community residents, as well as the normal discus- 
sions that neighbours had with each other about the 
interventions when no study personnel were present. 

Field workers identiﬁed communities that typically 
received at least one hour of running water twice weekly, 
and had not received soap or water treatment in a previous 
study with HOPE. Within these communities the study 
team identiﬁed barriers, for example a commercial street or 
industrial zone that separated groups of households into 49 
identiﬁable clusters of between 54 and 245 households. 
Within the clusters ﬁeld workers approached each house- 
hold. If the female or male head of household conﬁrmed 
that they had at least one child under the age of 5 years 
living in the household and if they provided informed 
consent, the ﬁeld workers administered a baseline ques- 
tionnaire. Ultimately, they identiﬁed 49 clusters with 
between 16 and 37 eligible, consented households per 
cluster. 
The 49 clusters were listed in the order that they had 
been identiﬁed. Using a spreadsheet, the ﬁve study groups 
(bleach water treatment, hand washing promotion with 
soap, ﬂocculent-disinfectant water treatment, ﬂocculent- 
disinfectant plus hand washing promotion with soap and 
control) were assigned a computer generated random 
number. The ﬁve study groups were ordered according to 
their random number, and this order was consecutively and 
repetitively applied to the list of the 49 clusters. Each study 
group continued to have clusters assigned until just over 
260 households were assigned to the group. Any additional 
clusters that would have been assigned to that group by 
consecutive assignment, but would have been more than 
necessary to encompass 260 households, were left unas- 
signed. Ultimately 47 clusters and 1340 households were 
assigned to the ﬁve study groups (Figure 1). 

Field workers, recruited from the study or nearby com- 
munities, were extensively trained in interviewing tech- 
niques, in data recording, in general approaches to 
community motivation and in speciﬁc techniques for 
promoting hand washing and drinking water treatment. 
The same ﬁeld workers promoted regular use of the 
interventions and collected outcome data during their 
household visits. 

Field workers arranged neighbourhood meetings. They 
used slide shows, videotapes and pamphlets to illustrate 
health problems resulting from hand and water contam- 
ination and to provide speciﬁc instructions on how to use 
the intervention assigned to that neighbourhood. Field 
workers, who spoke the ﬁrst language of the study subjects, 
visited each participating household at least twice weekly. 
They encouraged use of the interventions, answered 
questions, and provided families with the consumable 
supplies necessary for ongoing use of the intervention. 
Each participating household received a 20-litre insu- 
lated plastic water vessel with a wide mouth (15 cm), lid 
and tap. Field workers diluted three parts of locally 
manufactured bleach (4.4 mg% sodium hypochlorite) 
with 17 parts distilled water, and packaged the dilute 
hypochlorite into 10-ml reusable plastic bottles. One 
plastic bottle of dilute bleach added to 20 l of locally 
available water, typically produced a free chlorine residual 
between 0.5 and 2.0 mg/l. Households were instructed to 
empty one bottle of the dilute hypochlorite into the ﬁlled 
20 l water vessel and to wait 30 min before drinking. 
Field workers encouraged families to drink only treated 
water, but neither encouraged nor discouraged hand 
washing. 
The intervention soap was 90 g white bars of Safe- 
guard(cid:1)* bar soap (Procter and Gamble, Cincinnati, USA). 
The soap was generically packaged without a brand name 
or symbol. Field workers encouraged participants to wet 
* Inclusion of trade names is for identiﬁcation only and does not 
imply endorsement by CDC or the Department of Health and 
Human Services. 






their hands, lather them completely with soap, and rub 
them together for 45 s. Hands were typically dried on the 
participants’ clothing. Field workers encouraged all per- 
sons in intervention households old enough to understand 
(generally those over 30 months of age) to wash their 
hands after defecation, after cleaning an infant who had 
defecated, before preparing food, before eating and before 
feeding infants. Field workers encouraged adopting regular 
hand washing habits, but for this group neither encouraged 
nor discouraged drinking water treatment. 
Field workers instructed study subjects to add a single 
sachet of the ﬂocculent-disinfectant to 10 l of water in a 
bucket, to stir it vigorously for 5 min, and then let it stand 
until the ﬂoc settled to the bottom. Then study subjects 
were instructed to decant the ﬂocculent-disinfectant treated 
water through a piece of ﬂannel cloth into their water 
storage vessel, and discard the remaining residue in the 
toilet. They washed the ﬁlter cloth with detergent, and 
hung it to dry before re-use. The treated water was ready to 
drink 30 min after the ﬂocculent-disinfectant was intro- 
duced. Field workers encouraged families to drink only 
treated water, but for this group they neither encouraged 
nor discouraged hand washing. Field workers provided the 
supplies and instructions for both hand washing promotion 
and water treatment with ﬂocculent-disinfectant. 
Field workers provided control households with a 
regular supply of children’s books, notebooks, pens and 
pencils to help with their children’s education, but no 
products that would be expected to affect diarrhoea. Field 
workers neither encouraged nor discouraged hand washing 
or drinking water treatment in control households. Field 
workers visited control households and intervention 
households with equal frequency to collect health outcome 
data, but the visits were shorter in control households 
because no health education or encouragement for beha- 
viour change was provided. 

Field workers conducted a pre-intervention baseline survey 
of household characteristics. They identiﬁed the mother or 
caregiver and each child in the household. Children’s dates 
of birth were conﬁrmed with birth certiﬁcates, immuniza- 
tion records, or event calendars. Field workers visited 


Study area : 
49 neighbourhoods identified 
47 neighbourhoods consecutively 
assigned to study groups 

9 handwashing 
neighbourhoods 
9 flocculant -disinfectant 
neighbourhoods 
10 flocculant -disinfectant 
plus handwashing 
neighbourhoods 





1747 persons 
enrolled at baseline 
1711 persons 
enrolled at baseline 
1833 persons 
enrolled at baseline 
1852 persons 
enrolled at baseline 
29 children born in 
1 death 
27 children born in 
3 deaths 
36 children born in 
1 death 
37 children born in 
4 deaths 
23 children born in 
0 deaths 
65 077 potential 
person -weeks 
follow -up 
63 697 potential 
person weeks 
follow -up 
68 268 potential 
person weeks 
follow -up 
67 311 potential 
person weeks 
follow -up 
68 870 potential 
person weeks 
follow -up 
1806 persons 
enrolled at baseline 

60 403 (93%) observed 
person -weeks 
follow -up 
59 738 (94%) observed 
person weeks 
follow -up 
59 587 (87%) observed 
person weeks 
follow -up 
60 387 (90%) observed 
person weeks 
follow -up 
65 999 (96%) observed 
person weeks 
follow -up 



participating households at least weekly, for 37 weeks 
(April 2003–December 2003), and asked the mother or 
other caregiver if the children had diarrhoea (three or more 
loose stools within 24 h) in the preceding week, and, if so, 
for how many days. The mother was also asked about her 
own symptoms of diarrhoea. Typically, ﬁeld workers 
visited each household twice during the week to ensure that 
episodes of diarrhoea from both early and late in the week 
were recalled. Supervisors revisited 40% of homes each 
week and reviewed the history of diarrhoea among family 
members. The history recorded by the supervisor was 
compared to the history recorded by the ﬁeld worker, and 
if there was a discrepancy, the ﬁeldworker and supervisor 
revisited the house to clarify the difference. 

The primary hypotheses of the study included that each of 
the interventions would reduce diarrhoea compared to the 
control group and that the combination of water treatment 
with ﬂocculent-disinfectant and hand washing promotion 
with soap would result in less diarrhoea than either 
intervention separately. The primary study outcome was 
the percent of person-weeks that study subjects had at least 
one day of diarrhoea. For a more precise analysis we also 
calculated the percent of person-days with diarrhoea that is 
we summed the number of days each study subject had 
diarrhoea and divided it by the total number of days of 
observation. We measured diarrhoea using longitudinal 
prevalence, rather than incidence, because longitudinal 
prevalence is more closely associated with growth faltering 
and child mortality than is diarrhoea incidence (Morris 
et al. 1996). 

intervention group assuming diarrhoea would occur in 3% 
of person weeks in the control group, a 35% lower 
prevalence (1.95%) with the single intervention of either 
hand washing promotion or water treatment, an additional 
30% lower prevalence (1.365%) with combined hand 
washing promotion and water treatment, 3.8 children per 
household, 10% dropout, 95% follow-up, 80% power, 
95% conﬁdence, one-sided testing, and a quadrupling of 
sample size to offset the effect of clustering by neighbour- 
hood and repeated measures. 

level, we analysed the comparison of outcomes at the 
neighbourhood level. Speciﬁcally, within each neighbour- 
hood, among person-weeks within the subgroup of inter- 
est, we identiﬁed the total number of person-weeks (or 
days) with diarrhoea and divided it by the total number of 
person-weeks (or days) at risk for persons in that neigh- 
bourhood within the subgroup of interest. For evaluation 
of severe diarrhoea we identiﬁed children under age 5 years 
at the end of the study who were observed for at least 
11 weeks and calculated the proportion who had diarrhoea 
during >10% of observed days. We calculated prevalence 
by intervention assignment by taking the mean of the 
appropriate neighbourhood prevalences weighted by the 
number of observations. We calculated prevalence ratios 
by dividing the weighted means from intervention neigh- 
bourhoods by the weighted means from control neigh- 
bourhoods (Donner & Klar 2000). We calculated standard 
conﬁdence intervals for a ratio of normal means (Cox & 
Hinkley 1974). This approach calculated conﬁdence 
intervals that reﬂected the different distribution of pro- 
portions at the neighbourhood level. We report the percent 
difference in outcome between intervention and control, 
that is, the prevalence ratio minus one. Similarly, we report 
the 95% conﬁdence around this percent difference by 
subtracting 1 from the upper and lower conﬁdence limit of 
the prevalence ratio. 
The disease experience of each child, household, and 
neighbourhood was tracked and analysed with the group 
they were originally assigned to, that is the analysis was 
intention to treat. To calculate the intracluster correlation 
coefﬁcient we ﬁrst constructed an analysis of variance 
model. We used the longitudinal prevalence of diarrhoea 
among each participant throughout the study as the 
dependent variable, and intervention group and neigh- 
bourhood as independent variables. We then compared the 
variance between neighbourhoods to the variance within 
neighbourhoods to calculate the intracluster correlation 
coefﬁcient and the design effect (Donner & Klar 2000). 

Community leaders and heads of households provided 
informed consent. Ill children were assessed by ﬁeld 
workers and referred to the appropriate level of health 
care. The ﬁrst line of treatment for diarrhoea was oral 
rehydration solution. Ill children referred by ﬁeld workers 
were offered clinical services free of charge at HOPE health 
care facilities located in these communities. This included 
hospital admission and associated costs in case of 
emergencies. The study protocol was approved by the 
Ethics Review Committee of the Aga Khan University, the 
HOPE Human Research Review Board and an Institutional 
Review Board of the Centres for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 

Among 6962 households in the study neighbourhoods, 
1337 households (19%) met the inclusion criteria and 





enrolled in the study. The number of clusters, households, 
persons and births was similar across the intervention 
groups (Figure 1). Overall, data were collected from 92% 
of the potential person-weeks of follow-up, though it 
differed across groups, ranging from 87% among persons 
living in households that received ﬂocculent-disinfectant to 
96% in control households. 
At baseline, the households in the different study groups 
were similar in size, socio-economic status, drinking water 
source, hand washing and sanitary facilities, and purchases 
of soap and water (Table 1). During the course of the 
study, children were routinely breastfed in all of the 
groups, although there was some difference by intervention 
group in exclusive breast-feeding among children under age 
6 months. 

interventions had markedly less diarrhoea compared to 
persons living in control neighbourhoods (Table 2). The 
reduction in daily longitudinal prevalence of diarrhoea 
ranged from 51% among households receiving soap and 
hand washing promotion to 64% among households 
receiving ﬂocculent-disinfectant. There was no apparent 
additional beneﬁt to ﬂocculent-disinfectant water treat- 
ment plus hand washing promotion with soap, compared 
to either of these interventions individually. 
The longitudinal prevalence of diarrhoea varied mark- 
edly over the course of the study. In July 2003, 190 mm of 
rain fell in Karachi, 2.6 times the 50-year mean July rainfall 
of 72 mm (U.S. Department of Commerce 2003). In the ﬁrst 
3 months of observation, persons living in neighbourhoods 
that received ﬂocculent-disinfectant had a lower prevalence 
of diarrhoea compared to households that received soap 
and hand washing promotion or soap and hand washing 
promotion plus ﬂocculent-disinfectant (Figure 2). During 
the heavy rains in July, the prevalence of diarrhoea in 
intervention neighbourhoods was the same as in control 
neighbourhoods. Diarrhoea prevalence peaked in the con- 
trol group following the heavy July rains. During the last 
5 months of observation the diarrhoea prevalence across 
the intervention groups tracked fairly closely together, and 
was markedly lower than control neighbourhoods. 

diarrhoea, with infants having the highest prevalence 
(Table 3). The largest reductions in diarrhoea prevalence 
with interventions occurred among children 5–15 years. 
Diarrhoea prevalence was consistently lower among 
infants and children ‡1–2 years who lived in intervention 
neighbourhoods compared to control neighbourhoods, 
however the magnitude of the reductions were less than the 
overall reduction, and many of the individual age and 
intervention speciﬁc reductions were not statistically sig- 
niﬁcant (Table 3). 
Persons living in intervention neighbourhoods were 
signiﬁcantly less likely to visit a practitioner for diarrhoea 
treatment (Table 4). Hospitalisation for diarrhoea was a 
rare outcome that did not occur at signiﬁcantly different 
rates in intervention versus control neighbourhoods 
(Table 4). Intervention neighbourhoods had a substantially 
lower proportion of children under age 5 years with >10% 
of observed days with diarrhoea than persons in control 
neighbourhoods, though the 95% conﬁdence limit in the 
bleach water treatment group did not quite exclude zero 
(Table 4). 
The percentage of study participants followed up each 
week declined during the course of the study (Figure 3). 
This decline was most marked among persons living in 
neighbourhoods assigned to ﬂocculent-disinfectant and 
least common among households in the control and hand 
washing promotion neighbourhoods. Excluding children 
born during the study, 82% of study subjects completed 
34 (92%) or more weeks of follow-up. During the weeks 
they were observed, study subjects with fewer than 
34 weeks of follow-up reported a similar mean longitud- 
inal prevalence of diarrhoea compared to the mean 
longitudinal prevalence of study subjects in their same 
study group who completed 34 or more weeks of follow- 
up (Table 5). 
There was some reported difference in exclusive breast- 
feeding across intervention groups, especially among chil- 
dren under the age of 6 months (Table 1). However, 
children under the age of 6 months represent less than 1% 
of the total person-weeks observed, and the effects of the 
interventions were clearly independent of exclusive breast- 
feeding for the majority of the population who was beyond 
the age of breastfeeding (Table 3). 
Households in the ﬂocculent-disinfectant water treat- 
ment group averaged using 21.6 sachets per week or 4.4 l 
of treated water per person per day. Households in the 
ﬂocculent-disinfectant plus hand-washing group averaged 
20.4 sachets or 4.3 l of treated water per person per day. 
The consumption of sachets during July when there were 
heavy rains (21.5 sachets per household per week) was 
consistent with consumption throughout the summer. 
Households receiving bleach consumed sufﬁcient bleach to 
treat an average of 3.0 l of treated water per person per 
day. Soap households averaged consuming 2.5 bars of soap 
per week, for a mean 3.5 g of soap per person per day. 
Households often added ice purchased in the market to 
their drinking water. Between July and October households 
receiving the bleach water treatment added ice 5.3 times 
per week, households receiving the ﬂocculent disinfected 
added ice an average of 5.2 times per week and households 
receiving the ﬂocculent disinfected plus soap added ice an 
average of 4.9 times per week. 






















Diarrhoea daily longitudinal prevalence 
(306 069) 
Diarrhoea weekly longitudinal prevalence 
(306 069) 
Intervention group 
(person-weeks at risk) 
Mean(cid:1) 
prevalence(cid:2) 
Difference from 
control (95% CI)§ 
Mean(cid:2) 
prevalence– 
Difference from 
control (95% CI) 
Bleach water treatment 
Soap and hand washing promotion 
Flocculent-disinfectant water treatment 
Flocculent-disinfectant plus soap 
Control 
2.36 
2.57 
1.87 
2.36 
5.19 
)55% ()17%, )80%) 
)51% ()12%, )76%) 
)64% ()29%, )90%) 
)55% ()18%, )80%) 
– 
4.07 
4.73 
3.51 
4.34 
8.62 
)53% ()22%, )75%) 
)45% ()12%, )68%) 
)59% ()29%, )82%) 
)50% ()18%, )72%) 
– 
(cid:1) Mean was calculated by taking the mean of the neighborhood prevalences weighted by the number of observations. 
(cid:2) Days with diarrhoea/Days of observation. 
§ Conﬁdence interval. 
– Person-weeks with diarrhoea/Person-weeks of observation. 
reduction in rural Western Kenya (Crump et al. 2005). The 
most salient difference among these studies was that in 
Karachi, product consumption was substantially higher 
with a mean of over 20 sachets used per household per 
week compared to six in the ﬁrst Guatemala study, 10 in 
the second Guatemala study and 10 in the Kenya study 
(Reller et al. 2003; Crump et al. in press; Chiller et al. in 
press). 

hand washing promotion with soap failed to reduce 
diarrhoea more than either intervention separately. 
Although this is the ﬁrst simultaneous comparison of 
combined hand washing and water treatment compared 
against either intervention alone that we are aware of, in 
Fewtrell’s meta analysis (2005) interventions that com- 
bined water, hygiene and sanitation interventions were no 
more effective in reducing diarrhoea than programs inter- 
ventions that focused on a single intervention. One possible 
explanation is that 65%–75% of diarrhoea among persons 
living in this sewage contaminated environment is caused 
by pathogens that require a large dose to cause disease. A 
substantial reduction in the number of organisms ingested, 
either through hand washing or water treatment, may 
markedly reduce diarrhoea, but once ingested dose is 
below a certain threshold, further modest reduction in the 
dose of ingested organisms may not markedly reduce 
disease risk. Other possible explanations include that a 
substantial part of the reported reduction in diarrhoeal 
disease was a result of courtesy bias. Intervention house- 
holds were given supplies free of cost, and may have 
wanted to meet the expectation of the study workers. 
Courtesy bias would not be expected to be additive with 
more interventions. A third possible explanation is that 
improving one hygiene behaviour in the home may lead to 
improvement in other hygiene related behaviours. Study 
Figure 2 Longitudinal prevalence of diarrhoea by week and 
intervention group, Karachi 2003. 
For the primary study outcome, the longitudinal pre- 
valence of diarrhoea, the intracluster correlation coefﬁcient 
was 0.105. The design effect was 21.1. 

Point-of-use water treatment with either bleach or ﬂoccu- 
lent-disinfectant as well as hand washing promotion with 
soap resulted in marked reductions in the overall preval- 
ence of diarrhoea. The magnitude of the reduction in 
diarrhoea seen with hand washing promotion with soap 
and with dilute sodium hypochlorite was consistent with 
previous evaluations (Mintz et al. 2001; Curtis & Cairn- 
cross 2003; Luby et al. 2004a,b; Fewtrell et al. 2005). The 
64% reduction in diarrhoea seen with ﬂocculent-disin- 
fectant was larger than the reductions noted in three 
previous trials in rural non-refugee settings including a 
24%–29% reduction in an initial study in rural Guatemala 
(Reller et al. 2003), a 40% reduction in a follow-up study 
in rural Guatemala (Chiller et al. 2006) and a 16% 




















Prior studies in squatter settlements in Karachi have 
noted a delay between distribution of household interven- 
tions and effect on diarrhoea outcome (Luby et al. 
2004a,b). We hypothesize that with time there is technical 
mastery and increasingly habitual use of household inter- 
ventions to prevent diarrhoea. During the present study 
after 6 weeks of intervention, the disease experience of the 
intervention neighbourhoods had diverged from the con- 
trol neighbourhoods. However, none of the interventions 
appeared to be effective in preventing diarrhoea during the 
heavy rain and acute ﬂooding in July. There was no fall off 
in product consumption during these weeks. This suggests 
that during the heavy rains and ﬂooding there was so much 
fecal contamination of the environment that neither water 
treatment nor hand washing with soap reduced the 
ingested dose of pathogens sufﬁciently to prevent diar- 
rhoea. After the ﬂooding abated, the difference between 
intervention and control neighbourhoods re-emerged and 
was stable into the lower prevalence winter season as has 
been noted in a prior hand washing intervention study 
(Luby et al. 2004b). 
Although intervention supplies were provided at no cost, 
fewer households were available for follow-up for each of 
the intervention groups compared to control. The largest 
drop off in use was among households using the most time- 
intensive intervention, the ﬂocculent-disinfectant. For any 
of these household-based interventions to have a substan- 
tial public health impact they need to be valued enough so 
that a large proportion of the at-risk population chooses to 
become regular users. 

personnel and participants were not blinded to the inter- 
vention. It is possible that study participants in the 
intervention groups, grateful for the supplies, minimized 
reported episodes of diarrhoea in the household, or ﬁeld 
workers recorded fewer episodes because of a desire to 
meet the expectation of study sponsors. However, ﬁeld 
workers were formally trained, and the importance of 
accurate recording of reported symptoms was stressed. 
Unannounced supervisory visits did not identify systematic 
errors. 
A second limitation is that the differential follow-up 
among groups suggests that persons who used the inter- 
ventions more conscientiously may have been over-sam- 
pled compared to less regular users. However, the 
prevalence of diarrhoea did not differ among persons who 
were followed for fewer weeks, so their loss to follow-up is 
unlikely to have had a marked effect on the results. 
In this setting where diarrhoea is a leading cause of death 
and the environment is heavily contaminated with sewage, 
household-level interventions to improve drinking water 
quality and hand washing promotion with soap resulted in 
Figure 3 Percent of study subjects (excludes children born into 
study families) followed up by week and group. 
Table 5 Characteristics of study subjects with above and below 
average follow-up* 
Follow up >33 
person-weeks 
(n ¼ 7313) 
Follow up £33 
person-weeks 
(n ¼ 1636) 
Mean age (years) 
Mean diarrhoea longitudinal 
prevalence 
Mean diarrhoea longitudinal prevalence by age at study initiation 




<1 year 
‡1–2 years 
‡2–5 years 
‡5–15 years 
‡15 years 
8.2% 
6.7% 
4.7% 
2.3% 
1.0% 
6.2% 
5.8% 
3.8% 
2.0% 
0.7% 

Bleach water treatment 
Soap and hand washing 






2.4% 
2.6% 




2.6% 
2.2% 



workers provided supplies and messages only for the 
assigned intervention, but in descriptive studies hygiene 
behaviours are typically closely associated (Bartlett et al. 
1992). Self-efﬁcacy in one area could lead to self-efﬁcacy in 
another. Fourth, it is possible that the combination of 
water treatment and hand washing promotion would have 
an additive effect, but introducing two interventions 
simultaneously did not allow their optimal combined use. 
Behaviour change is best achieved with single simple 
messages (Loevinsohn 1990), an approach that combining 
two interventions in one season did not permit. However, 
product consumption was similar in the combined and 
separate intervention arms. 















a marked reduction in diarrhoea. Outside of a randomised 
controlled trial, in which participants were provided 
supplies at no cost and regularly encouraged to use them, 
water treatment and hand washing would probably be less 
consistent. Some families and individuals may be more 
inclined to adopt one or the other intervention. Thus, as 
part of a public health program, promoting both hand 
washing and point-of-use water treatment with safe storage 
may expand the proportion of the population that adopts a 
protective behaviour and thereby produce additive beneﬁt. 
However, these data suggest that an additive beneﬁt of 
hand washing and water treatment should not be assumed, 
that the cost of multiple messages both for public health 
programs to deliver and for low income families to adopt 
may not be justiﬁed. The next step in determining the role 
that these approaches have in preventing diarrhoea glo- 
bally is to implement them at larger scale and evaluate their 
practicality, uptake and effectiveness. 

We thank the HOPE staff workers who worked in the 
community, Aqil Hussain, Gharnata Tabassum, Zahida 
Kanum, Badar and Sabeen who supervised the daily ﬁeld 
work and data collection, Faisal Sarwari and Asif Ahmed 
who supervised data entry, Will Duck who programmed 
the initial Access database, and Eben Kenah who assisted 
in calculation and interpretation of the intracluster corre- 
lation coefﬁcient. The majority of the funding for this study 
was provided by the Procter & Gamble Company, the 
manufacturer of Safeguard Bar Soap(cid:1) and PuR(cid:1). The 
balance of the funding was provided by the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. 


Association of indicators of hygiene behaviour with persistent 
diarrhoea of young children. Acta Paediatrica Supplementum 
381, 66–71. 

diarrhoea in Guatemalan children: a randomized controlled trial 
of a ﬂocculent-disinfectant for drinking water. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization 84(1), 28–35. 


Crump JA, Otieno PO, Slutsker L et al. (2005) Household based 
treatment of drinking water with ﬂocculant-disinfectant for 
preventing diarrhoea in areas with turbid source water in rural 
western Kenya: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ, 331, 
478–483. 
Curtis V & Cairncross S (2003) Effect of washing hands with soap 
on diarrhoea risk in the community: a systematic review. Lancet 
Infectious Diseases 3(5), 275–281. 

Randomization Trials in Health Research. Oxford University 
Press, New York. 

Colford JM (2005) Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions 
to reduce diarrhoea in less developed countries: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infectious Diseases 5, 42–52. 
Khan Sr, Jalil F, Zaman S, Lindblad BS & Karlberg J. (1993) Early 
child health in Lahore, Pakistan: X. Mortality. Acta Paediatrica 
Supplementum 390, 109–117. 

oping countries: a methodological review of published articles. 
International Journal of Epidemiology 19(4), 788–794. 
Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Hoekstra RM, Rahbar MH, Billhimer 
W & Keswick BH (2004a) Delayed effectiveness of home-based 
interventions in reducing childhood diarrhoea, Karachi, Paki- 
stan. American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene 71(4), 
420–427. 
Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Painter J, Altaf A, Billhimer WL & 
Hoekstra RM (2004b) Effect of intensive hand washing pro- 
motion on childhood diarrhoea in high-risk communities in 
Pakistan: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association 291(21), 2547–2554. 
Marsh D, Husein K, Lobo M, Shah MA & Luby S (1995) Verbal 
autopsy in Karachi slums: comparing single and multiple cause 
of child deaths. Health Policy and Planning 10, 395–403. 
Mintz E, Bartram J, Lochery P & Wegelin M (2001) Not just a 
drop in the bucket: expanding access to point-of-use water 
treatment systems. American Journal of Public Health 91(10), 
1565–1570. 
Morris SS, Cousens SN, Kirkwood BR, Arthur P & Ross DA 
(1996) Is prevalence of diarrhoea a better predictor of sub- 
sequent mortality and weight gain than diarrhoea incidence? 
American Journal of Epidemiology 144(6), 582–588. 

controlled trial of household-based ﬂocculent-disinfectant 
drinking water treatment for diarrhoea prevention in rural 
Guatemala. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene 69(4), 411–419. 

spheric Administration (NOAA) and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (2003) Weekly Weather and Crop Bulletin 90(31), 
27. 


Corresponding Author Dr Steve Luby, Programme Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Sciences, ICDDRB: Centre for Health and 
Population Research, GPO Box 128, Mohakhali, Dhaka 1212 Bangladesh. E-mail: sluby@icddrb.org 






objectifs Evaluer l’efﬁcacite´ du traitement de l’eau au point d’utilisation avec un de´sinfectant ﬂoculant sur la re´duction des diarrhe´es et le be´ne´ﬁce 
additionnel de la promotion du lavage des mains. 
me´ thodes l’e´tude a e´te´ conduite dans les installations d’habitations de fortune de Karachi au Pakistan ou` la diarrhe´e est la cause principale de 
mortalite´ infantile. Les interventions ont e´te´ assigne´es de fac¸on randomise´e a` 47 quartiers. Dans 10 quartiers, les familles ont rec¸u de l’eau de javel dilue´e 
et des contenaires pour l’eau. Dans 9 quartiers, elles ont rec¸u du savon et ont e´te´ motive´es pour le lavage des mains. Dans 9 quartiers, elles ont rec¸u le 
de´sinfectant ﬂoculant pour le traitement de l’eau et des contenaires pour l’eau. Dans 10 quartiers, elles ont rec¸u le de´sinfectant ﬂoculant et du savon et 
ont e´te´ motive´es pour le lavage des mains. 9 quartiers ont e´te´ suivis comme controˆ les. Les agents de terrain ont visite´ chaque famille au moins une fois 
par semaine, d’avril a` de´cembre 2003 pour promouvoir l’utilisation des interventions et pour collecter des donne´es sur la diarrhe´e. 
re´ sultats Les participants dans les quartiers controˆ les avaient la diarrhe´e sur 5,2% des jours. Compare´s au controˆ les, les participants des quartiers 
recevant l’intervention avaient une pre´valence de diarrhe´e plus faible repartie comme suit: 55% (IC95%: 17–80) plus faible dans les quartiers ayant rec¸u 
l’eau de javel et des centenaires, 51% (IC95%: 12–76) plus faible dans les quartiers ayant rec¸u la promotion du lavage des mains, 64% (IC95%: 29–90) 
dans les quartiers ayant rec¸u le de´sinfectant ﬂoculant et 55% (IC95%: 18–80) plus faible dans les quartiers ayant rec¸u le de´sinfectant ﬂoculant en plus de 
savon pour le lavage des mains. 
conclusion Avec une forte intervention base´e sur la communaute´ et des moyens procure´s sans charge, chacune des interventions a entraıˆne´ une 
re´duction signiﬁcative de la diarrhe´e. Il n’y avait pas de be´ne´ﬁce supple´ment en combinant la promotion du lavage des mains et le traitement de l’eau. 


objetivos Evaluar la efectividad del tratar el agua con desinfectante ﬂoculado en la reduccio´ n de la diarrea, ası´ como los beneﬁcios adicionales en la 
promocio´ n del lavado de manos con jabo´ n. 
me´ todos El estudio fue conducido en asentamientos ilegales de Karachi, Pakista´ n, en los que la diarrea es la principal causa de mortalidad infantil. Las 
intervenciones fueron asignadas aleatoriamente en 47 barrios. Las casas de 10 barrios recibieron lejı´a diluida y un recipiente para agua; en 9 barrios se 
entrego´ jabo´ n y se les animo´ a que se lavasen las manos; en otros 9 barrios se entrego´ desinfectante ﬂoculado para tratamiento del agua y un recipiente 
para agua; 10 barrios recibieron desinfectante ﬂoculado para tratamiento del agua y jabo´ n, y se les animo´ a que se lavaran las manos; y 9 barrios fueron 
seguidos como controles. Los trabajadores de campo visitaron las casas al menos una vez por semana, entre Abril y Diciembre del 2003, para promover 
el uso de la intervencio´ n y para recolectar datos sobre diarreas. 
resultados Los participantes de los barrios controles tuvieron diarrea en un 5.2% de los dı´as. Comparado con los controles, los participantes que 
vivı´an en uno de los barrios en los que se intervino tuvieron una menor prevalencia de diarrea: 55% (95% IC 17%, 80%) menos en los barrios en los que 
se entrego´ lejı´a y un recipiente para el agua, 51% (95% IC 12%, 76%) menos en los barrios en los que se promovio´ el lavado de manos con jabo´ n, 64% 
menos (95% IC 29%, 90%) en los barrios con desinfectante ﬂoculado, y 55% (95% IC 18%, 80%) menos en los barrios con desinfectante ﬂoculado 
ma´ s promocio´ n del lavado de manos con jabo´ n. 
conclusiones Con una intervencio´ n comunitaria intensiva y suministros gratuitos, cada una de las Intervenciones redujo la diarrea de forma 
signiﬁcativa. No se hallo´ beneﬁcio en combinar la promocio´ n del lavado de manos con el tratamiento del agua. 



