
Effect of Intensive Handwashing Promotion 
on Childhood Diarrhea in High-Risk 
Communities in Pakistan 
A Randomized Controlled Trial 

Mubina Agboatwalla, MBBS 
John Painter, DVM 
Arshad Altaf, MBBS, MPH 
Ward L. Billhimer, MS 
Robert M. Hoekstra, PhD 

die annually from diarrheal 
disease.1 A recent meta- 
analysis concluded that 
handwashing promotion interven- 
tions decrease diarrhea by a mean of 
47%.2 The authors estimate that such 
interventions could prevent 1 million 
child deaths per year.2 However, the sys- 
tematic meta-analysis and the studies 
it included summarized the reduction 
in diarrheal rates among all children or 
all family members. But all family mem- 
bers are not at equal risk of death from 
diarrhea. Children younger than 5 years 
are at much higher risk of death from 
diarrhea than older children and adults,1 
and infants (younger than 1 year) are 
at the highest risk of death. Verbal au- 
topsy studies from Egypt,3 Pakistan,4 
Bangladesh,5 and Ethiopia6 report that 
43% to 78% of deaths from diarrhea 
among children younger than 5 years 
occur in the first year of life. 
Infants cannot wash their own hands 
and therefore cannot interrupt the 
transfer of pathogens between their 
hands and their mouth. Infants might 
benefit from a lower rate of diarrheal 
pathogen transmission from parents 
and siblings who wash their hands more 
Context Washing hands with soap prevents diarrhea, but children at the highest risk 
of death from diarrhea are younger than 1 year, too young to wash their own hands. 
Previous studies lacked sufficient power to assess the impact of household handwash- 
ing on diarrhea in infants. 
Objective To evaluate the effect of promoting household handwashing with soap 
among children at the highest risk of death from diarrhea. 
Design, Setting, and Participants A cluster randomized controlled trial of 36 low- 
income neighborhoods in urban squatter settlements in Karachi, Pakistan. Field work- 
ers visited participating households at least weekly from April 15, 2002, to April 5, 
2003. Eligible households located in the study area had at least 2 children younger 
than 15 years, at least 1 of whom was younger than 5 years. 
Interventions Weekly visits in 25 neighborhoods to promote handwashing with soap 
after defecation and before preparing food, eating, and feeding a child. Within inter- 
vention neighborhoods, 300 households (1523 children) received a regular supply of 
antibacterial soap and 300 households (1640 children) received plain soap. Eleven neigh- 
borhoods (306 households and 1528 children) comprised the control group. 
Main Outcome Measure Incidence density of diarrhea among children, defined 
as the number of diarrheal episodes per 100 person-weeks of observation. 
Results Children younger than 15 years living in households that received hand- 
washing promotion and plain soap had a 53% lower incidence of diarrhea (95% con- 
fidence interval [CI], –65% to –41%) compared with children living in control neigh- 
borhoods. Infants living in households that received handwashing promotion and plain 
soap had 39% fewer days with diarrhea (95% CI, –61% to –16%) vs infants living in 
control neighborhoods. Severely malnourished children (weight for age z score, (cid:1)–3.0) 
younger than 5 years living in households that received handwashing promotion and 
plain soap had 42% fewer days with diarrhea (95% CI, –69% to –16%) vs severely 
malnourished children in the control group. Similar reductions in diarrhea were ob- 
served among children living in households receiving antibacterial soap. 
Conclusion In a setting in which diarrhea is a leading cause of child death, improve- 
ment in handwashing in the household reduced the incidence of diarrhea among chil- 
dren at high risk of death from diarrhea. 
JAMA. 2004;291:2547-2554 

Author Affiliations: Division of Bacterial and 
Mycotic Diseases, National Center for Infectious 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Preven- 
tion, Atlanta, Ga (Drs Luby, Painter, and Hoekstra); 
Health Oriented Preventive Education (Dr Agboat- 
walla) and Community Health Sciences, Aga 
Khan University (Dr Altaf ), Karachi, Pakistan; and 
Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio 
(Mr Billhimer). 
Financial Disclosure: Dr Luby has received research 
support from Procter and Gamble. Mr Billhimer is an 
employee of Procter and Gamble. 
Corresponding Author: Stephen P. Luby, MD, Food- 
borne and Diarrheal Diseases, Centers for Disease Con- 
trol and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd, Mailstop A-38, 
Atlanta, GA 30333 (sluby@cdc.gov). 




frequently with soap but the benefit to 
the infant might be quite different from 
the overall benefit. 
We identified only 2 handwashing in- 
tervention trials from developing coun- 
tries that reported diarrheal rates among 
infants.7,8 In 1 study in which the inter- 
vention assignment was randomized,7 
the analysis accounted for the cluster de- 
sign but the measured 24% reduction in 
diarrheal disease among children 
younger than 1 year was not signifi- 
cantly different from the control group. 
A second handwashing promotion 
study8 reported a 61% reduction in di- 
arrheal disease among children younger 
than 1 year but there was only 1 inter- 
vention handwashing promotion com- 
munity and 1 control community. The 
data were analyzed at the individual level 
and the repeated measures of each in- 
dividual were not accounted for in the 
analysis.8 
In addition to young age, malnutri- 
tion9-11 and persistent diarrhea10,12,13 are 
important risk factors for death from di- 
arrhea. We cannot identify any hand- 
washing intervention trials that evalu- 
ated effectiveness among malnourished 
children or for persistent diarrhea. Thus, 
the effectiveness of handwashing with 
soap in preventing diarrhea among the 
most vulnerable children is unclear. 
In Karachi, Pakistan, more than 4 mil- 
lion low-income residents live in squat- 
ter settlements where they do not own 
legal title to the land and municipal in- 
frastructure is limited.14 A verbal au- 
topsy study from these communities 
concluded that 41% of all childhood 
deaths younger than 5 years were due 
to diarrhea.15 Seventy-three percent of 
these diarrheal deaths occurred among 
infants.15 We evaluated whether pro- 
moting washing hands with soap de- 
creased diarrhea among children at the 
highest risk of death from diarrhea in 
Karachi squatter settlements. 
METHODS 
Setting 
The Karachi Soap Health Study was con- 
ducted in adjoining multiethnic squat- 
ter settlements in central Karachi— 
Bilal, Hazara, Manzoor, and Mujahid 
colonies—in collaboration with Health 
Oriented Preventive Education (HOPE), 
a nongovernmental organization that op- 
erates local health clinics and supports 
community-based health and develop- 
ment initiatives. 
Most residents in these communi- 
ties have household toilets but the dis- 
charge flows into open sewers. After def- 
ecation, toilet paper is rarely used. 
Instead, residents routinely rinse their 
anus with water from a pitcher. Al- 
though handwashing, typically with wa- 
ter alone, is part of ritual preparation for 
prayer in these communities, thorough 
washing of hands with soap is less com- 
mon, even though affordable hand soap 
is widely available throughout these 
communities from small neighbor- 
hood shops. The water used for drink- 
ing and handwashing in these commu- 
nities is heavily contaminated with fecal 
organisms.16 Hands are typically dried 
on clothing. Clothing is usually laun- 
dered after several days of wear. 
Study Groups 
Field workers identified 42 candidate 
neighborhoods of 60 to 273 house- 
holds, separated from one another by a 
street or market area. Field workers con- 
ducted a census of these neighbor- 
hoods, and before intervention assign- 
ment, identified and obtained informed 
consent from 1050 households. Eli- 
gible households were located in the 
study area, had at least 2 children 
younger than 15 years, at least 1 of 
whom was younger than 5 years, and 
planned to continue to reside in their 
homes for the duration of the study. 
The field workers listed the candi- 
date neighborhoods in order of prox- 
imity to their field center. One of the in- 
vestigators not involved in recruiting 
neighborhoods or households (S.P.L.) 
programmed a spreadsheet to generate 
randomly the integers 1 or 2 with twice 
the probability of generating a 2 vs a 1. 
He applied the random numbers sequen- 
tially to the list of neighborhoods. Those 
neighborhoods with a 1 were assigned 
to control and those with a 2 were as- 
signed to handwashing promotion. Ran- 
dom assignment continued until neigh- 
borhoods comprising 600 handwashing 
promotion households and 306 con- 
trol households were assigned. Ulti- 
mately, 25 neighborhoods were as- 
signed to handwashing promotion and 
11 to control (FIGURE 1). Handwash- 
ing promotion was assigned at the neigh- 
borhood level because a number of the 
handwashing promotion activities were 
neighborhood-level activities. Antibac- 
terial vs plain soap was randomly as- 
signed at the household level. 
Interventions 
Handwashing Promotion. Field work- 
ers conducted neighborhood meetings 
about handwashing. They used slide 
shows, videotapes, and pamphlets to il- 
lustrate health problems resulting from 
contaminated hands and to provide spe- 
cific handwashing instructions. The core 
handwashing promotion activity was 
regular, at least weekly, household vis- 
its by the field workers. Each field 
worker spoke the first language of the 
study households they visited. They de- 
scribed in detail the importance of hand- 
washing. They encouraged partici- 
pants to wet their hands, lather them 
completely with soap, and rub them to- 
gether for 45 seconds. Hands were typi- 
cally dried on the participants’ cloth- 
ing. Field workers encouraged all 
persons in intervention households old 
enough to understand (generally those 
participants older than 30 months) to 
wash their hands after defecation and 
cleaning an infant who had defecated, 
and before preparing food, eating, and 
feeding infants. They encouraged adopt- 
ing regular handwashing habits. Field 
workers also encouraged participants to 
bathe once a day with soap and water. 
Field workers encouraged questions and 
discussion about handwashing. They re- 
supplied the families with soap as 
needed. Field workers did not provide 
educational messages on water treat- 
ment, food hygiene, or other strategies 
to decrease diarrhea. 
Soap. The antibacterial soap con- 
tained 1.2% triclocarban as an antibac- 
terial agent. The plain soap was identi- 
cal to the antibacterial soap with the 
single exception that it did not contain 



triclocarban. Both soaps were provided 
as 90-g white bars without a brand name 
or symbol and packaged identically in 
a generic white wrapper. Cases of 96 bars 
were identified by serial numbers that 
were matched to households. Neither 
the field workers nor the families knew 
whether the family’s soap was antibac- 
terial or plain. 
Control. Field workers provided con- 
trol households with a regular supply of 
children’s books, notebooks, pens, and 
pencils to help with their children’s edu- 
cation but no products that would be ex- 
pected to affect diarrhea. Field workers 
neither encouraged nor discouraged 
handwashing in control households. 
Field workers visited control and inter- 
vention households with equal fre- 
quency to collect health outcome data 
but the visits were shorter in control 
households because no health educa- 
tion or encouragement for behavior 
change was provided. 
Field Workers 
Field workers recruited from the study 
or nearby communities were exten- 
sively trained in interviewing tech- 
niques, data recording, approaches to 
promote handwashing, and measuring 
and weighing children. The same field 
workers promoted handwashing and 
collected outcome data during their 
household visits. 
Measurements 
Trained field workers conducted a pre- 
intervention baseline survey of house- 
hold characteristics. They identified each 
child (aged (cid:1)15 years) in the house- 
hold. Children’s dates of birth were con- 
firmed with birth certificates or immu- 
nization records. Field workers visited 
participating households at least weekly 
for 1 year (April 15, 2002, to April 5, 
2003) and asked the mother or other 
caregiver if the children had diarrhea 
((cid:2)3 loose stools within 24 hours) in the 
preceding week, and, if so, for how many 
days. Typically, field workers visited 
each household twice during the week 
to ensure that episodes of diarrhea from 
both early and late in the week were re- 
called. Supervisors revisited 40% of 


homes each week and reviewed the his- 
tory of diarrhea among family mem- 
bers. The history recorded by the su- 
pervisor was compared with the history 
recorded by the field worker and, if there 
was a discrepancy, the fieldworker and 
supervisor revisited the house to clarify 
the difference. 
Field workers weighed participating 
children younger than 5 years at base- 
line and every 4 months. Field workers 
weighed children 3 years or younger by 
using a hanging scale (Salter, Ton- 
bridge, Kent, England) and children 
older than 3 years by using a bathroom 
scale. We calculated weight for age z 
scores to compare the study children’s 
weight with the National Center for 
Health Statistics standards. The z score 
represents the number of standard de- 
viations that the child’s measured weight 
for age differs from the standard healthy 
population. We calculated the mean 
weight for age z score from the mul- 
tiple weighing sessions throughout the 
study for each child. We classified chil- 
dren as moderately malnourished if their 
mean weight for age z score was less than 
–2.0 and −3.0 or higher, and severely 
malnourished if their mean weight for 
age z score was less than –3.0. 
Statistics 
A primary hypothesis of the Karachi 
Soap Health Study was that promoting 
handwashing with antibacterial or plain 
soap would significantly reduce the 
amount of diarrheal illness compared 
with standard habits and practices in the 
control group. (Other primary hypoth- 
eses of the Karachi Soap Health Study 
address the effectiveness of bathing and 
handwashing with antibacterial or plain 
soap in preventing impetigo and acute 
respiratory illness and will be reported 
separately.) A primary study outcome 
was the incidence density of diarrhea (ie, 
the number of new episodes of diar- 
rhea divided by the at-risk person- 
weeks of observation). We considered 
a child at risk for a new episode of di- 
arrhea if he or she reported no diarrhea 
in the previous week. We also mea- 
sured disease outcome using longitudi- 



36 Neighborhoods Closest to the 
Study Center Enrolled 



300 Households Assigned to 
Receive Plain Soap 



51 Children Born Into Study 
65 Children Aged out of Study 

44 Children Born Into Study 
70 Children Aged out of Study 

40 Children Born Into Study 
82 Children Aged out of Study 

11 Neighborhoods (306 Households) 
Randomly Assigned to Control 






67 630 Actual Person-Weeks 
of Follow-up 
Included in Analysis 
73 850 Actual Person-Weeks 
of Follow-up 
Included in Analysis 
68 653 Actual Person-Weeks 
of Follow-up 
Included in Analysis 

Randomly Assigned to Handwashing 
Promotion 




nal prevalence because it is more closely 
associated with growth faltering and 
child mortality than is diarrhea inci- 
dence.17 We calculated longitudinal 
prevalence by summing the number of 
days each child had diarrhea and divid- 
ing by the total number of days of ob- 
servation. 
We calculated a sample size of 239 
households per intervention group, as- 
suming 1.2 episodes of diarrhea per 100 
person-weeks among children younger 
than 15 years in the control group, 25% 
lower incidence of diarrhea in each 
handwashing promotion group vs con- 
trol, 3.8 children per household, and 
a doubling of sample size to offset the 
effect of clustering by neighborhood 
and repeated measures. We increased 
the sample size to 300 households per 
intervention group to assess other 
health outcomes, which will be re- 
ported separately. 
Because we assigned soap promo- 
tion vs control at the neighborhood level, 
we analyzed the comparison of out- 
comes at the neighborhood level. Spe- 
cifically, within each neighborhood 
among person-weeks within the sub- 
group of interest, we identified the total 
number of new episodes of diarrhea or 
days of diarrhea and divided it by the 
total number of person-weeks at risk for 
children in that neighborhood within the 
subgroup of interest. We calculated rates 
by intervention assignment by taking the 
mean of the appropriate neighborhood 
rates, weighted by the person-weeks of 
observation from each neighborhood 
that contributed to the mean. We cal- 
culated rate ratios by dividing the 
weighted means from intervention 
neighborhoods by the weighted means 
from control neighborhoods.18 We cal- 
culated 95% confidence intervals around 
these rate ratios using Taylor Series ap- 


Persons per household, mean (SD) 
Children aged (cid:1)5 years per household, 







Households with infants 
Children aged (cid:1)5 years 
With moderate malnutrition† 
With severe malnutrition‡ 

Father 
Mother 
Monthly household US income (cid:1)$60 
Refrigerator ownership 

Municipal supply within the house 
Municipal supply at a community tap 
Tanker truck 
Water bearer 
Bore hole 



Antibacterial Soap 
(n = 300) 
Plain Soap 
(n = 300) 


Control 
(n = 306) 



















125 (26) 
20 (4.1) 
176 (59) 
113 (38) 


34 (11) 
42 (14) 
168 (56) 
37 (12) 
19 (6) 


103 (21) 
24 (4.8) 
114 (24) 
19 (4.0) 
171 (57) 
107 (36) 


35 (12) 
59 (20) 
170 (57) 
25 (8) 
11 (3) 


196 (64) 
98 (32) 


30 (10) 
45 (15) 
189 (62) 
31 (10) 
11 (4) 






*Data are No. (%) unless otherwise specified. 
†Weight for age z score is less than −2.0 and −3.0 or more. 
‡Weight for age z score is less than −3.0. 
proximations to obtain SEs.19 This ap- 
proach calculated confidence intervals 
(CIs) that reflected the different distri- 
bution of proportions at the neighbor- 
hood level. We report the percentage dif- 
ference in outcome between intervention 
and control (ie, rate ratio minus 1). The 
disease experience of each child, house- 
hold, and neighborhood was tracked and 
analyzed with the group they were origi- 
nally assigned to (ie, intention-to-treat 
analysis). We considered P(cid:3).05 as sta- 
tistically significant. We used SAS ver- 
sion 9.0 and JMP version 5.0 (SAS In- 
stitute Inc, Cary, NC) to conduct the 
statistical analysis. 
Ethics 
Community leaders and heads of house- 
holds provided informed consent. Ill 
children were assessed by field work- 
ers and referred to the appropriate level 
of health care. The first line of treat- 
ment for diarrhea was oral rehydration 
solution. Ill children referred by field 
workers were offered clinical services 
free of charge at HOPE health care fa- 
cilities located in these communities. 
The study protocol was approved by the 
ethics review committee of the Aga Khan 
University and an institutional review 
board of the Centers for Disease Con- 
trol and Prevention. 
RESULTS 
The 36 neighborhoods in the study in- 
cluded a median 115 households 
(range, 60-273 households). A me- 
dian of 21% of households in each 
neighborhood (range, 6%-39%) met the 
eligibility criteria for the study. All eli- 
gible households chose to enroll. Thus, 
for the study, a median 26 households 
participated per neighborhood (range, 
9-37; interquartile range, 21-30). 
Within the 25 neighborhoods random- 
ized to handwashing promotion, 300 
households (1523 children) were ran- 
domized to receive antibacterial soap 
and 300 households (1640 children) 
were randomized to receive plain soap 
(Figure 1). Eleven neighborhoods, rep- 
resenting 306 households and 1528 
children, were randomized to the stan- 
dard habits and practices control group. 







Mean† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 


Mean† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
Antibacterial Soap 
(n = 300) 
Plain Soap 
(n = 300) 
Control 
(n = 306) 
2.02 
−50 (−64 to −37) 
1.91 
−53 (−65 to −41) 
1.57 
−46 (−63 to −30) 
1.46 
−50 (−65 to −35) 
4.06 
1.00 
2.92 
1.00 
Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval. 
*Incidence is episodes per 100 person-weeks at risk. 
†Mean rates were calculated by taking the mean of the neighborhood rates weighted by the person-weeks at risk from 


Figure 2. Diarrhea Incidence for Each 
Neighborhood by Intervention Group 







Antibacterial 
Soap 
(n = 25) 
Plain 
Soap 
(n = 25) 
Control 
(n = 11) 
Diarrhea incidence is defined as number of new epi- 
sodes per 100 person-weeks. All neighborhoods (num- 
ber indicated in parentheses) are shown for each group 
but data markers may overlap due to close measure- 
ments of diarrhea incidence. 
erate malnutrition vs 3.7% among chil- 
dren without malnutrition). The effec- 
tiveness of soap in preventing diarrhea 
was independent of childrens’ nutri- 
tional status. Among children younger 
than 5 years living in households that 
received plain soap and handwashing 
promotion, those who were severely 
malnourished had a 42% lower longi- 
tudinal prevalence of diarrhea (95% CI, 
–69% to –16%) and those who were 
moderately malnourished had a 41% 
lower longitudinal prevalence (95% CI, 
–65% to –17%) vs children of compa- 
tent across most of the individual neigh- 
borhoods (FIGURE 2). Indeed, the diar- 
rhea incidence in 8 of 11 control 
neighborhoods was higher than in any 
of the handwashing promotion neigh- 
borhoods. 
For the first 8 weeks of the study, the 
incidence of diarrhea was similar among 
children living in handwashing promo- 
tion neighborhoods compared with chil- 
dren in control neighborhoods. After 8 
weeks, the incidence of diarrhea among 
children living in handwashing promo- 
tion neighborhoods was consistently 
lower than children living in control 
neighborhoods (FIGURE 3). 
Diarrhea was more common among 
younger children (6.2% longitudinal 
prevalence among infants and 5.5% 
among children aged 1-2 years) vs older 
children (3.3% among children aged 2-5 
years and 1.1% among children aged 
5-15 years). Infants living in neighbor- 
hoods where handwashing was actively 
promoted and in households that 
received plain soap had a 39% lower lon- 
gitudinal prevalence of diarrhea (95% 
CI, –61% to –16%) vs infants living in 
control neighborhoods (TABLE 3). Chil- 
dren older than 5 years living in house- 
holds that received plain soap had a 57% 
reduction in diarrhea vs children liv- 
ing in control neighborhoods (95% CI, 
–73% to –41%). The age-specific lon- 
gitudinal prevalence of diarrhea among 
households receiving antibacterial soap 
was similar to households receiving 
plain soap. 
Malnourished children had more di- 
arrhea (5.3% and 4.8% prevalence 
among children with severe and mod- 
During 51 weeks of follow-up, diar- 
rhea outcome information was col- 
lected on 210133 person-weeks, rep- 
resenting 89% of the study populations’ 
experience (88% in antibacterial soap, 
89% in plain soap, and 89% in control 
households). The most common rea- 
son for failure to collect information 
was that study participants had tem- 
porarily left the city to visit relatives. 
There was a discrepancy between the 
field worker’s record of diarrhea symp- 
toms and the supervisor’s record in less 
than 1% of supervisory visits. 
At baseline, households in the 3 in- 
tervention groups were of similar size and 
socioeconomic status, had a compa- 
rable number of young children, a simi- 
lar proportion of whom were malnour- 
ished, similar sources of water, sanitary 
facilities, and reported hand soap pur- 
chases (TABLE 1). Mothers reported 
breastfeeding their children younger than 
2 years during 95% of child-weeks of ob- 
servation in the antibacterial soap group, 
95% in the plain soap group, and 94% 
in the control group. Exclusive breast- 
feeding was less common. Mothers re- 
ported exclusively breastfeeding their in- 
fants during 43% of infant-weeks of 
observation in the antibacterial soap 
group, 42% in the plain soap group, and 
45% in the control group. 
During the course of the study, hand- 
washing promotion households re- 
ceived a mean 3.3 bars of the study soap 
per week; this translates into each 
household resident using a mean 4.4 g/d 
of soap. 
Compared with children living in 
control neighborhoods, children liv- 
ing in households that received plain 
soap and encouragement to wash their 
hands had a 53% lower incidence of di- 
arrhea (95% CI, –65% to –41%) and a 
50% lower longitudinal prevalence of 
diarrhea (95% CI, –65% to –35%; 
TABLE 2). The incidence and longitu- 
dinal prevalence of diarrhea among 
households receiving antibacterial soap 
was similar to households receiving 
plain soap. 
The mean differences in diarrhea rates 
between handwashing promotion and 
control neighborhoods were consis- 



ing antibacterial soap vs households 
receiving plain soap (TABLE 5). 
Seven children died during the study. 
For 3 of the children, 1 from each of the 
study groups, the mother reported that 
the child had diarrhea as part of the ill- 
ness that led to his/her death. These 
deaths occurred in children aged 33, 36, 
and 63 months. The diarrhea-specific 
death rate was 1.6 deaths per 1000 chil- 
dren younger than 5 years per year. 
COMMENT 
In these communities in which diar- 
rhea is the leading cause of childhood 
death, wash water was heavily contami- 
nated with human fecal organisms, and 
no provisions were made for clean dry- 
ing of hands, handwashing promotion 
with soap halved the burden of diar- 
rheal disease. This study addressed 
many of the methodological concerns 
raised by previous reviewers of hy- 
giene interventions.2,20 The interven- 
tion was randomly assigned and in- 
cluded a contemporaneous control 
group. Diarrhea prevalence was simi- 
lar at the beginning of the study be- 
tween intervention and control groups. 
The analysis accounted for the cluster 
design of the intervention and had suf- 
ficient power to evaluate the effective- 
ness of the intervention in subgroups 
of children at the highest risk of death 
from diarrhea. The overall level of re- 
duction in longitudinal prevalence of 
diarrhea among children in house- 
holds with handwashing promotion 
(50% in the plain soap and 46% in the 
antibacterial soap groups) was remark- 
ably close to the 47% decrease calcu- 
lated in the recent meta-analysis on the 
effect of handwashing in preventing 
diarrhea.2 
Our study was not designed to evalu- 
ate child mortality as an outcome. Only 
3 children died from diarrhea during the 
study, 1 from each group. Our rate of 
death from diarrhea was 79% lower than 
the diarrhea-specific death rate for chil- 
dren younger than 5 years previously re- 
ported from similar communities.15 The 
close surveillance for childhood illness 
by field workers and rapid referral to ap- 
propriate clinical care at no cost to the 
8.41 
1.00 
7.60 
1.00 
4.91 
1.00 
1.70 
1.00 

rable age and nutrition status living in 
control neighborhoods (TABLE 4). The 
malnutrition-specific longitudinal preva- 
lence of diarrhea among households re- 
ceiving antibacterial soap was similar to 
households receiving plain soap. 
Compared with control neighbor- 
hoods, children living in households 
that received plain soap and hand- 
washing promotion were 56% less 
likely to visit a health care practitioner 
for diarrhea (95% CI, –69% to –43%). 
Hospitalization for diarrhea was 
uncommon, occurring in only 0.23% 
of the observed person-weeks. Chil- 
dren living in households receiving 
plain soap and handwashing promo- 
tion were 26% less likely to be hospi- 
talized for diarrhea but this difference 
was not statistically significant (95% 
CI, –100% to 66%). Only 5% of 
observed episodes of diarrhea were 
persistent diarrhea (ie, episodes lasting 
(cid:4)14 days). Children living in house- 
holds receiving plain soap and hand- 
washing promotion were 31% less 
likely to have a persistent episode of 
diarrhea but this difference was not 
statistically significant (95% CI, –70% 
to 8%). The probability of visiting a 
health care practitioner for diarrhea, 
being hospitalized for diarrhea, and 
having a persistent episode of diarrhea 
was similar among households receiv- 

Jan 6 
2003 














Antibacterial Soap 
(n = 300) 
Plain Soap 
(n = 300) 
Control 
(n = 306) 


Prevalence, %† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 

Prevalence, %† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 

Prevalence, %† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 

5.36 
−36 (−55 to −17) 
5.16 
−39 (−61 to −16) 
4.24 
−44 (−61 to −27) 
4.73 
−38 (−57 to −19) 
2.48 
−49 (−69 to −30) 
2.58 
−48 (−67 to −29) 
Prevalence, %† 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
0.82 
−52 (−71 to −33) 
0.73 
−57 (−73 to −41) 
Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval. 
*Longitudinal prevalence was calculated by taking the mean of the neighborhood longitudinal prevalences by the 








family likely contributed to this low 
death rate. 
However, our study did have suffi- 
cient power to evaluate the effective- 
ness of handwashing promotion with 
soap among children at high risk for 
death from diarrhea. Important risk fac- 
tors for diarrhea-specific death in de- 
veloping countries include age younger 
than 1 year,3-6,15 malnutrition,9-11 and per- 
sistent diarrhea.10,12,13 In our study, in- 
fants who were unable to wash their 
hands had 39% fewer days of diarrhea 
if they lived in households that re- 
ceived plain soap and encouragement to 
wash hands compared with control 
households. This 39% reduction in di- 
arrhea for infants was less than the 57% 
reduction observed among children aged 
between 5 and 15 years who are able to 
regularly wash their own hands. 
Handwashing with soap removes 
transient potentially pathogenic organ- 
isms from hands.21,22 If individuals wash 
their hands, they are less likely to trans- 
mit pathogens from their hands to their 
mouths. This mechanism benefits the 
person washing his/her hands and is not 
available to infants. However, persons 
washing their hands are also less likely 
to transfer pathogens from their hands 
to the hands of others, or to food or the 
environment that is shared with oth- 
ers. Moreover, parents and siblings who 
prevent their own episodes of diar- 
rhea are less likely to shed pathogens 
to the vulnerable infant’s environ- 
ment. Our study findings suggest that 
household handwashing interrupts 
transmission of diarrheal pathogens suf- 
ficiently to markedly reduce diarrhea 
among infants. 
Moderately or severely malnour- 
ished children had as large a reduction 
in diarrhea from improvement in house- 
hold handwashing as children without 
malnutrition. Although some reduc- 
tion in persistent diarrhea (19%-31%) 
was observed within households receiv- 
ing soap and handwashing promotion, 
persistent diarrhea was uncommon and 
these reductions were not statistically 
significant. Nevertheless, the effective- 
ness of handwashing with soap in re- 
ducing the longitudinal prevalence of di- 

arrhea among children at increased risk 
of death from diarrhea—infants and mal- 
nourished children—suggests that hand- 
washing with soap would reduce the risk 
of death from diarrhea. 
We found no significant difference 
in diarrheal disease among persons liv- 
ing in households receiving antibacte- 
rial soap compared with plain soap. This 
is not surprising because triclocarban 
is a bacteriostatic agent that inhibits the 
growth of some gram-positive bacte- 
ria but is not effective against gram- 
negative bacteria, viruses, or parasites 
that cause infectious diarrhea.23,24 
There are important limitations to our 
study. First, study personnel and par- 
ticipants were not blinded to the inter- 
vention. It is possible that study partici- 
pants in the handwashing promotion 
groups, grateful for the soap, mini- 
mized reported episodes of diarrhea in 
the household, or field workers recorded 
fewer episodes because of a desire to meet 
the expectation of study sponsors. How- 
ever, field workers were formally trained 
and the importance of accurate record- 
ing of reported symptoms was stressed. 
Unannounced supervisory visits did not 
identify systematic errors. 
Table 4. Mean Longitudinal Prevalence of Diarrhea Among Children Younger Than 5 Years 
by Nutritional Status and Group* 



Antibacterial Soap 
(n = 300) 
Plain Soap 
(n = 300) 
Control 
(n = 306) 
Diarrhea prevalence, %‡ 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
2.91 
−45 (−65 to −25) 
2.81 
−47 (−66 to −29) 


Diarrhea prevalence, %‡ 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
3.54 
−49 (−66 to −33) 
4.12 
−41 (−65 to −17) 

(3916 person-weeks at risk) 
Diarrhea prevalence, %‡ 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
4.11 
−46 (−75 to −18) 
4.41 
−42 (−69 to −16) 
5.32 
1.00 
7.01 
1.00 
7.64 
1.00 
Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval. 
*Longitudinal prevalence was calculated for each neighborhood, and the mean of the neighborhood prevalences weighted 

†Children whose weight for age z score is −2.0 or higher. 
‡Prevalence is the number of person-days with diarrhea divided by the number of person-days under surveillance. 
§Children whose mean weight for age z score is less than −2.0 and −3.0 or more. 
(cid:1)Children whose mean weight for age z score is less than −3.0. 

Diarrhea Outcomes 
Saw a practitioner for diarrhea 

Antibacterial Soap 
(n = 300) 
Plain Soap 
(n = 300) 
Control 
(n = 306) 
Proportion of child-weeks, %* 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 






Proportion of child-weeks, %* 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 
0.21 
−24 (−100 to 73) 
0.20 
−26 (−100 to 66) 



per 100 person-weeks‡ 
% Difference vs control (95% CI) 






0.27 
1.00 


Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval. 
*The proportion was calculated for each neighborhood, and the mean of the proportions weighted by the person-weeks 

†Episode for more than 14 days. 
‡Incidence was calculated by taking the mean of the neighborhood incidence weighted by the person-weeks at risk from 





A second limitation was that our study 
was not originally undertaken to evalu- 
ate the hypothesis that children at the 
highest risk of death would benefit from 
handwashing. We observed more diar- 
rhea than we expected. Diarrhea was un- 
usually prevalent in Karachi in the sum- 
mer of 2002, both as measured within 
the study as well as by reports from lo- 
cal clinicians. The incidence of diar- 
rhea in the control group was more than 
3 times higher than in control groups we 
had observed in earlier studies in 2000 
and 2001, which we used to estimate the 
sample size. We further increased the 
sample size to assess other outcomes. 
Thus, sufficient observations for the 
analysis of diarrhea among subgroups at 
high risk of death were recorded. The 
analysis and reporting of interesting sub- 
groups risks publication bias. How- 
ever, the reduction in diarrheal disease 
noted among infants and malnour- 
ished children was not statistically 
borderline. Moreover, there were 2 in- 
tervention groups, plain soap and anti- 
bacterial soap, and the findings from 
both suggest a consistent phenomena. 
A third limitation was that all of the 
disease reduction in the intervention 
communities was not necessarily attrib- 

1. World Health Organization. The World Health Re- 
port 2002: Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2002. 
2. Curtis V, Cairncross S. Effect of washing hands with 
soap on diarrhoea risk in the community: a systematic 
review. Lancet Infect Dis. 2003;3:275-281. 
3. Yassin KM. Indices and sociodemographic determi- 
nants of childhood mortality in rural upper Egypt. Soc 
Sci Med. 2000;51:185-197. 
4. Fikree FF, Azam SI, Berendes HW. Time to focus child 
survival programmes on the newborn: assessment of 
levels and causes of infant mortality in rural Pakistan. 
Bull World Health Organ. 2002;80:271-276. 
5. Baqui AH, Sabir AA, Begum N, Arifeen SE, Mitra SN, 
Black RE. Causes of childhood deaths in Bangladesh: 
an update. Acta Paediatr. 2001;90:682-690. 
6. Shamebo D, Muhe L, Sandstrom A, Wall S. The Bu- 
tajira rural health project in Ethiopia: mortality pattern 
of the under fives. J Trop Pediatr. 1991;37:254-261. 
7. Stanton BF, Clemens JD. An educational interven- 
tion for altering water-sanitation behaviors to reduce 
childhood diarrhea in urban Bangladesh, II: a random- 
ized trial to assess the impact of the intervention on hy- 
gienic behaviors and rates of diarrhea. Am J Epide- 
miol. 1987;125:292-301. 
8. Shahid NS, Greenough WB 3rd, Samadi AR, Huq 
MI, Rahman N. Hand washing with soap reduces di- 
arrhoea and spread of bacterial pathogens in a Ban- 
gladesh village. J Diarrhoeal Dis Res. 1996;14:85-89. 
utable to improved handwashing. It is 
possible that regular visits by field work- 
ers, the provision of soap, and the suc- 
cessful improvement in hand hygiene led 
to other behavioral changes in house- 
holds that reduced diarrheal disease. 
However, the high soap consumption of 
families suggests frequent handwash- 
ing and field workers were specifically 
trained to limit behavioral change mes- 
sages to handwashing promotion. Thus, 
improved handwashing likely played an 
important role in reducing the inci- 
dence of diarrhea. 
Although visiting households weekly 
to provide free soap and encourage 
handwashing was effective in reduc- 
ing diarrhea, this approach is prohibi- 
tively expensive for widespread imple- 
mentation. The next essential step is to 
develop effective approaches to pro- 
mote handwashing that cost less and 
can be used to reach millions of at- 
risk households. Studies evaluating the 
durability of behavioral change from 
handwashing promotion are also im- 
portant to assess cost-effectiveness. In 
the interim, existing public health pro- 
grams should experiment with inte- 
grating handwashing promotion into 
their current activities. 
Author Contributions: As principal investigator, Dr 
Luby had full access to all of the data in the study and 
takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and 
the accuracy of the data analysis. 
Study concept and design: Luby, Agboatwalla, Altaf, 
Billhimer, Hoekstra. 
Acquisition of data: Agboatwalla, Painter. 
Analysis and interpretation of data: Luby, Agboat- 
walla, Hoekstra. 
Drafting of the manuscript: Luby. 
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intel- 
lectual content: Agboatwalla, Painter, Altaf, Billhimer, 
Hoekstra. 
Statistical expertise: Luby, Hoekstra. 
Obtained funding: Luby, Billhimer. 
Administrative, technical, or material support: Luby, 
Agboatwalla, Painter, Altaf, Billhimer. 
Supervision: Luby, Agboatwalla. 
Funding/Support: This study was mainly supported 
by Procter and Gamble Company, including salary sup- 
port for Dr Luby. Procter and Gamble also supplied 
the soap for the study. The Centers for Disease Con- 
trol and Prevention contributed the personnel time of 
Drs Painter and Hoekstra, and administrative sup- 
port for the study. 
Role of the Sponsor: Mr Billhimer, an employee of Proc- 
ter and Gamble, critically reviewed the study protocol 
and made technical suggestions. Mr Billhimer ar- 
ranged for the production and delivery to Karachi, Pa- 
kistan, of coded plain and antibacterial soap, and re- 
tained the coding of plain vs antibacterial soap. However, 
Procter and Gamble employees were not involved in 
data collection or in data analysis but commented on 
the interpretation of the analysis following oral pre- 
sentation of the results and in response to drafts of the 
manuscript. The Centers for Disease Control and Pre- 
vention retained the right to publish results without ap- 
proval from Procter and Gamble. 
Acknowledgment: We thank the HOPE staff workers 
who worked in the community and collected and en- 
tered the data for the study. We thank Nasiruddin Mu- 
hammadali, MBA, at the Aga Khan University Depart- 
ment of Community Health Sciences for administrative 
support. 
9. Yoon PW, Black RE, Moulton LH, Becker S. The effect 
of malnutrition on the risk of diarrheal and respiratory 
mortality in children (cid:1)2 y of age in Cebu, Philippines. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 1997;65:1070-1077. 
10. Sachdev HP, Kumar S, Singh KK, Satyanarayana 
L, Puri RK. Risk factors for fatal diarrhea in hospital- 
ized children in India. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1991; 
12:76-81. 
11. Teka T, Faruque AS, Fuchs GJ. Risk factors for 
deaths in under-age-five children attending a diar- 
rhoea treatment centre. Acta Paediatr. 1996;85:1070- 
1075. 
12. Bhandari N, Bhan MK, Sazawal S. Mortality asso- 
ciated with acute watery diarrhea, dysentery and per- 
sistent diarrhea in rural north India. Acta Paediatr. 1992; 
81(suppl 381):3-6. 
13. Lima AA, Fang G, Schorling JB, et al. Persistent di- 
arrhea in northeast Brazil: etiologies and interactions with 
malnutrition. Acta Paediatr. 1992;81(suppl 381):39- 
44. 
14. Planning and Development Corporation and 
Pakistan Environmental Planning and Architecture 
Consultant. Karachi Development Plan 2000. Kara- 
chi, Pakistan: Karachi Development Authority; 
1990:20. 
15. Marsh D, Husein K, Lobo M, Ali Shah M, Luby S. 
Verbal autopsy in Karachi slums: comparing single and 
multiple causes of child deaths. Health Policy Plan. 1995; 
10:395-403. 
16. Luby S, Agboatwalla M, Raza A, et al. A low-cost 
intervention for cleaner drinking water in Karachi, Pa- 
kistan. Int J Infect Dis. 2001;5:144-150. 
17. Morris SS, Cousens SN, Kirkwood BR, Arthur P, Ross 
DA. Is prevalence of diarrhea a better predictor of sub- 
sequent mortality and weight gain than diarrhea inci- 
dence? Am J Epidemiol. 1996;144:582-588. 
18. Donner A, Klar N. Design and Analysis of Cluster 
Randomization Trials in Health Research. New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press; 2000. 
19. Serfling RJ. Approximation Theorems of Math- 
ematical Statistics. New York, NY: Wiley; 1980. 
20. Blum D, Feachem RG. Measuring the impact of wa- 
ter supply and sanitation investments on diarrhoeal dis- 
eases: problems of methodology. Int J Epidemiol. 1983; 
12:357-365. 
21. Lowbury EJ, Lilly HA, Bull JP. Disinfection of hands: 
removal of transient organisms. BMJ. 1964;5403:230- 
233. 
22. Kaltenthaler E, Waterman R, Cross P. Faecal indi- 
cator bacteria on the hands and the effectiveness of 
hand-washing in Zimbabwe. J Trop Med Hyg. 1991; 
94:358-363. 
23. Heinze JE, Yackovich F. Washing with contami- 
nated bar soap is unlikely to transfer bacteria. Epide- 
miol Infect. 1988;101:135-142. 
24. Walsh SE, Maillard JY, Russell AD, Catrenich CE, 
Charbonneau DL, Bartolo RG. Activity and mecha- 
nisms of action of selected biocidal agents on gram- 
positive and gram-negative bacteria. J Appl Micro- 
biol. 2003;94:240-247. 



