ARTICLE
Cannabis analgesia in chronic neuropathic pain is
associated with altered brain connectivity
Libat Weizman, MSc,* Lior Dayan, MD,* Silviu Brill, MD, Hadas Nahman-Averbuch, PhD,
Talma Hendler, MD, PhD, Giris Jacob, MD, PhD,‡ and Haggai Sharon, MD‡
Neurology® 2018;91:e1285-e1294. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000006293
Correspondence
Dr. Sharon
haggaisharon@gmail.com
Abstract
Objective
To characterize the functional brain changes involved in δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
modulation of chronic neuropathic pain.
Methods
Fifteen patients with chronic radicular neuropathic pain participated in a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial employing a counterbalanced, within-subjects design. Pain
assessments and functional resting state brain scans were performed at baseline and after
sublingual THC administration. We examined functional connectivity of the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) and pain-related network dynamics using graph theory measures.
Results
THC signiﬁcantly reduced patients’ pain compared to placebo. THC-induced analgesia was
correlated with a reduction in functional connectivity between the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) and the sensorimotor cortex. Moreover, the degree of reduction was predictive of the
response to THC. Graph theory analyses of local measures demonstrated reduction in network
connectivity in areas involved in pain processing, and speciﬁcally in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC), which were correlated with individual pain reduction.
Conclusion
These results suggest that the ACC and DLPFC, 2 major cognitive-emotional modulation
areas, and their connections to somatosensory areas, are functionally involved in the analgesic
eﬀect of THC in chronic pain. This eﬀect may therefore be mediated through induction of
functional disconnection between regulatory high-order aﬀective regions and the sensorimotor
cortex. Moreover, baseline functional connectivity between these brain areas may serve as
a predictor for the extent of pain relief induced by THC.
*These authors contributed equally to this work as first authors.
‡These authors contributed equally to this work as last authors.
From the Sagol Brain Institute (L.W., T.H., H.S.), Institute of Pain Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine (L.D., S.B., H.S.), and Department of Internal
Medicine F (G.J.), Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Sagol School of Neuroscience (L.W., T.H.) and Sackler School of Medicine (L.D., T.H., G.J., H.S.), Tel Aviv University, Israel;
Department of Anesthesia (H.N.-A.), Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, OH; and Pain Management & Neuromodulation Centre (H.S.), Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK.
Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Neurology
e1285
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

The possible therapeutic role of cannabis and of its main
psychoactive substance, δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is
a subject of intense interest in Western medicine. Currently,
the most prevalent medical use of cannabis is for the treat-
ment of chronic pain.1 Increasing evidence shows that can-
nabis may be safe and eﬀective for refractory chronic pain.2,3
Nevertheless, the brain mechanism underlining this analgesic
eﬀect remains unknown.
A recent functional neuroimaging study found that THC
reduced acute experimentally induced pain in healthy
participants, and its analgesic eﬀect was correlated with
reduced activity of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).4
This result is compatible with the fact that the ACC has
been shown to be densely populated with cannabinoid-1
receptors,5 which are agonistically activated by THC. In-
terestingly, cannabinoid receptors in the ACC were found
to have decreased binding capability in an animal model of
chronic neuropathic pain.6 These ﬁndings suggest the ACC
may have a substantial contribution to cannabinoid anal-
gesia in clinical pain states.
As the neural underpinnings of cannabis-induced analgesia in
chronic pain remain poorly understood, we assessed the eﬀect
of a single dose of THC vs placebo on chronic pain by
evaluating subjective pain ratings and resting-state brain
connectivity of the ACC using fMRI. To that aim, we devised
a double-blind, placebo-controlled, counterbalanced within-
subjects study in patients with chronic neuropathic lower limb
radicular pain. We hypothesized that THC will have an an-
algesic eﬀect on patients’ pain ratings and that this eﬀect will
correlate with functional changes in the ACC.
Methods
Patients
Seventeen patients with chronic lumbar radicular pain com-
pleted the study (27–40 years old; mean age 33.3 ± 3.9; all
male). Women were excluded due to evidence that
menstruation-related hormonal ﬂuctuations may alter pain
sensitivity.7 The inclusion criterion was established neuro-
pathic lower limb radicular pain for over 6 months, with
medium to high chronic pain (over 40 on a 100-point visual
analog scale [VAS]) with no other known comorbidities.
Participants’ demographic and clinical data, as well as detailed
inclusion and exclusion criteria data, are available in table e-1
(doi.org/10.5061/dryad.df6qd5n).
Standard protocol approvals, registrations,
and patient consents
Seventeen participants gave written informed consent ap-
proved by the Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center institutional
review board (Clinical Trial Registration: clinicaltrials.gov/
show/NCT02560545). Patients were recruited from The
Institute of Pain Medicine at Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center. Two participants were excluded because on second
examination they did not fulﬁll the inclusion criteria.
CONSORT diagram data are available in ﬁgure e-1 (doi.org/
10.5061/dryad.df6qd5n).
Study procedure
Patients participated in a counterbalanced manner in 2
meetings of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. In each meeting, patients received THC oil or placebo oil
sublingually (0.2 mg/kg, average THC dosage = 15.4 ± 2.2
mg; Panaxia Pharmaceutical Industries, Lod, Israel). Ran-
domization was done by a dedicated physician using a sealed
envelope website (sealedenvelope.com/). Nine patients re-
ceived THC in the ﬁrst meeting and placebo in the second
meeting, whereas 6 patients received the reverse treatment
order. The experimental design is depicted in ﬁgure 1.
In each session, patients underwent baseline clinical evaluation
composed of pain rating on a 0–100 VAS, anxiety questionnaire
(State-Trait Anxiety Inventory–State [STAI-S]), and heart rate
(HR) and blood pressure (BP) measurements (Nexﬁn
BMEYE, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Subsequently, patients
underwent an fMRI scan composed of a non-task resting state,
after which they received the treatment (THC/placebo). The
resting state scan lasted 6 minutes and patients were instructed
to keep their eyes closed, rest, and relax, but not to fall sleep.
One hour post drug administration, the same procedure was
repeated. The second fMRI scan was thus preformed about 2
hours post drug administration, in accordance with THC
sublingual absorption showing maximal plasma concentrations
usually after 2 to 3 hours.8 The meetings were separated by at
least a week in order to enable a washout period of the possible
THC treatment (average weeks interval = 2.9 ± 3.3).
fMRI data acquisition
fMRI data were acquired with a 3T MRI scanner (Magnetom
Prisma, Siemens, Munich, Germany), with a 20-channel head
coil, located at the Wohl Institute for Advanced Imaging at the
Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center. Functional scans were per-
formed with T2*-weighted echoplanar images (44 axial
Glossary
ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; aMCC = anterior middle cingulate cortex; ALE = activation likelihood estimate; BOLD =
blood oxygenation level–dependent; BP = blood pressure; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FDR = false discovery rate;
FOV = ﬁeld of view; HR = heart rate; MCC = middle cingulate cortex; MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; ROI = region of
interest; SII = secondary somatosensory cortex; STAI-S = State-Trait Anxiety Inventory–State; TE = echo time; THC = δ-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol; TR = repetition time; VAS = visual analog scale.
e1286
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

interleaved slices, repetition time [TR] 3,000 ms, echo time [TE]
35ms, ﬁeldof view [FOV]220mm,in-planematrixresolution 96
× 96, voxel size 2.3 × 2.3 × 3.0 mm, slice thickness 3 mm, ﬂip
angle
90°).
Anatomical
scan
consisted
of
T1-weighted
magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo structural images
(TR 1,860 ms, TE 2.74 ms, FOV 256 mm, in-plane matrix res-
olution 256 × 256, voxel size 1 × 1 × 1 mm, slice thickness 1 mm,
ﬂip angle 8°).
Data analysis
Behavioral and physiologic measurements
Statistical analyses for behavioral and physiologic evaluations
were performed using STATISTICA 10 (TIBCO Software
Inc., Palo Alto, CA). Within-subjects repeated measures
analysis of variance was employed to ascertain signiﬁcant in-
teraction and simple main eﬀects between the treatment
(THC, placebo) and the state (pre, post) for VAS, STAI-S,
and cardiovascular measures (HR and BP). For each partici-
pant, in each treatment condition, pain reduction was de-
termined as the delta between the VAS score postintervention
and the VAS score preintervention. These VAS subtraction
values were used in subsequent analyses as indication for
individual improvement in pain, that is, the more negative the
values, the higher the improvement in pain.
fMRI data analysis
Preprocessing and functional connectivity analysis
Functional analyses were performed using Statistical Para-
metric Mapping (SPM12) software (ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/
software/spm12/) and the Functional Connectivity toolbox9
(nitrc.org/projects/conn). Preprocessing included the fol-
lowing; ﬁrst 18 seconds of the functional data were discarded
to allow steady-state magnetization. Functional images were
slice-time corrected, realigned to the middle scan, motion-
corrected, and normalized according to standard Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Spatial smoothing was
performed using a 6-mm full width at half maximum Gaussian
kernel. In order to reduce noise, functional volumes were
bandpass ﬁltered at 0.008–0.15 and component-based
method (CompCor) was used for noise signals such
as white matter, CSF, and movement artifact that were taken
as confounders. In addition, images that were regarded as
movement outliers were regressed out. Outliers were detected
using the ART toolbox (nitrc.org/projects/artifact_detect/)
and deﬁned as volumes with a movement greater than 2 mm
or signal intensity changes greater than 9 SD.
Functional connectivity was performed using a seed-based anal-
ysis looking for temporal correlations of the resting-state blood
oxygenation level–dependent (BOLD) signal time series between
theACCastheseedregionandtherestofthebrain.Theregionof
interest (ROI) was deﬁned using the ACC peak coordinates from
an activation likelihood estimate (ALE) meta-analysis of chronic
neuropathic pain.10 The coordinates were converted from
Talairach space to MNI space using Lancaster Transform, and
a 3-mm radius sphere was generated (MNI coordinates 2, 30, 29).
For each participant, ﬁrst-level correlation maps were produced
by extracting the residual BOLD time course from the seed and
Figure 1 Experiment design
Fifteen patients with chronic lumbar radicular pain participated in 2 meetings of a counterbalanced randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Patients underwent clinical evaluation and an fMRI scan pre and post δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)/placebo administration. STAI-S = State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory–State; VAS = visual analog scale.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
e1287
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

computing the Pearson correlation coeﬃcients between that
time course and the time course of all other voxels. Correlation
coeﬃcients were converted to normally distributed z scores
using the Fisher transformation to allow second-level general
linear model analyses.
To examine pain decrease–related changes in connectivity,
ﬁrst-level connectivity maps for each participant, at each state
(pre, post), were entered into a whole-brain regression anal-
ysis with pain decrease as a covariate. The states were con-
trasted (post > pre) in order to examine the change in the
treatment state (post) compared to baseline state (pre). In
this analysis, reported clusters survived a height threshold of
uncorrected p < 0.001 and an extent threshold of false dis-
covery rate (FDR)–corrected p < 0.05 at the cluster level.
Anatomical allocation of the connectivity maps was done in
reference to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps using the
SPM Anatomy Toolbox.11 Activations were assigned to the
most probable histologic area.
Graph theory analysis
Graph theory analysis was performed for9regions extracted from
an ALE meta-analysis of chronic neuropathic pain10: operculum
(secondary somatosensory cortex [SII]), insula, thalamus, puta-
men, ACC, middle cingulate cortex (MCC), and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The amygdala was added to these
regions as a central hub of emotion processing and as it has also
been shown to have an important role in persistent and chronic
pain states,12 and in particular in our patient cohort. In addition, it
has been shown to be involved in cannabinoid analgesia in
humans.4 Left and right amygdala clusters were extracted from
Neurosynth term-based meta-analyses of chronic pain. In total,
11 ROI were included. Presentation of all ROI data is available in
ﬁgure e-2 (doi.org/10.5061/dryad.df6qd5n).
For each participant, the BOLD time course was extracted from
each ROI and correlation coeﬃcients between its time course
and the time course of all other ROIs were computed. The ROI-
to-ROI correlation matrix was then thresholded to construct
a binary matrix where existing connections were assigned a value
of 1, while the absence of a functional connection between
network nodes was designated by a value of 0.
The unweighted ROI-to-ROI correlation matrices were thresh-
olded with cost value (K). Cost is a measure of the proportion of
connections for each ROI in relation to all connections in the
network. A cost threshold allows for roughly the same number of
connections across participants by varying the correlation
threshold for each participant to achieve the ﬁxed cost threshold.
Observing a range of network costs values between 0 < K < 0.5
over global and local eﬃciency networks, compared with the
same measures estimated in a random graph and a regular lat-
tice, can be an indication for small world network properties,13
where global eﬃciency is greater than that of a lattice graph and
local eﬃciency is greater than that of a random graph.14 The
data showed this behavior at a cost of 0.45 (ﬁgure e-3, doi.org/
10.5061/dryad.df6qd5n); therefore it was chosen as a threshold.
The following measures for integration (global eﬃciency) and
segregation (local eﬃciency and clustering coeﬃcient) of the
network were examined: global eﬃciency was calculated as the
average of the inverse of the shortest path length between each
ROI and all other ROIs. The shortest path length is deﬁned as
the fewest number of connections must be traversed to go from
one ROI to another. Thus, a network with high global eﬃciency
would be one in which nodes are highly integrated so the path
between nodes is consistently short. Local eﬃciency was calcu-
lated as the average global eﬃciency between only ROIs
neighboring a given ROI. Clustering coeﬃcient is the proportion
of connected ROIs neighboring a given ROI. Altogether, local
eﬃciency and clustering coeﬃcient measures the extent to which
ROIs are part of a local cluster. Within-subjects repeated-
measures analysis of variance was used to compute network
measures interaction eﬀects between the treatment (THC, pla-
cebo) and state (pre, post). Regression analysis was used to
examine network change posttreatment (post > pre) covariation
with pain decrease posttreatment (post-pre). These analyses
were corrected for FDR of p < 0.05.
Data availability
Anonymized grouped data will be shared upon request by any
qualiﬁed investigator.
Results
Behavioral results
As hypothesized, compared with placebo, THC signiﬁcantly
reduced the subjective perceived ongoing pain rated with the
VAS score prior to and immediately after fMRI scanning,
about 2 hours following drug administration (interaction ef-
fect F1,14 = 5.9, p < 0.05, simple eﬀect p < 0.005, THC post-
pre = 18.8 ± 5.6, placebo post-pre = 8.7 ± 5.5; ﬁgure 2).
The anxiety and the cardiovascular measures did not change
signiﬁcantly post THC administration compared to placebo.
Functional connectivity results
In order to test the association between the analgesic eﬀect of
THC and functional changes in ACC, patients’ pain ratings
were used as a covariate in the seed-to-whole-brain functional
connectivity regression analysis. ACC ROI was used as the
seed and the change in functional connectivity was examined
by the contrast between the pre and post THC administration
resting state scans (pre < post). We found a reduction in
functional connectivity between the ACC and the sensori-
motor cortex that covaried with the reduction in the sub-
jective pain ratings after THC treatment (ﬁgure 3). Three
clusters within the sensorimotor cortex were found: the right
and left secondary somatosensory cortex (SII) and the right
motor cortex (Ml) (right SII [areas OP4, OP1: MNI coor-
dinates 64, −16, 20; 121 voxels, T(13) = 8.92, cluster p-FDR =
0.0023]; left SII [areas OP4, OP1: MNI coordinates 66, −20,
e1288
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

22; 67 voxels, T(13) = 7.77, cluster p-FDR = 0.0286]; and
right Ml [area 4a: MNI coordinates 30, −16, 64; 95 voxels,
T(13) = 7.22, cluster p-FDR = 0.0081]. The MNI coordinates
of local maxima for each region are reported).
The relation between the reduction in the functional connec-
tivity and the reduction in pain ratings was represented by β
coeﬃcient of 0.01. Crucially, there was no relation between the
change in pain ratings and the ACC seed-to-whole-brain
functional connectivity change in the placebo condition. To
further examine the diﬀerent components of the association
observed following THC administration, a post hoc analysis of
the functional connectivity brain state pre-THC treatment was
tested for correlation with the pain ratings of the pre-THC
treatment, as well as with the improvement in pain ratings post-
THC treatment (post-pre). There was no correlation between
pre-THC treatment ACC functional connectivity and pain
ratings (ﬁgure 4A). Contrarily, pre-THC treatment ACC
functional connectivity with right, left SII, and M1 correlated
with the improvement in pain scores following THC admin-
istration (Pearson r = 0.679, p < 0.01, Pearson r = 0.66, p < 0.01,
and Pearson r = 0.8, p < 0.005. respectively, ﬁgure 4B).
Graph theory results
The results showing functional connectivity changes within
areas that are considered parts of the so-called chronic pain
network10 prompted us to further examine functional changes
among all chronic pain network components using graph
theory measures.
A signiﬁcant change in global eﬃciency was found for the
MCC when comparing THC and placebo treatment
eﬀects (ﬁgure 5; interaction eﬀect F1,14 = 3.05, p-FDR =
0.0477).
Local eﬃciency and clustering coeﬃcient measure the ex-
tent to which a given ROI is part of a local network. Both
measures showed reduction in the whole network (local
eﬃciency network: T13 = 2.33, p = 0.018, clustering co-
eﬃcient network: T13 = 2.72, p = 0.0087, ﬁgure 6), as well as
in the right DLPFC cluster, which covaried with the re-
duction in pain scores after THC administration (local
eﬃciency of DLPFC: T10 = 3.31, p-FDR = 0.0435, clus-
tering coeﬃcient DLPFC: T10 = 3.34, p-FDR = 0.0037,
ﬁgure 6). Placebo administration did not show such
association.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to explore the poorly un-
derstood neural correlates of cannabis-induced analgesia in
chronic pain. To this aim, we employed fMRI during single-
dose THC vs placebo administration in a cohort of patients
with well-documented chronic neuropathic pain and exam-
ined its clinical and brain eﬀects.
THC resulted in signiﬁcant analgesia compared with placebo,
in line with previous studies indicating the analgesic proper-
ties of THC in chronic pain, and speciﬁcally neuropathic
pain.2,3,15 The present study critically adds to existing clinical
literature, as this has not yet been convincingly shown to our
knowledge in chronic radicular pain, an extremely common
neuropathic pain state, using a double-blind randomized de-
sign. In line with our hypothesis, the extent of individual pain
relief was associated with reduced ACC–sensorimotor cortex
functional connectivity.
Pain is a complex multimodal subjective experience, encom-
passing sensory and emotional domains. A traditional view
divides the ascending nociceptive information into parallel
pathways, in which the ACC is part of the “medial” stream,
involved in processing aﬀective aspects of pain, whereas the
somatosensory cortex is considered part of the “lateral”
stream, involved in the sensory aspects of pain processing.16
Nevertheless, it is clear that these 2 pathways are heavily
interconnected, and are thought to eventually converge at the
ACC.17 The ACC and SII are anatomically connected and
both are main cortical targets of the spinothalamic system,
a major pathway of peripheral nociceptive information.18 The
ACC and the primary motor cortex have strong anatomical
connections as well.19
The fact that our results associate pain relief with ACC–
sensorimotor cortex functional connectivity reduction suggests
that THC may alleviate subjectively experienced pain by dis-
rupting the synchrony and integration between these pain
processing 2 pathways. Functional connectivity reduction be-
tween sensorimotor and aﬀective pain-related areas was also
reported during THC analgesia in the context of acute
Figure 2 Visual analog scale (VAS) score after δ-9-tetrahy-
drocannabinol (THC)/placebo administration
Compared to placebo, THC significantly reduced the subjective perceived on-
goingpain.Error barsrepresent SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.005. n.s = not significant.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
e1289
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

experimental pain in healthy participants,4 supporting our
suggestion of THC cognitive–aﬀective integration interference.
Accordingly, diﬀerent treatments for chronic pain aim to
modulate the ACC. Cingulotomy has long been used for re-
fractory chronic pain, where analgesia is characterized by al-
tered emotional responses to pain.20 Real-time fMRI
neurofeedback targeting the ACC reduced patients’ sponta-
neous pain,21 and deep brain stimulation targeting the ACC
similarly relieves the aﬀective component of pain.22 Further-
more, both invasive and noninvasive brain stimulation of the
primary motor cortex have been shown to reduce chronic
pain,23 and this eﬀect has been suggested to stem from in-
terfering with the activity of the ACC.24 Taken together, this
evidence supports the notion that lesioning and modulation
of the ACC aﬀects pain perception.
Interestingly, our results also demonstrate that pretreatment
functional connectivity between the ACC and the sensori-
motor cortex positively correlated with the improvement in
pain scores induced by THC, that is to say, the higher the
positive functional connectivity at baseline, the more beneﬁt
was gained from THC administration. It has been shown
before that functional connectivity of the ACC and SII
Figure 3 Seed-to-whole-brain functional connectivity reduction between anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and sensorimotor
cortex covariates with visual analog scale (VAS) score reduction after δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
administration
Sensorimotor cortex composed of ACC, secondary somatosensory cortex (SII), and primary motor cortex (M1). The regions were defined using the SPM
toolbox for probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps.
e1290
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

correlated with clinical pain ratings.25 Our results suggest that
this regional functional connectivity may also serve to predict
the extent of pain relief induced with THC.
Further investigation of the brain eﬀects of cannabis focused on
the well-characterized set of regions often referred to as the
chronic pain network.26 We used graph theory measures to test
for changes in integration measured by global eﬃciency and
segregation measured by local eﬃciency and clustering co-
eﬃcient of the network. This analysis ﬁrst revealed global ef-
ﬁciency changes in the MCC cluster post THC treatment
compared to placebo, signifying reduced integration between
the cluster and the rest of the network post THC treatment.
While this cluster is slightly posterior to the seed region ROI in
the ACC used in the previous analysis, both are part of the
anterior MCC (aMCC) subdivision, according to a recent
proposed division of the ACC into anterior and mid cingulate
cortices based on cytoarchitectural studies.27 This ﬁnding
implicates the aMCC as the component that has functionally
changed in comparison to the other regions, and showed less
connectivity to the other pain-related regions, as has been
shown in 2 diﬀerent analyses. Our results echo previous ﬁnd-
ings of reduced activityof the same cingulatesubdivision during
THC analgesia seen in experimental pain induced in healthy
participants,4 and further emphasize the role of the aMCC in
the disintegration of multilevel pain processing that delineates
THC-induced analgesia in clinical chronic pain.
In addition, we found local eﬃciency and clustering coeﬃcient
decreases in the right DLPFC cluster and in the whole network,
which covaried with pain reduction. These measures show that,
on average, the whole network has become locally less con-
nected, and in particular, the right DLPFC is less connected to
it. Resting functional connectivity of the cortical network
consisting of pain-related areas has been shown to increase in
chronic neuropathic pain compared to controls.28 Accordingly,
Figure 4 Correlation between anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) functional connectivity with right secondary somatosensory
cortex (SII), left SII, and right primary motor cortex (M1) and pre and post δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
treatment visual analog scale (VAS) scores
(A) Low correlation between VAS scores and functional connectivity pre-THC treatment. (B) Correlation between the functional connectivity pre-THC treat-
ment and the pain improvement reports post THC treatment. r = Pearson r correlation coefficient.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
e1291
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

the network modulation as expressed by the reduction in local
connectivity measures of this network observed after THC in
this cohort of patients may represent a trend towards nor-
malization of the network connectivity.
The DLPFC has been shown to be involved in the
cognitive–aﬀective aspects of processing painful stimuli, and
was proposed to exert active control on pain perception by
top-down modulation.29 Accumulating evidence suggests that
DLPFC may also have a role in recovery from chronic pain. It
has been shown to have thinner gray matter in chronic back
pain patients, which reverses following successful surgical
treatment.30 Similarly, the DLPFC presented altered func-
tional connectivity with various brain areas, including senso-
rimotor regions,31 which normalized following alleviation of
pain. In addition, patients who transition from acute back pain
to chronic back pain show less negative functional connec-
tivity between the insula and DLPFC.32 Moreover, DLPFC
stimulation has an analgesic eﬀect on chronic pain, and it has
been shown that this stimulation induces functional connec-
tivity changes between the medial thalamus and sensory-
aﬀective cortices.33 Our results further corroborate the
involvement of this region in pain modulation and speciﬁcally
suggest its involvement in THC-mediated analgesia in
chronic clinical pain.
Importantly, the aMCC and the DLPFC, the 2 main areas that
we found changed their connectivity indices after THC admin-
istration, have substantial anatomical reciprocal connections,
strong positive resting-state functional connectivness,34 and both
have been suggested as major components of supraspinal pain
modulation in a top-down manner.26,29,35
Limitations
Women were excluded from this study due to concern re-
garding menstruation-induced ﬂuctuations in pain sensitivity.
In addition, larger scale studies should examine whether these
results are reproduced. Moreover, future investigations
should include other chronic conditions to better understand
whether our results represent a pervasive neuronal mecha-
nism of cannabis eﬀects on chronic pain or are unique to
neuropathic pain states. Finally, it should be emphasized that
the cannabis plant contains a multitude of cannabinoids be-
yond THC, of which special attention has been directed to
cannabidiol. Such compounds may play important roles in
observed variability of the clinical properties of the plant; for
example, the observation that in cancer pain, the combination
of THC:cannabidiol may be superior to THC alone.36 Future
studies studying the diﬀerential brain-based eﬀects of diﬀerent
cannabinoids or cannabinoid compositions may thus prove of
major importance.
Figure 5 Global efficiency change in middle cingulate cortex (MCC) after δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)/placebo
administration
MCC global efficiency changed significantly after THC administration (interaction effect F1,14 = 3.05; p-FDR = 0.0477). Each red circle represents a cluster within
the network and its size represents the effect change. The bar graph demonstrates the interaction effect of THC and placebo. Error bars represent SEM.
e1292
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

In this study, cannabis analgesia was associated with reduced
ACC–sensorimotor cortex functional connectivity and reduced
connectivity between the DLPFC and chronic pain network. In
addition, pretreatment functional connectivity predicted the
extent of pain relief. These results suggest that THC analgesia
in chronic pain is mediated through brain areas underlying
aﬀective processing of pain, as well as supraspinal pain modu-
lation, potentially addressing an imbalance in pain processing
dynamics that occurs in chronic pain states.
Author contributions
Libat Weizman: study concept and design, acquisition of data,
analysis and interpretation. Lior Dayan: study concept and
design, clinical screening and evaluation. Silviu Brill: clinical
evaluation. Hadas Nahman-Averbuch: study concept and
design. Talma Hendler: study concept and design, revision of
the manuscript. Giris Jacob: clinical evaluation, study super-
vision. Haggai Sharon: study concept and design, clinical
evaluation, revision of the manuscript.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Avi Lougassi for his support, Dr. Joumana
Espanioly for assistance with clinical evaluation of patients,
and PhD candidate Itamar Jalon for assistance with data
analysis.
Study funding
This project was supported by Yahel Foundation, Recanati,
New York, and by the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Space (Grant no. 3-11170).
Disclosure
The authors report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript.
Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.
Publication history
Received by Neurology April 3, 2018. Accepted in ﬁnal form June
29, 2018.
References
1.
Bonn-Miller MO, Boden MT, Bucossi MM, Babson KA. Self-reported cannabis use
characteristics, patterns and helpfulness among medical cannabis users. Am J Drug
Alcohol Abuse 2014;40:23–30.
2.
Hill KP. Medical marijuana for treatment of chronic pain and other medical
and psychiatric problems: a clinical review. J Am Med Assoc 2015;313:
2474–2483.
3.
Ashton JC, Milligan ED. Cannabinoids for the treatment of neuropathic pain: clinical
evidence. Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2008;9:65–75.
4.
Lee MC, Ploner M, Wiech K, et al. Amygdala activity contributes to the dissociative
eﬀect of cannabis on pain perception. Pain 2013;154:124–134.
5.
Eggan SM, Lewis DA. Immunocytochemical distribution of the cannabinoid CB1
receptor in the primate neocortex: a regional and laminar analysis. Cereb Cortex
2006;17:175–191.
6.
Hoot MR, Sim-Selley LJ, Poklis JL, et al. Chronic constriction injury reduces
cannabinoid receptor 1 activity in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex of mice.
Brain Res 2010;1339:18–25.
Figure 6 Reduction of local efficiency in structures of the chronic pain network and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) covariates with visual analog scale (VAS) score reduction after δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
administration
Reduction of local efficiency covariates with reduction in VAS score after THC administration (network p-FDR = 0.018; DLPFC p-FDR = 0.0435). Each red circle
represents a cluster within the network and its size represents the regression effect. The graphs (right side) depict the regression in the THC condition as
compared to placebo.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
e1293
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

7.
Vincent K, Tracey I. Sex hormones and pain: the evidence from functional imaging.
Curr Pain Headache Rep 2010;14:396–403.
8.
Guy GW, Robson PJ. A phase I, double blind, three-way crossover study to assess the
pharmacokinetic proﬁle of cannabis based medicine extract (CBME) administered
sublingually in variant cannabinoid ratios in normal healthy male volunteers
(GWPK0215). J Cannabis Ther 2004;3:121–152.
9.
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli S, Nieto-Castanon A. Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for
correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain Connect 2012;2:125–141.
10.
Friebel U, EickhoﬀSB, Lotze M. Coordinate-based meta-analysis of experimen-
tally induced and chronic persistent neuropathic pain. Neuroimage 2011;58:
1070–1080.
11.
EickhoﬀSB, Stephan KE, Mohlberg H, et al. A new SPM toolbox for combining
probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data. Neuroimage 2005;
25:1325–1335.
12.
Neugebauer V, Li W, Bird GC, Han JS. The amygdala and persistent pain. Neurosci
2004;10:221–234.
13.
Watts DJ, Strogatz SH. Collective dynamics of “small-world” networks. Nature 1998;
393:440–442.
14.
Achard S, Bullmore E, Papathanassiou B, Crivello D, Etard F. Eﬃciency and cost of
economical brain functional networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2007;3:e17.
15.
Beaulieu P, Ware M. Reassessment of the role of cannabinoids in the management of
pain. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007;20:473–477.
16.
Rainville P, Duncan GH, Price DD, Carrier B, Bushnell MC. Pain aﬀect encoded in
human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex. Science 1997;277:968–971.
17.
Price DD. Psychological and neural mechanisms of the aﬀective dimension of pain.
Science 2000;288:1769–1772.
18.
Dum RP, Levinthal DJ, Strick PL. The spinothalamic system targets motor and
sensory areas in the cerebral cortex of monkeys. J Neurosci 2009;29:14223–14235.
19.
Morecraft RJ, Stilwell-Morecraft KS, Cipolloni PB, Ge J, McNeal DW, Pandya DN.
Cytoarchitecture and cortical connections of the anterior cingulate and adjacent
somatomotor ﬁelds in the rhesus monkey. Brain Res Bull 2012;87:457–497.
20.
Yen CP, Kung SS, Su YF, Lin WC, Howng SL, Kwan AL. Stereotactic bilateral anterior
cingulotomy for intractable pain. J Clin Neurosci 2005;12:886–890.
21.
deCharms RC, Maeda F, Glover GH, et al. Control over brain activation and pain
learned by using real-time functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:
18626–18631.
22.
Boccard SGJ, Fitzgerald JJ, Pereira EAC, et al. Targeting the aﬀective component of
chronic pain. Neurosurgery 2014;74:628–637.
23.
Lima MC, Fregni F. Motor cortex stimulation for chronic pain: systematic review and
meta-analysis of the literature. Neurology 2008;70:2329–2337.
24.
DosSantos MF, Ferreira N, Toback RL, Carvalho AC, DaSilva AF. Potential mech-
anisms supporting the value of motor cortex stimulation to Treat chronic pain Syn-
dromes. Front Neurosci 2016;10:18.
25.
Wang Y, Cao D, Remeniuk B, Krimmel S, Seminowicz DA, Zhang M. Altered brain
structure and function associated with sensory and aﬀective components of classic
trigeminal neuralgia. Pain 2017;158:1561–1570.
26.
Bushnell MC, Ceko M, Low LA. Cognitive and emotional control of pain and its
disruption in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2013;14:502–511.
27.
Vogt BA. Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2005;6:533–544.
28.
Cauda F, Sacco K, Duca S, et al. Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
PLoS One 2009;4:e4542.
29.
Lorenz J, Minoshima S, Casey KL. Keeping pain out of mind: the role of the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex in pain modulation. Brain 2003;126:1079–1091.
30.
Seminowicz DA, Wideman TH, Naso L, et al. Eﬀective treatment of chronic low back
pain in humans reverses abnormal brain anatomy and function. J Neurosci 2011;31:
7540–7550.
31.
ˇCeko M, Shir Y, Ouellet JA, Ware MA, Stone LS, Seminowicz DA. Partial recovery of
abnormal insula and dorsolateral prefrontalconnectivity to cognitive networks in chronic
low back pain after treatment. Hum Brain Mapp 2015;36:2075–2092.
32.
Baliki MN, Petre B, Torbey S, et al. Corticostriatal functional connectivity predicts
transition to chronic back pain. Nat Neurosci 2012;15:1117–1119.
33.
Sankarasubramanian V, Cunningham DA, Potter-Baker KA, et al. Transcranial direct
current stimulation targeting primary motor versus dorsolateral prefrontal cortices:
proof-of-concept study investigating functional connectivity of thalamocortical networks
speciﬁc to sensory-aﬀective information processing. Brain Connect 2017;7:182–196.
34.
Yu C, Zhou Y, Liu Y, et al. Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is
conﬁrmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation. Neuro-
image 2011;54:2571–2581.
35.
Wiech K, Ploner M, Tracey I. Neurocognitive aspects of pain perception. Trends
Cogn Sci 2008;12:306–313.
36.
Johnson JR, Burnell-Nugent M, Lossignol D, Ganae-Motan ED, Potts R, Fallon
MT. Multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group
study of the eﬃcacy, safety, and tolerability of THC: CBD extract and THC
extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain. J Pain Symptom Manage
2010;39:167–179.
e1294
Neurology | Volume 91, Number 14 | October 2, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

