HEALTH BEHAVIORS AMONG FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH

DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY

by

LAUREN ELIZABETH HALLADAY

A DISSERTATION

Presented to the Department of Special Education and Clinical Sciences and the Graduate
School of the University of Oregon
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

June 2021


-----

DISSERTATION APPROVAL PAGE

Student: Lauren Elizabeth Halladay

Title: Health Behaviors Among Families of Children with Developmental Delay

This dissertation has been accepted and approved in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the Doctor of Philosophy degree in the Department of Special Education
and Clinical Sciences by:

Laura Lee McIntyre, PhD Chairperson
Nicole Giuliani, PhD Core Member
John Seeley, PhD Core Member
Elizabeth Budd, PhD Institutional Representative

and

Kate Mondloch Interim Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School

Original approval signatures are on file with the University of Oregon Graduate School.

Degree awarded June 2021

ii


-----

© 2021 Lauren Elizabeth Halladay

iii


-----

DISSERTATION ABSTRACT

Lauren Elizabeth Halladay

Doctor of Philosophy

Department of Special Education and Clinical Sciences

June 2021

Title: Health Behaviors Among Families of Children with Developmental Delay

When compared to typically developing children, children with developmental

delays (DD) are at especially high risk for poor health outcomes. Several interpersonal

factors, including caregiver behaviors, have been examined in relation to typically

developing preschool children’s health. Limited research has examined these associations

in the DD population. The following preliminary study sought to provide a preliminary

evaluation of the associations between caregiver health behaviors and health behaviors of

preschool-aged children with DD in a sample of 77 families. Surveys and interviews were

completed with caregivers to assess sociodemographic variables, child adaptive behavior

and autism symptoms, and family lifestyle and health behaviors. This study included the

following research questions: (1) Are family sociodemographic variables (i.e., caregiver

education, household income, caregiver race/ethnicity) associated with caregiver health

behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical activity)? (2) Are caregiver health

behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical activity) associated with child heath

behaviors (i.e., child unhealthy eating, physical activity, and screen time)? (3) Does child

developmental functioning (i.e., adaptive behavior and autism symptoms) moderate the

association between caregiver health behaviors and child health behaviors?

iv


-----

Study results for the first research question indicated neither caregiver race,

caregiver education, nor household income, were meaningfully associated with caregiver

health behaviors. The second research question revealed that 1) caregiver health

behaviors were negatively associated with child unhealthy eating habits and positively

child physical activity, but not meaningfully associated with child screen time. Results

for research question three demonstrated that 1) the relation between caregiver health

behaviors and child unhealthy eating was moderated by child adaptive behavior and 2)

the relation between caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating was

moderated by child ASD symptomatology, 3) neither child adaptive behavior functioning

nor child ASD symptomatology moderated the association between caregiver health

behaviors and child physical activity or caregiver health behaviors and child screen time.

The results of this study have implications for the development of interventions for

families of children with developmental delays.

v


-----

CURRICULUM VITAE

NAME OF AUTHOR: Lauren Elizabeth Halladay

GRADUATE AND UNDERGRADUATE SCHOOLS ATTENDED:

**University of Oregon (APA- and NASP-accredited), Eugene, OR**
September 2016- June 2021 (Expected)
Ph.D., School Psychology

**University of Oregon (TSPC-accredited), Eugene, OR**
September 2016-June 2019
M.S., Special Education

**Arizona State University, Online**
August 2018-Decemeber 2019
Certificate, Applied Behavior Analysis

**Hamilton College, Clinton, NY**
August 2012-May 2016
B.A., Psychology

DEGREES AWARDED:

Doctor of Philosophy in School Psychology, 2021, University of Oregon
Certificate in Applied Behavior Analysis, 2019, Arizona State University
Master of Science in Special Education, 2019, University of Oregon
Bachelor of Arts in Psychology, 2016, Hamilton College

AREAS OF SPECIAL INTEREST:

My professional interests center on assessment and intervention of developmental and
behavioral health problems in children at risk for poor outcomes.
Within this broad interest, two specific lines of research emerge: 1) the impact of family
health behaviors on child wellbeing, and 2) the development of assessment tools
and resources to improve outcomes.
My clinical interests center on optimizing outcomes for children with
neurodevelopmental delays through evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of
learning challenges, and behavioral difficulties in the context of complex medical
conditions.

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE:

Pre-doctoral Psychology Intern, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Summer 2020present

vi


-----

Practicum Therapist, Child and Family Center, University of Oregon, Fall 2019–
Spring 2020
Advanced Practicum Student, Child Development and Rehabilitation Center,
Neuropsychology Clinic, Summer 2019 – Summer 2020
Advanced Practicum Student, Child Development and Rehabilitation Center,
Pediatric Psychology Assessment Clinic, Fall 2018 – Fall 2019

GRANTS, AWARDS, AND HONORS:

Graduate Teaching Fellowship, John E. Jaqua Center, University of Oregon, Fall
2018-Spring 2020
Graduate Teaching Fellowship, Center on Teaching & Learning, University of
Oregon, Summer 2017– Spring 2018
College of Education Doctoral Travel Award, Spring 2019

vii


-----

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to express sincere gratitude to my entire dissertation committee for their

guidance, wisdom, and flexibility during these unprecedented times. Thank you to John

Seeley, who took the time to meet with me on multiple occasions to discuss and interpret

my statistical analyses. Thank you to Charlotte Winters, who put so much time and effort

into coordinating with our California research site and quickly processed my data despite

state restrictions related to the ongoing pandemic. I want to express special thanks to

Laura Lee—I cannot imagine a better advisor and mentor throughout this entire

dissertation process and my graduate school career. Thank you for your time, dedication,

and unwavering support over the last four and a half years.

viii


-----

To my mother, Robin, father, David, and sister, Jessica—I would not have completed this
process without you. Momma, thank you for your unconditional love and support; and
inspiration to tirelessly help others. Dad, thank you for instilling in me an unrelenting
desire to pursue higher education and pay my privilege forward. Jess, thank you for
serving as an incredibly persistent, resilient, and strong-willed role model, and always
being a source of humor and encouragement.

To Tripp — I could never put into words how grateful I am for your selflessness over the
last 3 years. Thank you for constantly building me up, always being my captivated
audience, and sharing in my struggles and joy.

To AnnaCecilia McWhirter—graduate school would not have been the same without you.
Thank you for bringing me into your family, sharing in the highs and lows of graduate
school, and always being my confidant.

ix


-----

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter Page

I. INTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................................1

II. METHOD ....................................................................................................................18

III. RESULTS ..................................................................................................................33

IV. DISCUSSION ............................................................................................................43

APPENDIX: TABLES AND FIGURES .........................................................................59

REFERENCES CITED ....................................................................................................74

x


-----

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure Page

1. Conceptual Model ......................................................................................................59

2. Family Lifestyle Survey. ........................................................................................... 60

3. Moderation Effects of Dichotomized Vineland ABC Scores on the Association
Between Caregiver Health Behaviors on Child Unhealthy Eating Habits ................. 62

4. Moderation Effects of Dichotomized SCQ Scores on the Association Between
Caregiver Health Behaviors on Child Unhealthy Eating Habits ................................ 63

xi


-----

LIST OF TABLES

Table Page

1.  Demographic Information for Caregivers and Children (N = 77) .............................64

5. Descriptive Statistics for Caregiver and Child Composite Scores .............................65

6. Descriptive Statistics for the Adaptive Behavior Standard Scores (Vineland-3)

and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) .....................................................66

4. Correlations Between Study Variables and Demographics .......................................67

5. Regression Results for Child Unhealthy Eating: Vineland Scores and Caregiver
Health Behaviors ........................................................................................................68

6. Regression Results for Child Physical Activity: Vineland Scores and Caregiver
Health Behaviors ........................................................................................................69

7. Regression Results for Child Screen Time: Vineland Scores and

Caregiver Health Behaviors .......................................................................................70

8. Regression Results for Child Unhealthy Eating: SCQ Scores and

Caregiver Health Behaviors .......................................................................................71

9. Regression Results for Child Physical Activity: SCQ Scores and

Caregiver Health Behaviors .......................................................................................72

10. Regression Results for Child Screen Time: SCQ Scores and

Caregiver Health Behaviors .......................................................................................73

xii


-----

I: INTRODUCTION

**Children with Developmental Delay and Disabilities**

Developmental Delay (DD), a substantial lag in cognitive and/or physical

development, greatly impacts functioning in young children. DD is a disability category

typically used to provide children ages 3 to 9 with supports and services prior to being

diagnosed with a specific disability (Boyle et al., 2011; Morin, 2014). Delays can occur

in one or more skill domains, including 1) cognitive abilities, 2) social and emotional

functioning, 3) speech and language abilities, 4) fine and gross motor skills, as well as 5)

daily living skills. It is well-documented in the literature that those diagnosed with

developmental delays often present with deficits in adaptive functioning, which are

defined as skills necessary for coping with the natural and social demands of the

environment (Liss et al., 2001; Volkmar et al., 1987). Adaptive behavior has been shown

to impact engagement in health-related activities. For example, Bremer and Cairney

(2020) suggest that level of adaptive behavior significantly moderates the relation

between motor competence and health-related fitness in a sample of school-age children.

Impairments in the skill domains mentioned above put these individuals at risk for

attention issues, learning difficulties, behavior problems, and poor health outcomes (Liss

et al., 2001). While not every child with DD will require services later in life, some are

diagnosed with a developmental disability in middle or late childhood. Such

developmental disabilities include, but are not limited to, Attention Deficit/ Hyperactivity

Disorder (ADHD), Cerebral Palsy, Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Intellectual

Disability (ID), and Down Syndrome (Morin, 2014).


-----

Although causes can be unclear, some delays begin prenatally. Other factors

associated with risk for delay include perinatal complications, infections during or after

pregnancy, injury, exposure to environmental toxins, trauma, as well as caregiver health

behaviors (Boyle et al., 2011; Center for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2018).

Caregiver health behaviors contribute to the overall nature of the household environment

and family context, which can have a tremendous impact on children’s development and

overall functioning. Although a wealth of literature has documented the relation between

parent well-being, parenting strategies, and meeting the unique needs of children within

this population, limited research has examined the associations between specific family

lifestyle factors and child health behaviors (Abbeduto et al., 2004; Paczkowski & Baker,

2010). More research is warranted on the association between caregiver health behaviors

and health behaviors among preschool children with DD.

Over the last few decades, the prevalence of DD and related disabilities has

increased and currently affects nearly 15% of children ages 3 to 17 years, with males

more likely to be impacted in comparison to females (Boyle et al., 2011; CDC, 2018;

Zablotsky et al., 2017). This suggests that nearly 1 in 6 families in the United States will

require additional health and education services to manage their child’s delays (Boyle et

al., 2011; CDC, 2018). It is essential to conduct rigorous research in this area to inform

early intervention services that promote health and well-being among families of and

children with DD. Such evidence-based services can be used to provide preventative and

effective health care to this population, which can allow them to lead full lives and stay

active within their communities. Providing access to information on healthy decision

-----

making may help improve this populations’ quality of life and give caregivers direction

on how to best support their child’s mental and physical health as they grow.

**Health Risk Factors**

Establishing a healthy lifestyle is essential for maintaining a good quality of life

and, ultimately, reducing early mortality. According to the CDC, the leading cause of

death in the United States is heart disease, which involves the narrowing or blockage of

blood vessels in the body (CDC, 2020; Mayo Clinic, 2018). These blockages often lead

to heart attacks, stroke, or angina, and can be caused by diabetes, obesity, unhealthy

eating, physical inactivity, and excessive alcohol use (CDC, 2020; Mayo Clinic, 2018).

Caregivers, particularly mothers, of children with intellectual and developmental

disabilities are at increased risk of poor health outcomes when compared to caregivers of

typically developing children (Fairthorne et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2017; Masefield et al.,

2020; Miodrag et al., 2015; Miodrag & Hodapp, 2010). Researching methods for

improving health among caregivers of this population is essential to promote well-being

and reduce the risk of significant health problems throughout life.

Children may be at risk for significant health problems as well. While it greatly

depends on the frequency and severity, poor nutrition, physical inactivity, as well as

alcohol and tobacco exposure are significant risk factors for chronic disease and

premature death (CDC, 2013). Additionally, regardless of body size, the food we eat

impacts out health. Despite encouragement from the national government to consume a

variety of fruits and vegetables to optimize health outcomes, top calorie sources include

sugar sweetened beverages and foods high in simple carbohydrates (U.S. Department of

Agriculture, 2010). Furthermore, the leading source of fruit consumption in children’s


-----

diets takes the form of 100% fruit juice, which lacks the nutrients necessary to promote

healthy development (Lorson et al., 2009; Ramsay et al., 2017; U.S. Department of

Agriculture, 2010).

Preschool children’s diets are dictated by caregivers’ food purchases, which are

largely influenced by income and education level. Research examining socioeconomic

(SES) inequalities in food selection, suggest that families of higher SES spend more

money on food when compared to their low socioeconomic counterparts (Pechey &

Monsivais, 2016). Considering that foods with little nutritional value are cheaper when

compared to fresh produce, children from low income households are more likely to

consume fewer fruits and vegetables, and therefore lower quality diets that lack

nutritional diversity (Darmon & Drewnowski, 2008; Drewnowski, 2010; Handbury et al.,

2015; Jones et al., 2014; Pechey & Monsivais, 2016). Caregiver education level is also

associated with overall healthier food purchasing, suggesting that families from lower

income and lower caregiver education backgrounds may be especially vulnerable to

unhealthy diets.

Furthermore, individuals of color are at a disproportionately higher risk for

experiencing poor health outcomes (Li et al., 2017; Mensah et al., 2005). Several social

determinants greatly contribute to these disparities in eating habits among racial/ethnic

minorities. For example, previous research has found that individuals residing in

impoverished and racially diverse neighborhoods are less likely to have access to

affordable of food, pharmacies, medications, and have more exposure to advertisements

for unhealthy behaviors, including tobacco and alcohol consumption (Cummins, &

Macintyre, 2002; Morello-Frosch et al., 2002; Morland et al., 2002; Morrison et al.,


-----

2000). It’s likely these social factors contribute to African American adults reportedly

consuming fewer micronutrients and having a lower daily caloric intake, when compared

to White adults (Li et al., 2017). Similar to discrepancies in caloric intake, it’s reasonable

to assume these social determinants impact the existing relation between identifying as

White and having an increased awareness of health risks associated with nutrient

consumption, when compared to identifying as an individual of color (Wang & Chen,

2011). Provided the intersectionality of SES, caregiver education, and race/ethnicity as

well as the disproportionate level of risk associated with identifying as a person of color

and/or a member of a low SES family, these factors should be explored when

investigating relations between the current study constructs of caregiver and child health

behaviors.

**Eating Habits and Dietary Concerns among Children with DD**

When compared to typically developing children, children with DD are at

especially high risk for poor health outcomes (Bandini et al., 2005; De et al., 2008;

Emerson, 2009). It is possible that this heightened vulnerability could be due to a

predisposition to nutritional deficits, as evidenced by feeding difficulties typically

displayed during infancy (Malone et al., 2016). For example, Sanders et al. (1993) found

that children with feeding challenges are more likely to engage in food refusal, as well as

noncompliant and oppositional behavior during mealtimes. These unique challenges can

impact both caregiver and child feeding habits as well as caregiver mental health

(Abbeduto et al., 2004; Must et al., 2014).

In addition to this possible predisposition, decades of research have documented

eating habits within one development disability, ASD, which is frequently associated


-----

with unusual and restrictive eating patterns (Coffey & Crawford, 1971; Jones, 1982;

Palmer & Horn, 1987; Perske et al., 1977; Schreck et al., 2004). In particular, children

with ASD have significantly more feeding problems and consume a narrower range of

food when compared to typically developing children (Schreck et al., 2004). Maintaining

overly selective eating habits due to sensory stimuli aversion is common and can lead to

malnutrition, high blood pressure, and diabetes among other illnesses (Ahearn et al.,

2001; Curtin et al., 2010; Raiten & Massaro, 1986; Schreck et al., 2004; Williams et al.,

2000). While these associations have been found within the ASD population, it is

plausible that young children with DD display similar restricted eating habits or feeding

difficulties, which impacts their overall health.

Despite the nutritional risk and symptoms associated with children with DD and

specific diagnoses (e.g., ASD), it is likely that several family factors influence children’s

health behaviors. Considering that caregivers play a vital role in their child’s eating habits

and mealtime routines, the family context significantly influences eating patterns,

especially in preschool aged children (Birch & Davison, 2001; Must et al., 2014; Ventura

& Birch, 2008). For example, results of a 2013 systematic review of this limited literature

concluded that higher BMIs in children with developmental disabilities is associated with

caregiver body mass index (BMIs), household SES, caregiver perceptions and attitudes

toward weight status, as well as caregiver and child activity levels (McGillivray et al.,

2013; Must et al., 2014). The present study seeks to extend this research by investigating

specific caregiver eating practices as well as physical activity patterns that are associated

with children’s health behaviors. Considering their nutritional risk and likelihood of

displaying problem behaviors during mealtimes, research on factors associated with


-----

health behaviors in children within this population is essential for preventing the

development of significant health issues later in life.

**Physical Activity in Typically Developing Preschool Aged Children**

Physical activity refers to any bodily movement produced from muscle

contractions resulting in the expenditure of energy (Caspersen et al., 1985). National

health organizations posit that higher levels of physical activity can lead to both short
and long-term health benefits across the lifespan (National Institute of Health, 2016; U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services, 2008). For preschool-aged children, the most

frequently observed active behaviors include crawling, walking, running, jumping,

skipping, and climbing (Brown et al., 2009). However, direct observational data across

studies suggest that preschool aged children spend 80– 94% of their time engaged in

activities such as sitting, squatting, standing, and lying down (Brown et al., 2009; Pate et

al., 2008).

According to the CDC’s 2018 “Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans”,

caregivers should encourage preschool aged children to move and play in a variety of

physical activities for at least 3 hours per day. However, previous research indicates that

the average amount of time typically developing children in this age group spend

engaged in physical activity is significantly below this standard (Brown et al., 2009; Pate

et al., 2008). Current evidence suggests that the lack of opportunity to engage in activity,

lack of variation in the type of play equipment available (i.e., portable versus structure),

as well as the education, training and preferences the supervising adult has for physical

activity, significantly contributes to this discrepancy (Bower et al., 2008; Brown et al.,

2009; Pate et al., 2008).


-----

Several other contextual factors have been examined in relation to preschool

children’s physical activity (Hinkely et al., 2008). Although findings across studies are

mixed when examining demographics variables, there has been a consistent pattern

documenting the lack of association between SES and physical activity within the

preschool age group (Jackson et al., 2003; Kelly et al., 2006; O’Donoghue et al., 2018;

Sallis et al., 1993). However, studies examining the individual components of SES rather

than grouping them as one variable have demonstrated significant associations, with

income and education positively associated with child physical activity (Ferreria et al.,

2006). This not only suggests current practices lack a standard measurement of SES, but

also implies that behavioral and cultural variables as well as aspects of the physical

environment may influence preschool aged children’s physical activity to a larger degree.

Contrary to the lack of association between SES and physical activity, race and

ethnicity have consistently been associated with lower levels of activity and higher levels

of screen time (Saffer et al., 2015; Sallis et al. 1993). For example, findings from Sallis et

al. (1993) suggest that Mexican Americans are less likely to be active and more likely to

engage in sedentary activities (i.e., TV watching) when compared to Anglo-Americans.

Similarly, Saffer et al. (2015) found that engaging in physical activity for leisure is

significantly lower among adults of color. Socioeconomic status and education could

account for these differences; however, it is still important to account for race and

ethnicity when examining the relations between caregiver and child health given cultural

or family practices that may not be accounted for when looking at SES alone.

Research targeting these contextual factors have most commonly occurred in

preschool settings or center-based programs (e.g., Head Start, church-affiliated


-----

programs), suggesting that childcare centers fostering supportive environments for

activity participation leads to increased time spent being active (Bower et al., 2008). Not

only has this effect been documented in school and childcare environments, but it is also

prevalent in the home. For example, research exploring caregiver influences on preschool

children’s physical activity, suggest that increased caregiver support for activity leads to

children spending more time engaged in physical activity (Zecevic et al., 2010).

Similarly, positive associations exist between caregiver enjoyment, encouragement, and

involvement in physical activity on their children’s active behaviors, which contributes to

maintenance of those health habits later in adolescence (Gustafson & Rhodes, 2006;

Hinkley et al., 2008; Moore et al., 1991; Trost et al., 2003).

According to Social Learning Theory, new patterns of health behavior can be

acquired through observing and imitating the behavior of others (Bandura, 1971).

Therefore, caregivers who are active and interested in engaging in physical activity,

provide a model and basis for their children to develop thoughts, attitudes, and

expectations for appropriate levels of physical activity (Welk et al., 2003). Specifically,

Moore et al. (1991) found that children of active mothers were twice as likely to be active

when compared to children of inactive mothers. For children with two active caregivers,

this number tripled, to six times as likely, when compared to children of two inactive

caregivers (Moore et al., 1991). However, even if caregivers are not personally active,

being involved (i.e., participating in activities with their child) and acting as facilitators

(e.g., providing transportation to parks and stadiums) has been shown to promote

physical activity participation in young children as well (Welk et al., 2003).


-----

Due to the adult initiated nature of preschool children’s activity engagement, it is

important for caregivers to both encourage and organize physical activities for their

children. Participating in these activities promotes bone growth, as well as gross and fine

motor development, which are necessary for the writing skills required to complete

academic work in school, for example (Zecevic et al., 2010; Zeng et al., 2017).

Additionally, physical activity supports language learning, academic achievement,

working memory, attention, executive functioning, and overall cognitive development

(Zeng et al., 2017). Children with DD are at greater risk for experiencing challenges in

these areas, which is why conducting research on familial factors that impact physical

activity is necessary.

**Physical Activity in Preschool Aged Children with DD**

Most of the research on physical activity within the preschool population has been

conducted with typically developing children. Limited literature has examined

determinants and correlates of physical activity within the DD population. The DD

literature has primarily focused on the implementation and development of physical

education curriculum in schools as it relates to motor skill development, rather than on

familial factors related to physical activity patterns (Provost et al., 2007; Valentini &

Rudisill, 2004). The dearth of research in this area and limitations of previous studies

makes it challenging to draw conclusions about health outcomes within this population.

However, within this small sample of literature, several benefits of physical activity have

emerged. For example, individuals with DD have displayed decreases in aggressive,

stereotypic, off-task, and eloping behaviors, and increases in motor behavior and

academic responding following physical activity (Lang et al., 2010; Levinson et al., 1993;


-----

MacDonald et al., 2011). Although these results have been found in school-aged children

with developmental disabilities, it is plausible that preschool-aged children would reap

similar benefits from engaging in physical activity and being surrounded by

environmental factors that promote active lifestyles.

Despite the scarcity of research in this area, it is well documented that individuals

with DD are more likely to have deficits in physical and motor functioning, and therefore

spend more time engaged in sedentary activities (Memari et al., 2012). This is

problematic due to the significant association between lack of activity and weight gain

(CDC, 2015). For example, Whitt-Glover et al. (2006) found that individuals with DD are

more likely to have higher BMIs and engage in lower levels of physical activity when

compared to their typically developing siblings. Previous research attributes this

discrepancy to motor impairments and deficits in social communication, which are

common symptoms of DD (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Curtin et al., 2010;

Healy et al., 2017; Srinivasan et al., 2014). Despite differences in study designs and

procedures, this effect has been replicated across studies and seems to worsen as children

age if early interventions are not utilized (Hinckson & Curtis, 2013; MacDonald et al.,

2011). Therefore, it is imperative to study factors associated with physical activity in

young children with DD prior to the establishment of unhealthy habits and worsening of

symptoms.

**Prevalence and Impact of Screen Time Behavior**

Screen-time has become one of the most ubiquitous sedentary activities for

children across settings (Pearson et al., 2018). Sedentary screen-time activities can range

from watching TV, playing video games, to using a mobile device, such as a web

-----

accessible tablet or phone. According to a 2017 study, 98% of children ages 0 to 8 years

of age live in a home with such devices (Common Sense Media, 2018: Madigan et al.,

2019). Contrary to pediatrician’s recommendations, most American children spend about

5 to 7 hours per day engaging in these types of activities; compared to the recommended

amount of 1 hour per day spent watching high-quality programs (U.S. National Library of

Medicine, 2018). In the last four years, the number of homes with tablets nearly doubled,

with mobile device use being the second most common screen-time activity to television

viewing (Common Sense Media, 2018). Even larger increases have been seen with the

amount of time children spend on mobile devices, which has increased ten-fold over the

past 8 years (Common Sense Media, 2018).

While evidence exists to support improved learning, cognitive, and social

outcomes for preschool children who watch well-designed television programs, a wealth

of literature demonstrates the negative health and developmental impacts of heavy media

used during the preschool years as well as in adolescence (American Psychiatric

Association, 2016). Among adolescents, more screen-time has been associated with

consumption of fewer fruits and vegetables, and a higher intake of energy-dense snack

foods (Leech et al., 2014; Pearson et al., 2017; Pearson et al., 2018). In preschool,

excessive media use has been associated with significant increases in BMI, fewer minutes

of sleep, and poorer executive functioning in preschoolers (American Psychiatric

Association, 2016; Aishworiya et al., 2018; Cespedes et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2012;

Nathansan et al., 2014; Wen et al., 2014). For example, Madigan et al. (2019) found that

excessive exposure to screen time at 2 and 3 years of age was significantly associated

with poorer performance on developmental screening assessments, when compared to


-----

children who spent less time per week on screens. The presence of this effect could be

attributed to the limited number of opportunities children have to practice their motor and

communication skills while using screen media (Madigan et al., 2019). For instance, it is

possible that, if done in excess, the lack of interactivity within screen media could lead to

delays in achieving developmental milestones due to the limited number of opportunities

to hone adaptive skills. Considering their symptomatology, children with DD are even

more susceptible to experience these challenges when compared to children with typical

development.

**_Sociodemographic Variables and Screen Time_**

When comparing caregiver education level and household income, substantial

differences in screen-time use are present. Children from low income families spend

nearly an hour and a half more on screen media per day when compared to children from

high income families (Common Sense Media, 2018). Similarly, children of lower

educated caregivers consume over an hour more of screen time per day when compared

to children of higher educated caregivers (Common Sense Media, 2018). Despite this

discrepancy, the gap in phone ownership by socioeconomic status is virtually nonexistent

because smartphone ownership is so common (Common Sense Media, 2018). Contrary to

the significant differences in screen time seen among household income and caregiver

education status, research regarding race and ethnicity differences in screen time are

mixed. Although some research suggests screen time does not significantly differ among

racial groups, others have found greater levels of screen time among Black children ages

4 to 12 years when compared to other racial groups, which could be due in part to cultural

differences related to implementing different household rules around the amount of


-----

screen-based content children are allowed to consume (Anderson et al., 2008; Common

Sense Media, 2018). Findings are far from conclusive and warrant additional

investigation, particularly among families with children with delays or disabilities.

**Screen Time and Children with DD**

Previous research suggests that children with DD spend more time watching

television and playing video games when compared to typically developing children

(Mazurek & Wenstrup, 2013; Memari et al., 2013; Must et al., 2014; Sandt & Frey,

2005). Of the limited research in this area, studies have most commonly examined

children with ASD. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental

_Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5), one of the core features of ASD is engagement in_

restrictive and repetitive behaviors (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Some

suggest that specific interests in television and video games represent one type of

restrictive behavior for this population (Mazurek et al., 2012). Anecdotally, it is noted

that children with ASD have circumscribed interests in screen-based media; however,

limited research has targeted this topic directly (Mazurek et al., 2012). Of the few

published studies, two studies have examined children’s screen media habits in relation to

caregiver management and perceptions of technology use (Nally et al., 2000; Shane &

Albert, 2008). These studies provide preliminary evidence that support anecdotal claims,

suggesting that children with ASD are interested in and engage in screen-time activities

more often than other sedentary activities (Shane & Albert, 2008).

Although unique manifestations of screen-based media behavior can differ across

individuals, they similarly contribute to issues related to social and family functioning

(Mazurek et al., 2012; South et al., 2005). For example, caregivers most frequently report


-----

using screen-based media (i.e., watching TV and videos) as a distraction and preventive

method for maladaptive behavior. Therefore, it’s possible that differences in the

topography and severity of ASD symptomatology may contribute to differences in

children’s time spent on screens. For example, if children display higher levels of

challenging behavior or more severe symptoms, it is possible caregivers would more

frequently use screen-time as an intervention to reduce behavioral outbursts.

Furthermore, caregivers of children with ASD report a tremendous amount of stress

associated with managing their children’s technology use and are concerned about the

impact screen-time has on family functioning and relationships (Nally et al., 2000).

Therefore, issues surrounding children’s screen-time media use are socially valid within

the home context, and especially among families of children with developmental

disabilities.

**Purpose of the Current Study**

The aim of the current study is to provide a preliminary evaluation of the

associations of caregiver health behaviors and health behaviors of preschool-aged

children with DD. Considering that children with DD are more susceptible to nutritional

deficits, motor impairments, and delays in adaptive functioning, it is probable that

parenting behaviors strongly and positively associated with these children’s physical

activity patterns and eating habits. This study offers a unique opportunity to examine

these factors across a historically underrepresented sample, and will provide information

that can be used to inform interventions aimed at promoting overall health and well-being

in families of and children with DD.

**Research Questions**


-----

The present study examined the associations between caregiver health behaviors

and children’s health behaviors in a diverse sample of preschool-aged children with

developmental delay. Given the preliminary nature of the study, no hypotheses are

proposed. The specific research questions are:

**1.** **Are family sociodemographic variables (i.e., caregiver education,**

**household income, caregiver race/ethnicity) associated with caregiver**

**health behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical activity)?**

**2.** **Are caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical**

**activity) associated with child heath behaviors?**

2a. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with child eating habits?

2b. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with child physical activity?

2c. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with child screen time?

**3.** **Does child developmental functioning (i.e., adaptive behavior and autism**

**symptoms) moderate the association between caregiver health behaviors**

**and child health behaviors?**

3a. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child eating habits?

3b. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity?

3c. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child screen time?

3d. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

between caregiver health behaviors and child eating habits?


-----

3e. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

between caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity?

3f. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

between caregiver health behaviors and child screen time?

As previously stated, we know children with DD are at especially high risk for

poor health outcomes (Bandini et al., 2005; De et al., 2008; Emerson, 2009). However,

little is known about the extent factors specific to the family context impact health

behaviors among preschool- aged children with DD. The present study seeks to address

this gap. See Figure 1 for a complete conceptual model with study aims.


-----

II: METHOD

**Participants and Setting**

A sample of 77 preschool-aged children with DD and their caregivers were

recruited from agencies in Southern California and the Pacific Northwest that provide

early intervention and childhood special education services to children preschool-aged

and younger as part of a larger, randomized controlled trial study (R01HD093661; PIs

McIntyre and Neece). Provided the geographical differences in recruitment areas, the

sample is culturally, linguistically, and socioeconomically diverse. For the purposes of

this study, the term caregiver is used to describe anyone who indicated they were a

primary caregiver for the target child including, but not limited to, biological, adoptive,

and foster parents, as well as extended family members. Caregivers spoke and read in

Spanish and/or English and completed questionnaires.

**_Caregivers_**

Table 1 displays caregiver demographic information. Participating caregivers

were primarily female (98.7%), on average 38.7 years old (SD = 8.76), and living with a

partner (89.6%). The sample was predominantly Hispanic/Latinx (70.1%), followed by

White/Caucasian (23.4%), Black/African American (6.5%), Asian (2.6%), and multi
ethnic (3.9%). Latinx is used throughout the document as a gender neutral term used to

describe people who are of or relate to Latin American origin or descent (Noe
Bustamante et al., 2020). The majority of the sample reported Spanish as the language

primarily spoken in the home (53.2%), followed by English (42.9%). Regarding

education, 35.1% of caregivers completed less than a high school education, 18.2%

graduated from high school or earned a GED, 22.1% attended a few years of college,


-----

received specialized training, or earned an Associate’s degree, 18.2% graduated from a 4
year college or university, and 6.5% had graduate professional training or earned a

graduate degree. The majority of caregivers described themselves as full-time

homemakers (55.8%), with fewer reporting full time employment (28.6%), part-time

employment (5.2%), self- employment (3.9%), unemployment (2.6%), disabled (2.6%),

or retired (1.3%). Household income varied widely, with 6.5% of the sample reporting

$10,000 – $14,999, 9.1% reporting $15,000 – $19,999, 10.4% reporting $20,000 –

$24,999, 9.1% reporting $25,000 – $29,999, 11.7% reporting $30,000 – $39,999, 5.2%

reporting $40,000 – $49,000, 13.0% reporting $50,000 – $59,000, 2.6% reporting

$60,000 – $69,999, 7.8% reporting $70,000 – $79,999, 3.9% reporting $80,000 –

$89,999, and 20.8% reporting $90,000 or more. The average reported family income in

this study was $81,783.33 (SD = 124,999.29); however, there was quite a bit of

variability.

**_Children_**

Table 1 provides demographic characteristics for participating children. Child

participants were predominantly male (63.6%) and an average of 3.88 years old (SD =

0.81). Most of the children were Latinx (68.8%), followed by White/Caucasian (24.7%),

Black/African American (7.8%), Asian (3.9%), multi-ethnic (2.6%), Native American

(1.3%), and Pacific Islander (1.3%). Nearly three-quarters of children (72.2%) were

reported to receive special education services in school, and 31.2% had existing

medical/health problems. Most of the children were bilingual (61%), with more than half

indicating English as their primary language (51.9%). Related to primary diagnosis,

44.2% of children were diagnosed with ASD, 23.4% with a speech/language delay,


-----

10.4% with a developmental delay, 1.3% with cerebral palsy, and 19.5% with “other”

(e.g., genetic disorder/syndrome, sensory disorder, learning disability, social-emotional

delay).

**Protocol**

The present study analyzed a subset of data collected from the Partnerships in

Research for Optimizing Parenting (PRO-Parenting) Project (R01HD093667, PIs

McIntyre & Neece). The PRO-Parenting Project is an ongoing, federally funded, multi
site study examining parenting and stress reduction among families with preschool-aged

children with DD in Southern California and the Pacific Northwest. Eligible families

provided consent for screening and randomization. Prior to the global COVID-19

pandemic, the design involved an initial phone screening for eligibility, home and

laboratory baseline assessments, random assignment to one of two treatment groups, in
home posttreatment assessments, in-home 6-month assessments, and in-home 12-month

follow-up assessments of child and family functioning. See the “Missing Data” section

for pandemic related adjustments to the larger study protocol.

Caregivers were asked to complete several self-report measures (i.e., demographic

information, service utilization, caregiver behaviors, and child behavior

problems/symptomatology) within a mail-home questionnaire packet. Within this packet,

caregivers were asked to complete an additional survey assessing family lifestyle factors,

including caregiver health behaviors (i.e., physical activity, eating habits), as well as

child screen-time, physical activity, eating habits, and sleep behaviors. As part of the

laboratory assessments, caregivers participated in an interview with a research staff

member to characterize the child’s adaptive behavior.


-----

The Family Lifestyle Survey (see below for a description) was added to the study

battery after the larger study was initiated. Thus, data for the present study were collected

at the posttreatment assessment phase for cohort 1 (summer 2019), and the baseline

assessment phases for cohorts 2 (fall 2019) and 3 (spring 2020). The intervention

condition was not controlled for in the present study given that the lion share of the data

were collected at baseline (with the exception of cohort 1) and study variables were not

targeted in the intervention conditions.

**Measures**

**_Demographic Survey_**

The primary caregiver completed a demographics form, which included caregiver

and child characteristics. Caregiver variables included in this study were age, gender,

race/ethnicity, education level, employment status, and household income. Child

variables included in this study were age, gender, race/ethnicity, bilingualism, primary

language, DD status, primary diagnosis, health concerns, and special educational

eligibility category for early childhood special education services.

**_Caregiver and Child Health Behaviors_**

**Family Lifestyle Survey (FLSS). Primary caregivers completed the Family**

Lifestyle Survey (FLSS) to evaluate the extent to which caregivers of and children with

DD engage in health behaviors within their family context (See Figure 2). This 11-item

survey includes items related to caregiver and child eating practices (i.e., 6 items

measuring child eating; 8 items measure caregiver eating), physical activity (i.e., 7 items

measuring child physical activity; 2 items measuring caregiver physical activity), screen

time (i.e., 4 items measuring child screen time), sedentary activity (i.e., 1 item measuring


-----

sedentary behavior in children) and sleeping habits (i.e., 6 items measuring child sleep

habits). Items for this survey were modified from a health questionnaire used in previous

prevention trials conducted by Stormshak and McIntyre (U.S. Department of Education

grant R324A130002) examining the Family Check-Up (FCU; Dishion & Kavanaugh,

2003) in an early elementary-aged sample. Please see Figure 2 for specific items and

response options.

**_Child Adaptive Behavior_**

**The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Third Edition (VABS-III; Sparrow et**

al., 2016). The VABS-III was used to characterize children’s level of independence in the

everyday environment. This is a norm-referenced assessment that has been established as

a reliable and valid measure of adaptive behavioral functioning for the target population

(Sparrow et al., 2016). The domain level parent/caregiver form of the VABS-III is a 502
item measure that captures information on five domains: 1) communication, 2) daily

living skills, 3) socialization, 4) motor skills, and 5) maladaptive behavior. Each item is

scored on a 3-point Likert scale: (2) Usually, (1) Sometimes, (0) Never. Scores are

aggregated to form subdomain and domain standard scores, as well as an overall

Adaptive Behavior Composite (ABC) standard score. The present study utilized the ABC

score as a measure of overall adaptive functioning when conducting statistical analyses.

The ABC standard score has a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.

**_Child Autism Symptomatology_**

**The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ; Rutter et al., 2003). The SCQ**

was used to measure ASD symptomatology, including reciprocal social interaction,

language and communication, and repetitive and stereotyped behaviors and interests. The


-----

SCQ is a 40-item questionnaire intended to be completed by the primary caregiver with a

child who has the cognitive abilities of, at least, a typically developing 2-year-old. Each

item requires a dichotomous response; with the presence of atypical behavior, relative to

the child’s age, receiving a score of 1, and the presence of typical behavior receiving a

score of 0. Scores range from 0 to 39 with higher scores indicating more social

communication deficits. The SCQ has been deemed a valid screening tool and reasonable

measure of ASD symptom severity (Rutter et al., 2003).

**_Study Variable Compositions_**

**Continuous. The following were continuous variables: caregiver health**

behaviors, child unhealthy eating, child physical activity, child screen time, child

adaptive behavior scores, and child ASD symptomatology.

**Categorical. The following were categorical variables: household income (1 =**

“$4,999 or less”, 2 = “$5,000 to $9,999”, 3 = “$10,000 to $14,999”, 4 = “$15,000 to

$19,999”, 5 = “$20,000 to $24,999”, 6 = “$25,000 to $29,999”, 7 = “$30,000 to

$39,999”, 8 = “$40,000 to $49,999”, 9 = “$50,000 to $59,999”, 10 = “$60,000 to

$69,999”, 11 = “$70,000 to $79,999”, 12 = “$80,000 to $89,999”, 13 = “$90,000 or

more”) and caregiver education status (1 = “No formal schooling”, 2 = “7[th] grade or less”,

3 = “Junior high completed”, 4 = “Partial high school (at least on year)”, 5 = “High

school graduate/ GED certificate”, 6 = “Partial college (at least 1 year)”, 7 = “Specialized

training”, 8 = “Junior college/ Associates degree (2 years)”, 9 = “Standard college or

university graduation (4 years)”, 10 = “Graduate professional training/Graduate

degree”).


-----

**Dichotomous. Identifying as Latinx was a dichotomous variable and dummy**

coded, such that 0 = “Non-Hispanic/Latinx” (n = 23) and 1 = “Hispanic/Latinx” (n = 54).

Vineland ABC composite scores (1 = “low group of scores < 70), 2 = “high group of

scores > 71”) and SCQ scores (1 = “low group of scores < 13” and 2 = “high group of

scores > 14”) were also dichotomized based on a median split to interpret moderation

analyses.

**Data Analysis**

Several analyses were used to address the present study research questions.

Descriptive statistics are displayed in Table 2. Study variables were analyzed using the

Statistical Package for the Social Sciences 25 (SPSS) software package (IBM Corp, 2016).

The following analyses were conducted to address each research question.

**_Preliminary Analyses on Distributions of Key Variables_**

The shape of the distributions for all continuous study variables, including

caregiver health behaviors (M = 25.82, SD = 7.04, range = 0 – 40), child unhealthy eating

(M = 4.20, SD = 2.87, range = 0 – 28), child physical activity (M = 6.51, SD = 3.80, range

= 0-20), child screen time (M = 5.74, SD = 3.13, range = 0 – 16), child adaptive behavior

scores (M = 70.58, SD = 10.95, range = 41 - 99), and child ASD symptomatology (M =

15.09, SD = 7.68, range = 1 - 33) were roughly symmetrical and unimodal, with no severe

skew and no outliers. Specifically, the caregiver health behaviors variable had a skewness

of -.21 (SE = .28), and kurtosis of .22 (SE = .55); the child unhealthy eating variable had a

skewness of 1.09 (SE = .28), and kurtosis of 1.41 (SE = .55); the child physical activity

variable had a skewness of .37 (SE = .27) and kurtosis of -.42 (SE = .54); the child screen

time variable had a skewness of .40 (SE = .27), and kurtosis of -.13 (SE = .54); the child


-----

adaptive behavior variable had a skewness of -.49 (SE = .31), and kurtosis of .90 (SE =

.61); and the child ASD symptomatology variable had a skewness of .27 (SE = .28), and

kurtosis of -.82 (SE = .55).

**_Preliminary Reliability Analysis Procedures and Composite Score Development_**

Preliminary analyses included an examination of the Cronbach’s alpha estimate of

internal consistency of each a priori scale (Cronbach, 1951). Child health behavior

composite scales were comprised of 4 to 5 items and showed Cronbach’s alpha values

ranging from .61-.73. The caregiver health behavior composite scale was comprised of 10

items and showed a Cronbach’s alpha value of .86 (Cronbach, 1951). See below for

additional details regarding scale development and internal consistency analyses.

**Caregiver Health Behavior Scale Development. Based on face validity, alpha**

reliability analyses on caregiver healthy eating and physical activity items on the FLSS

measure were conducted to determine if the items hung together as a single “caregiver

health behaviors” construct. The FLSS originally contained 8 items measuring caregiver

eating habits (α = .88) and 2 items measuring caregiver physical activity (α = .68). When

a reliability analysis was conducted on the unidimensional “caregiver health behaviors”

scale (10 items), Cronbach’s alpha showed acceptable reliability (α = .86).

**_Child Health Behaviors Scale Development. Again, based on face validity, three_**

separate composite scores were developed for child eating behaviors, physical activity, and

screen time constructs, respectively using an alpha reliability procedure.

**_Child Unhealthy Eating Composite. The FLSS contains 4 items measuring child_**

unhealthy eating behaviors. A reliability analysis was conducted using 4 items specifically

measuring “child unhealthy eating” (e.g., number of days per week eating at a fast food


-----

restaurant, amount of candy consumed per day, and times the child drinks juice or has a

sugar sweetened beverage per day). Cronbach’s alpha showed moderate reliability (α =

.61).

**_Child Physical Activity Composite._** The FLSS contains 5 items measuring child

physical activity, including questions such as, “how much time on a typical school day

does your child spend: 1) playing sports, 2) playing outside 3) riding a bike, 4) walking,

and 5) going to the park.” Cronbach’s alpha showed the “child physical activity” scale to

reach acceptable reliability (α = .73).

**_Child Screen Time Composite. The FLSS contains 4 items measuring child screen_**

time, including questions such as, “how much time on a typical school day does your child

spend: 1) watching TV, 2) playing video games, 3) playing on the computer or tablet, and

4) watching movies.” Cronbach’s alpha showed the “child screen time” scale to reach

moderate reliability (α = .62).

**_Research Questions and Corresponding Analyses_**

**Research Question #1. Are family sociodemographic variables (i.e., caregiver**

education, household income, caregiver race/ethnicity) associated with caregiver health

behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical activity)?

**_Analysis. Bivariate Pearson correlations were conducted to evaluate the_**

association between family sociodemographic factors (i.e., primary caregiver education,

household income, and caregiver race/ethnicity) and caregiver health behaviors.

**Research Question #2. Are caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating**

habits and physical activity) associated with child health behaviors?


-----

2a. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with child unhealthy eating

habits?

2b. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with physical activity?

2c. Are caregiver health behaviors associated with child screen time?

**_Analysis. Bivariate correlations were conducted to evaluate the association_**

between caregiver health behaviors and child health behaviors.

**Research Question #3. Does child developmental functioning (i.e., adaptive**

behavior and autism symptoms) moderate the association between caregiver health

behaviors and child health outcomes?

3a. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating habits?

3b. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity?

3c. Does child adaptive behavior moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child screen time?

**_Analysis. To explore the moderation of adaptive skills on the association between_**

caregiver health behaviors on child health behaviors, a hierarchical linear regression was

used. Block 1 included caregiver health behaviors and child VABS-III ABC scores as

independent predictors of child health behaviors. Block 2 included the interaction of

VABS-III ABC scores and caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver health behaviors by

VABS-III ABC scores). This procedure was repeated three times with the child outcome

variable changing for each analysis (i.e., analysis one included child unhealthy eating


-----

habits as the outcome variable, analysis two included child physical activity as the

outcome variable, and analysis three included child screen time as the outcome variable).

To make meaningful interpretations of the regression analyses, the child VABS
III ABC scores were dichotomized based on median splits (i.e., categories were labeled

“low” and “high”) after conducting a frequency analysis to determine the cutoff score.

The lowest scoring 50% of the sample (i.e., obtaining a standard score less than or equal

to 70) were conceptualized as the “low” group (i.e., having fewer adaptive skills when

compared to the “high” group), while the highest scoring 50% of the sample (i.e.,

obtaining a standard score equal to or greater than 71) was conceptualized as the “high”

group (i.e., having more adaptive skills when compared to the “low” group). Bivariate

Pearson correlations were conducted between the caregiver health behavior variable, the

dichotomized VABS-III ABC variable, and the child outcome variables only if the

previous regression was clinically meaningful.

3d. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

between caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating habits?

3e. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

between caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity?

3f. Does the level of child ASD symptoms moderate the association

caregiver health behaviors and child screen time?

**_Analysis. To explore the moderation of ASD symptomatology on the association_**

between caregiver health behaviors on child health behaviors, a hierarchical linear

regression was used. Block 1 included caregiver health behaviors and child SCQ scores

as independent predictors of child health behaviors. Block 2 included the interaction of


-----

SCQ scores and caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver health behaviors by SCQ

scores). This procedure was repeated three times with the child outcome variable

changing for each analysis (i.e., analysis one included child unhealthy eating habits as the

outcome variable, analysis two included child physical activity as the outcome variable,

and analysis three included child screen time as the outcome variable).

To make meaningful interpretations of the regression analyses, the child SCQ

scores were dichotomized based on median splits (i.e., categories were labeled “low” and

“high”) after conducting a frequency analysis to determine the cutoff score. The lowest

scoring 50% of the sample (i.e., obtaining a raw score less than or equal to 13) were

conceptualized as the “low” group (i.e., having fewer symptoms of autism when

compared to the “high” group), while the highest scoring 50% of the sample (i.e.,

obtaining a raw score greater than or equal to 14) was conceptualized as the “high” group

(i.e., having more symptoms of autism when compared to the “low” group). Bivariate

correlations were conducted between the caregiver health behavior variable, the

dichotomized SCQ variable, and the child outcome variables only if the previous

regression was clinically meaningful.

**_Posthoc Analyses_**

Independent samples t-tests were conducted to address several post hoc research

questions including:

1) Are there clinically meaningful mean differences between child gender and study

variables?


-----

a. Are there clinically meaningful mean differences in child health behaviors

(i.e., unhealthy eating habits, physical activity, and screen time) by

gender?

b. Are there clinically meaningful mean differences in child sleep by gender?

c. Are there clinically meaningful mean differences in child adaptive

behavior by gender?

d. Are there clinically meaningful mean differences child SCQ scores by

gender?

2) Are there clinically meaningful mean differences between study variables (i.e.,

child health behaviors, sleep, and adaptive behavior) among children with and

without ASD diagnoses?

3) Descriptively, what does sleep look like in this sample?

a. Are there clinically meaningful mean differences between child sleep

among children with and without existing medical conditions?

b. Are there clinically meaningful associations between child sleep and child

study variables (i.e., child health behaviors, SCQ scores, and adaptive

behavior)?

**Power Analyses**

Power analyses using G*Power 3.1 were conducted to determine what level of

power was achieved with two different sample sizes due to missing data (Faul et al.,

2009). The overall sample size for this study was 77; however, 60 participants completed

the VABS-III (i.e., 17 missing), and 74 participants completed the SCQ (i.e., 3 missing).

VABS-III and SCQ data were necessary to complete moderation analyses with three


-----

predictors. An exact sample size of 77 with a two-tailed probability for a p value of .05 is

needed to reach sufficient power (.80) to detect a medium effect size of f[2] = 0.15 for

linear regression analyses. Given the large amount of missing data, the study is

underpowered. Therefore, results will be reported and discussed using phrases such as,

“clinically meaningful” and “meaningfully associated/ moderated” rather than

“statistically significant” or “significantly associated/moderated.” Reported below are the

results of separate power analyses conducted with study sample sizes that correspond to

relevant analyses.

**_Bivariate Correlations_**

A power analysis was conducted to determine what level of power is achieved

with the overall sample size (N = 77). Provided the sample size of 77 and a two-tailed

probability for a p value of .05, there is a lack of sufficient power (.76) to detect a

medium effect size of r = .30 for bivariate correlation analyses. Given the underpowered

nature of the study, the correlation value of r > .30 was used to make clinically

meaningful interpretations.

**_Hierarchical Regression Analyses_**

Based on the smallest sample size (N = 60), and a two-tailed probability for a p

value of .05, there is a lack of sufficient power (.68) to detect a medium effects size of f[2]

= 0.15 (incremental R[2] - .06) for hierarchical regression analyses. Given the

underpowered nature of the study, an incremental R[2] - .06 was used to make clinically

meaningful interpretations.

**Missing Data**


-----

Due to the ongoing global pandemic, there is a substantial amount of missing data

for the current study. In-person administrations of assessments were disrupted to due

COVID-19. The research team attempted to quickly adjust to two different state’s safety

precautions by administering assessments over the phone; however, given the rapid

progression of the virus and constant regulation changes, data collection could not be

completed in all cases. Due to state restrictions, the research teams could not access

Oregon or California research spaces, therefore, limiting the teams’ access to previously

collected data. Furthermore, there were issues with scoring the SCQ in which some of the

items were not administered, which contributed to missing data for that measure in three

cases.


-----

III: RESULTS

**The Presence and Distributions of Caregiver and Child Health Behaviors**

As previously stated, due to the underpowered nature of the study. results will be

reported using phrases such as, “clinically meaningful” or “meaningfully

associated/moderated” rather than “statistically significant” or “significantly

associated/moderated.”

**_Child Eating Habits_**

Regarding child consumption of energy dense foods, 88.4% of caregivers reported

their child eats out at fast food restaurants 0-2 times per week, 94.9% of children

consume 0-2 pieces of candy or other sweets daily, 58.5% drink juice 0-1 times per day

and 40.3% drink juice 2-3 times per day, and 88.3% of children drink sugar sweetened

beverages, such as soda, 0-1 times per day. On average, caregivers rated child unhealthy

eating items between a 1 (piece/time per week/time per day) and 2 (piece(s)/time(s) per

week/time(s) per day) (M = 1.05, SD = 0.72), indicating that children, on average, are

engaging in unhealthy eating habits roughly one time per day/week (i.e., depending on

the item) listed above.

Related to consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, 52% of caregivers reported

their children eat 2-3 servings of fruits and vegetables on an average day. Furthermore,

39.0% reported eating a meal together 6-7 nights per week, while 24.7% of caregivers

reported 4-5 nights per week most of their family members eat a meal together.

**_Child Physical Activity_**

Regarding child activity level, 14.3% of caregivers reported their children

normally sit down while playing, coloring, watching TV, or reading, 40.3% of children


-----

combine play with activities that involve movement, and 44.2% of children do not stop

moving/run from one part of the house to another/go up and down stairs/run and jump.

Additionally, 46.8% of children exercise for at least 20 minutes 1-4 days per week,

36.4% exercise for at least 20 minutes for 5-7 days, and 15.6% of children never exercise

for 20 minutes per day.

The majority of caregivers reported their children play sports (84.5%), play

outside (65%), ride their bike (92.2%), walk (87.1%), and go to the park (74.1%) for

under an hour per day. On average, caregivers rated child physical activity items between

a 1 (15-30 minutes per day) and 2 (30 minutes to an hour) (M = 1.30, SD = 0.76),

indicating that children, on average, are spending more than 30 minutes, but less than 1

hour engaged in the physical activities listed above.

**_Child Screen Time_**

Caregivers reported the amount of time their children spend engaging in a variety

of screen time activities. The majority of caregivers reported their children watch TV

(58.5%), play on the computer/tablet/phone (68.9%), and watch movies (74.1%) for

under an hour per day. Additionally, 77.9% of caregivers reported their children do not

spend any time playing video games. On average, caregivers rated child screen time

items between a 1 (15-30 minutes per day) and 2 (30 minutes to an hour) (M = 1.44, SD =

0.78), indicating that children, on average, are spending more than 30 minutes but less

than 1 hour engaged in the screen time activities listed above.

**_Caregiver Health Behaviors_**

Caregivers provided self-reports on their own physical activity and eating habits.

The majority of caregiver reports fell between a 2 (i.e., sometimes) and 3 (i.e., often) on


-----

items measuring eating habits. Furthermore, 66.3% of caregivers reported making low

calorie meals for their families between sometimes and often (M = 2.63, SD = 1.06),

71.5% of caregivers reported offering their children a healthy alternative when he/she

asks for junk food between sometimes and often (M = 2.76, SD = 0.89), 72.8% reported

eating low calorie/fat food themselves between sometimes and often (M = 2.53, SD =

0.97), 52% reported between sometimes and often keeping unhealthy food out of their

children’s sight (M = 2.84, SD = 1.17), 70.2% reported between sometimes and often

choosing healthy options at fast food or other restaurants (M = 2.50, SD = 1.00), 58.5%

reported between sometimes and often eating vegetables (M = 2.86, SD = 1.06), 66.3%

reported between sometimes and often serving fresh fruits and vegetables in their homes

(M = 2.93, SD = 0.88), and 67.6% reported between sometimes and often teaching their

children about healthy food choices (M = 2.72, SD = 0.95).

Related to physical activity, 48.1% of caregivers reported almost never to rarely

independently participating in physical activity (M = 1.80, SD = 1.31); however, 63.7%

reported between sometimes and often participating in physical activities with their child

(M = 2.24, SD = 1.03).

**The Presence and Distribution of Child Adaptive Skills and ASD Symptomatology**

**_Child Adaptive Behavior_**

Child adaptive behavior composite (ABC) scores, ranging from 41 to 99 (M =

70.58, SD = 10.95), were primarily used to conduct the analyses for the present study.

However, the VABS-III also includes four subscales: Communication, Daily Living

Skills, Socialization, and Motor Skills. Communication standard scores ranged from 40 to

101 (M = 68.40, SD = 13.94), Daily Living Skills standard scores ranged from 40 to 112


-----

(M = 73.08, SD = 14.47), Socialization standard scores ranged from 40 to 98 (M = 74.40,

_SD = 11.34), and Motor Skills standard scores ranged from 37 to 113 (M = 73.82, SD =_

12.90). See Table 3 for descriptive statistics for child adaptive behavior.

**_Child ASD Symptomatology_**

Child ASD symptomatology scores, as measured by the SCQ, ranged from 1 to 33

(M = 15.09, SD = 7.68). The SCQ was completed by 74 of 77 total participants. The

distribution of SCQ scores was unimodal and roughly symmetrical with no severe skew

or outliers. See Table 3 for descriptive statistics for child ASD symptomatology.

**Research Question 1: Sociodemographic Factors and Caregiver Health Behaviors**

To examine the results of the first research question, “are family

sociodemographic variables (i.e., caregiver education, household income, caregiver

race/ethnicity) associated with caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits

and physical activity)?” bivariate Pearson correlation analyses were conducted (see Table

4). Results indicate neither caregiver race/ethnicity (r = .06, p = .619), caregiver

education (r = .01, p = .949), nor household income, (r = -.04 p = .724) were

meaningfully associated with caregiver health behaviors. However, there were

meaningful negative associations between caregiver race/ethnicity (Latinx) and 1)

caregiver education (r = -.58, p < .001), 2) household income (r = -.69, p < .001), and 3)

child adaptive behavior (r = -.38, p = .003); indicating that caregiver identification as

Latinx was associated with fewer years of education, lower household income, and

having children with fewer adaptive skills when compared to other racial/ethnic groups.

Caregiver race/ethnicity (Latinx) was also positively associated with higher levels of

child unhealthy eating (r = .23, p = .048). Caregiver education was meaningfully


-----

correlated with household income (r = .53, p < .001), child ASD symptomatology (r = 
.30, p = .009), and child adaptive skills (r = .50, p < .001), such that higher levels of

education were associated with higher household incomes, fewer ASD symptoms, and

higher adaptive skills. Household income was meaningfully positively associated with

child adaptive skills (r = .47, p < .001), such that higher household incomes were

associated with higher levels of child adaptive behavior.

**Research Question 2: Caregiver Health Behaviors and Child Health Behaviors**

To examine the second research question, “are caregiver health behaviors (i.e.,

caregiver eating habits and physical activity) associated with child heath behaviors?”

bivariate Pearson correlations were conducted (see Table 4). Caregiver health behaviors

were meaningfully associated with child unhealthy eating (r = -.25, p = .028) and child

physical activity (r = .44, p < .001), such that higher levels of caregiver health behaviors

were associated with lower levels of child unhealthy eating and higher levels of child

physical activity. Caregiver health behaviors were not meaningfully associated with child

screen time (r = -.03, p = .801). Furthermore, child screen time was not meaningfully

correlated with any study variables.

**Research Question 3: Moderation Analyses**

To examine the third research question, “does child developmental functioning

(i.e., adaptive behavior and autism symptoms) moderate the association between

caregiver health behaviors and child health outcomes?” hierarchical linear regressions

were conducted.

**_Child Adaptive Behavior as a Moderator_**


-----

To test whether child adaptive behavior moderated the relation between caregiver

health behavior and child unhealthy eating, a hierarchical linear regression analysis was

conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health behaviors and

child Vineland ABC scores. These variables did not account for a meaningful proportion

of variance in child unhealthy eating, R[2] = .08, F(2, 57) = 2.44, p = .096. An interaction

term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive behavior was created. Next,

the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive behavior was

added to the regression model, which meaningfully accounted for a proportion of the

variance in child unhealthy eating, ∆ _R[2]_ = .06, F(1, 56) = 3.90, p = .053, b = -2.18,

suggesting an association between caregiver health behavior and child unhealthy eating

was more pronounced in children with higher adaptive behavior scores (r = -.35, p =

.060) when compared to children with lower adaptive behavior scores (r = -.23, p = .220)

(i.e., see Figure 3). See Table 5 for hierarchical linear regression results related to

adaptive functioning, caregiver health behaviors, and child unhealthy eating.

To test whether child adaptive behavior moderated the relation between caregiver

health behavior and child physical activity, a hierarchical linear regression analysis was

conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health behaviors and

child Vineland ABC scores. These variables accounted for a clinically meaningful

amount of variance in child physical activity, R[2] = .11, F(2, 57) = 3.66, p = .032. An

interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive behavior was

created. Next, the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive

behavior was added to the regression model, which did not account for a meaningful

proportion of the variance in child physical activity, ∆ _R[2]_ = .05, F(1, 56) = 3.61, p = .062,


-----

_b = 2.06. See Table 6 for hierarchical linear regression results related to adaptive_

functioning, caregiver health behaviors, and child physical activity.

To test whether child adaptive behavior moderated the relation between caregiver

health behavior and child screen time, a hierarchical linear regression analysis was

conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health behaviors and

child Vineland ABC scores. These variables did not account for a clinically meaningful

amount of variance in child screen time, R[2] = .02, F(2, 57) = 0.44, p = .644. An

interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive behavior was

created. Next, the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child adaptive

behavior was added to the regression model, which did not account for a meaningful

proportion of the variance in child screen time, ∆ _R[2]_ = .002, F(1, 56) = 0.11, p = .745, b =

0.39. See Table 7 for hierarchical linear regression results related to adaptive functioning,

caregiver health behaviors, and child screen time.

**_Child ASD Symptomatology as a Moderator_**

To test whether child ASD symptomatology moderated the relation between

caregiver health behavior and child unhealthy eating, a hierarchical linear regression

analysis was conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health

behaviors and child SCQ scores. These variables accounted for a meaningful amount of

variance in child unhealthy eating, R[2] = .10, F(2, 70) = 3.84, p = .026. An interaction

term between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD symptomatology was created.

Next, the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD

symptomatology was added to the regression model, which accounted for a meaningful

proportion of the variance in child unhealthy eating, ∆ _R[2]_ = .12, F(1, 69) = 10.37, p =


-----

.002, b = 1.59, suggesting the association between caregiver health behaviors and child

unhealthy eating was more pronounced in children with fewer ASD symptoms (r = -.55,

_p < .001) when compared to children with more ASD symptoms (r = -.02, p = .891) (i.e.,_

see Figure 4). See Table 8 for hierarchical linear regression results related to ASD

symptomatology, caregiver health behaviors, and child unhealthy eating.

To test whether child ASD symptomatology moderated the relation between

caregiver health behavior and child physical activity, a hierarchical linear regression

analysis was conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health

behaviors and child SCQ scores. These variables accounted for a clinically meaningful

amount of variance in child physical activity, R[2] = .19, F(2, 70) = 8.32, p = .001. An

interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD symptomatology was

created. Next, the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD

symptomatology was added to the regression model, which did not account for a

meaningful proportion of the variance in child physical activity, ∆ _R[2]_ = .001, F(1, 69) =

0.09, p = .765, b = -0.15. See Table 9 for hierarchical linear regression results related to

ASD symptomatology, caregiver health behaviors, and child physical activity.

To test whether child ASD symptomatology moderated the relation between

caregiver health behavior and child screen time, a hierarchical linear regression analysis

was conducted. In the first step, two variables were included: caregiver health behaviors

and child SCQ scores. These variables did not account for a clinically meaningful amount

of variance in child screen time, R[2] = .02, F(2, 70) = 0.69, p = .505. An interaction term

between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD symptomatology was created. Next,

the interaction term between caregiver health behaviors and child ASD symptomatology


-----

was added to the regression model, which did not account for a meaningful proportion of

the variance in child screen time, ∆ _R[2]_ = .02, F(1, 69) = 1.43, p = .237, b = 0.65. See

Table 10 for hierarchical linear regression results related to ASD symptomatology,

caregiver health behaviors, and child screen time.

**Post-hoc Analyses Findings**

**_Gender_**

Results of independent samples t-tests showed that male and female children in

the sample were not meaningfully different from each other with regard to child adaptive

behavior t(56) = -0.13, p = .901, child ASD symptomatology t(70) = 0.52, p = .605, child

sleep time t(73) = -0.37, p = .712, child screen time t(73) = 0.28, p = .780, child physical

activity t(73) = -0.49, p = .629, or child unhealthy eating t(72) = -0.12, p = .904.

**_Child Primary Diagnoses_**

To determine whether there were clinically meaningful differences in child health

behaviors by ASD diagnosis, the child primary diagnosis variable was dichotomized into

two categories, 1) ASD, and 2) no ASD. Independent samples t-tests showed children

with ASD and children without ASD were meaningfully different in their adaptive

behavior scores t(56) = 2.69, p = .009, SCQ scores t(69) = -4.43, p < .001, as well as

their amount of sleep per night t(72) = 2.84, p = .006, such that children with ASD had

lower adaptive scores (M = 66.71) when compared to children without ASD (M = 73.97),

higher SCQ scores (M = 19.00) when compared to children without ASD (M = 11.83),

and slept fewer hours per night (M = 9.82) when compared to children without ASD (M =

10.68). There were no clinically meaningful mean differences between children with and


-----

without ASD for screen time t(72) = 0.39, p = .699, physical activity t(72) = 0.30, p =

.765, or unhealthy eating t(71) = 0.22, p = .828.

**_Child Sleep_**

On average, children in this sample reportedly slept between 7.5 and 14 hours per

night (M = 10.30, SD = 1.36). Children in this sample reportedly went to sleep between

7:00 pm and 12:00 am (M = 9:00 pm, SD = 1.23) and woke up between 5:00 am and

10:00 am (M = 7:30 am, SD = 1.29). Regarding sleeping habits, 39.0% of children often

had trouble going to bed, 22.1% often had trouble sleeping through the night, and 42.9%

sometimes woke up too early. Additionally, 63.6% of caregivers rated their child as

rarely being too tired during the day. Child sleep time was meaningfully associated with

child physical activity (r = .26, p = .022), such that children who spent more time

sleeping each night were likely to spend more time engaging in physical activity during

the day.

**Child Medical Problems and Sleep. Results of independent t-tests showed that**

children with and without medical problems did not meaningfully differ in adaptive

scores t(55) = 0.79, p = .433, SCQ scores t(67) = -1.20 p = .234, sleep time t(70) = -0.52,

_p = .607, screen time t(70) = 0.17, p = .863, physical activity t(70) = 1.68, p = .097, or_

unhealthy eating t(70) = 0.62, p = .541.


-----

IV: DISCUSSION

The present study sought to investigate associations between caregiver health

behaviors and child health behavior in a diverse sample of preschool-aged children with

DD. As previously stated, due to the underpowered nature of the study. results will be

discussed using the phrases “clinically meaningful” or “meaningfully

associated/moderated” rather than “statistically significant” or “significantly

associated/moderated.” Only clinically meaningful associations are discussed below.

**Research Question 1: Sociodemographic Variables and Caregiver Health Behaviors**

The first research question was “are family sociodemographic variables (i.e.,

caregiver education, household income, caregiver race/ethnicity) associated with

caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver eating habits and physical activity)?” Results

indicate neither caregiver race/ethnicity, caregiver education, nor household income,

were meaningfully associated with caregiver health behaviors. However, several

clinically meaningful findings emerged: 1) caregiver identification as Latinx was

negatively associated with caregiver education, household income, and child adaptive

scores, and positively associated with child unhealthy eating, 2) caregiver education was

positively associated with income and child adaptive scores, and negatively associated

with child ASD symptoms, and 3) annual household income was positively associated

with higher child adaptive behavior scores. Each of the findings are discussed below:

**_Caregivers Identifying as Latinx_**

**Household Income, Caregiver Education, and Child Adaptive Functioning.**

Consistent with previous literature, caregiver identification as Latinx was meaningfully

associated with fewer years of caregiver education and lower household income


-----

(Braveman et al., 2010; Morales et al., 2007). According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in

the United States the Latinx population has the lowest educational attainment rate relative

to any other racial/ethnic group and are second to the Black population for lowest

household income (Cuy Castellanos, 2015; US Census Bureau, 2012). Given that many

of the participants in the current sample did not speak English, it is possible that these

income and education discrepancies within the Latinx population may be attributed to

limited employment opportunities due to language barriers. Further, these barriers are

exacerbated given decades of systemic racism and marginalization of minority groups

within the United States (Alexander, 2010; Kilty & Haymes, 2000) and likely more

salient given the politically tumultuous time in which the study took place.

Identifying as Latinx was meaningfully associated with children presenting with

fewer adaptive skills when compared to other racial/ethnic groups. Provided the high

level of evidence supporting that the Latinx population has more limited access to health

care when compared to their non-Latinx counterparts, this population might have fewer

resources to access appropriate behavioral health services that could improve their child’s

adaptive functioning skills (Morales et al., 2007). Lower adaptive functioning skills

within this sample could also be due to identification of disabilities later in life when

compared to other racial groups (Mandell et al., 2009; Morgan et al., 2017). From an

immigration lens, late disability identification could be due to fear associated with real or

perceived threat of deportation if families are undocumented. For example, families

might be less likely to seek professional behavioral health services or financial support

during a time in our country’s history where the current administration places stigma on

help-seeking behaviors and promotes systemic marginalization of minorities. This


-----

interpretation is generalizing and extending beyond the current study’s sample provided

documentation questions were not part of the larger study’s protocol; however, it is

important to consider the broader political and cultural context under which these

families are making decisions.

**Child Unhealthy Eating. Caregiver identification as Latinx was positively**

associated with child unhealthy eating, such that identifying as Latinx was associated

with more unhealthy eating in children. To parse out the intersectionality of

sociodemographic variables, including income, education, and race/ethnicity, post hoc

analyses were conducted and provided further insight into these associations. After

controlling for caregiver education and household income, the association between

caregiver identification as Latinx and child unhealthy eating continued to be meaningful

(r = .38, p = .048). Similarly, after controlling for child adaptive behavior scores, the

association between caregiver identification as Latinx and child unhealthy eating

continued to be clinically meaningful (r = .31, p = .017).

It is important to recognize that the intersectionality of race/ethnicity,

socioeconomic status, and education exists in the United States, and the current results

provide evidence to suggest there may be cultural and environmental factors contributing

to these associations. For example, it is possible that the association between identifying

as Latinx and child unhealthy eating could be due, in part, to acculturation. Acculturation

has previously been defined as, “the process by which immigrants adopt the attitudes,

values, customs, beliefs, and behaviors of a new culture” (Abraido-Lanza et al., 2004). It

is typically a unidirectional process, which often reduces multiculturalism, and manifests

in four different ways: 1) “melting pot” – individuals completely forgo their heritage to


-----

fully assimilate into mainstream culture; 2) “bicultural” – individuals choose to retain

their heritage while also integrating into mainstream culture; 3) “separated”- individuals

retain their heritage without attempting to assimilate into mainstream culture; and 4)

“marginalized/invisible” – individuals lose their heritage without attempting to integrate

into mainstream culture (Cuy Castellanos, 2015). The manifestation of acculturation

within individuals is likely impacted by several factors, but most relevant might be timing

of residency or immigration to the United States (Morales et al., 2007). For example,

individuals whose families have been in the United States for generations, might have

similar dietary profiles to those of non-Latinx Americans moreso than members of

families who immigrated more recently (Morales et al., 2007).

It is well-documented in the literature that there is a strong association between

acculturation and health outcomes (Baquero & Parra-Medina, 2019; Cuy Castellanos,

2015). In particular, results from the Neuhouser et al. (2004) study in Yakima Valley,

Washington suggest acculturation is a significant predictor of dietary patterns in the

Latinx population. Specifically, after accounting for age, sex, income, and education,

Neuhouser et al. (2004) found that highly acculturated Latinx individuals consumed

fewer fruits and vegetables and had slightly higher fat intakes when compared to Latinxs

who were less acculturated. Furthermore, food selection and consumption are largely

influenced by perceptions, attitudes, and beliefs about food within an individual’s cultural

lens. When individuals from more traditional societies assimilate to more modern

communities with greater food variety and availability, a “nutrition transition” often

occurs, which involves the integration of dietary patterns present within the mainstream

culture (Lin et al., 2003). Related to the United States, this manifests as consuming fewer


-----

complex carbohydrates and more saturated fatty acids (Bermudez et al., 2000; Bermudez

et al., 2002; Lin et al., 2003).

Neither citizenship/immigration status, nor residency, or place of birth questions

were asked within the larger study. However, provided that 70.1% of our sample

identified at Latinx, 58.4% of our sample was monolingual Spanish speaking, and 61%

identified their child as bilingual, it is reasonable to surmise that a significant portion of

our sample experienced some level of acculturation in a country where the majority speak

English. The current study did not include acculturation as a variable; therefore, it is

unclear where each individual family is within the acculturation process. However, it is

important to consider factors related to minority status within the United States that could

potentially account for the continued, clinically meaningful, relation between identifying

as Latinx and child unhealthy eating.

**_Caregiver Income, Education, and Child Symptomatology_**

Consistent with decades of literature, results suggest higher levels of education

were meaningfully associated with higher household incomes (de Wolff & Slijpe, 1973;

Muller, 2002). Completing more years of education often leads to individuals gaining

more problem-solving skills and specialized training, which can allow individuals to be

more qualified for higher paying jobs.

Results also suggest meaningful positive associations between income, education

and child adaptive skills, such that children with higher socioeconomic backgrounds have

better developed adaptive skills. Additionally, higher education was negatively associated

with child ASD symptomatology, such that caregivers who completed more years of

school had children with fewer ASD symptoms. These associations may be attributed to


-----

increased access to services, provided more affluent families likely have the financial

means to access services aimed at improving adaptive skills and symptomatology

associated with ASD. It is also possible caregivers who complete more years of school

may be more aware of typical child development and/or ASD symptoms, which allows

them to seek professional support and participate in intervention earlier than caregivers

with fewer years of education.

**Research Question 2: Caregiver Health Behaviors and Child Health Behaviors**

The second research question was, “are caregiver health behaviors (i.e., caregiver

eating habits and physical activity) associated with child heath behaviors?” Results

indicate caregiver health behaviors were meaningfully associated with child unhealthy

eating and child physical activity, but not child screen time.

**_Caregiver Health Behaviors and Child Screen Time_**

Caregiver health behaviors were not meaningfully associated with child screen

time. Furthermore, screen time was not associated with any study variables. Previous

literature suggests excessive screen time is associated with consumption of fewer fruits

and vegetables, and a higher intake of energy-dense snack foods in adolescents (Leech et

al., 2014; Pearson et al., 2017; Pearson et al., 2018) as well as significant increases in

BMI, fewer minutes of sleep, and poorer executive functioning in preschoolers

(Aishworiya et al., 2018; American Psychiatric Association, 2016; Cespedes et al., 2014;

Cox et al., 2012; Nathansan et al., 2014; Wen et al., 2014). Within the current sample,

neither an excessive amount of screen time nor a high level of screen time variability was

reported by caregivers (M = 1.44, SD = 0.78), indicating that children, on average, are

spending more than 30 minutes but less than 1 hour engaged in screen time activities.


-----

This lack of amount and variability could be attributed to underreporting screen time

provided the stigma associated with exposing young children to high levels of screen

time (Hinkley et al., 2014; Twenge & Campbell, 2018). Additionally, caregivers in this

sample could also be strictly adhering to the screen time recommendation of

approximately 1 hour per day spent watching high-quality programs, for preschool aged

children (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2018).

**_Caregiver Health is Associated with Child Unhealthy Eating and Child Physical_**

**_Activity_**

Unlike child screen time, caregiver health behaviors were negatively associated

with child unhealthy eating and positively associated with child physical activity, such

that healthier habits among caregivers was associated with healthier eating and more

time spent engaging in physical activity in children. These findings are consistent with

literature examining typically developing children. Specifically, caregivers who either

engage in physical activities themselves, or facilitate their child engaging in physical

activities increases child participation in physical activity (Moore et al., 1991; Welk et

al., 2003). With regard to eating, children’s level of consumption has been found to be

positively associated with the degree to which caregivers (specifically mothers) engage in

healthy eating, prepare healthy meals, and make healthy foods available (Birch et al.,

1999; Johnson et al., 2001; Wardle et al., 2005; Ventura et al., 2008).

Children within the 3 to 5 age range likely do not have a considerable amount of

autonomy in making decisions about their health behaviors. Both eating habits and

physical activity require caregiver facilitation, which could substantially contribute to the

present associations. Furthermore, provided the interconnectedness of caregiver and child


-----

health behaviors, it is reasonable to assume caregivers and children are often eating the

same foods. When purchasing foods, it is likely caregivers are selecting foods for the

entire household rather than shopping separately for their children.

Lastly, these finding support and validate Bandura’s (1971) previously referenced

Social Learning Theory, stating children acquire new patterns of behavior through

observing and imitating the behaviors of others. Provided the young age of the child

sample and the current physical distancing regulations due to the pandemic, it is

reasonable to assume children are spending a considerable amount of time with their

caregivers and attending to their caregiver’s behaviors more than they typically would

have if the world was functioning normally.

**Research Question 3: Vineland and SCQ Scores as Moderators**

The third research question was, “does child developmental functioning (i.e.,

adaptive behavior and autism symptoms) moderate the association between caregiver

health behaviors and child health outcomes?” Results indicate: 1) the relation between

caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating was meaningfully moderated by

child adaptive behavior and 2) the relation between caregiver health behaviors and child

unhealthy eating was meaningfully moderated by child ASD symptomatology, 3) neither

child adaptive behavior functioning nor child ASD symptomatology moderated the

association between caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity or caregiver

health behaviors and child screen time.

**_Caregiver Health Behaviors and Child Unhealthy Eating_**


-----

Moderation analyses were only clinically meaningful for the relation between

caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating. Results are discussed in more

detail below.

**Child Adaptive Functioning as a Moderator. The relation between caregiver**

health behaviors and child unhealthy eating was meaningfully moderated by child

adaptive behavior, such that children with higher adaptive functioning scores were more

likely to engage in healthy eating practices when compared to children with lower

adaptive functioning skills.

It is well established that parenting children with DD can be highly stressful and

can lead to feelings of frustration, anxiety and depression (MacDonald et al., 2010).

Specifically, Feizi and colleagues (2014) found mothers of children with more severe

disabilities experience more stress when compared to mothers parenting children with

less severe disabilities. The heightened parenting stress associated with parenting

children who are lower functioning, could make enforcing strict health habits early more

challenging. Colloquially, we might attribute this to caregivers “picking their battles”,

such that they might be content if their child is eating something even if it is not

necessarily the healthiest option.

Additionally, the association between stress and alteration of eating habits has

been well documented in the literature (Yau & Potenza, 2013). According to a study

conducted by Torres & Nowson (2007), stress can lead to either over- or undereating,

which can be influenced by stress severity. Specifically, chronic life stress has been

previously associated with consuming foods with higher sugar and fat content (Oliver et

al., 2000; Schiffman et al., 2000), which could lead to an increased chance of energy


-----

dense food availability in the home. Furthermore, if caregivers are experiencing a high

level of stress and consuming more energy dense foods, they are modeling unhealthy

eating habits for their children, which could lead to children observationally acquiring

more unhealthy eating habits (Bandura, 1971).

**Child ASD Symptomatology as a Moderator. The relation between caregiver**

health behaviors and child unhealthy eating was meaningfully moderated by child ASD

symptomatology, such that children with fewer ASD symptoms were more likely to

engage in less unhealthy eating practices when compared to children with more ASD

symptoms. This finding is consistent with previous research, which indicates children

with ASD consume more snack foods and sugar sweetened beverages, and fewer servings

of fruits and vegetables when compared to typically developing children (Evans et al.,

2012).

According to the DSM-5, ASD is characterized by social communication deficits

as well as restricted and repetitive behaviors (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

Social communication deficits can manifest as difficulty with interacting and

communicating with others, including challenges with observing social cues (American

Psychiatric Association, 2013). Again, referring to Bandura’s (1971) Social Learning

Theory, children who present with more deficits in social communication may not readily

acquire skills through observing others in their environment. Related to eating, children

with more ASD symptoms may require a higher degree of explicit instruction about

healthy eating when compared to children with fewer ASD symptoms, who may be able

to acquire healthy eating habits through observing their caregivers.


-----

When considering restricted and repetitive behaviors, children with ASD often

present with an insistence on sameness, which can manifest as preferences for certain

types or brands of food. For example, results from the Bandini et al. (2010) study found

children with ASD are more likely than their typically developing counterparts to have a

higher intake of single foods and engage in food refusal. These behaviors restrict the type

and variety of food children with more symptoms of ASD are willing to consume.

Additionally, restricted diets may be associated with sensitivities to the physical

characteristics of food. For example, children with ASD often present with rigid eating

habits related to dry (crunchy and crisp) and soft (moist or mushy) food textures

(Whiteley et al., 2000). Textural sensitivities to food may also be contributing to the

differences present between children with more versus few ASD symptoms.

**Implications**

Although preliminary in nature, the outcomes of this study have a number of

meaningful implications for research, intervention, and practice. First, this study adds to

the growing body of literature demonstrating links between caregiver health behaviors

and child health outcomes in families with young children with DD. Learning about the

presence and impact of caregiver health behaviors can inform intervention development

and implementation for families. Specifically, the findings from the present study can aid

in the development of interventions aimed at promoting the health of Latinx families in

the United States. Provided the majority of our sample identified as Latinx, and that the

U.S. Latinx population is disproportionately affected by chronic illnesses, relative to

other racial/ethnic and socioeconomic groups, it is imperative to develop culturally

appropriate intervention programs tailored to the needs of these families (American


-----

Diabetes Association, 2015; Baquero & Parra-Medina, 2019). Furthermore, the study

results support existing research regarding the discrepancy between the timing of

disability identification in young children from minority backgrounds relative to their

White counterparts (Mandell et al., 2009; Morgan et al., 2017). It is essential for

clinicians to be aware of this disparity, as implementation of early intervention services

should occur as soon as possible.

Second, the study findings may inform 1) feeding interventions that utilize

sensorimotor training and nutritional monitoring for children with higher levels of ASD

symptomatology and lower adaptive skills, as well as 2) interventions aimed at improving

stress associated with parenting children with varying disability severity, which could

lead to consumption of healthier food options. Furthermore, the study findings may bring

awareness to caregivers looking for information to promote child healthy behavior.

Dissemination of these finding will encourage caregivers to personally engage in and

facilitate healthy eating and physical activity with their children, which could positively

contribute to family well-being and quality of life.

**Limitations**

While this study yields some interesting findings, there are several important

limitations to discuss. First, this study was cross-sectional and did not include

longitudinal data. When examining the associations between caregiver health behaviors

and child health behaviors (given the age of the children, disability status, and other

family factors), it is important to understand that they represent relations that occurred

during a single time period. It cannot be determined if these associations will continue to

be meaningful over time. Therefore, it is important to highlight that neither predictive nor


-----

causal relations can be inferred, provided cross-sectional data yields effects that may be

bidirectional. Future longitudinal studies are necessary to determine temporal precedence

and the influence of caregiver health behavior on health behaviors of children with DD

over time.

There were several pandemic-related adjustments to the larger federally funded

research project, which lead to a substantial amount of missing data. Provided the smaller

than anticipated sample size, the present study was underpowered. Additionally, direct

measures of child factors including ASD symptomatology and intellectual functioning

could not be obtained due to physical distancing restrictions. Furthermore, measures of

child outcome variables, including motor skills from the VABS-III were not able to be

obtained. Prior to the implementation of COVID-19 related restrictions, in-person

assessments and interviews were being conducted, which could have aided in the

accuracy of data collection, as caregivers’ literacy levels and receptive language abilities

were unknown.

The study data were primarily based on caregiver reports of their own, as well as

their child’s behavior via mail-home questionnaire packets. Self-report data does not

always yield reliable or representative results of overall behavior (Chan, 2009; Nisbett &

Wilson, 1977). It is possible caregiver responses were biased and they completed

questionnaires based on what they believed was “correct”, or in the case of the larger

study, what they thought would place them in their preferred intervention condition.

Results of self-report data may also be influenced by caregiver mental health state and

social desirability, as well as environmental factors, including what their children are

doing the moment they are completing the questionnaires (Couch & Keniston, 1961).


-----

Despite the many limitations mentioned about caregiver self-report, the information

gathered through this modality is indicative of what caregivers think about their current

situation, which is valuable.

Finally, this study was preliminary in nature and utilized the FLSS measure,

which is not norm-referenced and has not undergone rigorous reliability and validity

testing. Developing and/or utilizing a stronger assessment tool, with more items

measuring each caregiver and child construct, would increase alpha reliability values for

composite scales, which may increase the confidence with which researchers can reliably

report meaningful results.

**Future Directions**

There are several important future directions that can be taken to better

understand the associations between caregiver health behaviors and child health

outcomes. First, future research should utilize a multi-modal and longitudinal approach to

data collection with a larger sample size so as to better characterize the severity and

persistence of ASD symptoms and adaptive behavior, as well as the frequency and

duration of caregiver and child health behaviors over time. For example, future

researchers might consider using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, Second

Edition (ADOS-2) along with the SCQ to better conceptualize ASD symptoms (Lord et

al., 2000). Future research might consider measuring caregiver and child health behaviors

through questionnaires as well as pedometers, skin conductance tools, or meal tracking

applications to better understand family lifestyles. Conducting this research

longitudinally and with a larger sample size, would not only provide information about

whether the current study associations persist over the course of a child’s life, but allow


-----

researchers to examine the predictive relations between caregiver health behaviors and

child health behaviors under adequately powered conditions.

Second, research should further investigate the association between identifying as

Latinx and child unhealthy eating. Previous research has suggested acculturation as a

potential predictive factor (Neuhouser et al, 2004); however, there are different cultural

and eating practices within Latinx subgroups (Seiga-Riz et al., 2014). It would be

interesting to examine whether the association between identifying as Latinx and

unhealthy eating in young children differs depending on Latinx subgroup. Furthermore, it

appears as though level of acculturation differentially impacts health behaviors, which

could also be fascinating to parse out in the context of the present study questions

(Morales et al., 2007).

Pertaining to screen time, there are a few directions future research could explore.

The present study did not inquire about caregiver screen time; therefore, it would be

interesting to investigate the association between caregiver and child screen time in future

studies, particularly in an adolescent population. Relatedly, investigating screen-time as it

relates to eating habits and physical activity within an adolescent population presenting

with circumscribed interests in video games or online platforms (e.g., YouTube) would

meaningfully contribute to the scarce literature in this area. Lastly, provided the

pandemic has led to an increase in time spent in the home context, it would be valuable to

examine 1) differences in caregiver’s perceptions of screen time before and during the

pandemic and 2) differences in the amount of caregiver and child screen time before and

during the pandemic, and how that varies by season.

**Conclusion**


-----

The current study sought to provide a preliminary evaluation of the associations

between caregiver health behaviors and health behaviors of preschool-aged children with

DD across two west coast states in the United States. Results indicated that 1) caregiver

identification as Latinx was negatively associated with caregiver education, household

income, and child adaptive scores, and positively associated with child unhealthy eating,

2) caregiver education was positively associated with income and child adaptive scores,

and negatively associated with child ASD symptoms, and 3) annual household income

was positively associated with higher child adaptive behavior scores. Caregiver health

behaviors were meaningfully associated with child unhealthy eating habits and child

physical activity, but not child screen time. Moderation analyses indicated, the relation

between caregiver health behaviors and child unhealthy eating was moderated by child

adaptive behavior and 2) the relation between caregiver health behaviors and child

unhealthy eating was moderated by child ASD symptomatology. Neither child adaptive

behavior functioning nor child ASD symptomatology meaningfully moderated the

association between caregiver health behaviors and child physical activity or caregiver

health behaviors and child screen time. In sum, this study added to the literature by

providing novel information that is consistent with health literature on typically

developing children. The study findings demonstrate important associations between

caregiver health behaviors and child health behaviors that will be useful for clinicians and

in guiding future research.


-----

APPENDIX: TABLES AND FIGURES

Figure 1

_Conceptual Model_

_Note. Caregiver health behaviors include both caregiver physical activity and eating_

habits.


-----

Figure 2

_Family Lifestyle Survey (FLSS)_


-----

-----

Figure 3

_Moderation Effects of Dichotomized Vineland Composite Scores on the Association_

_Between Caregiver Health Behaviors and Child Unhealthy Eating Habits_


-----

Figure 4

_Moderation Effects of Dichotomized SCQ Scores on the Association Between Caregiver_

_Health Behaviors and Child Unhealthy Eating Habits_


-----

Table 1

_Demographic Information for Caregivers and Children (N = 77)_

Caregiver Children
Characteristic _M or % (SD)_ Characteristic _M or % (SD)_

Age (years) 38.74 (8.67) Age (years) 3.88 (0.81)

% Female 98.70 % Male 63.60

% White/Non-Latinx 23.40 % White/Non-Latinx 24.70

% Latinx 70.10 % Latinx 68.80

% Monolingual- Spanish 58.40 % SPED[a] eligibility 72.70

% > Partial college 46.80 % Health concerns 31.20

% Employed full-time 28.60 Primary diagnosis

% Partner in the home 89.60 ASD 44.20

% ≤ 50,000 19.50 Speech lang.
delay 23.40

Other 31.20

_Note. “Other” = genetic disorder/syndrome, sensory disorder, learning disability, social-_

emotional delay, developmental delay, and/or cerebral palsy.

a“SPED” = special education.


-----

Table 2

_Descriptive Statistics for Caregiver and Child Composite Scores_

Variable _n_ _M_ _SD_


Caregiver health

behaviors

Child unhealthy


76 25.82 7.04


eating 76 4.20 2.87

Child physical

activity 77 6.51 3.80

Child screen time 77 5.74 3.13

_Note. The range of possible scores for caregiver health behaviors is 0-40. The range of_

possible scores for child unhealthy eating is 0-28. The range of possible scores for child

physical activity was 0-20. The range for child screen time is 0-16. Ranges were

developed by multiplying the number of items comprising each respective composite by

the number of response options on the Likert scale.


-----

Table 3

_Descriptive Statistics for the Adaptive Behavior Standard Scores (Vineland-3) and Social_
_Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)_

Subscales _n_ _M_ _SD_

Communication 60 68.40 13.94

Daily living skills 60 73.08 14.47

Socialization 60 74.40 11.34

Motor skills 49 73.82 12.90

ABC 60 70.58 10.95

ABC median split

High ABC Vine 30  - 71

Low ABC Vine 30 < 70

SCQ total score 74 15.09 7.68

SCQ median split

High total SCQ 37  - 14

Low total SCQ 37 < 13

_Note. Distributions are unimodal and approximately symmetrical with no severe skew_

and no severe outliers.


-----

Table 4

_Correlations Between Study Variables and Demographics_

Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1. Caregiver race – Latinx —


2. Caregiver education -.58***

3. Household income (cat.)[a] -.69***


—

.53*** —


4. Caregiver health behaviors .06 .01 -.04 —

5. Child unhealthy eating .23* -.13 -.20 -.25* —

6. Child physical activity .04 -.07 -.11 .44*** .04 —

7. Child screen time -.06 .09 .00 -.03 .08 .22 —

8. SCQ .10 -.30** -.19 .14 -.13 -.09 -.12 —

9. Vineland ABC -.38** .50*** .47*** .03 .03 -.00 .07 -.52*** —

_Note. ***p < .001, **p < .01, *p < .05_

a Household income was categorized into 13 groups: 1 = “$4,999 or less”, 2 = “$5,000 to $9,999”, 3 = “$10,000 to $14,999”, 4
= “$15,000 to $19,999”, 5 = “$20,000 to $24,999”, 6 = “$25,000 to $29,999”, 7 = “$30,000 to $39,999”, 8 = “$40,000 to
$49,999”, 9 = “$50,000 to $59,999”, 10 = “$60,000 to $69,999”, 11 = “$70,000 to $79,999”, 12 = “$80,000 to $89,999”, 13 =
“$90,000 or more.”


-----

Table 5

_Regression Results for Child Unhealthy Eating: Vineland Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


-.25 .05 -2.24 .028 -.28 .06 -2.20 .032 1.56 .42 1.66 .103


Vineland ABC .04 .04 .31 .760 1.13 .16 2.00 .051

Caregiver health
behaviors x Vineland -2.18 .01 -1.97 .053
ABC

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .06, F = 5.01, p = .028. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .08, ∆F = 2.44, p = .096. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .06, ∆F = 3.90, p = .053.

a n = 60. b n = 77.


-----

Table 6

_Regression Results for Child Physical Activity: Vineland Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


.44 .06 4.18 < .001 .34 .06 2.70 .009 -1.41 .44 -1.52 .134


Vineland ABC -.01 .04 -.09 .926 -1.05 .17 -1.88 .066

Caregiver health
behaviors x Vineland 2.06 .01 1.90 .062
ABC

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .19, F = 17.44, p < .001. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .11, ∆F = 3.66, p = .032. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .05, ∆F = 3.61, p =

.062.

a n = 60. b n = 77.


-----

Table 7

_Regression Results for Child Screen Time: Vineland Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


-.03 .05 -.25 .801 -.10 .06 -.75 .455 -.43 .48 -.42 .674


Vineland ABC .08 .04 .59 .559 -.17 .18 -.19 .849

Caregiver health
behaviors x Vineland .39 .01 .33 .745
ABC

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .001, F = .06, p = .801. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .02, ∆F = .44, p = .644. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .002, ∆F = .12, p = .745.

a n = 60. b n = 77.


-----

Table 8

_Regression Results for Child Unhealthy Eating: SCQ Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


-.25 .05 -2.24 .028 -.29 .05 -2.54 .013 -.97 .10 -4.10 < .001


Child SCQ scores -.09 .04 -.74 .461 -1.39 .16 -3.31 .001

Caregiver health
behaviors x SCQ 1.59 .01 3.22 .002

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .06, F = 5.01, p = .028. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .10, ∆F = 3.84, p = .026. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .12, ∆F = 10.37, p =

.002.

a n = 74. b n = 77.


-----

Table 9

_Regression Results for Child Physical Activity: SCQ Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


.44 .06 4.18 < .001 .43 .06 4.00 < .001 .50 .13 2.08 .041


Child SCQ scores -.15 .05 -1.40 .166 -.03 .21 -.07 .947

Caregiver health
behaviors x SCQ -.15 .01 -.30 .765

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .19, F = 17.44, p < .001. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .19, ∆F = 8.32, p = .001. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .001, ∆F = .09, p =

.765.

a n = 74. b n = 77.


-----

Table 10

_Regression Results for Child Screen Time: SCQ Scores[a]_ _and Caregiver Health Behaviors[b]_ _(N = 77)_

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Parameter

_b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_ _b_ _SE_ _t_ _p_


Caregiver health
behaviors


-.03 .05 -.25 .801 -.08 .05 -.66 .509 -.36 .12 -1.37 .176


Child SCQ scores -.10 .05 -.87 .390 -.64 .19 -1.38 .173

Caregiver health
behaviors x SCQ .65 .01 1.19 .237

_Note. Model 1 R[2]_ = .001, F = .06, p = .801. Model 2 ∆R[2] = .02, ∆F = .69, p = .505. Model 3 ∆R[2] = .02, ∆F = 1.43, p = .237.

a n = 74. b n = 77.


-----

REFERENCES CITED

Abbeduto L., Seltzer M. M., Shattuck P., Krauss M.W., Orsmond G., & Murphy M. M.
(2004). Psychological well-being and coping in mothers of youths with autism,
Down syndrome, or fragile X syndrome. American Journal of Mental
_Retardation, 109(3), 237-254._

Abraido-Lanza, A. F., White K., Vasques, E. (2004). Immigrant populations and health.
In: Anderson N., (Ed). Encyclopedia of health and behavior. Sage Publications.

Ahearn, W. H., Castine, T., Nault, K., & Green, G. (2001). An assessment of food
acceptance in children with autism or pervasive developmental disorder-not
otherwise specified. Journal of Autism Developmental Disorders, 31, 505-511.

Aishworiya, R., Kiing, S. J., Chan H. Y., Tung, S. S., & Law, E. (2018). Screen time
exposure and sleep among children with developmental disabilities. Journal of
_Pediatrics and Child Health, 54(8), 889-894._

Alexander, M. (2010). The new jim crow: Mass incarceration in the age of
colorblindness. The New Press.

American Diabetes Association. (2020). What causes diabetes? Find out and take
_control._
[American Diabetes Association. www.diabetes.org.](http://www.diabetes.org/)

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
_disorders (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Association._

American Psychiatric Association. (2016). Media and young minds. Pediatrics, 138(5),

[http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/pediatrics/138/5/e20162591.full.pdf](http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/pediatrics/138/5/e20162591.full.pdf)

Anderson, S. E., Economos, C. D., & Must, A. (2008). Active play and screen time in US
children aged 4 to 11 years in relation to sociodemographic and weight status
characteristics: A nationally representative cross-sectional analysis. BMC Public
_Health, 8, 366. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-366_

Bandini, L. G., Anderson, S. E., Curtin, C., Cermak, S., Evans, E. W., Scampini, R.,
Maslin, M., & Must, A. (2010). Food selectivity in children with autism spectrum
disorders and typically developing children. The Journal of Pediatrics, 157(2),
259–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.02.013

Bandini, L. G., Curtin, C., Hamad, C, Tybor, D. J., & Must, A. (2005). Prevalence of
overweight in children with developmental disorders in the continuous national
health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) 1999-2002. Journal of
_Pediatrics, 146(6), 738-743._


-----

Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. General Learning Press.

Baquero, B. & Parra-Medina, M. D. (2019). Chronic disease and the Latinx population:
Threats, challenges, and opportunities. In Martínez, D. A., & Rhodes, D. S. (Eds.),
_New and Emerging Issues in Latinx Health pp.19-44. Springer._

Bermudez, O. L., Falcon, L. M., & Tucker, K. L. (2000). Intake and food sources of
macronutrients among older Hispanic adults: Association with ethnicity
acculturation, and length of residence in the United States. Journal of the
_American Dietetic Association, 100(6), 665-673._

Bermudez, O. I., Velez-Carrasco, W., Schaefer, E. J., & Tucker, K. L. (2002). Dietary
and plasma lipid, lipoprotein, and apolipoprotein profiles among elderly
Hispanics and non-Hispanics and their association with diabetes. The American
_Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 76(6), 1214-1221._

Birch, L. L., & Davison, K. K. (2001). Family environmental factors influencing the
developing behavioral controls of food intake and childhood overweight.
_Pediatric Clinics of North America, 48(4), 893-907._

Birch L. L., Fisher J. O., Smiciklas-Wright J. O. (1999). Eat as do not as I say: Parental
influences on young girls' calcium intakes. The FASEB Journal, 13, 593.

Boyle, C. A., Boulet, S., Schieve, L., Cohen, R. A., Blumberg, S. J., Yeargin-Allsopp,
M., Visser, S., & Kogan, M. D. (2011). Trends in the prevalence of
developmental disabilities in US children, 1997–2008. Pediatrics, 27, 1034-1042.

Bower, K. J., Hales, P. D., Tate, F. D., Rubin, A. D., Benjamin E. S., & Ward S. D.
(2008). The childcare environment and children’s physical activity. American
_Journal of Preventative Medicine, 34(1). doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2007.09.022_

Braveman, P. A., Cubbin, C., Egerter, S., Williams, D. R., & Pamuk, E. (2010).

Socioeconomic disparities in health in the United States: What the patterns tell us.
_American Journal of Public Health, 186–196._
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.166082

Bremer, E., & Cairney, J. (2020). Adaptive behavior moderates health-related pathways
in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Journal of Autism and
_Developmental Disorders, 50(2), 491–499. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-_
04277-6

Brown, W. H., Pfeiffer, K. A., McIver, K. L., Dowda, M., Addy, C. L., & Pate, R. R.
(2009). Social and environmental factors associated with preschoolers'
nonsedentary physical activity. Child Development, 80(1), 45–58.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01245.x


-----

Caspersen, C. J., Powell, K. E., & Christenson, G. M. (1985). Physical activity, exercise,
and physical fitness: Definitions and distinctions for health-related research.
_Public Health Reports, 100(2), 126–131._

Center for Disease Control (CDC). (2013). Preventing Chronic Diseases and Reducing
_Health Risk Factors. Center for Disease Control and Prevention._
[https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dch/programs/healthycommunitiesprogram/overvie](http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dch/programs/healthycommunitiesprogram/overvie)
w/diseasesandrisks.html

Center for Disease Control (CDC). (2020). Heart disease facts. Center for Disease
[Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.html](http://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.html)

Center for Disease Control (CDC). (2020). Leading causes of death. Center for Disease
[Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-)
death.htm

Center for Disease Control (CDC). (2015). Physical activity for a healthy weight. Center
for Disease Control and Prevention.
[https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/physical_activity/index.html](http://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/physical_activity/index.html)

Center for Disease Control (CDC). (2018). Physical activity guidelines for Americans_second edition. Center for Disease Control and Prevention._
https://health.gov/paguidelines/secondedition/pdf/Physical_Activity_Guidelines_2nd_edition.pdf

Cespedes, E. M., Gillman, M. W., Kleinman, K., Rifas-Shiman, S. L., Redline, S., &
Taveras, E. M. (2014). Television viewing, bedroom television, and sleep
duration from infancy to mid-childhood. Pediatrics,133(5).
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/133/5/e1163pmid:24733878

Chan, D. (2009). So why ask me? Are self-report data really that bad. Statistical and
_methodological myths and urban legends: Doctrine, verity and fable in the_
_organizational and social sciences, 309-336._

Common Sense Media. (2017). The common sense census: Media use by kinds age zero
to eight 2017.
[https://www.commonsensemedia.org/sites/default/files/uploads/research/csm_zer](http://www.commonsensemedia.org/sites/default/files/uploads/research/csm_zer)
otoeight_fullreport_release_2.pdf

Couch, A., & Keniston, K. (1961). Agreeing response set and social desirability. The
_Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62(1), 175–179._
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0047429


-----

Cox, R., Skouteris, H., Rutherford, L., Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Dell’Aquila, D., &
Hardy, L. L. (2012). Television viewing, television content, food intake, physical
activity and body mass index: A cross-sectional study of preschool children aged
2-6 years. Health Promotion Journal of Australia, 23(1), 58–62.

Cummins, S., & Macintyre, S. (2002). “Food deserts”—evidence and assumption in
health policy making. BMI, 325(7361), 436-438.

Cuy Castellanos, D. (2015). Dietary acculturation in Latinos/Hispanics in the United
States. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 9(1), 31–36.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1559827614552960

Curtin, C., Anderson, S. E., Must, A., & Bandini, L. (2010). The prevalence of obesity in
children with autism: A secondary data analysis using nationally representative
data from the National Survey of Children’s Health. BMC Pediatrics, 10, 0–4.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2431-10-11

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.

_Psychometrika, 16(3), 297-334._

Darmon, N., Drewnowski, A. (2008). Does social class predict diet quality? American
_Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 87, 1107–1117._

De, S., Small, J., & Baur, L. A. (2008). Overweight and obesity among children with
developmental disabilities. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental Disability,
_33(1), 43-77. doi: 10.1080/13668250701875137._

de Wolff, P., & Van Slijpe, A. R. D. (1973). The relation between income, intelligence,
education and social background. European Economic Review, 4(3), 235-264.

Dishion, T. J., & Kavanagh, K. (2003). Intervening in adolescent problem behavior: A
_family-centered approach. Guilford Press._

Drewnowski, A. (2010). The cost of US foods as related to their nutritive value.

_American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 92, 1181–1188_

Emerson, E. (2009). Overweight and obesity in 3- and 5-year-old children with and
without developmental delay. Public Health, 123(2). doi:
10.1016/j.puhe.2008.10.020

Evans, E. W., Must, A., Anderson, S. E., Curtin, C., Scampini, R., Maslin, M., &
Bandini, L. (2012). Dietary patterns and body mass index in children with autism
and typically developing children. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 6(1),
399–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2011.06.014


-----

Fairthorne, J., de Klerk, N., & Leonard, H. (2015). Health of mothers of children with
intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder: A review of the literature.
_Medical Research Archives, (3)._

Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A. G. (2009). Statistical power analyses
using G* Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behavior
_Research Methods, 41, 1149-1160. doi:10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149_

Feizi, A., Najmi, B., Salesi, A., Chorami, M., & Hoveidafar, R. (2014). Parenting stress
among mothers of children with different physical, mental, and psychological
problems. Journal of Research in Medical Sciences: The Official Journal of
_Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, 19(2), 145–152._

Ferreria, I., van der Horst, K., Wendel-Vos, W., Kremers, S., van Lenthe, F. J., Brug J.
(2006). Environmental correlates of physical activity in youth–a review and
update. Obesity Reviews, 8(2), 129–54.

Gustafson, S. L. & Rhodes, R. E. (2006). Parental correlates of physical activity in
children and early adolescents. Sports Medicine, 36(1), 79–97.

Handbury, J., Rahkovsky, I. M., & Schnell, M. (2015). What drives nutritional
disparities? Retail access and food purchases across the socioeconomic spectrum.
_Retail Access and Food Purchases Across the Socioeconomic Spectrum._

Healy, S., Haegele, J. A., Grenier, M., & Garcia, J. M. (2017). Physical activity, screentime behavior, and obesity among 13-year olds in Ireland with and without autism
spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 47(1), 49–
57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2920-4

Hinckson, A. E., & Curtis, A. (2013). Measuring physical activity in children and youth
living with intellectual disabilities: A systematic review. Research in
_Developmental Disabilities, 34(1), 72-86._

Hinkley, T., Crawford, D., Salmon, J., Okely, A.D., & Hesketh, K. (2008). Preschool
children and physical activity: A review of correlates. American Journal of
_Preventive Medicine, 34(5), 435–441._

Hinkley, T., Verbestel, V., Ahrens, W., Lissner, L., Molnar, D., Moreno, L. A., Pigeot, I.,
Pohlabeln, H, Reisch, L. A., Russo, P., Veidebaum, T., Tornaritis, M., Williams,
G., Henauw, S. D., & Bourdeaudhuij, D. I. (2014). Early childhood electronic
media use as a predictor of poorer well-being: A prospective cohort study. JAMA
_Pediatrics, 168(5), 485-492._

IBM Corp. (2016). IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 25.0. IBM Corp.


-----

Jackson, M. D., Reilly, J. J., Kelly, A. L., Montgomery, C., Grant, S., & Paton J.Y.
(2003). Objectively measured physical activity in a representative sample of 3- to
4-year-old children. Obesity Research, 11, 420-425.

Johnson, R. K., Panely C.V., Wang M. Q. (2001). Associations between the milk mothers
drink and the milk consumed by their school-aged children. Family Economics
_and Nutrition Review, 13, 27-36._

Jones, T. W. (1982). Treatment of behavior-related eating problems in retarded students:
A review of the literature. In J. H. Hollis & C. E. Myers (Eds.), Life threatening
_behavior: analysis and intervention (pp. 3–26). American Association on Mental_
Deficiency.

Jones, N. R.V., Conklin, A. I., Suhrcke, M., & Monsivais, P. (2014). The growing price
gap between more and less healthy foods: Analysis of a novel longitudinal UK
dataset. PLoS One, 9.

Kelly, A. L., Reilly, J. J., Fisher, A., Montgomery, C., Williamson, A., McColl, H. J.,
Paton, Y. J., & Grant, S. (2006). Effect of socioeconomic status on objectively
measured physical activity. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 91, 35-38.

Kilty, K. M., & Haymes, M. V. D. (2000). Racism, nativism, and exclusion: Public
policy, immigration, and the Latino experience in the United States. Journal of
_Poverty, 4, 1-25._

Lang, R., Koegel, K. L., Ashbaugh, K., Regester, A. Ence, W., & Smith, W. (2010).

Physical exercise and individuals with autism spectrum disorders: A systematic
review. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 4(4), 565-576.

Lee, M. H., Park, C., Matthews, A. K., & Hsieh, K. (2017). Differences in physical
health, and health behaviors between family caregivers of children with and
without disabilities. Disability and Health Journal, 10(4), 565-570.

Leech R. M., McNaughton S. A., & Timperio A. (2014). The clustering of diet, physical
activity and sedentary behavior in children and adolescents: A review.
_International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 11(4)._

Levinson, J. L., & Reid, G. (1993). The effects of exercise intensity on the stereotypic
behaviors of individuals with autism. Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly, 10(3),
255 268.

Li, W., Youssef, G., Procter-Gray, E., Olendzki, B., Cornish, T., Hayes, R., Churchill, L.,
Kane, K., Brown, K., & Magee, M. F. (2017). Racial differences in eating
patterns and food purchasing behaviors among urban older women. The Journal
_of Nutrition, Health & Aging, 21(10), 1190–1199. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12603-_
016-0834-7


-----

Liss, M., Harel, B., Fein, D., Allen, D., Dunn, M., Feinstein, C., Morrie, R., Waterhouse,
L., & Rapin, I. (2001). Predictors and correlates of adaptive functioning in
children with developmental disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental
_Disorders, 31, 219–230. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010707417274_

Lin, H., Bermudez, O. I., & Tucker, K. L. (2003). Dietary patterns of Hispanic elders are
associated with acculturation and obesity. The Journal of Nutrition, 133(11),
3651-3657.

Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C., Pickles,
A., & Rutter, M. (2000). The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule—Generic:
A standard measure of social and communication deficits associated with the
spectrum of autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30(3), 205223.

Lorson, B. A., Melgar-Quinonez, H. R., & Taylor, C. A. (2009). Correlates of fruit and
vegetable intakes in U.S. children. Journal of American Dietary Association, 3,
474–478.

MacDonald, M., Esposito, P., & Ulrich, D. (2011). The physical activity patterns of
children with autism. BMC Research Notes, 4, 422.

MacDonald, E. E., Hastings, R. P., & Fitzsimons, E. (2010). Psychological acceptance
mediates the impact of the behavior problems of children with intellectual
disability on fathers’ psychological adjustment. Journal of Applied Research in
_Intellectual Disabilities, 23(1), 27–37. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2009.00546.x_

Madigan, S., Browne, D., & Racine, N. (2019). Association between screen time and
children’s performance on a developmental screening test. JAMA Pediatrics,
_173(3), 244-250. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2018.5056_

Malone, C., Sharif, F., & Glennon – Slattery, C. (2016). Growth and nutritional risk in
children with developmental delay. Irish Journal of Medical Science, 185(4), 839846.

Mandell, D. S., Wiggins, L. D., Carpenter, L. A., Daniels, J., DiGuiseppi, C., Durkin, M.
S., Giarelli, E., Morrier, M. J., Nicholas, J. S., Pinto-Martin, J. A., Shattuck, P. T.,
Thomas, K. C., Yeargin-Allsopp, M., & Kirby, R. S. (2009). Racial/ethnic
disparities in the identification of children with autism spectrum disorders.
_American Journal of Public Health, 99(3), 493–498._
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.131243

Masefield, S. C., Prady, S. L., Sheldon, T. A., Small, N., Jarvis, S., & Pickett, K. E.
(2020). The caregiver health effects of caring for young children with
developmental disabilities: A Meta-analysis. Maternal and Child Health Journal,
_24(5), 561–574. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-020-02896-5_


-----

[Mayo Clinic. (2018). Heart disease. Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-](http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-)

conditions/heart-disease/symptoms-causes/syc-20353118

Mazurek, M. O., Shattuck, P. T., Wagner, M., & Cooper, B. P. (2012). Prevalence and
correlates of screen-based media use among youths with autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Autism Developmental Disorders, 42(8), 1757-1767.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-011-1413-8

Mazurek, M. O., & Wenstrup, C. (2013). Television, video game and social media use
among children with ASD and typically developing siblings. Journal of Autism
_and Developmental Disorders, 43(6), 1258–1271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-_
012-1659-9

McGillivray, J., McVilly, K., Skouteris, H., & Boganin, C. (2013). Parental factors
associated with obesity in children with disability: A systematic review. Obesity
_Reviews, 14(7), 541–54._

Memari, A. H., Ghaheri, B., Ziaee, V., Kordi, R., Hafizi, S. & Moshayedi, P. (2012).
Physical activity in children and adolescents with autism assessed by triaxial
accelerometry. Pediatric Obesity, 8(2), 150-158.

Memari, A. H., Ziaee, V., Shayestehfar, M., Ghanouni, P., Mansournia, M. A., &
Moshayedi, P. (2013). Cognitive flexibility impairments in children with autism
spectrum disorders: Links to age, gender and child outcomes. Research in
_Developmental Disabilities, 34(10), 3218–3225._
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2013.06.033

Mensah, A. G., Mokdad, H. A., Ford, S. E., Greenlund, J. K., & Croft B. J. (2005). State
of disparities in cardiovascular health in the United States. Circulation, 111(10),
1233-1241.

Miodrag, N., Burke, M., Tanner‐Smith, E., & Hodapp, R. M. (2015). Adverse health in
parents of children with disabilities and chronic health conditions: A meta‐
analysis using the Parenting Stress Index's Health sub‐domain. Journal of
_Intellectual Disability Research, 59(3), 257-271._

Miodrag, N., & Hodapp, R. M. (2010). Chronic stress and health among parents of
children with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Current Opinion in
_Psychiatry, 23(5), 407-411._

Moore, L. L., Lombardi, D. A., White, M. J., Campbell, J. L., Oliveria, S. A., & Ellison,

R. C. (1991). Influence of parent’s physical activity levels on activity levels of
young children. Journal of Pediatrics, 118(2), 215–219.


-----

Morello-Frosch, R., Pastor Jr, M., Porras, C., & Sadd, J. (2002). Environmental justice
and regional inequality in southern California: implications for future research.
_Environmental Health Perspectives, 110, 149-154._

Morland, K., Wing, S., Roux, A. D., & Poole, C. (2002). Neighborhood characteristics
associated with the location of food stores and food service places. American
_Journal of Preventive Medicine, 22(1), 23-29._

Morales, L. S., Lara, M., Kington, R. S., Valdez, R. O., & Escarce, J. J. (2002).
Socioeconomic, cultural, and behavioral factors affecting Hispanic health
outcomes. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 13(4), 477–503.
https://doi.org/10.1177/104920802237532

Morgan, P. L., Farkas, G., Hillemeier, M. M., & Maczuga, S. (2017). Replicated
evidence of racial and ethnic disparities in disability identification in US schools.
_Educational Researcher, 46(6), 305-322._

Morin, A. (2014). What you need to know about developmental delays. Understood.
[https://www.understood.org/en/learning-attention-issues/treatments-](http://www.understood.org/en/learning-attention-issues/treatments-)
approaches/early-intervention/what-you-need-to-know-about-developmentaldelays

Morrison, R. S., Wallenstein, S., Natale, D. K., Senzel, R. S., & Huang, L. L. (2000).
“We don't carry that”—failure of pharmacies in predominantly nonwhite
neighborhoods to stock opioid analgesics. New England Journal of Medicine,
_342(14), 1023-1026._

Muller, A. (2002). Education, income inequality, and mortality: A multiple regression
analysis. British Medical Journal, 324(7328), 23.

Must, A., Curtin, C., Hubbard, K., Sikich, L., Bedford, J., & Bandini, L. (2014). Obesity
prevention for children with developmental disabilities. Current Obesity Reports,
_3(2), 156–170. doi:10.1007/s13679-014-0098-7_

Must, A., Phillips, S. M., Curtin, C., Anderson, S. E., Maslin, M., Lividini, K., &
Bandini, L. G. (2014). Comparison of sedentary behaviors between children with
autism spectrum disorders and typically developing children. Autism: The
_International Journal of Research and Practice, 18(4), 376–384._
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361313479039

Nally, B., Houlton, B., & Ralph, S. (2000). Researches in brief: The management of
television and video by parents of children with autism. Autism, 4(3), 331–337.

National Institute of Health. (2016). Benefits of Physical Activity. National Institute of
[Health. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/phys/benefits.](http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/phys/benefits)


-----

Neuhouser, M. L., Thompson, B., Coronado, G. D., & Solomon, C. C. (2004). Higher fat
intake and lower fruit and vegetables intakes are associated with greater
acculturation among Mexicans living in Washington State. Journal of the
_American Dietetic Association, 104(1), 51-57._

Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports
on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84(3), 231–259.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231

Noe-Bustamante, L., Mora, L., & Lopez, M. (2020). Latinx used by just 3% of U.S.
_Hispanics: About one-in-four have heard of it. Pew Research Center._
[https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2020/08/11/about-one-in-four-u-s-hispanics-](http://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2020/08/11/about-one-in-four-u-s-hispanics-)
have-heard-of-latinx-but-just-3-use-it/

O'Donoghue, G., Kennedy, A., Puggina, A., Aleksovska, K., Buck, C., Burns, C.,
Cardon, G., Carlin, A., Ciarapica, D., Colotto, M., Condello, G., Coppinger, T.,
Cortis, C., D'Haese, S., De Craemer, M., Di Blasio, A., Hansen, S., Iacoviello, L.,
Issartel, J., Izzicupo, P., … Boccia, S. (2018). Socio-economic determinants of
physical activity across the life course: A "DEterminants of DIet and Physical
ACtivity" (DEDIPAC) umbrella literature review. PloS One, 13(1),
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0190737

Oliver, G., Wardle, J., & Gibson, E. L. (2000). Stress and food choice: A laboratory
study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 62(6), 853-865.

Paczkowski, E., & Baker, B. L. (2008). Parenting children with developmental delays:
The role of positive beliefs. Journal of Mental Health Research in Intellectual
_Disabilities, 1(3), 156. doi:10.1080/19315860801988392_

Palmer, S., & Horn, S. (1978). Feeding problems in children. In S. Palmer & S. Ekvalt
_(Eds.), Pediatric nutrition in developmental disorders, 13 (pp. 107–129). Charles_
S. Thomas Publisher.

Pate, R. R., McIver, K., Dowda, M., Brown, W. H., & Addy, C. (2008). Directly
observed physical activity levels in preschool children. Journal of School Health,
_78, 438– 444._

Pearson, N., Biddle, S. J. H., Griffiths, P., Johnston, J. P., & Haycraft, E. (2018).

Clustering and correlates of screen-time and eating behaviours among young
children. BMC Public Health, 18(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-0185698-9

Pearson, N., Griffiths, P., Biddle, S. J., Johnston, J. P., McGeorge, S., & Haycraft, E.
(2017). Clustering and correlates of screen-time and eating behaviours among young
adolescents. BMC Public Health, 17, 533.


-----

Pechey, R., & Monsivais, P. (2016). Socioeconomic inequalities in the healthiness of
food choices: Exploring the contributions of food expenditures. Preventive
_Medicine, 88, 203–209. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.04.012_

Perske, R., Clifton, A., McClean, B. M., & Stein, J. I. (Eds.) (1977). Mealtimes for
_severely and profoundly mentally-handicapped persons: New concepts and_
_attitudes. University Park Press._

Provost, B., Lopez, B. R. & Heimerl, S. (2007). A comparison of motor delays in young
children: Autism spectrum disorder, developmental delay, and developmental
concerns. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37, 321-328.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-006-0170-6

Raiten, D. J., & Massaro, T. (1986). Perspectives on the nutritional ecology of autistic
children. Journal of Autism Developmental Disorders, 16, 133-143.

Ramsay, S. A., Shriver, L. H., & Taylor, C. A. (2016). Variety of fruit and vegetables is
related to preschoolers' overall diet quality. Preventive Medicine Reports, 5, 112117. doi:10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.12.003

Rutter, M., Bailey A., & Lord, C. (2003). The Social Communication
_Questionnaire. Western Psychological Services._

Saffer, H., Dave, D., Grossman, M., & Leung, L. A. (2011). Racial, ethnic, and gender
differences in physical activity. Journal of Human Capital, 7(4), 378–410.
doi:10.1086/671200

Sallis, J. F., Nader, P. R., Broyles, S. L., Berry, C. C., Elder, J. P., McKenzie, T. L., &
Nelson, J. A. (1993). Correlates of physical activity at home in MexicanAmerican and Anglo-American preschool children. Health Psychology, 12(5),
390-398. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.12.5.390](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.12.5.390)

Sanders, R. M., Patel, K. R., Le Grice, B., & Shepherd, W. R. (1993). Children with
persistent feeding difficulties: An observational analysis of the feeding
interactions of problem and non-problem eaters. Health Psychology, 12(1), 64-73.

Sandt, D. D. R., & Frey, G. C. (2005). Comparison of physical activity levels between
children with and without autistic spectrum disorders. Adapted Physical Activity
_Quarterly, 22, 146–159._

Schiffman, S. S., Graham, B. G., Sattely-Miller, E. A., & Peterson-Dancy, M. (2000).
Elevated and sustained desire for sweet taste in African-Americans: A potential
factor in the development of obesity. Nutrition, 16(10), 886-893.


-----

Schreck, K. A., Williams, K., & Smith, A. F. (2004). A comparison of eating behaviors
between children with and without autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
_Disorders, 34(4), 433–438._
https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JADD.0000037419.78531.86

Shane, H., & Albert, P. (2008). Electronic screen media for persons with autism spectrum
disorders: Results of a survey. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
_38(8), 1499–1508._

South, M., Ozonoff, S., & McMahon, W. M. (2005). Repetitive behavior profiles in
Asperger syndrome and high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism and
_Developmental Disorders, 35(2), 145–158._

Srinivasan, S. M., Pescatello, L. S., & Bhat, A. N. (2014). Current perspectives on
physical activity and exercise recommendations for children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorders. Physical Therapy, 94(6), 875–889.
https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130157

Torres, S. J., & Nowson, C. A. (2007). Relationship between stress, eating behavior, and
obesity. Nutrition, 23(11), 887-894.

Trost, S. G., Sallis, J. F., Pate, R. R., Freedson, P. S., Taylor, W. C., & Dowda, M.
(2003). Evaluating a model of parental influence on youth physical activity.
_American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 25(4), 277–282._

Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2018). Associations between screen time and lower
psychological well-being among children and adolescents: Evidence from a
population-based study. Preventive Medicine Reports, 12, 271-283.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2018.10.003

U.S. Census Bureau. (2014). The 2012 statistical abstract. U.S. Census Bureau.

[http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/.](http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/)

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2010). Dietary guidelines for Americans. U.S. Census
[Bureau.http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/sites/default/files/dietary_guidelines_for_ameri](http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/sites/default/files/dietary_guidelines_for_ameri)
cans/PolicyDoc.pdf

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2008). Physical activity guidelines for
_Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services._
https://health.gov/sites/default/files/2019-09/paguide.pdf

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2018). Screen time and children. National Library of
Medicine. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000355.htm


-----

Valentini, C. N. & Rudisill, E. M. (2004). Motivational climate, motor-skill development,
and perceived competence: Two studies of developmentally delayed kindergarten
children. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 23(3), 216-234

Ventura, A. K., & Birch, L. L. (2008). Does parenting affect children's eating and weight
status? International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 5, 15.

Volkmar, F., Sparrow, S., Goudreau, D., & Cicchetti, D. (1987). Social deficits in autism:
An operational approach using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales. Journal of
_the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26, 156-161._

Wang, Y., & Chen, X. (2011). How much of racial/ethnic disparities in dietary intakes,
exercise, and weight status can be explained by nutrition- and health-related
psychosocial factors and socioeconomic status among U.S. adults? Journal of the
_American Dietetic Association, 111(12), 1904–1911._
doi:10.1016/j.jada.2011.09.036

Wardle, J., Carnell, S., & Cooke, L. (2005). Parental control over feeding and children's
fruit and vegetable intake: How are they related?. Journal of the American
_Dietetic Association, 105, 227-232._

Welk, G. J., Wood, K., & Morss, G. (2003). Parental influences on physical activity in
children: An exploration of potential mechanisms. Pediatric Exercise Science,
_15(1), 19–33._

Wen, L. M., Baur, L. A., Rissel, C., Xu, H., & Simpson, J. M. (2014). Correlates of body
mass index and overweight and obesity of children aged 2 years: Findings from
the healthy beginnings trial. Obesity, 22(7), 1723–1730

Whitt-Glover, M. C., O’Neill, K. L., & Stettler, N. (2006). Physical activity patterns in
children with and without down syndrome. Developmental Neurorehabilitation,
_9(2), 158–164._

Whiteley, P., Rodgers, J., & Shattock, P. (2000). Feeding patterns in autism. Autism, 4(2),
207-211.

Williams, P. G., Dalrymple, N., & Neal, J. (2000). Eating habits of children with autism.

_Pediatric Nurse, 26, 259-264._

Yau, Y. H., & Potenza, M. N. (2013). Stress and eating behaviors. Minerva
_Endocrinologica, 38(3), 255–267._

Zablotsky, B., Black, L., & Blumberg, S. (2017). Estimated prevalence of children with
_diagnosed developmental disabilities in the United States, 2014-2016. Center for_
Disease Control and Prevention.
[https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db291.htm](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db291.htm)


-----

Zecevic, C. A., Tremblay, L., Lovsin, T., & Michel, L. (2010). Parental influence on
young children's physical activity. International Journal of Pediatrics, 468-526.
doi:10.1155/2010/468526

Zeng, N., Ayyub, M., Sun, H., Wen, X., Xiang, P., & Gao, Z. (2017). Effects of physical
activity on motor skills and cognitive development in early childhood: A
systematic review. BioMed Research International. doi:10.1155/2017/2760716


-----

