





Abstract 
Primary objectives: To study the variables that relate to outcome after mild traumatic brain injury (TBI). 
Methods and procedures: Sixty-seven adults with disappointing recoveries after mild TBI most occurring in a compensation or 
litigation context were studied with regard to pre-injury, neuro-trauma, physical, emotional and cognitive variables on 
outcome. Validity of physical, emotional and cognitive symptoms was controlled for. 
Main outcomes and results: Except for prior psychological traumatization, neither pre-injury, neuro-trauma or cognitive 
variables were related to outcome. Variables most consistently related to outcome were depression, pain and symptom 
invalidity on measures of response bias. These factors accounted for the majority of variance in outcome. 
Conclusions: In cases of poor recovery after mild TBI where compensation or litigation may be a factor, most of the variance 
in recovery seems to be explained by depression, pain and symptom invalidity, rather than by the injury variables themselves. 


Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a significant public 
health problem. One study [1] concluded that 
(cid:1)1.5 million new cases of brain injury occur each 
year in the US, with the majority of these being in the 
mild severity category. In most cases of mild TBI, 
a good recovery can usually be anticipated. In those 
cases of mild TBI with a good outcome, recovery 
usually occurs over a short period of time; not usually 
lasting longer than several weeks to 3 months in the 
majority of cases [2–4]. Other studies found that 
return to normal may not be complete at 3 months 
[5] and those with residual symptoms which are still 
present at 3 months or longer tend to have problems 
which are often quite persistent [2]. This raises the 
possibility that different underlying mechanisms may 
account for those with mild TBI who recover early 
vs. those whose recovery is much more prolonged or 
incomplete. 
Those patients who apparently have mild TBI 
but who fail to recover as quickly and completely as 


expected have been a clinically perplexing group 
and various explanations have been proposed to 
account for the atypical recoveries which people in 
this group experience. These alternative diagnostic 
formulations 
include under-estimation of brain 
injury severity, concurrent dementia, pre-existing 
psychiatric 
personality 
factors and social and demographic factors which 
interact with injury 
circumstances. Post-injury 
explanations for failure to recover as expected include 
new psychiatric conditions occurring since the injury 
such as depression, anxiety disorder and conversion 
disorder; headache and other non-cephalic pain; 
dizziness; insomnia; medication side effects; and the 
influence of compensation and litigation factors [6]. 
Several studies have been interpreted as indicating 
that failure to recover as expected after mild TBI may 
be the result of the neuro-trauma itself [7–10]. These 
studies have tended to rely on specialized neuro- 
imaging techniques to demonstrate the presence of 
cerebral abnormalities not in evidence with conven- 
tional imaging methods. McAllister et al. [11] have 
Correspondence: George Mooney, PhD, Division of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of Utah, 30 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City, 
Utah 84132, USA. Tel: 801 581 2449. Fax: 801 587 9466. E-mail: gmooney@hsc.utah.edu 
ISSN 0269–9052 print/ISSN 1362–301X online # 2005 Taylor & Francis 
DOI: 10.1080/02699050500110264 





written a very comprehensive review of the use of 
both structural and functional imaging in mild TBI. 
pre-morbid psychiatric 
conditions to mild brain injury recovery has also 
been proposed as another explanation for failure 
to recover as expected. Qualitative analyses have 
identified pre-existing personality 
characteristics 
such as over-achievement, perfectionism and depen- 
dency which can sometimes complicate the recovery 
process [12]. The relationship of pre-morbid affec- 
tive disturbance to recovery after mild TBI has also 
been investigated and in the case of depression, 
not found to have a significant relationship to the 
development of chronic post-concussion syndrome 
after mild TBI [13, 14]. 
Post-injury motivational factors have been impli- 
cated in some cases of failure to recover after mild 
TBI. A significant number of mild TBIs potentially 
occur within a compensation or litigation context 
and the possibility has been raised that symptoms 
can become reinforced by their 
financial con- 
sequences. A meta-analysis of this topic was carried 
out on 17 reported studies and concluded that 
financial 
incentives actually did have a moderate 
effect on mild TBI symptoms and disability [15]. 
Other studies addressing this issue have produced 
results that may lend support to this conclusion, 
including post-injury symptom magnification [16] 
and exaggeration of 
the quality of pre-injury 
functioning among individuals who have retained 
brain 
attorney 
injury [17]. 




Many mild TBIs occur as a result of motor vehicle 
in 
accidents. Post-injury psychiatric 
failure 
general have been implicated in cases of 
to recover after accidents and injuries. Especially 
when accompanied by serious physical 
injuries, 
motor vehicle accidents themselves frequently have 
significant emotional effects and can result in such 
mental health conditions as adjustment disorder, 
phobic disorder, panic attacks, acute stress disorder, 
post-traumatic stress disorder, major depressive 
disorder or one of the somatoform disorders [18]. 
Indeed, in a major trauma outcome study, functional 
outcome after serious trauma, regardless of the cause, 
was found to be determined as much by the presence 
of psychological morbidity such as depression as it 
was determined by physical dysfunction [19]. 
Regardless of the presence of TBI, accidents in gen- 
eral, especially when accompanied by injuries, seem 
to be pre-disposing factors for the development of 
post-accident psychiatric disorders. With regard to 
injury situations which result in mild TBI, several 
studies have 
the development of 
new psychiatric conditions since the injury may also 
the 
play an important 
recovery process. One study [20] found a high rate 


of emotional disorders in patients who had sustained 
mild TBI’s in motor vehicle accidents. The investiga- 
tor concluded that ‘emotional disorders added to per- 
sistent cognitive loss and other neuropsychological 
symptoms greatly impair the capacity to adapt after 
TBI’. Several other studies have resulted in similar 
findings. For example, post-injury psychological 
distress was strongly associated with prolonged post- 
concussion syndrome [21]. A prospective study 
found that psychiatric conditions were often present 
in those who fail to recover after mild TBI and that 
in those patients with mild TBI without concurrent 
psychiatric morbidity there usually could be the 
expectation of a quick and complete recovery [22]. 
A number of studies have found that the presence of 
a mild TBI was compatible with the development 
of injury-related psychological traumatization in the 
form of acute stress disorder and post-traumatic 
stress disorder [23–29]. One study even found that 
post-concussion syndrome symptoms were more pre- 
valent in mild TBI patients with post-traumatic stress 
disorder than in those without it [30]. The investiga- 
tors concluded that post-concussion symptoms may 
be ‘mediated by an interaction of neurological and 
psychological factors’. 
Other studies have found depression to be a 
frequently occurring factor in cases of mild TBI 
where the outcome is worse than expected. Major 
depression after mild TBI has been found to be 
associated with poor functional outcome and high 
distress levels [31], with disability and cognitive 
impairment [32] and with higher levels of post- 
concussion 
symptom endorsement 
[31, 33, 34]. After treatment for depression, cogni- 
tive impairments are significantly alleviated [35]. 

Depersonalization is a feeling of detachment from 
one’s body or sense of self that most people experi- 
ence as alien. Patients with TBI often describe it 
as feeling of being mentally foggy or as a sensation 
of being detached and off at a distance from things. 
Depersonalization is a form of dissociation or a 
state in which there is a disturbance in the integration 
of mind, body and environment. Depersonalization 
has been reported to be common after head injury 
and among those with mild TBI, more than 60% 
complained of depersonalization [36]. In the same 
mild TBI sample, depersonalization had a high 
rate of co-morbidity with post-traumatic stress 
disorder and vertigo. Relatedly, high scores on the 
Dissociative Experiences Scale, a probe for deper- 
sonalization and other dissociative symptoms, have 
been found in those with mild TBI who had 
prolonged or complicated recoveries [22]. 
Depersonalization and other symptoms of disso- 
ciation have been shown to have an impact on 
basic information processing and to be related 
to deficits of memory [37]. Thus, the development 
of unusual symptoms such as depersonalization may 
also be a factor in the long-term maintenance of 
problems after mild TBI. At this point, it is not 
yet clear if 
these unusual symptoms should be 
considered to be neurological in origin or if they 
are more appropriately seen in connection with 
co-morbid psychiatric conditions. 
Another factor which has been proposed to explain 
failure to recover as expected after mild TBI is 
under-estimation of injury severity. Those cases of 
injury which, on clinical grounds, would be classified 
as mild but which are also accompanied by skull 
fracture or intra-cranial traumatic lesion appear to 
have a different recovery pattern than simple, mild 
TBI unaccompanied by such lesions [38–40]. Such 
cases have sometimes been referred to as complex 
mild TBI. The expectation for recovery after such 
injuries is probably different from simple mild TBI. 
Mild TBI can frequently be accompanied by a 
variety of physical symptoms including headache 
and dizziness. Many instances of mild TBI also 
occur in the context of additional musculoskeletal 
injury accompanied by non-cephalic pain. Headache 
and dizziness are also among the more commonly 
occurring symptoms of post-concussion syndrome. 
Headache and non-cephalic pain might have an 
effect on mild TBI outcome through several inter- 
mediary mechanisms. Persistent, severe pain has 
psychological consequences and can disorganize 
psychological 
levels [20]. 
functioning at several 
Headache and other pain are also known to have an 
adverse effect on important cognitive functions such 
as attention and memory [41–43]. Specific to those 
with mild TBI, worse memory performance has 
been found in those TBI subjects with headache 
than in those without headache [44]. With regard to 
other clinical conditions that cause pain, there is a 
fairly well established relationship between level of 
pain severity and the person’s ability to function [45]. 
Studies have found co-morbid rates of headache to 
be quite high in the mild TBI population. One study 
[46] noted a headache rate of 89% in a sample of 
mild TBI patients. The investigators emphasized 
the high rate of chronic pain in the mild TBI group 
and suggested that caution be exercised in misattri- 
buting symptoms to brain injury that could just 
as likely be due to the co-morbid pain condition. 
Other studies have presented evidence that symp- 
toms of post-concussion syndrome are by no means 
unique or specific to mild TBI, but are commonly 
found in chronic pain conditions. One study found 
that 81% of a non-brain injured chronic pain 
sample endorsed three or more post-concussion 
syndrome symptoms [47]. Another study compared 
responses on a post-concussion syndrome question- 
naire between a mild TBI sample and a chronic 
pain sample. Although there were some group 


differences with regard to endorsement of specific 
items, the two groups were not significantly different 
in their total scores on the post-concussion syndrome 
questionnaire [48]. These investigators concluded 
that post-concussion syndrome is not specific to 
mild TBI and is also present in other conditions 
such as chronic pain. 

symptoms are 
common after mild TBI, but their actual influence 
on recovery after mild TBI has not been sufficiently 
studied. An investigation of the effects which these 
symptoms have on mild TBI recovery would improve 
understanding of the full range of 
factors which 
complicate or prolong the recovery process after 
mild TBI. 

The study was an analysis of patient variables, injury 
variables, neuro-cognitive status, neuro-emotional 
status and the relationship among these variables to 
outcome after mild TBI. The specific focus of the 
study was to investigate the complexity of factors that 
influence outcome after mild TBI. The study had 
been reviewed and approved by the Institutional 
Review Board at the University of Utah Health 
Sciences Center. 

The subjects were 67 adult (37 male, 30 female) 
outpatients of the mild TBI clinic at the University 
of Utah Health Sciences Center. Participants were 
referred from a variety of sources both within and 
outside of the Health Sciences Center. Most were 
referred from physicians within the University Health 
Sciences Center or from local community physi- 
cians. Participants were classified according to 
whether or not they were recovering as expected 
from their 
injuries. Recovery as expected was 
defined as a significant remission of post-concussion 
symptoms within 3 months after the trauma of 
interest. Failure to recover as expected consisted of 
having an actual or suspected mild TBI and having 
three or more post-concussion syndrome symptoms 
for a period of 3 months or longer after the accident 
of interest. 
The average age of the participants was 41.36 
years (SD ¼ 13.26 years) and the median age was 
41 years. Fourteen subjects were over the age of 
50 years, which may indicate that this sample is 
older than typical TBI samples. The possible expla- 
nation for this may lie in the fact that many of them 
(85%) were in the workforce. The average education 
level of the subjects was 13.01 years (SD ¼ 2.34). 
Most (n ¼ 63, 94%) of the participants were involved 
either 
in 






employment or education at the time of their injury. 
Forty were married, 10 were single and not previously 
married and 17 were divorced or separated. The 
majority of the subjects (n ¼ 35, 52%) were injured 
in traffic accidents. The remainder were injured in 
other types of industrial accidents as well as falls, 
sports and assaults. Forty-one (61%) of the injuries 
occurred within a worker’s compensation context. 
Eighteen (27%) were involved in litigation concern- 
ing the injury. Thirteen (19%) were both workers 
compensation cases and were also involved in 
litigation. Alcohol did not appear to be a factor in 
any of the accidents as determined by self-report of 
subjects and by a review of the clinical records. The 
median 
until 
time 
of 
participation in the study was 15 months. 




Information about pre-injury history, injury history 
and post-injury clinical course was obtained from 
an interview with the subject, as well as a review of 
each participant’s clinical records. Information about 
pre-existing psychiatric history was obtained from 
carefully interviewing the participants. In many, 
although not 
family members were 
informants. Data were not 
available as collateral 
obtained about which cases had information supple- 
mented by collateral informants and which did not. 
Participants were classified as to whether they 
had a mild TBI using the definition of the Mild 
Traumatic Brain Injury Committee of the Head 
Injury Interdisciplinary Special Interest Group of 
the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine 
[49]. Participants were also classified as to whether 
they had a mental health condition using the 
diagnostic criteria of 
the American Psychiatric 
Association (DSM-IV) [50]. Failure to recover as 
expected was operationally defined as the presence 
of 
three or more post-concussion syndrome 
symptoms at a moderate or severe level of symptom 
intensity noted on a symptom checklist 3 months or 
more after the accident of interest. Disability after 
injury was defined as subjective inability on the part 
of the subject to no longer perform previous social 
roles 
resulting 
in withdrawal from work or school. 




The study included a battery of questionnaires 
about symptoms and about emotional functioning 
designed to probe for 
those 
conditions which previous studies had found to 
in the failure to recovery group. 
be prevalent 
the following: 
The questionnaires consisted of 
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory-2, 
Beck Depression 
Inventory-II, Dissociative 
Experiences Scale, Impact of Event Scale [51–54] 
and the Post-Concussion Syndrome Checklist 
published in a previous study [22]. In addition to 
symptom checklists and measures of emotional 
functioning, the participants were also administered 
several measures of cognitive functioning which 
consisted of: Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III, 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Trail Making Test, 
Part B, Hooper Visual Organization Test, Finger 
and the Boston Naming Test 
Tapping Test 
[55–60]. As needed, 
the measures of cognitive 
functioning were accompanied by validity testing 
consisting of 
the Computerized Assessment of 
Response Bias, the Word Memory Test and the 
Test of Memory Malingering [61–63]. In addition 
to measures of cognitive test taking validity, Scale F 
of the MMPI-2 was used as the measure of validity 
for questionnaires about emotional symptoms and 
Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 was used as the measure of 
validity of physical symptom reporting [64]. 


then 
de-identified, coded and stored in analysis-ready 
form in an electronic database. The data then 
underwent statistical analysis using SPSS 11.5 for 
Windows. 




Prior 
in the sample 
the individuals 
were a fairly high-functioning group. Ninety-four 
per cent (n ¼ 63) were engaged in productive social 
roles either through employment or as students or 
homemakers. Only 5% (n ¼ 3) had a prior history of 
substance abuse. This low figure possibly is a 
local religion and 
reflection of 
culture which tends to avoid the use of alcohol and 
drugs. On the other hand, prior history of TBI 
was present in 25% (n ¼ 17). Thirty-four per cent 
(n ¼ 23) had a prior history of psychological trauma, 
with 57% (n ¼ 13) of 
these cases consisting of 
childhood physical or 
sexual abuse. Fifty-four 
per cent (n ¼ 36) had a life-time history of prior 
mental health problems, with 58% (n ¼ 21) of these 
consisting of depression and 17% (n ¼ 6) consisting 
of an anxiety disorder. Although they were of a high 
functioning nature prior to injury, most of those 
in the failure to recover as expected sample were 
disabled (n ¼ 48, 72%) after injury. 
The relationship of pre-injury variables to outcome 
after injury was explored. Several variables appeared 
to have no significant 
relationship to outcome 
including level of social support ((cid:1)2 ¼ 3.00, df ¼ 1, 
n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.08), prior level of psychological adapta- 
tion ((cid:1)2 ¼ 3.50, df ¼ 2, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.17) and prior 
history of TBI ((cid:1)2 ¼ 0.26, df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.61). 
In contrast to this, a prior history of psychological 
traumatization did seem to have an important 
relationship to outcome after mild TBI ((cid:1)2 ¼ 6.67, 
df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.01). A prior history of TBI 
might not have been significantly related to outcome 
because of the mild nature of brain injuries in the 
present sample. 
Prior to injury, there was a lifetime rate of mental 
health problems in 54% (n ¼ 36) of the sample. 
This study was concerned that this was higher than 
expected in the general population and so the 
relationship of pre-injury mental health problems 
and post-injury functioning was analysed. This 
study first looked at how pre-injury mental health 
problems and pre-injury depression might affect 
level of post-injury depression. Pre-injury depression 
made no difference in post-injury scores on the 
(t ¼ 1.03, df ¼ 60, 
Beck Depression Inventory-II 
n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.31). Likewise, pre-injury mental health 
problems of any type made no difference in post- 
injury scores on the Beck Depression Inventory-II 
(t ¼ 1.26, df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.21). The relation- 
ship between post-injury disability to pre-injury 
depression, anxiety and mental health problems was 
also analysed. There did not appear to be a significant 
relationship between pre-injury depression, pre- 
injury anxiety or pre-injury mental health problems 
in general and post-injury disability ((cid:1)2 ¼ 0.51, 
df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.48; (cid:1)2 ¼ 0.36, df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, 
p ¼ 0.55; (cid:1)2 ¼ 0.43, df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.51). 



the 
interest 
The sample consisted of individuals with actual or 
suspected mild TBI who had not recovered as 
criteria. 
to 
expected 
Diagnostic possibilities of 
to this study 
consisted of mild TBI, psychiatric diagnosis, pain 
or various combinations of these diagnoses. Table I 
lists the final diagnoses for the sample under study. 
It can be seen that there are very few subjects in 
the failure to recover as expected sample who had 
a single diagnosis of mild TBI only (n ¼ 2, 3%). 
Similarly, there were only a few subjects with a 
psychiatric diagnosis only (n ¼ 4, 6%) or with pain 
only (n ¼ 1, 2%). Rather, the majority of patients who 


No diagnosis 
Mild TBI only 
Psychiatric diagnosis only 
Pain only 
Mild TBI þ psychiatric diagnosis 
Mild TBI þ pain 
Psychiatric diagnosis þ pain 
Mild TBI þ psychiatric diagnosis þ pain 

1 
2 
4 
1 
13 
6 
6 
33 

2 
3 
6 
2 
20 
9 
9 
49 


don’t recover as expected after mild TBI have 
multiple diagnoses. Indeed, the largest group of 
patients (n ¼ 33, 49%) were those who had the 
combined diagnoses of mild TBI, psychiatric 
diagnosis and pain. Among the sample as a whole, 
56 subjects (85%) had a psychiatric diagnosis which 
is a considerable increase over the 54% pre-injury 
lifetime occurrence rate of mental health conditions 
present in the sample prior to injury. 
Data were collected on a number of different 
neuro-trauma variables that might be of 
interest 
with regard to recovery after mild TBI. These 
included prior TBI, skull fracture, traumatic intra- 
cranial neuro-imaging abnormalities and abnormal 
physical signs on neurological exam. The frequency 
of neuro-trauma findings was low, consistent with 
the fact that this was a mildly injured group. Only 
four of the 67 subjects (6%) had loss of conscious- 
ness. The remainder had amnesia (n ¼ 47, 70%) or 
were only dazed or confused at the time of injury 
(n ¼ 16, 24%). Data about amnesia or confusion at 
the time of injury were obtained either from medical 
records or patient report. Objective medical record 
observations were required to establish actual loss 
of 
the neuro-trauma 
variables had a significant relationship to disability 
outcome after injury: prior TBI, (cid:1)2 ¼ 0.26, df ¼ 1, 
fracture, (cid:1)2 ¼ 1.52, df ¼ 1, 
n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.61; skull 
n ¼ 67, 
abnormality, 
(cid:1)2 ¼ 0.48, df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.49; and neurologi- 
cal exam abnormality, (cid:1)2 ¼ 0.37, df ¼ 1, n ¼ 67, 
p ¼ 0.54. 




Information about subjective symptoms was col- 
lected in the sample. This included data about 
post-concussion syndrome along with more specific 
such as depression, headache, non- 
symptoms 
cephalic pain and dizziness. The relationship of 
these subjective symptom variables to outcome was 
also evaluated. 
Headache, non-cephalic pain and depression were 
common in the sample of patients studied. Dizziness 
was somewhat common. Seventy-two per cent of 
the patients had moderate-to-severe headache, 64% 
had moderate-to-severe pain in other 
locations, 
32% had moderate-to-severe dizziness and 15% 
had moderate-to-severe vertigo. Depression in the 
form of major depressive disorder or depressive 
disorder, not otherwise specified, was present in 
61% of the failure to recover sample. 
The measure of post-concussion syndrome (PCS) 
was a 25-item questionnaire about PCS symptoms. 
The intensity of each symptom is rated by the subject 
on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. The individual scores are 
summed for a total PCS score. The relationship 


of PCS to outcome after injury was evaluated in the 
sample by comparing the PCS scores of the disabled 
group (n ¼ 47) with the scores of the non-disabled 
group (n ¼ 19). There was a significant difference 
in PCS scores between the two groups (t ¼ 3.26, 
df ¼ 64, n ¼ 66, p ¼ 0.002), with the disabled group 
having higher scores than the non-disabled group. 
The relationship of specific symptoms to overall 
PCS was also evaluated in the case of depression, 
headache and non-cephalic pain. There was a signi- 
ficant correlation between headache and PCS 
(r ¼ 0.49, n ¼ 66, p < 0.001), between non-cephalic 
pain levels and PCS (r ¼ 0.44, n ¼ 66, p < 0.001) 
and between scores on the Beck Depression 
Inventory-II and PCS (r ¼ 0.58, n ¼ 62, p < 0.001). 
A small part of this relationship is undoubtedly 
explained by the fact that each of these symptoms 
is itself an individual PCS symptom. The strong 
relationship between these symptom variables and 
overall intensity of post-concussion syndrome con- 
tinued to hold up even after controlling for possible 
response bias influences. The MMPI-2 Scale 3 and 
the MMPI-2 Scale F were used as the measures of 
physical symptom validity and emotional symptom 
validity, 
respectively. A partial correlation was 
calculated for the relationship between headache 
level and PCS while controlling for MMPI-2 Scale 
3 (r ¼ 0.33, p ¼ 0.02), for the relationship between 
non-cephalic pain and PCS while 
controlling 
for MMPI-2 Scale 3 (r ¼ 0.45, p ¼ 0.001) and for 
the relationship between Beck Depression Scale-II 
and PCS while controlling for MMPI-2 Scale F 
(r ¼ 0.52, p < 0.001). 
Pain and depression are well known to be highly 
interactive with one another. Where both were 
present, one wanted to have a method to study the 
effect of each of these on outcome in isolation from 
the another. A series of partial correlations were 
conducted to accomplish this. The relationship of 
non-cephalic pain and PCS continued to be signifi- 
cant while controlling for 
level of depression 
(r ¼ 0.37, p ¼ 0.003). The relationship of depression 
to PCS remained significant while controlling 
for non-cephalic pain (r ¼ 0.54, p ¼ 0.000) and the 
relationship of headache to PCS was significant 
while controlling for both level of depression and 
level of non-cephalic pain (r ¼ 0.40, p ¼ 0.001). 
Thus, non-cephalic pain, headaches and depression 
appeared to be independent factors in their effect 
on outcome after injury. 
Although these specific symptoms had a significant 
relationship to overall PCS score, their relationship 
to outcome in terms of disability was also of interest 
to the study. Scores on the Beck Depression 
Inventory-II (BDI-II) as an overall reflection of 
depression were significantly related to disability 
(t ¼ 2.29, df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.03). However, none 
of the other specific symptoms of interest individ- 
ually had a significant relationship to outcome after 
example 
injury 
headache (t ¼ 0.81, df ¼ 65, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.42), non- 
cephalic pain (t ¼ 0.19, df ¼ 65, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.85) and 
dizziness (t ¼ 1.18, df ¼ 65, n ¼ 67, p ¼ 0.24). 






The subjects in the sample were administered a 
battery of cognitive tests. Mean scores were calcu- 
lated for the subjects in the sample on these measures 
of cognitive functioning, as shown in Table II. Other 
than the abnormally long time to completion of 
Part B of the Trail Making Test, these scores are 
in the normal range in comparison to normative data 
derived from the general, non-injured population. 
This study was also interested in the relationship 
of the cognitive test variables to outcome after mild 
TBI in this sample who for the most part exhibited 
poor recoveries. The relationship of performance on 
the cognitive tests to total score on the PCS was 
analysed and is also displayed in Table II. In several 
cases, a significant relationship was present between 
cognitive test scores and post-concussion syndrome. 
However, when this relationship was analysed as a 
partial correlation while controlling for the influence 
of a moderating variable such as performance 
on symptom validity measures (e.g. CARB), the 
strength of the relationship diminished or became 
absent. In this sample, cognitive test performance 
relationship to 
had little, 
outcome. 


Another objective was to understand the relation- 
ship of cognitive test variables and outcome after 


WAIS-III full scale IQ 
AVLT 
HVOT 
BNT 
FTT 
Trails Part B 

59 
61 
61 
61 
64 
61 

91.57 
43.50 
23.82 
52.47 
46.98 
110.39 

13.46 
12.05 
4.21 
6.32 
12.63 
74.4 




(cid:2)0.15 
(cid:2)0.12 
(cid:2)0.43 
(cid:2)0.36 
(cid:2)0.33 
0.07 
0.27 
0.38 
0.001 
0.005 
0.007 
0.57 
– 
– 
0.20 
(cid:2)0.32 
(cid:2)0.12 
– 
– 
– 
0.14 
0.02 
0.37 
– 





WAIS-III full scale IQ 
AVLT 
FTT 
BNT 
Trails Part B 
HVOT 

60 
62 
65 
62 
61 
61 

58 
60 
63 
60 
59 
59 

1.11 
0.36 
1.33 
1.55 
0.19 
1.03 

0.27 
0.27 
0.19 
0.13 
0.85 
0.31 
injury in terms of overall disability and this was 
studied with a series of independent t-tests. None 
of the cognitive variables had a significant relation- 
ship to disability after injury, as shown in Table III. 

The subjects in the sample of patients who failed to 
recover as expected after mild TBI were adminis- 
tered a battery of questionnaires about emotional 
functioning. Mean scores were calculated for the 
sample of subjects on the measures of emotional 
functioning. The average score on the BDI-II was 
22.03 (SD ¼ 12.36). In clinical samples, scores in 
this range are typically found among individuals with 
mild-to-moderately severe depression. The mean 
number of MMPI-2 scales elevated over a T-score 
of 70 was 4.45 (SD ¼ 2.54). The mean raw score on 
the MMPI-2 Scale 1 was 20.17 (SD ¼ 5.83) and the 
mean raw score on the MMPI-2 Scale 3 was 35.00 
(SD ¼ 5.92). The average score on the DES was 
19.22 (SD ¼ 13.57). The mean score on the 
Intrusive Thoughts factor of the IES was 20.17 
(SD ¼ 3.71) and the mean score on the Avoidance 
factor of the IES was 23.52 (SD ¼ 6.09). All of these 
mean scores are well above the normal range. 
The scores on many of the measures of emotional 
functioning correlated significantly with one another. 
For example, the BDI-II and the number of clinical 
scales of the MMPI-2 that were elevated (r ¼ 0.77, 
n ¼ 52, p ¼ 0.000) and the BDI-II with the DES 
(r ¼ 0.63, n ¼ 40, p ¼ 0.000). 
Depression has previously been found in a number 
of studies of outcome after mild TBI to have an 
important connection to recovery after mild TBI 
and the relationship of scores on the BDI-II to sev- 
eral outcome variables was analysed. These included 
some of 
the pain variables including headache 
(r ¼ 0.23, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.07), non-cephalic pain (r ¼ 
0.26, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.05) and post concussion syn- 
drome checklist scores (r ¼ 0.58, n ¼ 62, p < 0.001). 
There was also a significant relationship between 
scores on the BDI-II and outcome in terms of dis- 
ability. Non-disabled subjects had a mean BDI-II 
score of 16.61, while disabled subjects had a mean 
BDI-II score of 24.24. This difference was significant 


M, current 
sample 











CARB 
WMT IR 
WMT DR 
TOMM Trial 2 
57 
34 
33 
17 
88.86% 
78.09% 
74.03% 
38.65 
18.22 
20.73% 
22.54% 
11.27 
M, normative 
group 


97% 
96.5% 
95.8% 
49 


(t ¼ 2.29, df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.03). These elevated 
depression scores are believed to be a reflection 
of post-injury circumstances and not of pre-injury 
factors as there appeared to be no relationship 
between the presence of self-reported pre-injury 
depression and post-injury scores on the BDI-II 
(t ¼ 1.03, df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.31). Similarly, 
there 
was no relationship between scores on the BDI-II 
and 
traumatization 
(t ¼ 1.35, df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.18) or the presence 
of pre-injury mental health conditions (t ¼ 1.26, 
df ¼ 60, n ¼ 62, p ¼ 0.21). These bi-variate analyses 
were followed-up with a linear regression analysis 
of depression, headache and non-cephalic pain 
on level of post-concussion syndrome. These three 
variables together explained 44% of the variance in 
level of concussion syndrome. Several of the other 
measures of emotional functioning were also found 
to be related to outcome. For example, there was 
a significant relationship between disabled status 
and number of clinical scales elevated on the 
MMPI-2 (t ¼ 4.08, df ¼ 51, n ¼ 53, p < 0.001) 
and 
the MMPI-2 (t ¼ 4.28, df ¼ 51, 
on Scale 3 of 
n ¼ 53, p < 0.001). 

Credibility measures were administered to the sub- 
jects in this study. These consisted of the MMPI-2 
Scale F to assess emotional symptom over-reporting, 
the MMPI-2 Scale 3 to assess physical symptom 
over-reporting and the Computerized Assessment 
of Response Bias (CARB), the Word Memory Test 
(WMT) and the Test of Memory Malingering 
(TOMM) to assess exaggeration of cognitive symp- 
toms. Mean scores on each of these symptom validity 
measures were calculated for the sample. These are 
shown in Table IV. For the sake of comparison, 
mean scores from normative samples of patients 
with verified TBIs are also shown where available. 
In most cases, the mean scores for the sample on these 
validity measures were abnormal. In all cases, the 
abnormality for the sample was in the direction 
of invalidity compared to normative data. 


Table V. Percentage of subjects below cut-off scores on symptom 
validity tests. 




57 
CARB 
WMT-IR 
34 
WMT-DR 33 
17 
TOMM 
89% 
82% 
82% 
46 
16 
19 
19 
10 
28% 
44% 
58% 
59% 



0.82 
0.90 
CARB 
WMT-IR 
WMT-DR 
TOMM 
Scale F 
0.83 
0.71 
0.82 
(cid:2)0.50 (cid:2)0.30 
(cid:2)0.47 (cid:2)0.45 
(cid:2)0.64 (cid:2)0.45 
(cid:2)0.66 (cid:2)0.63 
0.17 
The mean scores for the present sample that 
are shown in Table IV deviated substantially from 
the scores found in previous normative groups. 
This raised concern that many of the subjects in 
the sample might have invalid response patterns. 
To investigate this concern further, the number of 
subjects in the sample with symptom validity scores 
below cut-off levels established by prior research 
on the credibility measures was calculated. This is 
shown in Table V. 
The investigators were interested in any relation- 
ships that were present among the various symptom 
validity measures. The measures of cognitive symp- 
tom exaggeration were all very highly correlated 
with one another. The MMPI-2 F Scale, which was 
the measure of emotional symptom over-reporting, 
was inversely related to many of 
the cognitive 
symptom validity measures. Scores on the F Scale 
of the MMPI-2 and Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 did 
not seem to be related, suggesting a lack of relation- 
ship between the degree of physical symptom over- 
reporting and the degree of emotional symptom 
over-reporting. These relationships are shown in 
Table VI. 

How well each validity measure related to 
symptoms in its content area was also analysed. 
For example, scores on Scale F of the MMPI-2 
had a significant 
the 
(r ¼ 0.49, n ¼ 53, p < 0.001)m suggesting 
BDI-II 
that emotional symptom exaggeration may account 
for some portion of 
the depression reported by 
patients 
in the failure to recover as expected 
sample. Similarly, scores on validity measures for 
cognitive symptoms showed a significant relation- 
ship to scores on the actual cognitive tests them- 
selves. For example, scores on the CARB were 
related to scores on the AVLT 
significantly 
the FTT (r ¼ 0.65, 
(r ¼ 0.55, n ¼ 55, p < 0.001), 

n ¼ 57, p < 0.001) and Part B of the Trail Making 
suggests 
Test 
that a certain amount of the cognitive impairment 
in the failure to recover as expected sample may 
be due to poor test-taking effort and not to actual 
impairment. The MMPI-2 Scale 3 was selected as 
the measure of physical symptom over-reporting and 
the relationship of this measure to physical symptoms 
was analysed. Scale 3 raw scores did not have a 
significant relationship to headache level (r ¼ 0.16, 
n ¼ 53, p ¼ 0.26) or to level of non-cephalic pain 
(r ¼ 0.03, n ¼ 53, p ¼ 0.84), but were significantly 
related to subjective level of dizziness (r ¼ 0.34, 
n ¼ 53, p ¼ 0.01). 
Symptom exaggeration as a mediator of outcome 
after mild TBI was also a focus of the study and the 
relationship of the validity measures to outcome 
after injury was analysed. Lower scores on the 
CARB were related to higher scores on the PCS 
(r ¼ (cid:2)0.44, n ¼ 56, p ¼ 0.001). High scores on Scale 3 
of the MMPI-2 were strongly related to high levels of 
symptom reporting on the PCS (r ¼ 0.54, n ¼ 53, 
p < 0.001). The relationship of scores on Scale F, 
the measure of emotional symptom over-reporting 
to post-concussion syndrome symptoms on the 
PCS was significant but less strong (r ¼ 0.29, n ¼ 54, 
p ¼ 0.04). Symptom invalidity had a significant 
relationship to outcome in terms of scores on the 
PCS. Indeed, when a linear regression of CARB, 
the TOMM and WMT-DR on level of PCS was 
conducted, these variables together explained 37% 
of the variance in level of post-concussion syndrome. 
A linear regression analysis of CARB, TOMM, 
WMT-DR, BDI-II, headache level and level of 
non-cephalic pain was then conducted all on PCS. 
This analysis indicated that 63% of the variance 
in post-concussion syndrome intensity could be 
explained by pain, depression and level of invalidity 
on cognitive test taking. 
Finally, the relationship of the validity measures 
to disability after mild TBI was also analysed. Raw 
scores on Scale 3 of the MMPI-2 were significantly 
related to disability status (t ¼ 4.28, df ¼ 51, n ¼ 53, 
p ¼ 0.00), but no significant relationship was found 
for raw scores on Scale F of the MMPI-2 (t ¼ 1.46, 
df ¼ 52, n ¼ 54, p ¼ 0.15) or for scores on the CARB 
(t ¼ 1.59, df ¼ 55, n ¼ 57, p ¼ 0.12). 
In the case of some validity measures, there was 
a relationship between level of invalidity and length 
of time in months since injury. Such relationships 
were present for the CARB r ¼ (cid:2)0.29, p ¼ 0.03) and 
for MMPI-2 Scale F (r ¼ 0.41, p ¼ 0.002) but not 
for any of 
the other validity measures. This 
suggests that, in certain cases, invalidity may be an 
time and not something 
evolving process over 
present immediately after injury. 

This study focused on the minority of people with 
mild TBI who fail to recover as expected. The study 
attempted to understand which factors are related 
to failure to recover and which are not. A strength 
of this study lies in the fact that it simultaneously 
studied a fairly large number of factors that might 
be related to outcome after mild TBI. A potential 
weakness of this approach is the risk of false positive 
results when multiple analyses are conducted. This 
problem is mitigated by the fact that many of the 
study’s statistical analyses had highly significant 
results that probably corrected for the potential 
additive error issue. 
This study did not involve a consecutive series 
of patients with mild TBI. Rather, it relied on a 
sample of patients who were referred to a mild TBI 
specialty clinic. For this reason, a significant selec- 
tion bias may have been introduced into the process 
by which subjects were enrolled into the study. 
Additionally, 61% of the subjects had injuries that 
occurred within a worker’s compensation context 
and 27% were involved in litigation. It is, therefore, 
unlikely that this sample is representative of the 
general population of patients with mild TBI. On 
the other hand, the sample quite likely is representa- 
tive of the minority of mild TBI patients who fail 
to recover as expected, many of whose injuries 
occur in a compensation or litigation context. In a 
number of respects, this sample resembles typical 
clinical groups described in the mild TBI literature 
and there is some confidence that the results of 
the present study can be extended to patients likely 
to be seen in mild brain injury clinics, particularly 
those that treat a significant proportion of those 
injured in industrial settings. 
There are several classification systems for mild 
TBI. The diagnostic criteria for mild TBI used in 
this study were those of 
the Mild Brain Injury 
Special Interest Group of the American Congress 
of Rehabilitation Medicine (ACRM). This definition 
has been gaining in recognition over the past decade 
and is consistent with the diagnostic criteria used 
in a number of other recent mild TBI studies. 
The ACRM definition could be criticized for 
having diagnostic criteria which are overly inclusive 
and the risk of using these criteria would be that of 
committing a Type I error and labelling a condition 
a brain injury when in fact it was not. On the other 
hand, the consistent use of the same criteria among 
a large number of studies results in a uniform 
standard of how mild TBI is defined. 
Post-concussion syndrome was 
operationally 
defined as agreement with three or more symptoms 
on a post-concussion syndrome symptom question- 
naire 3 months or longer after injury. Significant 


endorsement of a symptom was further defined as a 
score of four or higher on a 1–5 rating scale of 
symptom intensity. Defined in this way, 91% of the 
sample had post-concussion syndrome. The partic- 
ular post-concussion syndrome checklist used in 
this study was selected because of the authors’ famil- 
iarity with it from a previous study [22] and because 
it included a numerical rating scale that allowed 
for quantification of symptom intensity. The ques- 
tionnaire itself is published as an appendix to that 
study [22]. The study also collected information on 
disability after mild TBI. Disability was present in 
72% of the sample, which indicates the significant 
impact on functioning which occurs in the failure 
to recover group after mild TBI. The significance 
of this finding is highlighted by the fact that, before 
injury, 94% of the sample were engaged in produc- 
tive roles. Level of post-concussion syndrome and 
presence of disability were significantly associated 
with one another. 
As in a number of previous studies, the present 
study also found that, for the most part, pre-injury 
factors had little relationship to post-injury factors 
or to outcome after mild TBI, even though there 
was a fairly high pre-injury rate of mental health 
problems. The exception to this was the prominent 
association between a pre-injury history of psycho- 
logical traumatization and outcome after mild TBI. 
This might be a general injury recovery phenom- 
enon, in that a similar association has been found 
between early, pre-injury psychological trauma and 
recovery from surgery for back pain [65]. 
The sample consisted of individuals with mild TBI 
who had failed to recover as expected. Data were 
collected about brain injury diagnosis, post-injury 
mental health diagnosis and pain. Potentially, these 
diagnoses could occur singly or in any combination 
with one another. Interestingly, there were very few 
people in the failure to recover sample with a single 
diagnosis of mild TBI only. This suggests that mild 
TBI itself rarely accounts for the presence of severe 
or chronic post-concussion syndrome or disability 
after such injuries. The largest single group in the 
failure to recover sample (49%) were those with 
mild TBI, a new mental health condition and pain. 
This suggests that an overly parsimonious approach 
to diagnosis that attempts to place patients in only 
one category is inappropriately restrictive. The next 
largest sub-group in the failure to recover as expected 
sample were those with both mild TBI and a new 
psychiatric condition. These trends suggest that the 
presence of a new mental health condition since 
the injury may be a particularly important influence 
on outcome after mild TBI. 
Data were collected on a number of neuro-trauma 
fracture and 
variables such as prior TBI, skull 
imaging abnormality. Consistent with the fact that 


this was a mildly injured group, such abnormalities 
were infrequently present and, upon analysis, had 
no significant 
relationship to outcome. This is 
consistent with the previous finding that there were 
few subjects in the failure to recover sample with a 
diagnosis of brain injury only [22]. 
The relationship of symptoms to outcome was 
of special interest in this study. First of all, symptom 
level 
in general, as reflected by severity of post- 
concussion syndrome, was of importance and those 
who were disabled after mild TBI has significantly 
higher scores on the post-concussion syndrome 
questionnaire. With regard to specific symptoms, 
however, only level of depression was strongly related 
to disabled status, making this one of the more 
important influences on outcome. 
A number of cognitive variables were studied with 
regard to their relationship to outcome after mild 
TBI. With one exception, the mean scores on these 
tests for the sample were close to the mean for 
normative samples derived from the general popula- 
tion. Especially after the cognitive test results were 
controlled for the effects of symptom exaggeration, 
they had no significant relationship to outcome, 
even though cognitive problems are some of the 
symptoms that patients in this group complain of 
the most. 
This study also looked at a number of variables 
in the area of emotional functioning as well as at 
their relationship to outcome after mild TBI. In all 
cases, the mean scores on these measures for the 
sample were significantly in the pathological direc- 
tion compared to the mean scores for normative 
groups from the general population. Additionally, 
the indicators of emotional problems in the sample 
are probably an accurate reflection of the actual 
level of emotional pathology in that the average 
MMPI-2 Scale F score does not indicate significant 
emotional symptom over-reporting. The high level 
of emotional symptoms also seemed to have a 
significant relationship to outcome and this is illus- 
trated quite well by the relationship of post-injury 
depression and outcome. Subjects in the disabled 
group had a mean score on the Beck Depression 
Scale-II of 24, a score which would ordinarily be 
found in those with depression of moderate severity. 
The importance of this finding is perhaps strength- 
ened by the fact that even when other factors such 
as pain are simultaneously controlled for, depression 
still continues to have a significant 
independent 
the importance 
relationship to outcome. Lastly, 
of depression as an influence on outcome is not 
simply an extension of pre-injury mental health 
problems as no such relationship was found between 
pre-injury depression and post-injury depression. 



The depression that is important as an influence 
on outcome is that which develops after the injury. 
included 
an array of credibility measures. This is particularly 
important in light of the fact that so many of the 
subjects in the failure to recover as expected sample 
had injuries which occurred in a compensation or 
litigation context. Many of 
the subjects in the 
sample were in this category and, in many of these 
the mean scores on the cognitive validity 
cases, 
measures were indicative of response bias. Thus, 
the data support the need for these measures when 
testing is done under conditions where response 
bias is possible. Similarly, the mean score for the 
sample on the MMPI-II Scale 3 which was the 
measure of physical symptom invalidity was also 
indicative of response bias. Response bias seemed 
less of an issue for exaggeration of emotional 
symptoms as indicated by a more moderate mean 
score for the sample on the MMPI-II Scale F. 


There was a high degree of correlation among 
many of the validity measures. This was interpreted 
there was symptom 
to mean that, generally, 
exaggeration in one 
it would 
probably also be found in other areas as well. The 
high levels of symptom exaggeration found in the 
sample was felt to be a significant mediator of out- 
come after mild TBI because the symptom validity 
scores were all strongly correlated with number and 
intensity of PCS symptoms and in the case of 
the MMPI-II Scale 3, with disability itself. There 
was also an intriguing relationship between the 
length of time since injury and responses on some 
of the validity measures. This suggests that symptom 
exaggeration may be a complex, dynamic process 
that evolves over time in response to a variety of 
potential influences. A similar pattern of unexplained 
late developing cognitive impairment accompanied 
by worsening somatization after TBI has been 
reported in a previous paper [66]. The authors 
do not have an opinion as to why this effect 
seemed to be present with some of the validity 
measures, but not with others. 

the consequences of having 
collected data on response bias is that it allowed 
the effects of cognitive response bias to be controlled 
for when analysing the actual cognitive test results. 
In most cases where the cognitive test results corre- 
lated with PCS, this relationship disappeared after 
controlling for response bias. 

A previous (n ¼ 80) study found that 
a 


there was 
between post-injury 


psychiatric morbidity and recovery after mild TBI 
[22]. This conclusion from a previous study as well as 
similar conclusions found by other investigators was 
again confirmed by the results of the present study. 
relationship of 
investigated the 
pre-injury and neurotrauma variables to outcome 
after mild TBI. Other than a pre-injury history of 
psychological 
traumatization, no other pre-injury 
factors evaluated by the study appeared to have a 
relationship to outcome after mild TBI. Similarly, 
neuro-trauma variables 
study 
did not appear to significantly relate to outcome. 

A number of post-injury variables were analysed 
with regard to their association with outcome. 
Cognitive test variables appeared to have little if any 
relationship to outcome after mild TBI, after con- 
trolling for response bias. This is of significance 
since subjective cognitive impairment is so frequently 
reported by those with mild TBI who have prolonged 
or complicated recoveries. Emotional 
variables 
appeared to have a strong relationship to outcome 
after mild TBI. Among the emotional variables, 
level of depression appeared to be of the greatest 
significance in terms of its relationship to outcome. 
A large number of the sample had headaches and 
non-cephalic pain. In addition to depression, these 
physical symptoms also had significant independent 
relationships to level of post-concussion syndrome, 
even after controlling for response bias, while only 
relationship to 
depression had an independent 
disability status after mild TBI. 
Indeed, when 
combined with cognitive symptom over-reporting, 
pain and depression accounted for most of 
the 
variance in cases of poor outcome after mild TBI. 
The relationship of multiple variables to outcome 
is also emphasized by the fact 
the largest 
single group of patients in this failure to recover 
as expected sample were those with mild TBI 
plus post-injury depression plus pain occurring 
simultaneously. 





the use of 
multiple credibility measures. Separate credibility 
measures were employed for physical, emotional 
and cognitive symptoms. Within this sample, a 
large number of 
subjects had credibility 
scores outside of the cut-off for acceptable validity. 
When such invalidity was controlled for, it some- 
times negated the significance of 
the symptom 
associated with it. This finding seems to confirm 
the importance of validity assessment as an impor- 
tant control measure that should be taken when 
studying the mild TBI group, particularly in a 
compensation or 
litigation context. Associated 
with this was the intriguing finding of a relation- 
ship between length of time since injury and level 


of 
invalidity. This observation may have impli- 
for understanding the development of 
cations 
psychological factors and their ability to alter or 
mitigate recovery from illness and injury. 

1. Sosin DM, Sniezek JE, Thurman DJ. Incidence of mild and 
moderate brain injury in the United States, 1991. Brain Injury 
1996;10:47–54. 
2. Alves WM, Colohan ART, O’Leary TJ, et al. Understanding 
posttraumatic symptoms after minor head injury. Journal of 
Head Trauma Rehabilitation 1986;1:1–12. 
3. Gentilini M, Nichelli P, Schoenhuber R, et al. Neuropsycho- 
logical evaluation of mild head injury. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1985;48:137–140. 
4. Levin HS, Mattis S, Ruff RM, et al. Neurobehavioral 
outcome following minor head injury: A three center study. 
Journal of Neurosurgery 1987;66:234–243. 
5. Hugenholtz H, Stuss DT, Stetham LL, et al. How long does 
it take to recover from a mild concussion. Neurosurgery 
1988;22:853–858. 
6. Mooney G, Speed J. Differential diagnosis in mild brain 
injury: Understanding the role of non-organic conditions. 
NeuroRehabilitation 1997;8:223–233. 
7. Kant R, Smith-Seemiller L, Isaac G, et al. Tc-HMPAO 
SPECT in persistent post-concussion syndrome after mild 
head injury: Comparison with MRI/CT. Brain Injury 
1997;11:115–124. 
8. Ruff RM, Crouch JA, Troster AI, et al. Selected cases of 
poor outcome following a minor brain trauma: Comparing 
neuropsychological 
and positron emission tomography 
assessment. Brain Injury 1999;8:297–308. 
9. Umile EM, Sandel ME, Alavi A, et al. Dynamic imaging 
in mild traumatic brain injury: Support for the theory of 
medial temporal vulnerability. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation 2002;83:1506–1513. 


Sandel ME. Functional 
assessment of mild traumatic brain injury using SPECT and 
neuropsychological testing. Brain Injury 1998;12:577–594. 
11. McAllister TW, Sparling MB, Flashman LA, Saykin AJ. 
Neuroimaging findings 
in mild traumatic brain injury. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
2001;23:775–791. 
12. Ruff RM, Camenzuli L, Mueller J. Miserable minority: 
Emotional risk factors that influence the outcome of a mild 
traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury 1996;10:551–565. 
13. Cicerone KD, Kalmar K. Does premorbid depression 
influence post-concussive symptoms and neuropsychological 
functioning? Brain Injury 1997;11:643–648. 
14. McCauley SR, Boake C, Levin HS, et al. Postconcussional 
disorder following mild to moderate traumatic brain injury: 
Anxiety, depression, and social support as risk factors and 
and Experimental 
comorbidities. 
Neuropsychology 2001;23:792–808. 


15. Binder LM, Rohling ML. Money matters: A meta-analytic 
review of the effects of financial incentives on recovery after 
closed-head 
of Psychiatry 
1996;153:7–10. 


16. Paniak C, Reynolds S, Toller-Lobe G, et al. A longitudinal 
study of the relationship between financial compensation 
and symptoms after treated mild traumatic brain injury. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
2002;24:187–193. 


17. Lees-Haley PR, Williams CW, Zasler ND, 
histories. Brain 


Response 

1997;11:791–799. 
et 
al. 
Injury 


following motor 
vehicle accidents. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
State of the Art Reviews 1998;12:111–132. 
19. Holbrook TL, Anderson JP, Sieber WJ, et al. Outcome 
after major trauma: Discharge and six month follow-up results 
from the trauma recovery project. The Journal of Trauma: 
Injury, Infection, and Critical Care 1998;45:315–324. 
20. Parker RS. The spectrum of emotional distress and 
personality changes after minor head injury incurred in a 
motor vehicle accident. Brain Injury 1996;10:287–302. 
21. Karzmark P, Hall K, Engalnder J. Late-onset post-concussion 
symptoms after mild brain injury: The role of premorbid, 
injury-related, 
factors. 
Brain Injury 1995;9:21–26. 


22. Mooney G, Speed J. The association between mild traumatic 
conditions. Brain Injury 

brain injury 
2001;10:865–877. 
23. King NS. Emotional, neuropsychological, and organic factors: 
Their use in the prediction of persisting postconcussion 
symptoms after moderate and mild head injuries. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1996;61:75–81. 
24. King NS, Crawford S, Wenden FJ, et al. Early prediction 
of persisting post-concussion symptoms following mild and 
moderate head injuries. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 
1999;38:15–25. 

stress 
following mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury 
1998;12:147–154. 

26. Bryant RA, Harvey AG. Relationship between acute stress 
disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder following mild 
traumatic brain injury. American Journal of Psychiatry 
1998;155:625–629. 
and mild 
27. Bryant RA. Posttraumatic 
and consequences. 
brain injury: Controversies, 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
2001;23:718–728. 
stress disorder 
causes 
28. Friedland JF, Dawson DR. Function after motor vehicle 
accidents: A prospective study of mild head injury and 
posttraumatic stress. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 
2001;189:426–434. 
29. Hickling EJ, Gillen R, Blanchard EB, et al. Traumatic brain 
injury and posttraumatic stress disorder: A preliminary 
test results in PTSD 
investigation of neuropsychological 
accidents. Brain Injury 
to motor 
secondary 
1998;12:265–274. 

30. Bryant RA, Harvey AG. Postconcussive symptoms and 
posttraumatic stress disorder after mild traumatic brain 
injury. 
and Mental Disease 
1999;187:302–305. 


31. Rapoport MJ, McCullagh S, Streiner D, Feinstein A. The 
clinical significance of major depression following mild 
traumatic brain injury. Psychosomatics 2003;44:31–37. 
32. Levin HS, Brown SA, Song JX, et al. Depression and 
posttraumatic stress disorder at three months after mild to 
moderate traumatic brain injury. Journal of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology 2001;23:754–769. 
33. Trahan DE, Ross CE, Trahan SL. Relationships among 
postconcussional-type symptoms, depression, and anxiety in 
neurologically normal young adults and victims of mild 
brain 
of Clinical Neuropsychology 
2001;16:435–445. 


JA, Gunstad J. Postconcussive symptom report: 
The relative influence of head injury and depression. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
2002;24:981–993. 
35. Fann JR, Uomoto JM, Katon WJ. Cognitive improvement 
with treatment of depression following mild traumatic brain 
injury. Psychosomatics 2001;42:48–54. 
36. Grigsby J, Kaye K. Incidence and correlates of depersonaliza- 
tion following head trauma. Brain Injury 1993;7:507–513. 
37. Prohl J, Resch F, Parzer P, Brunner R. Relationship between 
dissociative symptomatology and declarative and procedural 
memory in adolescent psychiatric patients. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease 2001;189:602–607. 


39. Goldstein FC, Levin HS. Cognitive outcome after mild 
and moderate traumatic brain injury in older adults. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
2001;23:739–753. 
40. Borgaro SR, Prigatano GP, Kwasnica C, et al. Cognitive 
and affective sequelae in complicated and uncomplicated 
mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury 2003;17:189–198. 
41. Grigsby J, Rosenberg NL, Busenbark D. Chronic pain is 
associated with deficits in information processing. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills 1995;81:403–410. 
42. Kuhajda MC, Thorn BE, Klinger MR, et al. The effect 
of headache pain on attention (encoding) and memory 
(recognition). Pain 2002;97:213–221. 
43. Taylor AE, Cox CA, Lailis A. Persistent neuropsychological 
deficits 
following whiplash: Evidence for chronic mild 
traumatic brain injury? Archives of Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation 1996;77:529–535. 
44. Cicerone K, Kalmer K. Neuropsychological deficits, 
emotional symptoms and persistent subjective complaints 
after mild traumatic brain injury. Paper presented at the 70th 
Annual Session of the American Congress of Rehabilitation 
Medicine, 25–27 June 1993, Denver, CO. 
45. Serlin RC, Mendoza TR, Nakamura Y, et al. When is cancer 
pain mild, moderate or severe? Grading pain severity by its 
interference with function. Pain 1995;61:277–284. 
46. Uomoto JM, Esselman PC. Traumatic brain injury and 
chronic pain: Differential types and rates by head injury 
severity. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
1993;74:61–64. 

‘Postconcussive’ symptoms 
in persons with chronic pain. Brain Injury 1997;11:783–790. 
48. Smith-Seemiller L, Fow NR, Kant R, Franzen MD. Presence 
of post-concussion syndrome symptoms in patients with 
chronic pain vs mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury 
2003;17:199–206. 
49. Kay T, Harrington DE, Adams R, et al. Definition of 
Journal of Head Trauma 
mild traumatic brain injury. 
Rehabilitation 1993;8:86–87. 
50. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association; 1994. 
51. Hathaway SR, McKinley JC. Minnesota multiphasic per- 
sonality inventory-2. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press; 1989. 
52. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Beck depression inventory. 
2nd ed. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation; 
1996. 
53. Berstein EM, Putnam FW. Development, reliability, and 
validity of a dissociation scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease 1986;174:727–735. 
54. Horowitz MJ, Wilner N, Alvarez W. Impact of event scale: 
A measure of subjective stress. Psychological Medicine 
1979;41:209–218. 


San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation; 1997. 
56. Lezak M. Neuropsychological assessment. New York: Oxford 

57. Reitan RM, Wolfson D. The Halstead-Reitan neuropsycholo- 
gical test battery. Tuscon, AZ: Neuropsychology Press; 1985. 
organization test. 


Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services; 1958. 
59. Brandon AD, Bennett TL. Digital Finger tapping test. 
Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services; 1985. 
60. Kaplan E, Goodglass H, Weintraub S. Boston naming test. 

61. Allen LM, Conder RL, Green P, Cox DR. CARB’97: 
Computerized assessment of response bias. Durham, NC: 
CogniSyst, Inc; 1997. 
62. Green WP, Allen LM, Astner K. The word memory test: A 
user’s guide to the oral and computer-administered forms. 
Durham, NC: CogniSyst, Inc; 1996. 






65. Schofferman J, Anderson D, Hinds R, et al. Childhood 
lumbar 
psychological 

spine surgery. Spine 1992;17(Suppl 6):S1380–S1384. 
66. Bierley RA, Drake AI, Ahmed S, Date ES, Rosner M, 
Warden D, Salazar AM. The Defense and Veterans Head 
Injury Program (DVHIP) Study Group. Biased responding: 
A case series demonstrating a relationship between somatic 
symptoms and impaired recognition memory performance for 
traumatic brain injured individuals. Brain Injury 2001; 
15:697–714. 
