

Longitudinal trajectories of post-concussive and depressive 
symptoms in adolescents with prolonged recovery from 
concussion 
Elizabeth Stein, B.A.1, Waylon Howard, Ph.D.1, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D.2,3, 
Frederick P. Rivara, M.D., M.P.H.1,3,4, Douglas Zatzick, M.D.3,5, and Carolyn A. McCarty, 
Ph.D.1,4 
1Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Center for Child Health, Behavior and Development 





Primary Objective: To investigate the symptom trajectories of depressive and post-concussive 
symptoms (PCS) in slow-to-recover adolescents to understand how the two sets of symptoms are 
related. 
Research Design: We used data from a randomized clinical trial of a collaborative care 
intervention for post-concussive symptoms to better understand how these two sets of symptoms 
change in parallel over six months. 
Methods and Procedure: PCS and depressive symptom scores for 49 adolescents (ages 11–17) 
were measured at enrollment and after 1, 3, and 6 months. Latent growth curve modeling for 
parallel processes was used to simultaneously examine change in PCS and depressive symptoms 
over time and to evaluate the influence of one change process on the other. 
Corresponding Author: Elizabeth Stein B.A., Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Center for Child Health, Behavior and 
Development, PO Box 5371, Suite 400, Mailstop CW8-5A, Seattle, WA 98145-5005, lizstein@me.com Phone: (847)309-5289. 
Waylon J. Howard Ph.D., Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Center for Child Health, Behavior and Development, PO Box 5371, 
Suite 400, Mailstop CW8-6, 2001 8th Avenue, Suite 400, Seattle, WA 98121, waylon.howard@seattlechildrens.org 
Ali Rowhani-Rahbar M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., University of Washington, Harborview Injury Prevention and Research Center, Pat Steel 
Building, 401 Broadway, 325 Ninth Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, rowhani@uw.edu 
Frederick P. Rivara M.D., M.P.H., University of Washington, Department of Pediatrics, 6200 NE 74th St, Ste 110, Seattle, WA 
98115-8160, fpr@uw.edu 
Douglas Zatzick M.D., University of Washington, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 325 9th Ave #1C18, Seattle, 
WA 98104, dzatzick@uw.edu 
Carolyn A. McCarty Ph.D., Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Center for Child Health, Behavior and Development, PO Box 5371, 
Suite 400, Mailstop CW8-5A, Seattle, WA 98145-5005, cari.mccarty@seattlechildrens.org 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
The authors have indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose. 
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
The authors have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Brain Inj. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 08. 


Main Outcomes and Results: On average, patients enrolled 66 days following injury (IQR 
43.5, 88.5). PCS and depressive symptoms were significantly associated at enrollment and over 
time, and both decreased over the course of 6 months. Higher PCS at enrollment predicted a 
greater decrease in depressive symptoms over time. 
Conclusions: Our results suggest that clinicians should screen for and treat depressive 
symptoms in patients with high post-concussive symptoms one month following injury. 

1 in 5 children will experience a traumatic brain injury by the age of 16 years.1 While 
symptoms following mild traumatic brain injury present acutely and typically resolve within 
two weeks of injury, an estimated 13–29% of injured youth experience the burden of 
persistent somatic, cognitive, sleep, and psychological symptoms 3 months following injury. 
2,3 A distinct symptom trajectory for this “miserable minority” of concussed youth is 
distinguishable from the typical disease course and expected recovery period.4 Persistent 
symptoms such as headache, fatigue, dizziness, and inattention confer functional impairment 
including executive dysfunction and poor academic performance.5–7 These post-concussive 
symptoms (PCS) may result in significant reductions in health-related quality of life, 
preventing youth from returning to school and normal activities.8 While it is widely accepted 
that a variety of biological, psychological, and social factors together contribute to increased 
risk of protracted symptom duration, the etiology and trajectory of persistent post- 
concussive symptomatology remains poorly understood.9,10 
Psychological symptoms, whether newly occurring following the injury or exacerbations of 
pre-injury “trait” symptoms, are factors which can further alter the recovery course and 
clinical management of persistent post-concussive symptoms. Pre-existing symptoms 
including those related to depression and anxiety, ADHD, learning disability and migraine 
are established ‘modifying factors’ that influence both the risk of sustaining a concussion 
and the duration of symptoms following injury.11 Moreover, multiple studies indicate that 
prior psychiatric history is associated with persistent post-concussive symptom burden 
following concussive injury in youth and collegiate athletes.12,13 Premorbid psychological 
status and family history factors play a significant role in predicting post-injury symptoms 
and must be taken into account in the assessment and management of sports-related 
concussion.14 Furthermore, acquired psychological symptoms commonly occur following 
injury.15 Particular attention has been paid to the prevalence of depressive symptoms that co- 
occur with other persistent post-concussive symptoms. A study of previously healthy adults 
without psychiatric pre-morbidities at time of study enrollment who sustained mild 
traumatic brain injury indicated that 62.5% of patients with persistent post-concussive 
symptoms 1 year after injury had a modifiable psychological risk factor (i.e., depression, 
possible PTSD, and/or low resilience) at 1 month.16 Given the frequency of co-occurring 
mood symptoms, depressive symptoms are commonly included amongst the constellation of 
post-concussive symptoms.17 
Despite the frequent onset of depressive symptoms following concussion, there is a paucity 
of research on depressive symptoms in children following concussion, and it remains unclear 



how depression is associated with prolonged recovery from concussion. Two prospective 
studies found incidence rates of 11% - 21.4% for new onset of depression/anxiety in 
children within 6 months of concussion.18,19 A recent prospective cohort study of youth 
with concussion found that 22% self-reported significant depressive symptomatology 
following their injury.20 Considering the prevalence and correlation of depressive symptoms 
in youth experiencing prolonged recovery from concussion, examination of these symptoms 
independent of other post-concussive symptoms is merited in order to understand their 
unique role in modifying the post-concussive symptom trajectory. This is particularly 
warranted given that depression is often treated differently, and sometimes under separate 
providers, than other post-injury symptoms. 
It is well established that the presence of depressive symptoms is associated with persistent 
somatic symptoms and reduction in health-related quality of life in patients who experience 
chronic illness, particularly in traumatic brain injury and regardless of injury severity.21–23 
An understanding of the role of psychological symptoms in protracting chronic illnesses 
prompted the development of collaborative care treatment models of integrated, early 
intervention amongst patients with chronic illness to manage both physical and 
psychological symptoms.24,25 Moreover, our recent clinical trial of collaborative care 
treatment for adolescents with post-concussive symptoms demonstrated significant 
reductions in post-concussive symptoms as well as significant depression remission at 6 
months in patients who received the collaborative care intervention targeting modifiable 
psychological symptoms compared with control patients who received care as usual.26 
While it is accepted that a relationship exists between depressive and persistent post- 
concussive symptoms, it remains poorly understood how depressive symptoms change over 
time in conjunction with post-concussive symptoms in patients who are slow to recover from 
concussion, as there is little research in this area, and none focused on youth.14,15,27–29 To 
our knowledge, no previous study has prospectively assessed longitudinal trajectories of 
post-concussive and depressive symptoms in a pediatric population of patients who remain 
symptomatic from concussion after the acute recovery period. 

The principal purpose of this study was to examine the trajectories of depressive and post- 
concussion symptoms (PCS) over a six month time period following study enrollment for 
adolescents with prolonged recovery from sports-related concussion. Specifically, we were 
interested in identifying the shape of the mean trend for depressive and PCS over time and 
determining whether both trajectories would significantly improve. We also suspected that 
change over time in post-concussive symptoms would be positively associated with change 
over time in depressive symptoms. The secondary goal of the study was to examine if initial 
levels of depressive symptoms predicted the course of post-concussive symptomatology, or 
whether initial levels of post-concussive symptoms predicted the course of depressive 
symptoms. We hypothesized that greater depressive symptom severity at the time of sudy 
enrollment would predict slower rate of change in post-concussive symptoms. 





Participants were adolescents who sustained sports or recreational-related concussion 
diagnosed by sports medicine or rehabilitation medicine specialists trained in concussion 
diagnosis and management. Patients were eligible to participate if they incurred an onset or 
increase in severity in at least three post-concussive symptoms post-injury compared to pre- 
injury based on parent report on the HBI at least one month following concussive injury. 
Patients and at least one parent/guardian were required to be able to read and speak English, 
and to live within commuting distance to the regional children’s hospital where assessments 
and treatment took place. Patients were excluded if they had sustained more severe brain 
injuries as documented by any abnormalities demonstrated on computer tomography or 
magnetic resonance imaging. Patients who were actively suicidal, abusing substances, or 
who reported bipolar or psychotic disorders were also excluded. 


This study used data from a randomized clinical trial of a collaborative care with embedded 
cognitive-behavioural therapy intervention for patients with persistent post-concussive 
symptoms. Forty-nine adolescents enrolled in the study. Following enrollment, patients were 
randomized to receive intervention (n=25) of collaborative care treatment or care as usual 
(n=24). Overall, participants ranged in age at the time of entry into the study from 11 to 17 
years (M = 14.95, SD = 1.63) and the sample was 65.3% female and 34.7% male. The 
majority (64.6%) of participants identified as white. Participants completed an intial study 
assessment and then follow-up symptom rating scales at 1, 3, and 6 months following 
enrollment. Informed consent and assent was obtained prior to data collection and study 
procedures were approved by the Seattle Children’s Institutional Review Board. Recruitment 
occurred between October 2014 and July 2015. 
Demographic and injury variables—A variety of demographic variables were 
collected from each participant including gender, age, race, date of injury, and household 
income. We collected information on whether the concusion was incurred while playing 
organized sports or in other, non-organized, recreational activities. Pre-injury history of 
concerns of anxiety or depression based upon chart review were considered instead of a 
formal diagnosis for this was only for descriptive purposes. This information was not part of 
the statistical evaluation of the prospectively collected data. 
Depressive Symptoms—Depressive symptoms were reported by youth using the Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), which includes nine questions, based upon DSM-IV major 
depression criteria, on a 4-point Likert-type scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly 
every day) ranging from 0–27.30 It has been found to have high sensitivity (89.5%) and 
acceptable specificity (73%) for the diagnosis of major depression in adolescent populations. 
31 High depressive symptoms was defined as scores greater than 10. 



PCS—Post-concussive symptoms were assessed by youth using the 27-item Health 
Behaviour Inventory (HBI) which includes somatic, cognitive, sleep, and psychological 
domains on a 4-point Likert-type scale ranging from 0 (never) to 3 (often) with a range of 0– 
60.32 High PCS was measured with scores greater than 22. 

The purpose of this study was, first, to examine the nature of change over time in post- 
concussive symptoms (PCS) and depressive symptoms across four measurement occasions 
from study enrollment to six months after enrollment. Based on theory, previous empirical 
findings,26 and initial examinations of mean and individual trajectories of PCS (see Figure 
1) and depressive symptoms (see Figure 2) we hypothesized that both PCS and depressive 
symptom trajectories would significantly decrease (show improvement) over the course of 
the study. To evaluate this hypothesis, a series of latent growth models (LGMs) were 
specified within the structural equation modeling framework using linear, quadratic, and 
latent basis models to find the best representation of change.33,34 An a priori Monte Carlo 
power simulation based on the particulars of the current data indicate this approach is 
sufficiently powered (b≥.80) for detecting a non-zero mean slope, given the current sample 
size of 49. 
Initially, a linear growth model was specified with basis scores (i.e., factor loadings) fixed to 
0, 1, 3, and 6 on the slope growth factor to reflect the unequal time spacing (in months) 
between measurement occasions. In this model, departures from linearity in the change 
process are treated as residual error.34 Then, we tested a quadratic model using orthogonal 
polynomial contrasts with linear (i.e., −3, −1, 1, 3) and quadratic (i.e., 1, −1, −1, 1) basis 
scores to avoid collinearity among the estiamted linear and quadratic growth parameters. 
33,34 Finally, we allowed the basis weights to optimally estimate the pattern of change using 
a latent basis model (i.e., unspecified LGM). For this model, basis scores were anchored at 0 
at the time of study enrollment (to set the initial status at baseline) and 1 for the 6-month 
follow-up assessment. The loadings for the second and third measurement occasions were 
freely estimated to allow the change process to be optimally estimated.34 Across all LGM 
models time differences (in days) between planned and actual observations were 
incorporated as a time-varying covariates to control for unbalanced time-of-observation 
within each unequal time-structured wave of measurement (i.e., 0, 1, 3, and 6 months).34,35 
Our second goal was to examine relationships among growth parameters of different 
processes (i.e., determine if change over time in one variable is related to change over time 
in another variable). Unlike multilevel modeling (random coefficient models, mixed-effects 
models), an extention of LGM for parallel processes allowed for a simultaneous examination 
of change in PCS and depressive symptoms over time and tests of the influence of one 
change process on the other.33 This model combined the best fitting LGM for PCS and 
depressive symptoms into a single model that contained two sets of intercepts and slopes, 
one for each repeated-measures variable.34 A conceptual diagram of the parallel LGM with 
four time points is shown in Figure 3 where repeated measures of the HBI Youth Report 
(i.e., PCS score) represent one change process, while repeated measures of the PHQ-9 (i.e., 
depressive symptom score) represent another change process. We hypothesized that (a) the 



higher the intial level of PCS (at time of study enrollment) the higher the initial level of 
depressive symptoms (at enrollment), (b) the greater the decrease in PCS the greater the 
decrease in depressive symptoms, (c) the higher the initial level of PCS the greater the 
decline in PCS over time, and similarly the higher the initial levels of depressive symptoms 
the greater decrease in depressive symptoms, and (d) the higher the intial level of PCS, the 
greater the predicted decrease in depressive symptoms over time, and higher levels of 
depressive symptoms will predict a sharper decrease in PCS. 
All models were estimated using multiple imputation in the Mplus 7.3 software program to 
handle missing data with 50 imputed data sets.36 Model fit was evaluated using the root- 
mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA) with the associated 90% confidence interval, 
the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and the comparative fit index (CFI). We considered values 
less than or equal to .08 acceptable for RMSEA and values greater than or equal to .90 
acceptable for the TLI and CFI indices.37 Structural parameters (correlations and predictive 
effects) were evaluated for significance (p < .05) using a chi-square difference test.33,38 


49 adolescents were enrolled and followed over six months. One participant dropped out 
following enrollment, and one participant withdrew from the intervention given spontaneous 
resolution of symptoms. Patient characteristics at the time of study enrollment are reflected 
in Table 1. Correlations, means, and standard deviations for the repeatedly measured PCS 
and depressive symptom variables are contained in Table 2. As shown in Table 2, PCS and 
depressive symptoms improve over time. Consistent with prior research, declines in PCS 
were greatest between the first (at study enrollment) and second (1 month after enrollment) 
measurement occasion.39 Declines in depressive symptoms were greatest between the 
second and third (3 months after enrollment) measurement occasions (see Table 2). Initial 
depressive symptoms were not related to change in post-concussive symptoms over time. 
Across all four measurement occasions, missing data was minimal at 1.9%. Little’s Missing 
Completely at Random test indicated that missing data are not likely to introduce bias, χ2 
(14) = 15.01, p = .378. 

Our first research question focused on the understanding the nature of change in PCS and 
depressive symptoms over 6 months. Model fit comparisons of univariate LGMs for PCS 
and depressive symptoms are shown in Table 3. 
For PCS the latent basis model was preferred due to model fit, χ2 (14, n = 49) = 11.14, p > . 
05, RMSEA = .000, 90% CI [.000, .111], TLI = .999, CFI = .999 and parsimony for 
capturing the non-linear pattern of change. We determined this (and subsequent) model fit to 
be sufficient despite the wide RMSEA confidence interval because RMSEA has been shown 
to be positively biased in smaller models (i.e., lower degrees of freedom),40 some research 
supports a more liberal cut off value of .10 for detecting a poor fitting model,41 and all other 
fit indicies suggest the model is acceptable.42 The initial level of PCS was 32.47 (p < .001) 



and growth decreased at an average rate of −17.95 (p = .026) from time of enrollment 
through the 6 month measurement occasion. The R2 values for the observed PCS measures 
were .59 or greater, indicating the growth parameters (and time-varying covariates) explain a 
meaningful amount of variation. The correlation between the intercept and slope was −.59 (p 
= .012), indicating participants with a higher PCS score at time of enrollment tended to have 
a sharper decline over time. Both the intercept (95.88, p = .001) and slope (111.27, p = .005) 
variances were significant, indicating significant individual differences in PCS at time of 
enrollment and in the nonlinear change growth factor. This is illustrated in Figure 1, which 
shows nonlinear intraindividual changes in post-concussive symptoms (PCS) based on HBI 
youth report and interindividual differences in those changes. Additionally, the estimated 
basis scores (0, .30, .82, and 1) indicated approximately 30%, 52%, and 18% of the total 
decrease in PCS scores occurred between time of enrollment and 1 month, 1 to 3 months, 
and 3 to 6 months, respectively.33 These estimates suggest a rapid decline through the first 
three measurement occasions followed by a leveling off. 
The latent basis model was also chosen for capturing the non-linear pattern of change of 
depressive symptoms. The model fit the data well, χ2 (15, n = 49) = 15.63, p > .05, RMSEA 
= .000, 90% CI [.000, .140], TLI = .988, CFI = .990. The initial level of depressive 
symptoms was 9.66 (p = .001) and growth decreased by −5.92 (p = .027) across the time 
period investigated. The model explained 61% or greater of the variance in the observed 
depressive symptoms scores. The correlation between the intercept and slope was −.57 (p = . 
024), indicating participants with a higher depressive symptoms at time of enrollment were 
associated with a sharper decline over time. Both the intercept (25.13, p = .005) and slope 
(17.49, p = .007) variances were significant, indicating significant variability around the 
average intercept and slope growth factor (see Figure 2). Similar to PCS, the estimated time 
scores for the depressive symptoms trajectory (0, .29, .90, and 1) suggest a sharp decline 
through the first 3-month period after study enrollment followed by a leveling off. 
Latent Growth Model with Parallel Processes—Our second research question 
evaluated the predictive relations among initial status and change over time. Specifically, we 
examined whether PCS at at time of study enrollment predicted change in depressive 
symptoms and whether depression sympoms measured at time of enrollment predicted 
change in PCS. 
To evaluate this question, we specified a LGM with parallel processes by combining the 
latent basis models for PCS and depressive symptoms into a single model.33 This model is 
illustrated in Figure 3. The initial unconditional parallel process LGM fit the data well, χ2 
(38, n = 49) = 30.04, p > .05, RMSEA = .004, 90% CI [.000, .100], TLI = .999, CFI = .999. 
All growth factors were significant, with both growth slope factors decreasing over time. As 
shown in Table 4, participants at the first study visit with higher levels of PCS tended to have 
higher levels of depressive symptoms (r = .58, p = .002). Similarly, over the course of the 
study, we found decreases in PCS to be strongly related to decreases in depressive symptoms 
(r = .81, p = .002). Also associations between initial status (intercept) and change over time 
(slope) within each process were large and negative. Specifically, participants with higher 
levels of PCS at enrollment tended to decline more in PCS over time (r = −.58, p = .023) and 



participants with higher initial levels of depressive symptoms tended to decline more in 
depressive symptoms over time (r = −.61, p = .042). 
Next, to account for the degree of variance related to participant exposure to collaborative 
care (n = 25) or usual care (n = 24), we fit a conditional LGM with parallel processes by 
regressing the slope growth factors for each process on a time-invariant covariate denoting 
group membership using a multiple indicators, multiple causes (MIMIC) model 
specification.35,43–45 This allowed subsequent predictive effects of the slope growth 
parameter residual variance unexplained by group. While group differences related to 
collaborative care or usual care were beyond the scope of this investigation, results suggest 
that although collaborative care participants experienced a faster decline (more positive 
outcome), the effect was small in magnitude. 
Predictive effects were then added to the parallel process LGM model by regressing the PCS 
growth slope factor on the depressive sympom intercept, and correspondingly regressing the 
depressive sympom growth slope factor on the PCS intercept. Results indicate a significant 
effect of initial PCS status predicting change in depressive symptoms over time. Specifically, 
the higher the PCS level at time of study enrollment, the greater the predicted decrease in 
depressive symptoms over time (standardized β = −.53, Δ χ2 (1) = 6.16, p = .013). Said 
differently, 25% of the variance in change over time in depressive symptoms could be 
accounted for by initial PCS status. 

To our knowledge, this is the first study to prospectively assess the parallel trajectories of 
post-concussive and depressive symptoms as they change over time throughout the recovery 
course of pediatric concussion patients receiving treatment. Overall, these findings 
demonstrate that post-concussive symptoms are closely intertwined with symptoms of 
depression among slow-to-recover youth, and that youth with high levels of post-concussive 
symptoms are able to experience significant improvements in depression. This study 
advances current knowledge about depressive symptoms in the context of concussion, 
suggesting that depressive symptomatology is not only common in patients who experience 
persistent symptoms but that it changes over time in tandem with other post-concussive 
symptoms. 
With regard to our first aim, our study showed that improvement in PCS was associated with 
improvement in depressive symptoms across the recovery period. Patients with high levels 
of PCS frequently also present with high levels of depression symptoms; however, with a 
course of active treatment, these symptoms can be significantly decreased. The slopes 
indicating rate of change of post-concussive symptoms and depressive symptoms were 
similar, suggesting their co-occurrence. The rate of change for both symptoms was most 
pronounced in the first three months. 
Moreover, we found that depressive symptom severity at enrollment did not significantly 
predict rate of change over time in post-concussive symptoms as initially hypothesized. 
Instead, in this clinical sample, patients with more post-concussive symptoms at the first 



study visit experienced a sharper decline in depressive symptoms over time. This finding 
might be explained by the fact that patients with higher initial level of symptoms had more 
room to improve. Given that patients with more post-concussive symptoms at time of study 
enrollment experienced a sharper decline in depressive symptoms over time, depression 
remains a tractable area of intervention in treatment of post-concussive symptoms. Our 
findings suggest that youth with persistent post-concussive symptoms can make appreciable 
improvements in their depressive symptoms. 
As previous studies have determined, patients with elevated post-concussive symptoms more 
than 1 month in duration following injury may be particularly subject to benefit from 
treatment that targets co-occurring psychological symptoms given the high prevalence of 
depression symptoms in this population and our finding that post-concussive and depression 
symptoms are closely related as they change over time.16 This study expounds on previous 
literature that links depression to chronic illness such as with chronic pain and post- 
traumatic stress disorder.46 
There were several limitations to our study, including the small sample population drawn 
from a randomized clinical trial. It is important to consider that this was a treatment-seeking 
sample that was recruited from Rehabilitation and Sports Medicine clinics, and the 
improvement in symptoms may have reflected gains that resulted from such treatment. We 
did not include group-specific results in this study as our study was not sufficiently powered 
to examine differences in associations by treatment group. Furthermore, the hypotheses 
evaluated in the current models required moderate to large effect sizes, therefore, non- 
significant effects may be due to sample size limitations. Time after injury at enrollment was 
not standardized across participants due to the pragmatic approach that investigators used to 
simulate real-world clinic conditions. We could not determine causality from our analysis 
and therefore cannot say whether the presence of depressive symptoms directly causes 
persistent post-concussive symptoms nor can we determine from our data whether 
psychological problems are responsible for chronic post-concussive symptoms or if 
psychological problems result from chronic post-concussive symptomatology. Psychological 
symptoms, including depression, are commonly reported in youth following concussion, as 
others have suggested.47 Our findings suggest that depression and post-concussive 
symptoms present together and change over time in parallel. 
It is worth noting that we used the PHQ-9 to evaluate depressive symptomatology and 
acknowledge that there is some overlap with the assessment of post-concussive symptoms 
on 3 questions: 1) trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too much; 2) feeling tired or 
having little energy; 3) trouble concentrating on things. There were several strengths to our 
study, including the prospective design that enabled us to longitudinally assess changes in 
symptom domains over time and the use of sophisticated parallel process linear growth 
models. Our study provides empirical data at multiple time points for a clinical pediatric 
patient population for which there is little published data, allowing us to appreciate a more 
comprehensive understanding of the symptom trajectories across domains. 
These data were derived from randomized clincial trial of collaborative care treatment that 
simultaneously targeted co-occurring psychological symptoms alongside somatic, cognitive, 



and sleep complaints with cognitive-behavioural therapy, care management, and 
psychotropic medication consultation.29 The findings in our prior report suggest that early 
intervention targeting both physical and psychological symptoms may be critical to 
accelerating recovery from persistent post-concussive symptoms, as the collaborative care 
group demonstrated a more rapid rate of symptom reduction as well as symptom reduction 
gains that persisted at 6 months. Following the publication of our trial, the evidenced-based 
guidelines for the care of youth with persistent symptoms were updated to recommend a 
collaborative care model which can simultaneously address somatic and psychological 
symptoms following concussion.29 Targeted approaches to psychological symptoms in 
pediatric patients with persistent post-concussive symptoms is a promising area of 
intervention with evidence-based treatment options including cognitive-behavioural therapy 
and psychotropic medication.48,49 Our results suggest that clinicians should systematically 
screen for and treat depressive symptoms in their patients with high post-concussive 
symptoms one month following injury given that psychological symptoms are modifiable 
factors that present with and change over time in parallel to other difficult-to-treat somatic 
symptoms. 


Supported by the Seattle Sports Concussion Research Collaborative and by the National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under CTSA grant UL1TR000423. The content is solely 
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of 
Health. Funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 

1. McKinlay A, Grace RC, Horwood LJ, Fergusson DM, Ridder EM, MacFarlane MR. Prevalence of 
traumatic brain injury among children, adolescents and young adults: prospective evidence from a 
birth cohort. Brain Inj 2008;22(2):175–81. [PubMed: 18240046] 





Longitudinal trajectories of postconcussive symptoms in children with mild traumatic brain injuries 
and their relationship to acute clinical status. Pediatrics 2009;123(3):735–743. [PubMed: 19254996] 
5. Peterson RL, Kirkwood MW, Taylor HG, Stancin T, Brown TM, Wade SL. Adolescents’ 
internalizing problems following traumatic brain injury are related to parents’ psychiatric 
symptoms. J Head Trauma Rehabil 2013;28(5):E1–12. 
6. Institute of Medicine (IOM) and National Research Council (NRC). Sports-related concussions in 
youth: Improving the science, changing the culture. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press; 2013. 





integrated review of recovery after mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI): implications for clinical 
management. Clin Neuropsychol 2009;23(8):1368–90. [PubMed: 19882476] 



10. Zemek R, Barrowman N, Freedman SB, Gravel J, Gagnon I, McGahern C, Aglipay M, Sangha G, 
Boutis K, Beer D and others. Clinical Risk Score for Persistent Postconcussion Symptoms Among 
Children With Acute Concussion in the ED. Jama 2016;315(10):1014–25. [PubMed: 26954410] 

Johnston K, Kutcher JS, Raftery M and others. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 
4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport, Zurich, November 2012. J Athl Train 
2013;48(4):554–75. [PubMed: 23855364] 
12. Yang J, Peek-Asa C, Covassin T, Torner JC. Post-concussion symptoms of depression and anxiety 
in division I collegiate athletes. Dev Neuropsychol 2015;40(1):18–23. [PubMed: 25649775] 
13. Morgan CD, Zuckerman SL, Lee YM, King L, Beaird S, Sills AK, Solomon GS. Predictors of 
postconcussion syndrome after sports-related concussion in young athletes: A matched case- 
control study. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2015;15(6):589–98. [PubMed: 25745949] 

Concussion: A Critical Review of the Literature. Phys Sportsmed 2016;44(1):14–9. [PubMed: 
26567843] 

Psychiatric outcomes after pediatric sports-related concussion. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2015;16(6): 
709–18. [PubMed: 26359916] 

Julkunen J, Ohman J, Iverson GL. Recovery from Mild Traumatic Brain Injury in Previously 
Healthy Adults. J Neurotrauma 2015. 


18. Luis CA, Mittenberg W. Mood and anxiety disorders following pediatric traumatic brain injury: a 
prospective study. Journal of clinical and experimental neuropsychology 2002;24(3):270–279. 
[PubMed: 11992209] 

SB, Dennis M, Yang TT. Depression in children and adolescents in the first 6 months after 
traumatic brain injury. International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience 2012;30(3):239–245. 
[PubMed: 22197971] 


21. Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, Tandon A, Patel V, Ustun B. Depression, chronic diseases, and 
decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet 2007;370(9590):851–8. 
[PubMed: 17826170] 



depressive disorder and clinical outcomes following traumatic brain injury. Jama 2010;303(19): 
1938–45. [PubMed: 20483970] 

O’Connor SS and others. A randomized stepped care intervention trial targeting posttraumatic 
stress disorder for surgically hospitalized injury survivors. Ann Surg 2013;257(3):390–9. 
[PubMed: 23222034] 
25. Zatzick D, Roy-Byrne P, Russo J, Rivara F, Droesch R, Wagner A, Dunn C, Jurkovich G, Uehara 
E, Katon W. A randomized effectiveness trial of stepped collaborative care for acutely injured 
trauma survivors. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004;61(5):498–506. [PubMed: 15123495] 
26. McCarty CA, Zatzick D, Stein E, Wang J, Hilt R, Rivara FP. Collaborative Care for Adolescents 
With Persistent Postconcussive Symptoms: A Randomized Trial. Pediatrics 2016:e20160459. 
[PubMed: 27624513] 






coping styles and outcome after mild traumatic brain injury: preliminary results from a cohort 
study. Brain Inj 2011;25(11):1126–38. [PubMed: 21870903] 
29. Waljas M, Iverson GL, Lange RT, Hakulinen U, Dastidar P, Huhtala H, Liimatainen S, Hartikainen 
K, Ohman J. A prospective biopsychosocial study of the persistent post-concussion symptoms 
following mild traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 2015;32(8):534–47. [PubMed: 25363626] 
30. Enders CK, Gottschall AC. Multiple Imputation Strategies for Multiple Group Structural Equation 



32. Yeates KO, Luria J, Bartkowski H, Rusin J, Martin L, Bigler ED. Postconcussive symptoms in 
children with mild closed head injuries. J Head Trauma Rehabil 1999;14(4):337–50. [PubMed: 
10407207] 




35. Little TD. Longitudinal Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY: The Guilford Press; 2013. 
36. Enders CK. Applied missing data analysis. Little TD, editor. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 2010. 
37. Hu L, Bentler PM. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional 
criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 
1999;6(1):1. 








42. Brown TA. Confirmatory factor analysis for applied research. New York: Guilford Press; 2012. 
43. Bollen KA, Curran PJ, Wiley J. Latent curve models: A structural equation perspective. Wiley- 







47. Makdissi M, Schneider KJ, Feddermann-Demont N, Guskiewicz KM, Hinds S, Leddy JJ, McCrea 
M, Turner M, Johnston KM. Approach to investigation and treatment of persistent symptoms 
following sport-related concussion: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51(12):958–968. 
[PubMed: 28483928] 

and young people: summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ 2015;350:h824. [PubMed: 
25739880] 
49. Fisher E, Law E, Palermo TM, Eccleston C. Psychological therapies (remotely delivered) for the 
management of chronic and recurrent pain in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2015;3:Cd011118. 



Figure 1. 
A plot of growth in post-concussive symptoms (PCS) HBI youth report illustrating nonlinear 
intraindividual changes and interindividual differences in those changes. 
Note: Grey lines represent individual trajectories; black line depicts average trajectory. 



Figure 2. 
A plot of growth in depression symptoms (PHQ-9) illustrating nonlinear intraindividual 
changes and interindividual differences in those changes. 
Note: Grey lines represent individual trajectories; black line depicts average trajectory. 



Figure 3. 
A conceptual path diagram of a latent growth curve model with parallel processes 
representing simultaneous growth in PCS and depressive symptoms using the latent basis 
(freely estimated basis loadings) specification for nonlinearity. 
Note: The parallel process model combined each individual LGM into a single model that 
contained two sets of intercepts and slopes, one for each repeated-measures variable. Circles 
represent latent variables, squares are measured variables (repeated measures), single headed 
arrows are path coefficients (regression weights), double headed arrows are variances or 
covariances. Regression weights related to the intercepts are fixed at a value of 1. Regression 
weights related to the slopes were fixed at 0 for the first measurement occasion and 1 at the 
final measurement occasion. The remaining regression weights (i.e., basis weights) denoted 
by * were freely estimated. 
Not all paths are displayed for clarity of presentation. 



Descriptive statistics on demographic, pre-injury health concerns, injury type, and clinical profile at time of 
study enrollment. 























































Correlation matrix with means and standard deviations for the indicators of post-Concussive Symptoms (PCS) 
and depression symptoms (DEP) across time (N = 49). 








































































































































1 
Error variance was equated over time to address convergence issues.35 
Note: χ2 = chi-square value; df = degrees of freedom; p = p-value, RMSEA = Root Mean Square Error of Approximation; TLI = Tucker-Lewis 
Index; CFI = Comparative Fit Index 














































































