Does befriending by trained lay workers
improve psychological well-being and
quality of life for carers of people 
with dementia, and at what cost? 
A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth, L Shepstone, E Wilson, 
M Thalanany, M Mugford and F Poland
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
NHS R&D HTA Programme
www.hta.ac.uk
March 2008

How to obtain copies of this and other HTA Programme reports.
An electronic version of this publication, in Adobe Acrobat format, is available for downloading free of
charge for personal use from the HTA website (http://www.hta.ac.uk). A fully searchable CD-ROM is
also available (see below). 
Printed copies of HTA monographs cost £20 each (post and packing free in the UK) to both public and
private sector purchasers from our Despatch Agents.
Non-UK purchasers will have to pay a small fee for post and packing. For European countries the cost is
£2 per monograph and for the rest of the world £3 per monograph.
You can order HTA monographs from our Despatch Agents:
– fax (with credit card or ofﬁcial purchase order) 
– post (with credit card or ofﬁcial purchase order or cheque)
– phone during ofﬁce hours (credit card only).
Additionally the HTA website allows you either to pay securely by credit card or to print out your
order and then post or fax it.
Contact details are as follows:
HTA Despatch
Email: orders@hta.ac.uk
c/o Direct Mail Works Ltd
Tel: 02392 492 000
4 Oakwood Business Centre
Fax: 02392 478 555
Downley, HAVANT PO9 2NP, UK
Fax from outside the UK: +44 2392 478 555
NHS libraries can subscribe free of charge. Public libraries can subscribe at a very reduced cost of 
£100 for each volume (normally comprising 30–40 titles). The commercial subscription rate is £300 
per volume. Please see our website for details. Subscriptions can only be purchased for the current or
forthcoming volume.
Payment methods
Paying by cheque
If you pay by cheque, the cheque must be in pounds sterling, made payable to Direct Mail Works Ltd
and drawn on a bank with a UK address.
Paying by credit card
The following cards are accepted by phone, fax, post or via the website ordering pages: Delta, Eurocard,
Mastercard, Solo, Switch and Visa. We advise against sending credit card details in a plain email.
Paying by ofﬁcial purchase order
You can post or fax these, but they must be from public bodies (i.e. NHS or universities) within the UK.
We cannot at present accept purchase orders from commercial companies or from outside the UK.
How do I get a copy of HTA on CD?
Please use the form on the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk/htacd.htm). Or contact Direct Mail Works (see
contact details above) by email, post, fax or phone. HTA on CD is currently free of charge worldwide.
The website also provides information about the HTA Programme and lists the membership of the various
committees.
HTA

Does befriending by trained lay workers
improve psychological well-being and
quality of life for carers of people 
with dementia, and at what cost? 
A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth,1* L Shepstone,2 E Wilson,3
M Thalanany,3 M Mugford3 and F Poland4
1 Centre for Behavioural and Social Sciences in Medicine, University
College London, UK, and North East London Mental Health Trust, UK
2 School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East 
Anglia, UK
3 Health Economics Group, School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice,
University of East Anglia, UK
4 School of Allied Health Professions, University of East Anglia, UK
* Corresponding author
Declared competing interests of authors: none
Published March 2008
This report should be referenced as follows:
Charlesworth G, Shepstone L, Wilson E, Thalanany M, Mugford M, Poland F. Does
befriending by trained lay workers improve psychological well-being and quality of life for
carers of people with dementia, and at what cost? A randomised controlled trial. Health
Technol Assess 2008;12(4).
Health Technology Assessment is indexed and abstracted in Index Medicus/MEDLINE,
Excerpta Medica/EMBASE and Science Citation Index Expanded (SciSearch®) and 
Current Contents®/Clinical Medicine.

NIHR Health Technology Assessment Programme
T
he Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Programme, part of the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR), was set up in 1993. It produces high-quality research information on the
effectiveness, costs and broader impact of health technologies for those who use, manage and provide
care in the NHS. ‘Health technologies’ are broadly defined as all interventions used to promote health,
prevent and treat disease, and improve rehabilitation and long-term care.
The research findings from the HTA Programme directly influence decision-making bodies such as the
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the National Screening Committee
(NSC). HTA findings also help to improve the quality of clinical practice in the NHS indirectly in that
they form a key component of the ‘National Knowledge Service’.
The HTA Programme is needs-led in that it fills gaps in the evidence needed by the NHS. There are
three routes to the start of projects. 
First is the commissioned route. Suggestions for research are actively sought from people working in the
NHS, the public and consumer groups and professional bodies such as royal colleges and NHS trusts.
These suggestions are carefully prioritised by panels of independent experts (including NHS service
users). The HTA Programme then commissions the research by competitive tender. 
Secondly, the HTA Programme provides grants for clinical trials for researchers who identify research
questions. These are assessed for importance to patients and the NHS, and scientific rigour.
Thirdly, through its Technology Assessment Report (TAR) call-off contract, the HTA Programme
commissions bespoke reports, principally for NICE, but also for other policy-makers. TARs bring 
together evidence on the value of specific technologies.
Some HTA research projects, including TARs, may take only months, others need several years. They can
cost from as little as £40,000 to over £1 million, and may involve synthesising existing evidence,
undertaking a trial, or other research collecting new data to answer a research problem.
The final reports from HTA projects are peer-reviewed by a number of independent expert referees
before publication in the widely read journal series Health Technology Assessment. 
Criteria for inclusion in the HTA journal series
Reports are published in the HTA journal series if (1) they have resulted from work for the HTA
Programme, and (2) they are of a sufficiently high scientific quality as assessed by the referees and editors.
Reviews in Health Technology Assessment are termed ‘systematic’ when the account of the search,
appraisal and synthesis methods (to minimise biases and random errors) would, in theory, permit the
replication of the review by others.
The research reported in this issue of the journal was commissioned by the HTA Programme as project
number 99/34/07. The contractual start date was in January 2002. The draft report began editorial review
in October 2006 and was accepted for publication in August 2007. As the funder, by devising a
commissioning brief, the HTA Programme specified the research question and study design. The authors
have been wholly responsible for all data collection, analysis and interpretation, and for writing up their
work. The HTA editors and publisher have tried to ensure the accuracy of the authors’ report and would
like to thank the referees for their constructive comments on the draft document. However, they do not
accept liability for damages or losses arising from material published in this report.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the 
HTA Programme or the Department of Health.
Editor-in-Chief:
Professor Tom Walley
Series Editors:
Dr Aileen Clarke, Dr Peter Davidson, Dr Chris Hyde, 
Dr John Powell, Dr Rob Riemsma and Professor Ken Stein
Programme Managers: 
Sarah Llewellyn Lloyd, Stephen Lemon, Kate Rodger, 
Stephanie Russell and Pauline Swinburne
ISSN 1366-5278
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008
This monograph may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and may be included in professional journals provided
that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising.
Applications for commercial reproduction should be addressed to: NCCHTA, Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
Published by Gray Publishing, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on behalf of NCCHTA.
Printed on acid-free paper in the UK by St Edmundsbury Press Ltd, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk.
G

Objectives: To determine whether a social support
intervention (access to an employed befriending
facilitator in addition to usual care) is effective
compared with usual care alone. Also to document
direct and indirect costs, and establish incremental
cost-effectiveness.
Design: The Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA)
trial was a cost-effectiveness randomised controlled
trial. Data on well-being and resource use were
collected through interviews with participants at
baseline and at 6, 15 and 24 months. 
Setting: This research was carried out in the English
counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the London
Borough of Havering. It was a community-based study.
Participants: Participants were family carers who
were cohabiting with, or providing at least 20 hours’
care per week for, a community-dwelling relative with
a primary progressive dementia.
Interventions: The intervention was ‘access to a
befriender facilitator’ (BF). BFs, based with charitable/
voluntary-sector organisations, were responsible for
local befriending schemes, including recruitment,
screening, training and ongoing support of befriending
volunteers, and for matching carers with befrienders.
The role of befrienders was to provide emotional
support for carers. The target duration for befriending
relationships was 6 months or more.
Main outcome measures: Depression was measured
by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
at 15 months postrandomisation. The health-related
quality of life scale EQ-5D (EuroQol 5 Dimensions) was
used to derive utilities for the calculation of quality-
adjusted life-years (QALYs). 
Results: A total of 236 carers were randomised into
the trial (116 intervention; 120 control). At final 
follow-up, 190 carers (93 intervention; 97 control) were
still involved in the trial (19% attrition). There was no
evidence of effectiveness or cost-effectiveness from the
primary analyses on the intention-to-treat population.
The mean incremental cost per incremental QALY
gained was in excess of £100,000, with only a 42.2%
probability of being below £30,000 per QALY gained.
Where care-recipient QALYs were included, mean
incremental cost per incremental QALY gained was
£26,848, with a 51.4% probability of being below
£30,000 per QALY gained. Only 60 carers (52%) took
up the offer of being matched with a trained lay
befriender, and of these only 37 (32%) were befriended
for 6 months or more. A subgroup analysis of controls
versus those befriended for 6 months or more found a
reduction in HADS-depression scores that approached
statistical significance (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84). 
Conclusions: ‘Access to a befriender facilitator’ is
neither an effective nor a cost-effective intervention in
the support of carers of people with dementia,
although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness for
the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In common
with many services for carers of people with dementia,
uptake of befriending services was not high. However,
the small number of carers who engaged with
befrienders for 6 months or more reported a reduction
in scores on HADS depression that approached
statistical significance compared with controls 
(95% CI –0.09 to 2.84). While providing only weak
evidence of any beneficial effect, further research into
befriending interventions for carers is warranted.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
iii
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Abstract
Does befriending by trained lay workers improve psychological
well-being and quality of life for carers of people with dementia,
and at what cost? A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth,1* L Shepstone,2 E Wilson,3 M Thalanany,3 M Mugford3
and F Poland4
1 Centre for Behavioural and Social Sciences in Medicine, University College London, UK, and 
North East London Mental Health Trust, UK
2 School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East Anglia, UK
3 Health Economics Group, School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East Anglia, UK
4 School of Allied Health Professions, University of East Anglia, UK
* Corresponding author


Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
v
Glossary and list of abbreviations .............
vii
Executive summary ....................................
ix
1
Introduction ...............................................
1
Background ................................................
1
Social consequences of caring ....................
1
Support provision .......................................
1
Psychosocial interventions ..........................
2
Cost-effectiveness of support for 
carers ..........................................................
3
Economic methods in carer intervention
evaluations ..................................................
3
Summary ....................................................
3
Aim and objectives .....................................
3
2
Methods .....................................................
5
Design ........................................................
5
Ethics approval ...........................................
5
Intervention and control conditions ..........
5
Study population ........................................
6
Randomisation ...........................................
7
Measures .....................................................
8
Data-collection procedures ........................
10
Data checking .............................................
11
Data analysis ...............................................
11
Economic analyses ......................................
11
Summary of changes to protocol ...............
12
3
Intervention ...............................................
13
Definition of befriending ...........................
13
Development of the BECCA befriending
schemes ......................................................
13
Befriending scheme procedures ................
14
Befriender training programme ................
16
Costing of befriending services ..................
18
Protocol changes relating to 
intervention ................................................
18
4
Results: characteristics and outcomes ......
19
Participant flow ..........................................
19
Baseline characteristics of randomised 
carers ..........................................................
21
Main outcomes ...........................................
24
5
Results: overall costs and economic 
analysis .......................................................
31
Costs ...........................................................
31
Quality-adjusted life-years ..........................
31
Cost–utility analysis ....................................
31
Alternative scenarios ..................................
32
Summary of cost-effectiveness analyses .....
35
6
Discussion and conclusions ........................
37
Main findings .............................................
37
Implications for healthcare ........................
37
Factors to consider in carer support 
research ......................................................
39
Recommendations for future research .......
41
Conclusions ................................................
42
Acknowledgements ....................................
43
References ..................................................
45
Appendix 1 Organisations involved in 
the trial .......................................................
49
Appendix 2 Unit costs and sources ...........
51
Appendix 3 Resource-use quantities at
15 months (complete case analysis) ...........
55
Appendix 4 Detailed breakdown of 
per-carer/person with dementia costs at 
15 months ..................................................
57
Health Technology Assessment reports
published to date .......................................
59  
Health Technology Assessment 
Programme ................................................
75
Contents


Glossary
Befriender facilitator
In the context of this
study, a voluntary sector employee with the
responsibility of recruiting, screening, training,
matching and supporting volunteer
befrienders.
Befriending
In the context of this study,
befriending refers to one-to-one emotional
support by a trained lay volunteer.
Bootstrapping
Statistical method for
examining uncertainty. It is a non-parametric
simulation method used in economic
evaluation and is particularly useful when
underlying data have a skewed distribution. 
Carers
Carers are defined in this report as
family members providing care for a person
with a primary progressive dementia.
Direct costs
The costs of providing the
intervention, primary and secondary care
resource use, out-of-pocket expenses and travel
costs incurred by patients or carers, and family
care costs.
Discounting
A method by which future costs
and benefits are converted to present values.
Indirect costs
In the context of this study,
the value of time spent in the caring role. 
Opportunity cost
The benefit that could
have been obtained from the next best use of
resources. The opportunity cost of an action is
the value of the forgone alternative action.
Opportunity costs arise because the resources
available to meet wants are finite, so that all
wants cannot be satisfied.
Perspective
A viewpoint for conducting a
cost-effectiveness analysis. Four perspectives
are used in this analysis. The societal
perspective incorporates all costs and all
health effects regardless of who incurs the costs
and who obtains the effects. Thus, a societal
perspective in healthcare means considering
costs that fall upon health services, other
public sector budgets such as provision of
social support, cost of lost productivity as well
as the costs that fall upon patients and
caregivers. The statutory sector perspective
incorporates costs incurred by the health
service and other public sector budgets 
(e.g. social services) alone. The voluntary
sector perspective incorporates costs incurred
by the voluntary sector alone. The household
sector perspective incorporates costs 
incurred by private households and 
individuals alone.
Quality adjusted life-years (QALYs)
A metric
that combines both the quality and quantity of
life gained from an intervention. One QALY is
defined as 1 year of perfect health, or 2 years
at ‘50% of perfect health’, etc. 
Resources
In economics, ‘resources’ refer to
all the factors of production (usually simplified
to labour and capital) that are used to produce
goods and services. In health programmes,
resources include medical and nursing staff
time, hospitals, medical equipment and drugs,
and patients’ time.
Sensitivity analysis
A technique used in
economic analysis to test whether uncertainty
in the values of the main variables is sufficient
to affect the results of the analysis. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
vii
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Glossary and list of abbreviations
Technical terms and abbreviations are used throughout this report. The meaning is usually clear from
the context, but a glossary is provided for the non-specialist reader. In some cases, usage differs in the
literature, but the term has a constant meaning throughout this review.

List of abbreviations
ACH
Age Concern Havering
ACS
Age Concern Suffolk
BECCA
Befriending and Costs of Caring
BF 
befriender facilitator
BL
baseline
CADI
Carers Assessment of Difficulties
Index
CAS
Caregiver Activity Schedule
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CEAC
cost-effectiveness acceptability
curve
CI
confidence interval
CMHT
community mental health team
COPE
Coping Orientation for Problem
Experience
CPN
community psychiatric nurse
CRB
Criminal Records Bureau
CSRI
Client Service Receipt Inventory
CUA
cost–utility analysis
EQ-5D
EuroQol 5 Dimensions
FU
follow-up 
GLM
generalised linear model
HADS
Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale
ICER
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
ITT
intention-to-treat
MCBS
Mutual Communal Behaviours
Scale
MREC
multisite research ethics committee
MSPSS
Multidimensional Scale of
Perceived Social Support
n
number who selected a certain
response
N
total number who answered a given
question
NVS
Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary
Services
ONS
Office for National Statistics
PANAS
Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule
PANT
Practitioner Assessment of Network
Type
PSSRU
Personal Social Services Research
Unit
PwD 
person (people) with dementia
QALY
quality-adjusted life-year
RCT 
randomised controlled trial
RUD
Resource Utilization in Dementia
SPSS 
Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences
VAS
visual analogue scale
Glossary and list of abbreviations
All abbreviations that have been used in this report are listed here unless the abbreviation is well known (e.g. NHS), or 
it has been used only once, or it is a non-standard abbreviation used only in figures/tables/appendices in which case 
the abbreviation is defined in the figure legend or at the end of the table.
viii

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
ix
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Objectives
The aims of this trial were two-fold. First, to
determine whether a social support intervention
(access to an employed befriending facilitator in
addition to usual care) is effective compared with
usual care alone, through randomly allocating
carers of people with dementia to one of two
groups (intervention versus usual care control) 
and follow-up for 2 years postrandomisation.
Secondly, to document direct and indirect costs 
in both the intervention and control group, 
and establish incremental cost-effectiveness,
calculating the costs from the perspectives of the
statutory and voluntary sectors and from a societal
perspective.
Methods
Design
The Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA)
trial was a cost-effectiveness randomised
controlled trial that compared outcomes and
associated costs for family carers offered ‘access to
befriending facilitator’ with those of control carers
receiving standard services only. Data on well-
being and resource use were collected through
interviews with participants at baseline and at
three follow-up interviews (6, 15 and 24 months).
The main end-point was at 15 months
postrandomisation, and for the economic analyses
the perspective in the base case is society.
Setting
This research was carried out in the English
counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the London
Borough of Havering. It was a community-based
study.
Participants
Participants were family carers who were
cohabiting with, or providing at least 20 hours’
care per week for, a community-dwelling relative
with a primary progressive dementia.
Intervention
The intervention was ‘access to a befriender
facilitator’ (BF). BFs, based with charitable/
voluntary-sector organisations, were responsible
for local befriending schemes, including
recruitment, screening, training and ongoing
support of befriending volunteers, and for
matching carers with befrienders. The role 
of befrienders was to provide emotional 
support for carers. The target duration for
befriending relationships was 6 months 
or more. 
Main outcome measures
The main outcome was depression as measured by
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS) at 15 months postrandomisation.
Secondary measures were anxiety, positive affect,
loneliness and global health. The health-related
quality of life scale EQ-5D (EuroQol 5
Dimensions) was used to derive utilities for the
calculation of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).
Resource use and other data related to costs were
collected using a semi-structured interview based
on the Resource Utilisation in Dementia
questionnaire and Client Service Receipt
Inventory. Measures of burden, social support and
coping were also used.
Results
Of 316 people expressing interest in participating,
236 (75%) were randomised into the trial (116
intervention; 120 control). At final follow-up
(24 months postrandomisation) 190 carers (93
intervention; 97 control) were still involved in the
trial (19% attrition). There was no evidence of
effectiveness or cost-effectiveness from the primary
analyses on the intention-to-treat population. The
mean incremental cost per incremental QALY
gained was in excess of £100,000, with only a
42.2% probability of being below £30,000 per
QALY gained. Analyses on secondary outcomes
were similarly negative, and there was no evidence
of cost-effectiveness in the alternative scenarios
considered except where care-recipient QALYs
were included. In this case mean incremental cost
per incremental QALY gained was £26,848, with a
51.4% probability of being below £30,000 per
QALY gained. Only 60 carers (52%) took up the
offer of being matched with a trained lay
befriender, and of these only 37 (32%) were
befriended for 6 months or more. A subgroup
Executive summary

x
analysis of controls versus those befriended for
6 months or more found a reduction in HADS-
depression scores that approached statistical
significance (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84).
Conclusions
‘Access to a befriender facilitator’ is neither an
effective nor a cost-effective intervention in the
support of carers of people with dementia,
although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness
for the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In
common with many services for carers of people
with dementia, uptake of befriending services was
not high. However, the small number of carers
who engaged with befrienders for 6 months or
more reported a reduction in scores on HADS
depression that approached statistical significance
compared with controls (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84).
While providing only weak evidence of any
beneficial effect, further research into befriending
interventions for carers is warranted.
Implications for healthcare
Volunteers can be safely involved in the provision
of emotional support for carers. When considering
commissioning support services for carers of
people with dementia, befriending schemes alone
should not be commissioned, and short-term
contracts should not be considered. 
Recommendations for further research
●Additional research is required to establish: the
characteristics of carers most likely to take up
befriending; befriender–carer characteristics of
successful matches; interplay between statutory
and voluntary support services and support
from families; carer well-being in the context of
receipt of befriending; and placement of the
care recipient in long-term residential or
nursing care.
●Future cost-effectiveness evaluations of carer
support should include outcomes for both the
carer and care recipient.
●Further work is required on economic methods
for carer intervention research.
Executive summary

Background
This study was a response to a call for bids from
the NHS Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
Programme for research into ‘support for carers of
people with dementia’. The call was made in the
context of increased recognition of the needs of
carers and the associated UK government
legislation and initiatives such as the Carers
(Recognition and Services) Act 19951 and the
National Strategy for Carers,2 and in the National
Service Frameworks for Mental Health3 and for
Older People.4 The needs of carers of people with
dementia were highlighted as a particular
concern, with there being perceived deficiencies in
the evidence base, especially in terms of evidence
on cost-effectiveness. 
It is estimated that there are around 6.8 million
adult carers in the UK, with up to 1.5 million
people involved in caring for a relative or friend
with a mental illness or some form of dementia.5
Dementia is an umbrella term encompassing a
broad range of cognitive losses, usually including
multiple deficits in aspects of memory, expressive
and/or receptive language, perception and
executive function. Dementia is the consequence
of a large number of progressive brain disorders,
the most common being Alzheimer’s disease and
vascular dementias. The prevalence of dementia
depends greatly on the age structure of the
population and for UK the prevalence rates are
2% in the 65–70 age group; 5% in the 70–80 age
group and 20% in the over-80 age group
(Alzheimer’s Society, UK). It is estimated that
there are currently over 750,000 people in the UK
with dementia,4 which may increase to 840,000 by
2026 and 1.2 million by 2050.4
Dementias are long-term, pervasive illnesses,
affecting all aspects of a person’s life. The person
with dementia (PwD) becomes increasingly
dependent on those around them, most usually
their spouse or other family members. It is widely
accepted that providing care for a person with
dementia is stressful and demanding, and research
has provided evidence on the poorer physical and
mental health of carers compared with non-
carers.6,7 In addition, there is some evidence that
carers who experience caring as stressful are at
higher risk of mortality than non-carers.8
Social consequences of caring
The association between social support and well-
being is well established for both physical and
mental health,9,10 with low levels of support being
associated with poorer health. Family carers can
experience a reduction in their social network
owing to a lack of opportunities to socialise and/or
the stigma associated with illness. Carers report
less social interaction and fewer friendships.11,12
The emotional and physical burden of caring can
result in family role conflicts that may reduce the
amount of emotional support available. A carer’s
family and friends may distance themselves
physically and/or psychologically from the carer
and care recipient, contributing to a reduction in
social support for the carer.11–13
Given the commitment involved in caring for a
relative with increasing levels of cognitive
impairment and dependency, carers of people
with dementia may be particularly at risk of social
isolation. Carers who experience social isolation are
more vulnerable to the negative impacts of caring.13
Social isolation is a risk factor for loneliness, and
loneliness has been associated with increased
mortality and morbidity, including psychiatric
morbidity. Protective factors are thought to include
companionship14 and long-standing friendships,
especially for women, and where the friendship is
based on choice and not obligation.15
Support provision
Support provision for family carers in the UK is
part of a mixed economy of care in which
statutory, private and voluntary sectors provide
community services in addition to the support
given by family and friends. Britain has a long
tradition of voluntary action, and the emphasis on
partnership in recent government policies has
given voluntary, community and user organisations
a more central role in the delivery of services.16,17
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
1
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 1
Introduction

At the same time, social service departments have
been encouraged to develop local markets in care
by providing fewer direct care services themselves
and commissioning independent service
providers.18 Local authority welfare provision in
England is organised to prioritise instrumental
needs within a system of case management in
which needs are assessed, care packages are set up
and cases are discharged. Such procedure-based
care management systems prevent the formation
of sustained relationships.19 As Community Mental
Health Teams integrate the working practice of
the NHS and Social Services and move towards an
‘assess and discharge’ model, it can be voluntary
and charitable sector workers who provide long-
term support. For carers of PwD, emotional
support may have a greater influence on the
course of stressors than instrumental support.20
Psychosocial interventions
A range of psychosocial interventions has been
developed to support carers, including, but not
limited to, the provision of accessible and relevant
information on available services, education and
training programmes, access to support groups,
short-term breaks, and interventions targeted at
the whole family, such as family therapy and
family counselling. 
Evaluations of carer interventions have been
extensively reviewed. Schulz and colleagues21
identified nine systematic reviews prior to their
own. The varying methodologies used for the
systematic review have led to significant
differences in conclusions about the quantity and
quality of research,22 yet there is consensus that
carer intervention research has historically been of
questionable quality, and that poor study design
has contributed to inconclusive findings.
Interventions showing greatest impact have
generally been comprehensive and intensive.23
Cognitive behavioural interventions have been
shown to be effective in reducing carer stress,24
but the provision of such interventions is
expensive and often not available owing to a lack
of appropriately trained therapists within
dementia care or carer support services. 
Only a fraction of psychological support is
provided by psychological therapists, and there is
much in common between informal and formal
helping, such as empathy, positive regard and
genuineness.25 Faust and Zlotnick26 found that, for
mild to moderate mental health problems, the
benefits of informal helping by mental health
paraprofessionals, such as clergy and family
doctors, are roughly the same as those of
professional, formal helping, carried out by
psychiatrists and psychologists. 
A range of social support interventions has been
devised and evaluated, but reviews of the evidence
base of social support interventions generally
highlight a lack of methodological rigour.27–29
Within the voluntary sector, a commonly used
model of social support is ‘befriending’. There are
many befriending schemes in the UK, most
particularly in the voluntary and charitable sector.
The role of befrienders varies widely from project
to project, and the characteristics of the
befrienders also vary, including both volunteers
and paid staff. Befriending has the potential to
foster friendship, with the reciprocities entailed in
this30,31 and concomitant gains experienced by
peer-befrienders.32 For befriendees, a volunteer
visit may be experienced as very different from
that of a professional, perhaps without fear of
institutional intervention in their family or care
choices, which may be especially welcomed by
older people trying to maintain their
independence. In addition, empathic, non-
directive befriending was as effective as structured
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in the short
term for people with treatment-resistant
schizophrenia,33 although CBT was superior at 
9-month follow-up. An analysis of session content
indicated that the befriending was distinct from
CBT, and a conclusion was drawn that social
support is “no mere placebo”.34
During protocol development for the Befriending
and Costs of Caring (BECCA) project, a literature
search was undertaken for befriending schemes for
family carers of people with dementia. No
quantitative research trials were found for the use
of befriending volunteers to support carers. The
closest trial was Harris and colleagues,35
evaluation of a volunteer befriending intervention
for women with chronic depression in inner
London. With additional searching using a
broader range of search terms, two randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) were identified which
evaluate ‘friendly visiting’ for isolated elders.36,37
Macintyre and colleagues37 found improved life
satisfaction, worth and social integration, and
concluded that volunteer visitors made a
difference for elderly people in the community.
Most recently, a report has been published of a
peer-support intervention for carers of people
with Alzheimer’s disease,38 but there was no
evidence of a beneficial effect, possibly because of
the short time-frame.
Introduction
2

Cost-effectiveness of support for
carers
The Carers Special Grant was established to
support the implementation of the National
Carers Strategy, with ring-fenced funding of £140
million made available to local authorities to help
them to develop a wider range of services to give
carers a break from their caring responsibilities.
However, there is evidence for managers wishing
to commission cost-effective interventions. 
In an RCT, Patel and colleagues39 evaluated the
cost-effectiveness of a training programme for
carers of stroke patients and found that costs were
significantly lower in the training group, while
improving overall quality of life of carers at 1 year.
Similarly, the economic evaluation of a training
programme for carers of people with dementia40
reported cost savings of Aus $7967 (US $5975) per
patient, with improved patient survival at home
and decreased carer morbidity. Drummond and
colleagues41 evaluated a support programme for
carers (RCT) which showed improved quality of
life with incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-
year (QALY) gained of Can $20,000. The
evaluation of a daily living programme (RCT) by
Knapp and colleagues42 found that it was more
cost-effective than hospital-based care. Similarly,
Donaldson and Gregson43 reported that a
community support intervention resulted in
prolonged life at home for the elderly and
concluded that the intervention will be cost-
effective if the cost of long-term institutional care
averted is included in the calculations. Payton and
colleagues,44 in their cost analysis of a community
health information network for carers of people
with Alzheimer’s disease, concluded that it
provides social and economic benefit to their
users. 
Economic methods in carer
intervention evaluations
The cost-effectiveness literature for carers has used
a range of costing methodologies and there is
presently no consensus. Considerations include:
whether to cost for the carer, care recipient or
both; whether to take cross-sectional snapshots of
service receipt or try to build up a longitudinal
picture of costs; and costing informal care.
Options for costing informal care include: the
market price method, the contingent valuation
method and the opportunity cost method.45
Theoretical and practical challenges of evaluating
carer time have previously been acknowledged.46
Wimo and colleagues47 recommend that the
valuation be based on the opportunity costs of
time sacrificed on each type of time-use. This
would necessitate data collection on the specific
nature of time sacrificed; for example, time spent
in caring, nursing and supervision; loss of time in
work; and impact on leisure activities.
Distinguishing between ‘care activities’ and
‘normal household duties’ can be especially
challenging for spouse carers where the carer is
also the person who has had a long-term
responsibility for the domestic household duties.
From a societal perspective, the value of informal
care may be recognised by considering the cost of
its replacement. Should individuals be unwilling
or unable to undertake the role of carer, society
would have little choice but to fund formal care.
This would involve diverting resources away from
other uses; the opportunity cost of those resources
– the forgone benefit – determines the cost of
informal care. The value of the resources diverted
is a measure of the cost of informal care and is
known as ‘replacement cost’. From the perspective
of the individual carer, the opportunity cost of
caring may be understood in terms of the
alternatives forgone as a result of taking on this
role, which may include employment
opportunities, other unpaid work, such as caring
for other family members, and leisure activities,
including holidays, social activities and relaxation.
Whether employment opportunities should be
valued is the subject of considerable debate and
scepticism,48 as inclusion of economically active
individuals’ time will be valued more highly than
the time of those who are economically inactive,
and this may lead to an exacerbation of existing
inequalities in the provision of care or support. 
Summary
Family carers of people with dementia report high
burden and stress. Demands of time and lack of
understanding among family and friends can lead
to reduced social contact and social supports. A
wide range of psychosocial interventions has been
devised, including one-to-one social support
interventions such as befriending, but no rigorous
studies of cost-effectiveness exist for befriending.
Aim and objectives
The aim of this report is to address this gap in the
evidence base by evaluating the cost-effectiveness
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

of befriending schemes for carers of people with
dementia alongside an RCT. The objectives of the
trial were as follows. 
●To determine whether a social support
intervention (access to an employed befriending
facilitator in addition to usual care) is effective
compared with usual care alone, through
randomly allocating carers of people with
dementia to one of two groups (intervention
versus usual care control) and follow-up for
2 years postrandomisation. 
●To document direct and indirect costs in both
the intervention and control groups, and to
establish incremental cost-effectiveness,
calculating the costs from the perspectives of
the statutory and voluntary sectors and from a
societal perspective.
Introduction
4

Design
An RCT design was used to compare usual care
plus a social support intervention [access to a
befriender facilitator (BF)] with control (usual care)
for carers of people with dementia. Data collection
points were at 6, 15 and 24 months from the date
of randomisation, with the main end-point being at
15 months. The primary perspective of the
economic evaluation was societal. 
Ethics approval
A protocol was submitted for ethical scrutiny by
the multisite research ethics committee (MREC) in
2001. The submission described the methodology
approved by peer reviewers for the HTA
programme, and included a Zelen randomisation
procedure. The protocol was rejected on the
grounds of the Zelen design, and also concerns for
the safety of carers put in contact with lay
intervention providers. The proposed
methodology was revised to use a standard RCT
design, and with additional information on the
recommended good practice for the involvement
of volunteers in the provision of heath and social
care. Ethical approval was received in November
2001 with the proviso that a pilot be carried out in
not more than three local research ethics
committee (LREC) districts before the
implementation of the full trial. The aim of the
pilot was to ensure that procedures for the
research interviews and befriending scheme were
feasible and appropriate. LREC approval was
subsequently received from all five LRECs in
Norfolk and Suffolk, plus the London Borough of
Havering. Trust research and development (R&D)
approval was also sought where recruitment was
planned within secondary care, and from primary
care groupings that had R&D approval procedures
during the recruitment phase of the trial.
There were consent procedures for both family
carers and potential befriending volunteers. The
PwD was not involved in interviews and was not
the intended recipient of the befriending
intervention, and was not therefore involved in the
consent procedures. 
Intervention and control
conditions
The befriending schemes were organised and
administered separately from the research
interviews. The befriending intervention
comprised access to an employed BF, and the
offer of contact with a trained volunteer
befriender for the duration of the befriending
schemes. The expectation was that befriending
visits by the trained volunteer befrienders would
be weekly home visits (dose) for at least 6 months
(duration), with variations in location, duration
and frequency of contact negotiated as necessary
by each carer–volunteer pairing, overseen by 
the BF.
The remit of the befriending volunteers was to
provide companionship and conversation. Their
role was to be a listening ear; that is, to provide
emotional support to the carer. Some
informational support or ‘signposting’ was also
permissible in appropriate circumstances. The
boundaries of the role specifically excluded giving
advice and carrying out practical caring tasks that
would otherwise be carried out by a paid worker
such as a nurse or home care worker. Further
details of the befriending intervention are given in
Chapter 3.
The intervention was offered as an addition to
usual care, and was not a replacement for any
other service (health, social or voluntary). In the
study areas, typical health services for the care
recipient included diagnostic clinics for memory
impairment and dementia (memory clinics) and
community support for challenging behaviours
through community psychiatric nurses (CPNs).
Typical social services for carers included short-
term and longer term respite in the form of day
centres and residential or nursing home stays,
and assistance with washing, dressing and eating
for more dependent care recipients. Typical
voluntary sector provision included carer
information and support groups, and luncheon
clubs. All carers randomised into the trial were
sent locally relevant information on services for
caring for people with dementia by the research
interviewer.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
5
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 2
Methods

Study population
The BECCA project was carried out in the UK, in
the East Anglian counties of Norfolk and Suffolk,
and in the London Borough of Havering, with
recruitment between April 2002 and July 2004. 
The HTA call for bids had specified that
participants should be the carers of people with
Alzheimer’s type dementia. However, Alzheimer’s
disease can only be diagnosed with certainty post-
mortem, and the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease
in vivo is made by exclusion of evidence of other
possible causes, and on a possible or probable
basis only. Alzheimer’s type pathology commonly
co-occurs with other dementia-causing
pathologies, and the symptom profiles are not
generally distinguished within primary care.
Therefore, carers in this study are of people with a
primary progressive dementia in general, rather
than specifically Alzheimer’s disease. 
Eligibility criteria
Inclusion
The main inclusion criteria were that participants
must be family carers aged 18 years or older,
caring for a person with a primary progressive
dementia. Carers should either be cohabiting with
the PwD, or spending an average of 20 hours or
more per week on care-related tasks such as
supervision and assistance in activities of daily
living (ADL).
Exclusion
Carers with significant congenital or acquired
cognitive impairment were excluded, as were those
with terminal illness. Carers of people in
permanent residential, nursing or long-stay
hospital accommodation were also excluded.
Sample size
During the planning stages of the trial there were
no published trials of befriending for carers of
people with dementia. Therefore, sample size
calculations were based on the effect size seen in
befriending interventions with different client
groups;35,49 that is, 0.42–0.45. It was anticipated
that retention of carers postrandomisation would
be high, based on the experience of Aneshensel
and colleagues;20 in a 3-year longitudinal study of
caring (without an intervention), 82% of carers
were followed up to 3 years. 
Using nQuery50 and making an assumption of a
normal distribution, to achieve 90% power at the
5% significance level (two-tailed), 150 carers were
needed for each group, for postrandomisation
dropout of 20% at 6 months. Making an
assumption that between 30% and 60% of people
invited to take part would not respond,35,51 a
target of 750 was set for carer invitations. In the
course of the trial, targets were recalculated on the
grounds that fewer carers were being lost to 
follow-up than had been anticipated. For a
postrandomisation dropout of 7%, it was
calculated that adequate precision and power
should be gained from a sample size of between
225 and 235 carers.
Recruitment procedures
A significant proportion of the population in
Norfolk and Suffolk lives in rural areas. Rural
carers are considered “hard to reach”52 and
dissemination of information can be difficult owing
to there being very few contact points.53 Therefore,
a recruitment strategy was needed that would
maximise equality of access to the trial, irrespective
of urban or rural location. Given that most
gerontological research work involves gatekeepers
such as health and social service practitioners,54
it was hoped that there would be less sample bias
from a primary care than from a secondary care
population. Therefore, general practices were
approached to identify surgeries that would be
happy to send out invitations to participate. It was
hoped that this would be acceptable to practices
given that the Government’s National Priorities
Guidance for health and social services in England
had asked primary care teams to take a lead and
identify carers by April 2000.
Unfortunately, initial recruitment was slow and
after 6 months, only 13 responses had been
received from practices in the pilot area. In
keeping with the picture in the rest of the UK,
practices had neither carers’ registers nor
straightforward means for identifying informal
carers in either computerised or paper records.
Only around half of practices expressed
willingness to send out invitations, even though
funding was available from the project to
reimburse administration time and postage costs.
It was clear that additional recruitment strategies
would be necessary if targets were to be met in the
full trial, so strategies were developed for media
and other publicity, and for wider dissemination of
information through gatekeepers in social services,
secondary care and the voluntary sector.
●Mailouts of publicity posters and leaflets: these went
to all libraries in Suffolk and Norfolk, in
addition to social services, mental health services
for older people, pharmacies, day services,
supermarkets and voluntary organisations. 
Methods
6

●Media publicity: radio interviews and various
articles were arranged with local press. 
●Voluntary-sector mailouts: some voluntary and
charitable organisations were willing to circulate
invitations akin to those used in primary care to
all on their mailing lists. This was the only
strategy used in the London Borough of
Havering, and mailing by Suffolk Carers
provided a significant response in Suffolk.
●Presentations to potential participants and to
gatekeepers: presentations were devised for
carers’ groups, and for health-, social- and
voluntary-sector personnel who may act as
gatekeepers.
All recruiters were briefed on the inclusion and
exclusion criteria for the trial, and the importance
of avoiding inappropriate approaches (e.g. to
family members who are unaware of their 
relative’s suspected diagnosis) was emphasised. 
All used standard letters of invitation and
approved participant information leaflets.
Potential participants expressed their interest in
participating in the research by completing and
returning a response form in a prepaid envelope
to the researchers. Recruitment strategies were
kept under continuous review, including
monitoring of productivity. 
Following receipt of a response form (expression of
interest), research associates made contact with
carers by telephone (or e-mail if this was requested)
to provide further information about the trial, and
where appropriate to carry out initial screening.
The purpose of the initial screening was to check
eligibility (see the section ‘Eligibility criteria’, p. 6).
For eligible carers who expressed continued
interest after this initial contact, arrangements
were made for a face-to-face interview. Times and
venues for face-to-face interviews were organised
as flexibly as possible to accommodate
interviewees’ caring responsibilities. All contact
with carers aimed to be sensitive to their needs,
and appropriately responsive to disclosure of
circumstances that present significant risk to the
well-being of the carer or care recipient (e.g.
abuse, suicidal or homicidal intent). Constraints
such as pressures on carers’ time and transport
difficulties were acknowledged. The importance of
considering transportation has also been
highlighted in previous recruitment literature. For
this project, it was anticipated that most carers
would prefer home visits, or interviews based at a
neutral location within their locality, rather than
travel to a research base. Therefore, the study
protocol and budget included transport costs for
interviewers to travel throughout the counties on a
regular basis. Interviewers endeavoured to meet
all carers’ preferences for days and times of day.
Once carers had contacted the research team
expressing interest in participation, they were
contacted by telephone, given the opportunity to
ask questions, and sent a full information booklet.
Written consent was taken at the first face-to-face
interview, after researchers had given an oral
overview of the trial and answered any questions
on the content of the information booklet.
Information about the trial clearly explained
randomisation, and made it clear to participants
that they were free to withdraw at any time without
giving a reason and without this affecting the
services available to the current or future carer, or
the care recipient.
Randomisation
Sequence generation
Randomisation lists were drawn up by the trial
statistician. Randomisation was stratified by
kinship between carer and PwD (either vertical or
horizontal) and also by region of residence (urban
or rural). Blocked randomisation (block length of
six) was used. For the stratification by kinship,
spouses, long-term partners, cousins of the same
generation and siblings were designated a
‘horizontal bond’, whereas adult offspring (sons
and daughters) and sons- and daughters-in-law
were classified as having a ‘vertical bond’. It was
anticipated that this stratification for kinship
would increase the likelihood of the two groups
matching in terms of gender balance and age,
since adult children carers are more commonly
women, whereas there is a more even gender
balance among spouse carers. Urban and rural
areas were classified on the basis of population
density, with densities of 10,000 per km2 and
above classified as urban.
Allocation concealment
Team members involved in carer consent and
interviews were not involved in the randomisation
process. The randomisation lists were drawn up
before the start of recruitment by the trial
statistician, and held by the research
administrator.
Implementation
After obtaining informed consent and completing
a baseline interview, the interviewer put forward
the carer’s ID number to the trial administrator.
The administrator assigned the carer to
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
7
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

intervention or control on the basis of the
sequence laid out in the relevant randomisation
list (urban/vertical; urban/horizontal; rural/vertical;
rural/horizontal). The administrator was
independent of interviews, had no direct contact
with study participants and was entirely unaware
of participants’ personal circumstances.
Blinding
Over the course of the trial, six researchers were
involved in the informed consent and recruitment
process. To reduce experimenter bias all outcome
measurement was completed with interviewers who
were independent from the provision of
befriending services. Carer well-being was assessed
using self-report inventories, which are less
susceptible to experimenter bias than observational
measures. 
Owing to the nature of the intervention it was not
possible to blind trial participants to group
allocation. Therefore, it was decided to keep
participants fully informed of the outcome of the
randomisation process by sending one of two
standard letters outlining their allocation to either
control or befriending intervention. Letters were
sent by the trial administrator responsible for
allocation from the randomisation lists. All
participants had previously received brief details
about the befriending intervention in their
information booklet. However, given the quantity
of information about using the scheme, full details
were only supplied to those carers who were
randomised to the befriending intervention. 
Measures
All data were collected through interviews with the
carer. The care recipient was not interviewed. The
main outcomes were carer well-being as measured
by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS) depression and health-related quality of
life measured using Euro-Qol 5 Dimensions (EQ-
5D). Secondary measures of well-being were HADS
anxiety, loneliness, positive affectivity and global
health. Measures of structural and perceived social
support were used to characterise the sample, as
were measures of relationship quality and carer
burden. Demographic data and characteristics of
the context of caring (e.g. multiple roles, sleep
disturbance) were also collected through carer self-
report.
Demographic data included age, gender, ethnicity
of the carer and PwD, and kin relationship of 
the carer to the care recipient. Additional
characteristics of caring included hours spent
caring, sleep disturbance, other caring roles and
employment.
Anxiety and depression
The negative aspects of carers’ well-being were
assessed by the HADS.55 On this 14-item scale,
seven items assess anxiety (e.g. ‘I feel tense’ or
‘wound up’, ‘Worrying thoughts go through my
mind’) and seven items assess depression (e.g. 
‘I feel as if I am slowed down’, ‘I have lost interest
in my appearance’). Items are scored on a four-
point scale ranging from 0 to 3, where the higher
scores indicate higher levels of anxiety or
depression. Both scales have good internal
consistency, with Cronbach’s  of 0.84 for the
anxiety subscale at baseline and 0.74 for the
depression subscale. Cut-offs have been used to
indicate caseness, where a score of 7 or below
indicates a non-case for both subscales, a score of
8–10 indicates a doubtful case, and a score of 11
or above indicates a definite case. 
Loneliness
A two-item measure of emotional loneliness was
used, after Stroebe and colleagues.56 The
questions used were ‘Over the past 7 days, how
much have you felt distressed by feeling
lonely/feeling lonely even when you are with
people?’ Both items were rated on a five-point
scale from 0 = not at all to 4 = extremely.
Cronbach’s  was 0.86.
Positive and negative affectivity
Positive and negative affectivity were measured
using the 20-item Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule (PANAS) scale.57 The measure consists of
20 adjectives, ten of which describe negative
moods (e.g. distressed, upset, guilty) and ten
describe positive moods (e.g. excited, proud,
determined). Respondents indicated on a five-
point scale (where 1 = very slightly or not at all
and 5 = extremely) the extent to which they have
experienced the feelings and emotions stated ‘over
the past seven days’. The internal consistency was
 = 0.88 for the negative items and 0.84 for the
positive items. The instrument was included so
that the possibility of an increase in positive affect
could be explored should floor effects be found on
the HADS (carers scoring within asymptomatic
range at baseline, with no room for further
improvement).
Burden
The Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index
(CADI)58,59 frequency scale was used as a measure
of objective burden. It is a 30-item instrument
Methods
8

including statements that describe experiences
related to caring (e.g. ‘It is physically tiring’, ‘The
person I care for can demand too much of me’).
Frequencies of experiences were indicated on a
three-point scale from 1 = never applies to me to
3 = always applies to me. Cronbach’s  was 0.89.
Relationship quality
The quality of premorbid relationship was assessed
using a single five-point scale (0 = very poor, 
2 = neither good nor bad, 4 = very good), and
also with the ten-item Mutual Communal
Behaviours Scale (MCBS),60 which measures the
responsiveness between the carer and care
recipient before the onset of illness. The frequency
of each behaviour was rated using a four-point
scale from 1 = never to 4 = always. A principal
components analysis for this study identified two
five-item factors (oblimin rotation) with
eigenvalues of 5.34 and 1.53, explaining 69% of
the variance. All items loaded highly, with factor
loadings of 0.7 and above. The first factor
contained the five items evaluating the care
recipient’s communal behaviour towards the carer
(e.g. ‘They seemed to enjoy responding to my
needs’, ‘They did things just to please me’) and
the second factor containing all items concerning
the carer’s communal behaviour towards the care
recipient (e.g. ‘If they were feeling bad, I tried to
cheer him/her up’, ‘When they had a need, he/she
turned to me for help’). Cronbach’s  for the two
subscales was 0.91 and 0.84, respectively. 
Perceived loss of companionship was assessed
using a three-item scale by Aneshensel and
colleagues.20 Each item (‘How much have you lost
being able to confide?’ ‘How much have you lost
the person that you used to know?’ ‘How much
have you lost having someone who knew you
well?’) was rated on a four-point scale from 
1 = completely to 4 = not at all, giving a range of
3–12, with lower scores indicating the greater
perceived loss. However, for ease of interpretation
of results, items were recoded such that higher
scores indicate greater perceived loss. A principal
components analysis on data from carers in this
study indicated that all three items loaded heavily
on one factor (loadings ranged from 0.82 to 0.89)
and accounted for 73.5% of the variance.
Reliability of the scale, as indicated by Cronbach’s
 was 0.81. 
Social support
The Practitioner Assessment of Network Type
(PANT) scale,61 which consists of eight
items/questions (e.g. ‘If you have any children
where does your nearest child live?’ ‘How often do
you see any of your neighbours to have a chat or
do something with?’), was developed to identify
social support network type. The instrument has
been found to correlate highly with a range of
demographic variables, level of service use and
response to interventions. Items from the Network
Typology questionnaire were also used to construct
a social isolation index akin to that of Scharf and
Smith,62 summarising contact with family, friends
and neighbours. The index provided a measure of
social isolation ranging from 0 = not isolated to
3 = extremely isolated (no contact with family,
friends or neighbours).
The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social
Support (MSPSS)63 is a 12-item measure assessing
perceived social support. Each item is rated on a
five-point Likert-type scale ranging from
1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. The
scale was developed to assess perceived social
support in relation to the family (e.g. ‘My family
really tries to help me’, ‘I can talk about my
problems with my family’), friends (e.g. ‘I can
count on my friends when things go wrong’, 
‘I have friends with whom I can share my joys and
sorrows’) and significant other (e.g. ‘There is a
special person who is around when I am in need’,
‘I have a special person who is a real source of
comfort to me’) source of support, which form the
three subscales of the measure. Strong
psychometric properties of the measure have been
documented previously, including test–retest
reliability, with correlation coefficients of r = 0.73
for the full scale, r = 0.73 for the friends subscale,
r = 0.74 for the family subscale and r = 0.54 for
the significant other subscale.64 Cronbach’s  in
this study was 0.92, 0.89 and 0.87 for the family,
friends and significant other subscales,
respectively.
Coping
The Brief Coping Orientation for Problem
Experience (COPE)65 is a 28-item measure for
multidimensional assessment of coping. Active
coping includes the subscales acceptance,
emotional support, religion, active coping,
planning and positive reframing. Avoidance
coping includes the subscales self-distraction,
venting, humour, denial, behavioural
disengagement and substance use. Items (e.g. ‘I’ve
been turning to work or other activities to take my
mind off things’, ‘I’ve been saying to myself “this
isn’t real”’) assess responses of individuals when
confronted with difficult or stressful situations and
are scored on a four-point Likert-type scale
ranging from 1 = don’t do this at all to 4 = do
this a lot. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
9
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Life events
The List of Threatening Experiences66 is a 
12-item measure, which states life events (e.g.
‘serious injury or illness to yourself ’, ‘Death of a
first degree relative including a child or a spouse’).
The scale accounts for two-thirds of life events that
may have a marked or moderate long-term threat.
The occurrence or absence of a life event was
scored as Yes or No. 
Health-related quality of life
Health-related quality of life was measured in
QALYs for both the carer and PwD using the 
EQ-5D instrument,67 with the carer providing a
proxy measure on behalf of the PwD. The EQ-5D
is a standardised instrument designed to measure
health outcomes and was recommended for adults
by Dixon and co-authors68 in an HTA review of
health status measures for economic evaluation. It
is a six-item self-assessment, health state measure
of health-related quality of life. The scale includes
five items accounting for five dimensions of
quality of life (mobility, self-care, usual activities,
pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression) and a
visual analogue ‘thermometer’, ranging from 0 to
100 points, where 100 represents the best possible
health state and 0 the worst. The five
items/dimensions of quality of life are scored on a
three-level scale ranging from 1 = no problem to
3 = extreme problem. Carers were not asked to
proxy for the PwD on the visual analogue scale
(VAS).
Resource use
Data on resource use were collected through a
semi-structured interview devised for this trial
influenced by pre-existing interview schedules,
namely the Client Service Receipt Inventory
(CSRI),69 the Caregiver Time Questionnaire,70 the
Caregiver Activity Schedule (CAS)71,72 and the
Resource Utilization in Dementia (RUD)
questionnaire.47 Information was collected on
statutory and voluntary sector usage by both carer
and PwD. Areas covered included home care
(personal care, e.g. bathing and dressing), day
care, inpatient admission, use of GP services, use
of medication, respite care, aids and adaptations,
loss of income, time taken off work and benefits
received. The data-collection instrument varied at
follow-up depending on whether the PwD
remained in the community, had moved
permanently into residential or nursing care, or
had died. 
Support from family and friends
Carers were asked about regular and occasional
support from family and friends. Arrangements
made with family or friends which occurred on a
regular daily or weekly basis were deemed ‘regular
support’. Regular support was subdivided into
‘respite support’, where the family member or
friend replaced the carer, and ‘assistance’, where
the carer remained with the PwD. 
Data-collection procedures
Baseline questionnaire data were collected after
the carer had consented to take part in the study,
with follow-up at 6, 15 and 24 months
postrandomisation. A longitudinal picture of
resource use was constructed for each carer. Carers
interviewed at 6 months were asked about all
resource use that occurred between the first
(baseline) interview and the ongoing interview.
This method was repeated at the 15- and 24-
month interviews, so a complete picture of
resource use for each carer and carer recipient was
available at the end of the final interview. It was
anticipated that all data would be collected
through face-to-face interviews in carers’ own
homes, with the resource-use semi-structured
interview being used to gather information from
carers’ recall, with the use of their own recording
systems such as calendars, diaries and copies of
repeat prescriptions. The recommended best
practice for drug-use information is to go through
the prescription sheets and repeat prescriptions of
study participants and take down names of drugs,
including the correct dosage and frequency.47
Where possible this practice was followed.
However, where repeat prescription forms were
not available, interviewers relied on carer recall.
Similarly, where diaries and calendars were
available, interviewers encouraged carers to use
them to ensure accuracy of frequency of visits and
duration of stays; however, in the absence of such
prompts, data were again subject to carer recall.
Psychometric questionnaires were completed
either as part of a semi-structured interview or as
self-completion, depending on the carer’s
preference. 
To maximise data collection, some variations were
made in data-collection methods. For example, in
cases where carers were fatigued by the interview
process, or their caring responsibilities precluded
completion of the interview, either a second
appointment was made or, for the psychometric
component only, carers were provided with a
stamped addressed envelope for return of
questionnaires. Where carers did not wish to be
interviewed in their own homes, alternative venues
Methods
10

were organised, for example GP surgeries, health
centres, or voluntary-sector or university meeting
rooms. Where the carer moved away from the
catchment area after randomisation, a telephone
interview was developed for the resource-use data
collection, and psychometric measures were either
completed over the telephone, or posted to carers
with a return envelope. Over the course of the
trial, it became standard procedure for follow-up
psychometric questionnaires to be posted out to
participants with letters confirming the
arrangements for follow-up interview, thus giving
carers the option of precompleting all or part of
the questionnaire, or waiting to complete with the
researcher.
Data checking
Data were entered into the Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 12.0.2; SPSS,
Chicago, IL, USA, 2003) and accuracy checks were
carried out. Subscale scores for psychometric
measures were both handscored and calculated by
SPSS as part of error checking. Other data checks
for the psychometric data included checks for out-
of-range values. A proportion of the resource-use
interview scripts was checked by the lead
economics researcher and a second researcher,
with any queries resolved with the main project
researchers.
Data analysis
Missing data
The proportion of missing psychometric data was
generally low (less than 5%), with greater missing
data for earlier rather than later interviews. No
psychometric scale or subscale was missing for
more than 10% of data from interviewer
participants. Where individual items were missing
within scales or subscales, data were imputed
before calculation of the scale or subscale score.
For the resource-use data, where five or fewer of
the 136 cost data items were missing, or two or
fewer of the utility items were missing, data were
imputed using Rubin’s multiple imputation
method.73
Baseline characteristics
As is now recommended,74 no formal tests were
carried out for significant differences in baseline
characteristics between the study groups. Data
were tabulated for intervention, control and whole
sample for both demographic and clinical
variables.
Primary effectiveness analysis
The psychometric data were transferred to SAS
software for outcome analysis. The intervention
group carers were compared with control on the
HADS depression scale at 6, 15 and 24 months,
using the intention-to-treat (ITT) population.
Unadjusted analysis was based on a pooled t-test,
and the adjusted analysis based on a generalised
linear model (GLM) with baseline HADS depression
score and stratification categories (urban/rural
location; horizontal/vertical kinship) as covariates.
Secondary effectiveness analyses
The method used for the primary analysis was
repeated for the secondary measures of HADS
anxiety, loneliness, positive affectivity and the
global VAS of the EQ-5D. In addition, the
proportion of PwD still in home care compared
with those institutionalised was compared between
groups.
Subgroup analyses
The primary analysis was repeated on a per-
protocol basis (i.e. removing those carers from the
intervention group who were not matched with a
befriender for at least 6 months and those carers
in the control group who ended up matched with
a befriender) and also looking at spouse carers
only (carers in a horizontal kinship relationship).
Economic analyses
Valuing resource use
The chosen price year was 2005. Resource-use data
were multiplied by national unit costs obtained from
routine NHS and other data sources such as the
national schedule of reference costs. Drug prices
were obtained from the British National Formulary.
Where unit cost data were not readily available, costs
were obtained directly from the relevant agency or
estimated separately. Time spent by carers, friends
and family in caring for their relative was valued at
average UK gross income rates for 2005, derived
from Office for National Statistics (ONS). Unit cost
data are listed in Appendix 2.
Discounting costs
It is conventional to discount costs (and outcomes)
incurred more than 1 year in the future to their
‘present value’. However, it was not possible to
identify which costs in the 15-month follow-up
data set had been incurred after the 12-month
cut-off point. Not discounting costs incurred
between 12 and 15 months is unlikely to have a
great impact on the results of this analysis, and
therefore no attempt was made to do so. Costs
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
11
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

incurred and QALYs accrued between 15 and
24 months were discounted at 3.5%.
Primary economic analysis
An economic evaluation was performed from the
perspective of society comparing costs with the
QALYs gained by carers in intervention versus
control after 15 months’ follow-up. The EQ-5D
health profiles were converted to utilities using UK
general population valuations,75 and thence to
QALYs over the period measured.76
To compare costs and effects, an incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was calculated,
comparing the difference (increment) in costs with
the difference in QALYs gained in each arm of the
study. The ratio states the cost of buying one 
extra QALY by enacting the befriending strategy
compared with no befriending. Typically, the NHS
is willing to pay up to £20,000–30,000 for a
QALY.77 Thus, if the ICER is below this threshold,
befriending may be considered good value for
money. If it is above this, it may be considered
poor value for money.
ICER =
where C2 is cost per carer–PwD in the befriending
arm, C1 is cost per carer–PwD in the control arm,
E2 = QALYs gained by carer in the befriending
arm, and E2 = QALYs gained by carer in the
control arm.
Mean costs and QALYs gained in the intervention
and control arms were calculated from trial
observations. A non-parametric bootstrap approach
of 1000 replications was used to construct
distributions around the mean costs and QALYs
gained in each arm. The simulations are used to
construct 95% confidence intervals (CIs) resulting
around mean difference in cost and QALYs
between the arms, and the ICERs used to construct
a cost-effectiveness acceptability curve (CEAC).76
Alternative economic scenarios
Further analyses were performed to consider the
cost-effectiveness of the intervention within
different scenarios.
Varying the perspective
The base case was societal, but within that there
are different sectors:
●the statutory sector (NHS, social services and
other government-funded services) 
●the voluntary sector
●the household sector.
Each calculation includes only those costs relevant
to each sector. For example, the statutory sector
analysis includes only costs borne by the NHS 
and social services, and thus excludes voluntary-
sector costs, patients’ and their carers’ out-of-
pocket costs, the value of carers’ time, and 
so on.
Varying the time-point
Although 15 months postrandomisation was the
main end-point, data were available at 6 months
and also at 24 months. The cost–utility analysis is
repeated for these time-points.
Complete case analysis
This comprised only observations for whom
complete cost and outcome data were available at
15 months (30 intervention; 31 control).
Taking account of both carer and PwD quality of
life
The resource-use data included costs for both the
carer and the person with dementia, but in the
main utility analysis the health-related quality of
life relates to the carer only. This alternative
scenario includes the QALYs calculated for the care
recipient from the EQ-5D, completed by 
the carer. 
Summary of changes to protocol
As already described above, recruitment strategies
were amended to include recruitment through the
voluntary sector, self-referral and secondary
services. The changes to the carer recruitment
process also included the addition of Havering as
a trial site. To maintain the original project end
date, follow-up periodicities were amended such
that follow-up occurred at 6, 15 and 24 months
rather than at 9, 18 and 36 months. That is, the
time-horizon (follow-up period) was reduced from
36 to 24 months owing to the extension of the
recruitment period. Low attrition rates in the
project facilitated the reduction of recruitment
targets as the assumed attrition was not
experienced. To maintain maximum follow-up,
data-collection methods were also broadened
through the course of the trial to include self-
completion of the psychometric follow-up and the
use of telephone follow-ups for carers who had
moved out of the area. Other protocol changes
were revisions to the management committees in
the light of new governance guidelines and the
inclusion of a pilot study as requested by the
ethical committee. The latter is described further
in Chapter 3.
C2 – C1
E2 – E1
Methods
12

I
n this chapter the development and
implementation of the befriending intervention
are described in detail. 
Definition of befriending
Befriending is a form of social support where a
supportive other is introduced to, or matched with
an individual who would otherwise be socially
isolated. The term ‘befriending’ has been used to
describe a range of interventions from emotional
support to tangible assistance. In the initial
protocol for this trial, befriending was
conceptualised as offering emotional,
informational and practical support. However,
through consultation with the potential local
providers, the definition of befriending and the
planned content of the intervention were
amended to focus on the provision of emotional
support and also, where appropriate, some
‘signposting’ to information and services. The role
did not encompass instrumental support (hands-
on caring, DIY, shopping, etc.) or advice. That is,
befriending comprised companionship and
conversation rather than instrumental support or
activities that aimed to increase community
participation.
Development of the BECCA
befriending schemes
The BECCA project was devised at the University
of East Anglia (UEA) in the city of Norwich
(population 120,000) in the county of Norfolk
(population 800,000), to take place in Norfolk and
the adjoining county of Suffolk (population
700,000). The physical size of the two counties
made it unfeasible to have a single scheme, and
there were no voluntary organisations spanning
both Norfolk and Suffolk that could support a
suitable befriending scheme. Discussions were held
between representatives of the research team (GC
and FP) and the Alzheimer’s Society’s national
office to determine ways in which the befriending
intervention could be set up and managed.
Various options were considered, and it was
decided that the only feasible option was for a
number of small befriending schemes to be set up
on a locality basis, with multiple BFs employed by
separate organisations, each of which had
experience of providing befriending services. As
Norwich and its surrounding areas had been
identified as the pilot area, further discussions
were held with community organisations within
the voluntary organisations in Norwich. It was
agreed that the first scheme would be hosted by
Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary Services (NVS),
and a contract was drawn up between UEA and
NVS. Following this agreement, and during the
process of recruiting to the post of BF, several
consultation meetings were held with key
stakeholders, with the remit of deciding the
appropriate policies and procedures for ensuring
the safe involvement of both carers and volunteers
in the befriending scheme. Once procedures for
recruitment, training and matching of volunteers
were in place in Norwich, the scheme was
extended to other areas of Norfolk overseen by
the same BF. In addition, two further schemes
were set up, one with Age Concern Suffolk (ACS)
and the smallest with Age Concern Havering
(ACH). Consistent with arrangements for the
initial Norwich scheme, the BFs were jointly
managed by the operations manager from the
‘host’ organisation and the BECCA grantholder
with responsibility for managing the befriending
intervention (designated ‘intervention manager’). 
The contracted host voluntary organisations (NVS,
ACS, ACH) agreed to employ a part-time BF, and
jointly manage the post with the UEA-based trial
intervention manager; register all potential
volunteer befrienders in their area, taking
informed consent for the volunteers’ involvement
in the BECCA research trial; take up references;
facilitate Criminal Records Bureau (CRB)
disclosures; provide public liability and personal
accident insurance; provide BECCA training for
volunteers including details of the Code of
Conduct and Statement of Confidentiality; and
provide ongoing support for the BF and all
registered BECCA volunteers. They also had
policies in place for volunteer support,
complaints, disciplinary action, grievance and the
storage of information about volunteers under the
Data Protection Act.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
13
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 3
Intervention

Consultation and advisory groups
The initial Norfolk-focused consultation group was
made up of representatives of organisations with
an interest in carer support, volunteer support
and/or people with dementia. This included
committee members from branches of the
Alzheimer’s Society, Alzheimer’s Society outreach
workers, representatives from Age Concern
Norwich and Age Concern Norfolk, Pabulum (a
Norwich-based project for reminiscence with
people with dementia), the Mental Health Service
dementia nurse specialist, Norfolk Social Services
planning and community development officer and
Suffolk Social Services carers grant officer.
Discussions within this initial consultation forum
included consideration of the boundaries of the
intervention, insurance, screening and training,
and exit strategies for the end of the project.
Members of this group also contributed to the
piloting of the befriender training. This initial
consultation group was extended to form a
broader group which met approximately every
6 months for the duration of the trial, to comment
on trial progress and contribute to decision-
making on evolving procedures. Similar groups
were convened in Suffolk and Havering.
In addition to issues policies, procedures and
training, the consultation groups proved
particularly helpful in anticipating some problems
and in suggesting solutions during the ongoing
trial. These included publicity phrasing,
placement and timing to fit with local-voluntary
sector programmes, and issues to consider in
befrienders’ introductory visits to carers’ homes,
particularly in considering the carer’s relationship
with the PwD.
Befriending scheme procedures
Befriender facilitator recruitment and
induction
BF posts were all part-time. They were advertised
internally within the host organisation, and where
necessary in the local press. The person
specification for BFs included the following
criteria: prior experience of working in the
voluntary sector, working with people with
dementia and their carers, and proficiency in
training volunteers. The job description was to
recruit and screen volunteers, organise training,
maintain contact with and support referred carers,
match befrienders and carers, monitor ongoing
befriending relationships, support endings,
facilitate support for befrienders, help support the
network of voluntary-sector partner organisations
and accurately compile records for the research
team.
The initial BF played a key part in the
development of policies and procedures for the
scheme, in close collaboration with the
intervention manager and principal investigator
for the BECCA trial. Subsequently employed BFs
took part in a full-day training course, which
covered the role of the BFs, befriender
recruitment and training procedures, volunteer
registration and screening, befriender training,
initial contact with carers, support across the
befriending relationship, reporting procedures,
expenses and volunteer time recording and
management, risk assessment, and befriender and
carer reviews. 
Recruitment and screening of potential
befriending volunteers
Pilot procedures for volunteer recruitment
included dissemination of recruitment posters and
leaflets through the network of volunteer bureaux
in the Norwich and District area, and through
partner organisations represented in the
consultation group. Open meetings were
organised and advertised so that potentially
interested volunteers could, without commitment,
hear a short talk about the project and about the
role of befrienders. There were attendees at two
pilot open meetings held in the City of Norwich
(one in a suburb at a venue with parking facilities,
and one in the centre of town convenient for
public transport). However, a similar meeting
arranged in one small market town did not attract
any new interest. Early indications were that
befrienders would be harder to identify outside
the largest centre of population. For the full trial,
therefore, opportunities were sought for contact
with a greater number of local social-care
organisations, in addition to dissemination of
recruitment leaflets and posters, and media
advertising. Recruitment literature emphasised the
importance of a ‘listening ear’ and the ability to
provide ‘companionship and conversation’.
Inclusion criteria
Potential befriending volunteers were asked to
meet the following criteria before being
considered eligible for matching with a family
carer.
Attend an open meeting, or individual meeting
with the BF
The aim of open meetings was to welcome
potential volunteers, to orientate them to the
stages to becoming a befriender and to outline the
Intervention
14

expectations of befrienders. The meetings also
provided volunteers with an opportunity to meet
those involved in the befriending scheme and to
ask questions before formally registering their
interest.
Read the information for potential befriending
volunteers and complete a befriender
registration form
As the BECCA befriending schemes were part of a
research trial, the befriending volunteers were
considered a form of research participant.
Therefore, the information booklet included
MREC-approved information relevant to research
trial participants, and the registration form also
included MREC-approved statements akin to
those found on research consent forms. The
volunteer registration form was also used to record
information on existing skills (e.g. experience as a
family carer and/or caring experience, or from
training within the helping professions or as a
paid carer), and volunteers’ availability (weekdays
or weekends; daytime or evening) and preferences
for placements (e.g. no pets or smoking; local or
away from own community). 
The information booklet and registration form
had been revised and amended in the light of
pilot work which identified the risk of dual roles
for befrienders and carers. It had been assumed
that all current carers would be too busy to be
considering voluntary activity; however, some
carers expressed an interest in being befrienders
themselves. Indeed, some misinterpreted the
carer information sheet used for recruitment of
family carers to the project to mean that they
were being asked to be befrienders, and they
engaged in the research interviews with this
express intent. To clarify literature, the
information sheets were amended, and some of
the terminology was changed to remove any
possible ambiguities. A procedure was devised 
for ensuring that active carers were not taken on
as potential befrienders during their time as a
research participant, but to value their offer and
contribution during later phases of the trial, 
once their research participation was complete. 
It was noted that some carers saw themselves as
better equipped for the befriending role, and 
not just in need of care. Feedback from pilot 
work also showed that befrienders needed to be
aware of some aspects of the research design, 
for example making it clear that carers had
contact with research interviewers before entry
into the trial, and that referrals could not be
taken for the befriending scheme except from
within the trial. 
Provide names of referees and complete a CRB
standard disclosure form
Contact details were requested for two character
referees (not relatives), and references were taken
up by the BF. Potential volunteers were also asked
to disclose criminal convictions, including any that
were spent, as people over the age of 65 (which
many carers were) are considered vulnerable
people under the terms of the Rehabilitation of
Offenders Act 1974. During the start-up of the
project, procedures for police checks were being
transferred to the new CRB, and participants were
asked to complete the CRB disclosure form.
Assistance was provided by the BF where necessary. 
Attend the befriender training course
The befriender training course consisted of six 
2-hour modules, totalling 12 hours of learning
(further details on p. 16). The course was
compulsory and volunteers were able attend
sessions from more than one course as long as all
modules were covered. A record of attendance was
kept.
Agree to abide by the Code of Conduct,
including the statement of confidentiality
The Code of Conduct outlined the expectations of
the work that befrienders would do on the scheme’s
behalf. It included a statement of confidentiality, as
organisers had to be able to trust volunteers with
personal information about the carers who used its
services, and personal information about the cared-
for PwD. Volunteers signed to say that they would
not pass on confidential information to anyone
other than their BF, or supporters nominated by
the BF. Volunteers could pass on confidential
information if they had been given the permission
of the person concerned. The statement of
confidentiality also emphasised situations where
safety took a higher priority than confidentiality,
for example in situations of suspected abuse.
Availability
Volunteers were asked to make a minimum
commitment to be involved with the scheme for
6 months, at an intensity of an hour per week plus
travel.
Exclusion criteria
The following exclusion criteria were applied:
●volunteers under the age of 18 years
●volunteers regarded as unsuitable in the light of
references or information from standard
disclosures from the CRB
●volunteers with special needs that could not 
be catered for within the scheme, or which
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
15
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

might add to the caring burden of a 
befriender
●volunteers who failed to declare convictions
which later came to light.
The above criteria were in line with the key
principles for the safe involvement of volunteers
with vulnerable clients.78 In the event, no
volunteers were excluded on the grounds of any of
these criteria.
Befriender training programme
The training programme was developed
specifically for the trial, and delivered by the BFs
in conjunction with invited others. The aims of the
training were to equip volunteers for their
befriending role, and ensure that they were aware
of scheme boundaries and guidelines for safe and
ethical involvement with carers. Certificates of
attendance were provided on completion. 
An early version of the training programme was
written by a clinical psychologist with experience
of working with carers and people with dementia,
and of training in the voluntary sector. Some
information was drawn from existing training
programmes, plus information from organisations
such as the Alzheimer’s Society. The training
included skills-based work, including listening
skills and maintaining boundaries. It also covered
key aspects of policies and procedures, including
non-discriminatory practice, health and safety
when working in other people’s homes, and the
balance of confidentiality versus communication of
risk. The initial programme was piloted with
members of the consultation group, and others
nominated by consultation group members. The
programme was amended to focus specifically on
the befriending role rather than dementia
knowledge, and the use of case vignettes was
increased. The final 12-hour training programme
was organised into six 2-hour units which could be
organised into six, three or two sessions. The
course curriculum is outlined below.
●Unit 1: Befriending: what is it, and what it isn’t:
covered the role and responsibilities of
befrienders in the BECCA scheme, including
confidentiality and safety. Short ‘carer scenarios’
provided a focus for discussion and learning.
●Unit 2: Listening skills: theory and practice of
good listening, and establishing a good
relationship with carers.
●Unit 3: Carers’ needs; the befriending relationship:
‘carer scenarios’ from session 1 were developed
to highlight the impact of caring for a person
with dementia, to raise befrienders’ awareness
of needs that befriending can meet. The four
stages of the befriending relationship were
introduced, and skills developed in stages 1 and
2 (‘breaking the ice’ and ‘getting to know one
another’).
●Unit 4: Working in other people’s homes: guidelines
for health and safety when visiting carers at
home, including risk assessment, and what to
do in the face of incidents, accidents or
untoward situations.
●Unit 5: Dementia and services: this session gave
information about dementia and signposted
volunteers to a variety of information resources
to assist in signposting.
●Unit 6: Later stages of befriending, and looking after
yourself: skills were developed for maintaining
companionship (stage 3), including avoiding
miscommunication and troubleshooting.
Procedures for ending befriending relationship
(stage 4) were covered, and the importance of
ongoing self-care was emphasised.
Carer registration
In parallel with the recruitment, screening and
training of befriending volunteers, the BFs also
registered carers expressing an interest in
receiving visits from a befriending volunteer. All
carers in contact with the BFs were put in contact
through the BECCA research trial. The BECCA
befriending schemes did not accept referrals from
outside the research project. In the pilot, carers
randomised to intervention were asked to opt in to
the befriending scheme by sending an expression
of interest form to the BF. However, carers
randomised to intervention during the pilot phase
did not opt in. The project consultation group
suggested that opting in could be perceived by
carers as ‘another hurdle to jump’, rather than as
protection of their right to choose whether or not
to be involved. Therefore, a protocol amendment
was sought and approved such that all carers were
asked for permission for their contact details to be
passed on to the local BF should they be allocated
to intervention as a result of the randomisation
process. Following the protocol amendment, those
carers allocated to the befriending intervention
through the randomisation procedure received a
letter from the trial administrator informing them
of their allocation and enclosing a brief
information leaflet about the befriending scheme.
Their contact details were forwarded to the
relevant BF. The introductory leaflet gave a clear
statement that making use of the befriending
scheme was optional. On receipt of a carer’s
details, the BF would make telephone contact to
Intervention
16

introduce themselves, to answer questions on the
introductory leaflet and, where appropriate, to
arrange to visit the carer. At the initial face-to-face
meeting, the BF provided carers with a full
information booklet about using the befriending
scheme. Carers interested in participating at that
stage completed a registration form and those who
declined involvement were given an open
invitation to change their mind at any time during
the life of the project. In accordance with the
suggestions of the consultation group, the BF
maintained occasional contact with those carers
who were not initially interested in having a
befriender. The information booklet and
registration form for carers using the befriending
scheme corresponded to those used with the
befriending volunteers. 
Befriender–carer matches
Matches were made by the BFs on the basis of
locality and knowledge of both the carer and
befriender. Information was used from the
registration forms, most particularly befrienders’
and carers’ preferences for time and location of
meetings. There were no requirements or
restrictions for matches relating to gender, current
circumstances or prior experience. The BF
organised an initial meeting to introduce the
befriender to the carer, to remind both parties of
the ground rules for the befriending partnerships,
and to set up an informal contract for meeting
location, duration and frequency. 
Monitoring of matches
Both befriender and carer were reminded that the
BF would be contacting each of them individually
to review the partnership after 1 month, 6 months
and every subsequent 6 months, but that they
could contact the BF at any time in between.
Befriender support
Local peer-support group meetings were
organised for befrienders at a minimum of 
6-monthly intervals. These provided opportunities
for volunteers to support each other on issues that
could be raised without breaching confidentiality,
and to have further training and topical
information about aspects of volunteering or carer
support, such as telephone support. Newsletters
were circulated, also at 6-monthly intervals, giving
information about the BECCA project, volunteer
recruitment and signposting issues. The BF
maintained individual contact with each volunteer
and carer between meetings, usually by telephone,
and 6-monthly reviews of the activity and the
quality of befriender relationship were routinely
carried out. However, both befriender and carer
were actively encouraged to contact the BF if they
had any concerns about issues within or relating to
the befriending activity.
Previous work has recommended that one full-
time befriending coordinator could only
successfully support 15–20 matched befrienders.79
Therefore, it was initially intended that the BF
would liaise with counterparts in relevant
organisations to identify potential befriender
contacts, and also work to develop a pyramid of
volunteer support in which more experienced
volunteers within a community take on the role of
local befriending contact, supporting and training
new recruits, matching befrienders with care dyads
and publicising the befriending scheme. For the
Suffolk and Havering schemes, the number of
matched did not rise above the recommended
ceiling. In Norfolk, the BF worked closely with
Alzheimer’s Society outreach workers, with some
aspects of the BF role delegated.
Ending of partnerships
At the start of their involvement with the scheme,
participating carers were told that they could use
the befriending scheme as long as there was an
appropriate BF. If the carer’s active caring
situation changed because the PwD had either
moved into long-term care or died, the carer was
then given the choice as to whether to continue or
terminate a befriending relationship. From the
start of the trial, the intervention manager and the
BFs worked towards an exit strategy to ensure that
ongoing matches could be supported beyond the
end of the trial-specific schemes.
Audit and data collection
Volunteer screening and training procedures were
audited by the BFs, in conjunction with the
intervention manager. Audit data and
demographic information on matched befriending
volunteers were collated by the BFs and sent to
the university-based research team in anonymised
format. Data included age and gender of
befriending volunteers, and whether or not they
had previous experience as a carer. Dates of
matches and partnership end dates were also
collated for use by the research team. 
Volunteer flow
A total of 124 volunteers approached BFs across
the three schemes expressing interest in the
volunteer befriender role. Of these, 81 (65%)
completed a volunteer registration form, 75 (60%)
were screened using references and 64 (52%)
completed CRB disclosures. In total, 63 (51%)
completed the training programme, and 60 (48%)
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
17
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

met all four screening criteria of registration,
references, CRB disclosures and completion of
befriender training. In other words, two potential
volunteers had to be recruited to result in one
eligible befriender or, alternatively, one in two
potential volunteers was lost through the screening
and training process. 
Previous descriptions of befriending schemes, for
example ‘City Support’ Case Study 6,80 have found
that around 15% of befriending applicants may be
considered unsuitable for befriending within
healthcare. The BECCA scheme screening
procedures did not include any assessment of
‘befriender suitability’. Individual applicants were
encouraged to consider this for themselves during
the recruitment, screening and training process,
and it was indeed the case that some potential
volunteers withdrew as they decided for
themselves that the befriending role was not right
for them. In some cases, BFs were able to direct
volunteers to other volunteering opportunities.
Of the 60 volunteers who completed the screening
and training process, only 49 became befrienders.
As demographic data for volunteers were only
passed on to the research team for those who
became befrienders (i.e. matched with carers), no
information is available on potential differences
between those volunteers who become befrienders
and those who withdrew earlier in the recruitment,
screening and training process, or on those who
were eligible to befriend, but not matched.
Anecdotally, non-matching of eligible volunteers
was often due to mismatches in geographical
location between befriender and carer
recruitment. 
Costing of befriending services
Each BECCA befriending scheme was set up
specifically for the trial in addition to existing
services, and therefore each service was uniquely
costed. Cost data were collected from the
beginning of the pretrial consultation to the end
of the financial year 2005/06. Costs collected
included set-up costs, training costs (for staff and
volunteers), staff salaries and travel, volunteer
time and travel, overhead expenses
(administration, stationery, telephone, postage,
insurance, CRB disclosures) and running costs
(ongoing and recruitment and publicity costs,
room hire for support groups). 
Half-yearly budget statements were obtained from
the host organisations to collect details on staff
salaries, travel claims and all expenses related to
overheads and running expenses. 
Record of activities 
BFs kept accounts of their own work and budget,
and basic records of befrienders’ contact with
carers. They also collected the records kept by
befrienders and trainers of their time spent and
expenses. The precise quantities of befriender time
and expenses were recorded on monthly returns.
Time, out-of-pocket expenses, use of volunteers’
cars and organisational costs of running the
befriending service were all collected routinely. 
Total cost of intervention
Intervention costs were calculated as a fixed and
variable component, specific to each of the three
centres (Norfolk, Suffolk and Havering). The fixed
cost was divided equally by centre among all those
in the intervention arm, and variable costs were
divided equally among those who actually received
befriending.
Protocol changes relating to
intervention
As a consequence of ethical review, a limited-area
pilot phase was introduced to the project with the
aim of piloting procedures for the recruitment and
training of befriending volunteers. This had
implications for the wider trial timetable, leading
in part to the changes to the recruitment process
described in the section ‘Summary of changes to
protocol’ (p. 12). As a consequence of the pilot,
there were changes to the consent procedures for
carers, and associated changes to the information
and consent forms. At this time the opportunity
was taken to amend the terminology used in these
forms to conform to best practice, in a changing
field. 
Intervention
18

Participant flow
A summary of participant flow is provided in the
CONSORT diagram (Figure 1). Details at each
stage are described below.
Expressions of interest and assessment
for eligibility
In total, the research team received 316
expressions of interest. Of these, 107 (34%) were
received as a result of invitations from GP
practices. The greatest proportion of responses
(136; 43%) came about as a consequence of carers’
contact with voluntary-sector personnel or
invitations received through voluntary-sector
mailing lists. Eleven per cent were self-referrals
following media publicity. Over the course of
recruitment an increasing number of enquiries
came by word of mouth. 
Of the 316 people initially expressing interest in
the trial, 31 (10%) declined involvement. It is not
known whether those who declined involvement
would have been eligible for the trial. A further
49 people were excluded at the screening stage as
they did not meet eligibility criteria for the trial.
The most common reasons for exclusion were the
PwD living in permanent care or having already
passed away. Other reasons included carer ill-
health and the care recipient having an illness
other than a primary progressive dementia.
Reasons for exclusion are shown in Table 1. 
No demographic or psychosocial information was
collected about potential participants prior to their
giving written informed consent to involvement in
the trial. Therefore, it is not known whether non-
responders systematically differ from responders,
nor is it known whether eligible carers had
demographic or psychosocial differences compared
with those who declined or were excluded. 
Randomised allocation
All 236 carers screened as eligible for the trial
gave informed consent and were randomised 
after baseline assessment between April 2000 
and August 2004. A total of 116 carers were
randomly allocated to intervention and 120 to
control. 
Of the 116 randomised to intervention, all 116
were offered contact with their local BF. During
the initial pilot stage of the trial carers were asked
to initiate this contact through the return of a
response form. However, following discussion with
the consultation group, this was seen as an
unnecessary barrier to accessing the service, and a
change to protocol was applied for and approved
by the MREC such that all carers consented to
having their details passed to the BF should they
be allocated to intervention. There were 42 carers
consented into the trial under the original
procedure, with 20 in the intervention arm and 22
in the control. Of the 20 invited to make contact
with the BF, 13 did so. For the 96 carers allocated
to intervention under the revised consent
procedures, all had contact with the BF. In
addition, administrative error meant that the
names of three carers allocated to control were
forwarded to a BF, and therefore were treated by
the BF as carers in the intervention.
Follow-up
Follow-up interviews were carried out as soon as
could be arranged after the interview due date;
that is, 6, 15 and 24 months postrandomisation.
Overall retention in the trial over the 2-year follow-
up was good at 81% overall (80% intervention and
81% control). Loss to follow-up was proportionately
greater in the intervention arm than in the control
arm for the first two follow-up interviews (at 6 and
15 months), but was very similar by 24 months.
The main reason for loss to follow-up was carer
health. Six carers died over the course of the 
2-year follow-up. Three carers withdrew from the
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
19
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 4
Results: characteristics and outcomes
TABLE 1 Reasons for exclusion at screening 
Reason for exclusion
n
Declined involvement (n = 31)
Refused
9
No reason given
22
Did not meet study eligibility criteria (n = 49)
PwD in care, or deceased
19
Carer ill-health (physical or emotional)
15
Care recipient not having dementia
8
Carer spending <20 hours per week caring
4
Out of catchment area
2
Paid carer
1

Results: characteristics and outcomes
20
Assessed for eligibility
(n = 316)
Allocated to interventiona (n = 116)
Received intervention (n = 116)
Enrolment
 
Excluded (n = 80)
  Not meeting inclusion criteria
    (n = 49)
  Refused to participate 
    (n = 9)
  Other reasons 
    (n = 22)
Is it randomised? Yes
Allocation
Analysed  (n = 101)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 4)
  1 missing FU data
  3 missing BL data
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 11)
  Reasons:
    Health (7)
    Withdrew (4)
Allocated to control (n = 120)
Received controlb (n = 120)
Follow-up 1c
Analysed  (n = 93)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 3)
  3 missing BL data
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 20)
  Reasons:
    Health (10)
    Died (3)
    Moved away (1) 
    Withdrew (6) 
Follow-up 2
Analysed  (n = 90)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 3)
  3 missing BL data
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 23)
  Reasons:
    Health (11)
    Died (4)
    Moved away (1)
    Withdrew (7)
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 7)
  Reasons:
    Health (3)
    Moved away (2)
    Lost contact (1)
    Withdrew (1)
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 14)
  Reasons:
    Health (4)
    Moved away (5)
    Lost contact (2)
    Died (1)
    Withdrew (2)
Lost to follow-up 
(n = 23)
  Reasons:
    Health (6)
    Moved away (5)
    Lost contact (5)
    Died (2)
    Withdrew (2)
    Moved on with 
      life (3)
Follow-up 3
Analysis
Analysed  (n = 111)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 2)
  2 missing BL
Analysed  (n = 104)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 2)
  2 missing BL
Analysed  (n = 95)
Excluded from 
analysis  (n = 2)
  2 missing BL
Analysis
FIGURE 1 CONSORT summary of participant flow. a Intervention was ‘access to a befriender facilitator’. b Three control carers also
received intervention. For purposes of analysis they were treated as control carers. c Figures for effectiveness analyses. The data set 
for 6-, 15- and 24-month economic evaluations comprised data from carers followed up at 6 months, i.e. 218 participants
(105 intervention; 113 control). BL, baseline; FU, follow-up. 

trial on the grounds that they felt they had ‘moved
on with life’ such that they no longer felt they had
a carer identity following the death of the PwD or
their move into permanent care. 
Analysis
All carers who were followed up were included in
the analyses, with the following exceptions:
●three intervention and two control carers had
missing data on the HADS at baseline 
●one further intervention carer had missing
HADS data at 6-month follow-up, so was
excluded from 6-month analyses
●11 intervention and seven control carers had no
resource-use data at 6 months, so were excluded
from economic analyses. 
Baseline characteristics of
randomised carers
Baseline data are presented for the complete
sample and by group (intervention versus control).
The denominators in the tables reflect the number
of carers who answered a given question.
Demographic information
Over the whole sample, two-thirds of carers were
female (Table 2). The kin relations of the carer to
the person with dementia in the sample were: 97
wives, 62 husbands, 39 daughters, 15 sons, 12
daughters or sons-in-law, four siblings, two nieces,
one parent, one cousin and two friends of long
standing, ‘as if related’. Three in five participants
lived in ‘urban’ locations (population density
10,000 or greater). A majority (86%) of the sample
were cohabiting with the PwD. All participants
except for two identified themselves as white. 
Two-thirds of the sample were retired. The mean
age of carers was 68 years (range 36–91 years) and
the mean age of PwD was older, at 78 years. The
mean duration of caring was just under 4 years. 
Almost the complete sample (97%) was providing
some form of assistance to the PwD on a daily
basis (Table 3). Two-thirds considered themselves
to be ‘on duty’ for 24 hours per day, and over half
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
21
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 2 Baseline demographic information
Total
Intervention
Control
n/N
%
n/N
%
n/N
%
Female carer
152/236
64
76/116
66
76/120
63
Carer ethnicity: white
232/234
99
116/116
100
116/118
98
Kinship: spouse
159/236
67
76/116
66
83/120
69
Urban location
146/236
62
71/116
61
75/120
63
Cohabiting
204/236
86
99/116
85
105/120
88
Retired
158/235
67
78/115
67
80/120
66
N
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Carer’s age (years)
236
68.0
11.4
116
68.4
11.3
120
67.6
11.6
PwD age (years)
236
78.2
8.7
116
78.6
8.9
120
77.8
8.5
Duration of caring (years)
232
3.8
5.9
114
3.9
7.7
118
3.7
3.5
TABLE 3 Burden of caring
Total
Intervention
Control
N
%
N
%
N
%
Daily assistance
226/234
97
110/114
97
116/120
97
24 hours/day ‘on duty’
139/216
64
67/105
64
72/111
65
Relative can be left unsupervised
142/233
61
68/114
60
74/119
62
Sleep disturbance
125/221
57
60/109
55
65/112
58
N
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Objective burden (CADI-F)
232
54.1
10.4
114
53.7
11.0
118
54.4
9.9

experienced sleep disturbance on account of the
PwD. 
Sixteen per cent of carers were caring for another
person in addition to a person with dementia and
16% were working, in full- or part-time paid
employment, or were self-employed (Table 4).
Eighteen carers (89%) identified themselves as
being full-time carers. The intervention and
control groups were notably similar in terms of
demographics, burden of caring and multiple roles.
Psychological well-being
The level of psychological morbidity for the
participating carers is shown in Table 5. In total, 40
carers (17%) self-reported case levels of depressive
symptomology (HADS depression score 11),
either with or without case levels of anxiety. This
proportion is in keeping with the expected
prevalence of clinical depression in family carers
of PwD (expected range 0.15–0.3281). The
proportion of carers expressing case levels of
anxiety (with or without depression) was higher,
with 63 (27%) scoring 11 or above on the HADS
anxiety scale. The mean scores on the HADS
depression and anxiety subscales are comparable
with those found in carers of PwD in day-hospital
settings or in contact with community mental
health teams (CMHTs).82
Baseline scores on other psychometric measures
are shown in Table 6. As for the baseline
demographics, the intervention and control
groups were similar on all measures.
Support in caring role
It was anticipated that the availability of support
for carers would depend in part on their social
network. There were participating carers in each
of the social network categories (Table 7), with the
largest category being ‘private restricted’. The
private restricted network type includes
individuals who have no local relative and have
very little local contact or informal support. 
The network typology questionnaire was also used
to generate an index of social isolation based on
whether or not the carer has family, friends and
contact with neighbours, and whether they see any
of them (family, friends and neighbours) less often
than once a week. The index does not incorporate
information on proximity to family (nearest
family/child/sibling), frequency of interaction with
family, friends and neighbours, or information on
local social ties (participation in social clubs,
groups or religious meetings), but has the
advantage of creating an ordered scale. On the
Social Isolation Index, the carer population was
evenly spread across the no-isolation, low- and
Results: characteristics and outcomes
22
TABLE 4 Multiple roles: concurrent caring and paid employment
Total
Intervention
Control
n/N
%
n/N
%
n/N
%
Concurrent caring
38/233
16
18/114
16
20/119
17
Caring for dependant under 18
12/36
33
6/17
35
6/19
32
Employment: 
Paid work
38/235
16
20/115
17
18/120
15
Full-time carer
18/235
8
10/115
9
8/120
7
TABLE 5 HADS depression and anxiety: caseness (score 11) and continuous data
Total
Intervention
Control
n/N
%
n/N
%
n/N
%
Depression and anxiety
22/231
9
9/113
8
13/118
11
Depression only
18/231
8
10/113
8
8/118
7
Anxiety only
41/231
18
20/113
18
21/118
18
Non-case
150/231
65
74/113
66
76/118
64
N
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Depression
231
6.8
3.7
113
6.7
3.6
118
6.9
3.9
Anxiety
231
7.7
4.6
113
7.5
4.5
118
7.9
4.6

moderate-isolation categories, with only 22 (10%)
falling into the high-isolation category (Table 8).
Support from family and friends is summarised in
Table 9. Almost one-third of participants had no
support from family or friends. One-quarter had
occasional support only. Just over one in five had
regular support only, and a similar proportion had
both regular and occasional support. Of those
carers reporting details of the regular support
received, the mean number of hours respite
received was only 2.2 hours per week (range
0–23 hours), and the mean number of hours
assistance was 8.2 hours per week (range
0–42 hours, excluding an outlier of 168 hours). 
In addition to support from family and friends,
carers received support and assistance from
statutory, private- and voluntary-sector services. 
A selection of these is shown in Table 10. Carers’
support services were predominantly provided 
by the voluntary sector, and included sitting
services, informational and support groups, 
lunch clubs and outings. Sixty per cent of
participating carers had used some form of carers’
support service. In addition, 50% of care
recipients had attended some form of day care
(including both day centres and day hospitals).
Only 26% were in receipt of assistance with home
care and 24% had undertaken residential or
nursing respite stays.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
23
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 6 Affectivity, loneliness, social support, coping, quality of relationship and life events: mean and SD by group
Total (N = 236)
Intervention (N = 116)
Control (N = 120)
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Negative affectivity (PANAS)
218
20.63
8.21
107
20.13
8.17
111
21.11
8.25
Positive affectivity (PANAS)
219
31.35
7.58
108
31.03
7.50
111
31.67
7.68
Loneliness
227
2.10
2.20
112
2.00
2.20
115
2.20
2.20
Perceived social support (MSPSS)
229
44.21
9.51
113
44.03
9.98
116
44.39
9.08
Active coping (COPE)
230
16.62
6.01
113
16.59
5.73
117
16.64
6.29
Avoidance coping (COPE)
230
7.46
4.40
113
7.30
4.21
117
7.61
4.59
Loss of companionship
228
8.37
2.45
113
8.38
2.59
115
8.35
2.32
MCBS (carer towards PwD)
228
16.89
3.19
111
16.81
3.08
117
16.97
3.29
MCBS (PwD towards carer)
228
14.87
3.93
111
14.77
3.95
117
14.96
3.92
Quality of premorbid relationship
229
3.63
0.65
112
3.63
0.65
117
3.64
0.64
Life events
229
2.28
1.89
112
2.25
2.02
117
2.31
1.77
TABLE 7 Social network (PANT) categories
Total (N = 230)
Intervention (N = 113)
Control (N = 117)
n
%
n
%
n
%
Family dependent
41
18
21
19
20
17
Locally integrated
48
21
21
19
27
23
Locally self-contained
46
20
19
17
27
23
Wider community focused
28
12
14
12
14
12
Private restricted
54
24
31
27
23
20
Inconclusive
13
6
7
6
6
5
TABLE 8 Social isolation categories 
Total (N = 231)
Intervention (N = 113)
Control (N = 118)
n
%
n
%
n
%
Not isolated
74
32
36
32
38
32
Low isolation 
70
30
35
31
35
30
Moderate isolation
65
28
32
28
33
28
High isolation
22
10
10
9
12
10

Summary
The demographic, psychometric and support
variables at baseline demonstrate that the
population under study is typical of carers of PwD.
Comparison of the data for the two groups
(intervention and control) demonstrates the
success of the use of the urban/rural and
horizontal/vertical kinship stratifications. 
Main outcomes
Primary analysis
The primary analysis on the ITT population 
did not demonstrate any evidence of an
advantage of intervention over control on the
HADS depression subscale (Table 11) at any 
time-point. 
Subgroup analyses
The primary analysis was repeated for two
subgroups: first, an analysis of the subgroup of
spouse carers (N = 158; 83 control and 75
intervention) and, secondly, a per-protocol
analysis comparing those intervention carers 
who are known to have been matched with a
befriender for at least 6 months before the 
15-month interview (N = 37) and control carers
known not to have had a befriender 
(N = 177). 
There is no evidence to suggest a benefit of
intervention compared with control for spouse
carers (Table 12). However, results of the per-
protocol analysis (Table 13) show a marginally
significant difference in favour of intervention at
15 months.
Secondary analyses
There is no evidence of any benefit of the
intervention with respect to any of the secondary
outcomes (HADS anxiety subscale, loneliness,
positive affectivity and the global VAS score of the
EQ-5D) at any time-point (Tables 14–17).
Admission to long-term care
As disabilities increase for the PwD, the level of
dependency on family carers can become
unsustainable, and a common outcome is for the
person with dementia to move into residential or
nursing accommodation, or into NHS continuing
care, where such facilities still exist. Whereas 
all care recipients were living at home at baseline, 
32 care recipients had been admitted to permanent
care (institutionalised) at 15-month follow-up
(Figure 2). The proportion of PwD still in home
care was compared with those institutionalised by
each time-point (Table 18). Those carers for whom
the PwD had died were removed from the analysis.
As for other secondary analyses, there is no evidence
of any advantage of the intervention over control.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
24
TABLE 9 Support from family and friends
Total
Intervention
Control
n/N
%
n/N
%
n/N
%
Regular support only
49/226
22
28/109
26
21/117
18
Occasional support only
59/226
26
26/109
24
33/117
28
Both regular and occasional 
49/226
22
16/109
15
33/117
28
No support
69/226
31
39/109
36
30/117
26
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Respite (hours/week)
92
2.2
4.3
43
2.2
4.6
49
2.2
4.0
Assistance (hours/week)
87
8.2
19.0
40
6.5
7.7
47
9.6a
25.0a
a Data include an outlier which was four times greater than the next highest number of hours.
TABLE 10 Receipt of support from services
Total
Intervention
Control
n/N
%
n/N
%
n/N
%
Carer services
138/231
60
71/113
63
67/118
57
Day care 
117/234
50
58/114
51
59/120
49
Home care 
61/236
26
29/116
25
32/120
27
Respite stays
56/232
24
27/115
23
29/117
25

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
25
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 11 HADS depression subscale: primary analysis
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 120)
(N = 116)
Baseline
n
118a
113a
Mean (SD)
6.96 (3.94)
6.73 (3.62)
6 months
n
113
104
–0.193
–0.485
Mean (SD)
5.84 (3.96)
6.03 (3.63)
(–1.21 to 0.83)
(–1.23 to 0.26)
p = 0.709
p = 0.201
15 months
n
106
96
0.676
0.468
Mean (SD)
6.71 (4.18)
6.03 (4.00)
(–0.46 to 1.81)
(–0.50 to 1.44)
p = 0.241
p = 0.342
24 months
n
97
93
0.103
–0.207
Mean (SD)
6.35 (4.59)
6.25 (4.12)
(–1.15 to 1.35)
(–1.32 to 0.90)
p = 0.871
p = 0.713
a Baseline data missing for two control and three intervention subjects.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
TABLE 12 HADS depression subscale: spouse carers
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 83)
(N = 75)
Baseline
n
82a
75
Mean (SD)
6.90 (3.94)
7.07 (3.48)
6 months
n
78
68
–0.427
–0.309
Mean (SD)
5.88 (3.81)
6.30 (3.71)
(–1.66 to 0.81)
(–1.20 to 0.58)
p = 0.495
p = 0.492
15 months
n
73
60
0.043
0.269
Mean (SD)
6.48 (4.09)
6.43 (4.24)
(–1.39 to 1.48)
(–0.93 to 1.47)
p = 0.952
p = 0.659
24 months
n
69
57
0.457
0.493
Mean (SD)
6.91 (4.80)
6.46 (4.05)
(–1.13 to 2.04)
(–0.87 to 1.85)
p = 0.570
p = 0.474
a Baseline data missing for one control subject.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.

Results: characteristics and outcomes
26
TABLE 13 HADS depression subscale: per protocol
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 117)
(N = 37)
Baseline
n
115a
36a
Mean (SD)
6.98 (3.95)
6.86 (3.54)
6 months
n
111
34
0.383
0.107
Mean (SD)
5.86 (3.97)
5.47 (3.37)
(–1.11 to 1.87)
(–1.00 to 1.21)
p = 0.612
p = 0.848
15 months
n
104
31
1.684
1.377
Mean (SD)
6.75 (4.21)
5.06 (3.45)
(0.04 to 3.32)
(–0.09 to 2.84)
p = 0.044
p = 0.066
24 months
n
95
30
1.402
1.038
Mean (SD)
6.37 (4.63)
4.97 (4.11)
(–0.47 to 3.27)
(–0.63 to 2.71)
p = 0.140
p = 0.220
a Baseline data missing for two control subjects and one intervention subject.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
TABLE 14 HADS anxiety subscale
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 120)
(N = 116)
Baseline
n
118a
113a
Mean (SD)
7.97 (4.68)
7.55 (4.58)
6 months
n
113
104
0.610
0.218
Mean (SD)
6.96 (4.37)
6.35 (4.46)
(–0.57 to 1.79)
(–0.43 to 0.97)
p = 0.311
p = 0.568
15 months
n
106
96
1.005
0.610
Mean (SD)
7.55 (4.47)
6.55 (4.54)
(–0.25 to 2.26)
(–0.33 to 1.55)
p = 0.115
p = 0.200
24 months
n
97
93
0.419
–0.037
Mean (SD)
6.97 (4.50)
6.55 (4.49)
(–0.87 to 1.71)
(–1.10 to 1.03)
p = 0.521
p = 0.946
a Baseline data missing for two control and three intervention subjects.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
27
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 15 PANAS: positive affect
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 120)
(N = 116)
Baseline
n
111a
108a
Mean (SD)
31.7 (4.68)
31.0 (7.50)
6 months
n
111
103
1.40
0.922
Mean (SD)
31.5 (8.31)
30.1 (8.13)
(–0.82 to 3.62)
(–0.98 to 2.83)
p = 0.214
p = 0.341
15 months
n
106
96
0.03
–0.079
Mean (SD)
30.5 (8.02)
30.5 (8.22)
(–2.22 to 2.29)
(–2.13 to 1.97)
p = 0.976
p = 0.940
24 months
n
95
92
1.10
1.17
Mean (SD)
31.2 (8.34)
30.1 (8.73)
(–1.36 to 3.57)
(–1.26 to 3.59)
p = 0.378
p = 0.344
a Baseline data missing for nine control and eight intervention subjects.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline positive affect PANAS score.
TABLE 16 Loneliness scale 
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 120)
(N = 116)
Baseline
n
115a
112a
Mean (SD)
2.29 (2.21)
2.07 (2.28)
6 months
n
112
104
0.148
0.016
Mean (SD)
2.21 (2.21)
2.06 (2.04)
(–0.42 to 0.72)
(–0.41 to 0.45)
p = 0.611
p = 0.945
15 months
n
106
96
0.358
0.320
Mean (SD)
2.57 (2.23)
2.21 (2.27)
(–0.27 to 0.98)
(–0.20 to 0.84)
p = 0.260
p = 0.230
24 months
n
97
93
0.392
0.173
Mean (SD)
2.63 (2.30)
2.24 (2.39)
(–0.28 to 1.06)
(–0.37 to 0.72)
p = 0.251
p = 0.529
a Baseline data missing for five control and four intervention subjects.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline Loneliness Scale.

Results: characteristics and outcomes
28
TABLE 17 EQ-5D global VAS
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 120)
(N = 116)
Baseline
n
114a
112a
Mean (SD)
73.1 (18.1)
74.0 (16.8)
6 months
n
112
101
–2.81
–2.06
Mean (SD)
72.9 (17.7)
75.7 (17.0)
(–7.51 to 1.89)
(–5.51 to 1.38)
p = 0.240
p = 0.239
15 months
n
106
95
–3.87
–2.33
Mean (SD)
69.9 (18.1)
73.8 (18.3)
(–8.94 to 1.19)
(–6.88 to 2.23)
p = 0.133
p = 0.315
24 months
n
96
92
–4.35
–3.03
Mean (SD)
68.1 (18.2)
72.5 (19.7)
(–9.82 to 1.11)
(–8.42 to 2.35)
p = 0.119
p = 0.268
a Baseline data missing for five control and four intervention subjects.
b Based on a pooled t-test.
c Based on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline EQ-5D global VAS.
24 months
T 96
I  50
C 46
At home
Residential/
nursing care
PwD deceased
T 38
I  21
C 17
T 56
I  22
C 34
46
15 months
T 130
I  63
C 67
T 32
I  19
C 13
T 40
I  14
C 26
34
6 months
T 179
I  87
C 92
Baseline
236
T 24
I  13
C 11
T 15
I  5
C 10
18
Lost to follow-up
FIGURE 2 Status of PwD at each follow-up. C, control group; I, intervention group; T, total.

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
29
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 18 Location of PwD by 6, 15 or 24 months
Control 
Intervention
Unadjusted analysisb
Adjusted analysisc
(N = 116)
(N = 120)
6 months
Na
103
100
OR = 1.25
OR = 1.18
PwD at home
92 (89%)
87 (87%)
(0.53 to 2.94)
(0.49 to 2.86)
p = 0.609
p = 0.717
15 months
Na
80
82
OR = 1.42
OR = 1.41
PwD at home
67 (83%)
63 (77%)
(0.66 to 3.08)
(0.65 to 3.08)
p = 0.372
p = 0.388
24 months
Na
63
71
OR = 1.14
OR = 1.05
PwD at home
46 (73%)
50 (70%)
(0.53 to 2.42)
(0.48 to 2.26)
p = 0.740
p = 0.911
a Excluding those subjects lost to follow-up and where the PwD had died.
b Odds ratio (OR) estimated using a logistic regression model with group alone as an explanatory variable.
c Odds ratio estimated using a logistic regression model with group, kinship and area as explanatory variables. 


Costs
Total costs are summarised in Table 19. Full cost
tables and quantities are in Appendices 3 and 4.
Quality-adjusted life-years
Total QALYs gained for the intervention and
control for carers, PwD and the sum of each are
presented in Table 20. 
Cost–utility analysis
The total cost from a societal point of view was
£1813 greater in the intervention arm, although
this was not statistically significant. The quality of
life of the carer was slightly higher at +0.017
QALYs, although this was not statistically
significant either (Table 21). Based on these point
estimates, the extra cost per extra QALY gained is
£105,954.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
31
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 5
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
TABLE 19 Total cost summary at 15 months per participating carer (£ sterling 2005 prices; 105 intervention; 113 control)
Mean
Median
Max.
Min.
SD
Intervention cost
Intervention
£1,138
£907
£1,722
£589
£395
Controla
£11
£0
£318
£0
£65
PwD and carer resource use
Intervention
£13,580
£8,839
£48,471
£1,113
£13,426
Control
£13,583
£10,427
£43,758
£2,482
£12,037
PwD care following admission to care/nursing home 
Intervention
£4,176
£0
£44,205
£0
£12,306
Control
£2,174
£0
£34,826
£0
£7,894
Miscellaneous other costs
Intervention
£374
£0
£2,283
£0
£2,080
Control
£166
£0
£1,299
£0
£714
Time spent caring for PwD by carer and family and friends, and time spent befriending 
Intervention
£103,398
£119,322
£153,288
£10,118
£46,625
Control
£104,918
£122,176
£151,230
£9,455
£46,708
Grand total
Intervention
£122,665
£137,134
£194,926
£19,932
£46,843
Control
£120,852
£134,852
£203,977
£22,014
£45,778
a Three control carers had contact with the BF.
TABLE 20 QALYs (based on EQ-5D) at 15 months
Mean
Median
Max.
Min.
SD
Carer QALYs
Intervention
0.946
0.980
1.270
–0.020
0.245
Control
0.929
0.980
1.250
0.010
0.260
PwD QALYs
Intervention
0.365
0.330
1.070
–0.330
0.292
Control
0.314
0.290
1.040
–0.450
0.317
Carer + PwD QALYs
Intervention
1.311
1.330
2.150
0.088
0.416
Control
1.243
1.270
2.283
–0.320
0.449

The scatterplot of bootstrapped increments in cost
and QALYs (Figure 3) shows points in all four
quadrants of the cost-effectiveness plane, although
the majority are to the east of the y-axis, and
somewhat to the north of the x-axis, suggesting a
trend towards befriending being both more
effective and more expensive than control. The
resulting CEAC (Figure 4) suggests only a 42.2%
probability that the ICER is below a typical
willingness to pay of £30,000 per QALY gained. 
An alternative means of presenting these results is
as a net monetary benefit chart (Figure 5). This
suggests that there is unlikely to be a net benefit
from the intervention, even when the willingness
to pay for a QALY is above £100,000. However,
there is a wide confidence interval around the
point estimates.
Alternative scenarios
Varying perspectives
A comparison of the results from the perspectives
of the statutory sector, voluntary sector and
household sectors is shown in Table 22.
The societal perspective costs are much higher
than the statutory, voluntary or household costs, 
as societal costs include the indirect costs valuing
carers’, family and friends’ time, which are the
biggest single component of resource input, when
valued as described earlier (see Table 19).
It should be noted that none of the cost or QALY
differences reached statistical significance at a
level of 95%. Nevertheless, the intervention
appears to show a trend towards being slightly
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
32
TABLE 21 Cost–utility analysis (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
£/carer–PwD
QALYs/carer
ICER
Intervention
£122,665
0.946
Control
£120,852
0.929
Increment
£1,813
0.017
£105,954
(95% CI of increment, from bootstrap)
(–£11,312 to £14,984)
(–0.051 to 0.083)
NA
–£30,000
–£20,000
–£10,000
£0
£10,000
£20,000
£30,000
£40,000
–0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Incremental QALYs
Incremental cost
FIGURE 3 Scatterplot of increments (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
33
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Willingness to pay for a QALY (£000s)
Probability
FIGURE 4 CEAC (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Willingness to pay for a QALY (000s)
Net monetary benefit (£000s)
FIGURE 5 Net monetary benefit per carer–PwD (mean and 95% CI, societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life
only)

more costly than the control from all perspectives.
Given a typical willingness to pay of £30,000 per
QALY gained, there is a less than 50% probability
that befriending is ‘cost-effective’ from every
perspective except for the voluntary sector. This is
because the voluntary sector bears only a small
proportion of the total costs. Note that this
analysis only includes direct costs borne by the
voluntary sector. The value of volunteers’ time in
caring and befriending (indirect cost) is
incorporated in the societal perspective.
Varying time-horizon
As the time-horizon extends, the cost-effectiveness
of the befriending intervention deteriorates
(Table 23). This is because while the QALY
increment increases over time, the cost increment
increases at a faster rate, and thus the cost-
effectiveness deteriorates. In general, a longer
time-horizon is preferable to a shorter one as it
allows for longer term costs and benefits to be
accrued. These results suggest that over the longer
term, befriending is not cost-effective at
conventional thresholds.
Complete case analysis
The results from the complete case analysis are 
in marked contrast to the imputed analysis results,
suggesting a positive cost-effectiveness ratio (the
intervention is both less costly and 
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
34
TABLE 22 Cost–utility analysis from societal, statutory, voluntary and household perspectives (15-month time-horizon, carer quality of
life only)
Cost
Carer QALYs
Increments (95% CI)
ICER
p (cost-
Perspective
Intervention
Control
Intervention
Control
Cost
QALYsb
effective)a
Societal 
£122,665
£120,852
0.946
0.929
£1,813
0.017
£105,954
42.2%
(basecase)
(–£11,312 to (–0.051 to 
£14,984)
0.083)
Statutory
£13,740
£11,737
0.946
0.929
£2,003
0.017
£117,039
29.4%
(–£1,981 to 
(–0.049 to 
£6,884)
0.084)
Voluntary
£716
£707
0.946
0.929
£9
0.017
£521
69.9%
(–£418 to 
(–0.052 to 
£441)
0.087)
Household
£4,811
£3,489
0.946
0.929
£1,322
0.017
£77,236
29.8%
(–£655 to 
(–0.048 to 
£3,147)
0.086)
a Probability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
b Confidence intervals estimated using non-parametric bootstrap, therefore differences between scenarios is due to random
variation.
TABLE 23 Cost–utility analysis from a societal perspective at 6, 15 and 24 months
Time-
Cost
Carer QALYs
Increments (95% CI)
ICER
p (cost-
horizon
Intervention
Control
Intervention
Control
Cost
QALYs
effective)a
6 months
£54,509
£54,854
0.388
0.379
–£344 
0.008
–£40,996
59.6%
(–£5,155 to 
(–0.017 to 
£4,465)
0.034)
15 months 
£122,665
£120,852
0.946
0.929
£1,813
0.017
£105,954
42.2%
(basecase)
(–£11,312 to (–0.051 to 
£14,984)
0.083)
24 months
£188,683
£179,492
1.474
1.450
£9,191
0.024
£380,939
17.2%
(–£7,864 to 
(–0.083 to 
£26,377)
0.136)
a Probability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.

more effective than control, with 87.7% probability
that the ICER is below £30,000 per QALY gained)
(Table 24). However, these results are based on
only 61 observations (versus 218 in the imputed
data set), and are likely biased owing to potential
correlations between health status (and hence
resource use) and probability of providing
complete responses to all questions.
Incorporating PwD quality of life
When the quality of life of the PwD is taken into
account as well as that of the carer, the point
estimate ICER is £26,848, which is within the
conventionally accepted threshold of cost-
effectiveness (Table 25). Taking into account
uncertainty, the authors estimate a 51.4% probability
that the ICER is below £30,000 per QALY gained.
Therefore, when including PwD quality of life too,
befriending may be a cost-effective intervention.
Summary of cost-effectiveness
analyses
There are trends towards both increased quality of
life and higher costs to society among carers
randomised to intervention, although neither
trend is statistically significant. The point estimate
of the ICER is £106,000 per QALY gained. This is
above conventionally accepted thresholds of cost-
effectiveness (approximately £20,000–30,000 per
QALY gained). Indeed, there is only an estimated
42.2% probability that the ICER is below £30,000
per QALY gained.
From the point of view of the statutory sector,
‘access to a BF’ has an even lower probability of
being the cost-effective choice. This is due to the
statutory sector bearing a greater proportion of
the incremental cost. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
35
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
TABLE 24 Cost–utility analysis: comparison of imputed data versus complete case analysis (societal perspective, 15-month 
time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
Cost
Carer QALYs
Increments (95% CI)
ICER
p (cost-
Scenario
Intervention
Control
Intervention
Control
Cost
QALYs
effective)a
Imputed data 
£122,665
£120,852
0.946
0.929
£1,813
0.017
£105,954
42.2%
(basecase)
(–£11,312 to (–0.051 to 
£14,984)
0.083)
Complete 
£121,615
£132,717
0.900
0.872
–£11,103
0.028
–£393,866
87.7%
case analysisb
(–£31,469 to (–0.091 to 
£8,755)
0.150)
a Probability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
b N = 30 + 31.
TABLE 25 Cost–utility analysis: comparison of base case versus inclusion of PwD quality of life (societal perspective, 15-month 
time-horizon)
Cost
Carer QALYs
Increments (95% CI)
ICER
p (cost-
Scenario
Intervention
Control
Intervention
Control
Cost
QALYs
effective)a
Carer QALYs 
£122,665
£120,852
0.946
0.929
£1,813
0.017
£105,954
42.2%
only (basecase)
(–£11,312 to (–0.051 to 
£14,984)
0.083)
Carer and 
£122,665
£120,852
1.311
1.243
£1,813
0.068
£26,848
51.4%
PwD QALYs
(–£11,163 to (–0.045 to 
£15,024)
0.185)
a Probability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.

The results from the voluntary sector perspective
are in contrast to other sectors, for which there is
an estimated 69.9% probability that the ICER will
be below £30,000. However, this is because the
voluntary sector bears only a small proportion of
the overall costs of caring for carers or PwD. [Note
that this analysis only includes direct costs borne
by the voluntary sector. The value of volunteers’
time in caring and befriending (indirect cost) is
incorporated in the societal perspective.] This
result underlines the importance of considering
cost-effectiveness from the societal perspective, as
an intervention can appear cost-effective to one
individual or sector, when in fact this is simply an
artefact of arbitrary budgetary boundaries.
From the household perspective, there is an
estimated 29.8% probability that access to a BF is
a cost-effective intervention (at a threshold of
£30,000 per QALY gained). It is questionable,
however, whether this is an appropriate analysis
for evaluating cost-effectiveness from a household
perspective. Cost–utility analysis is a useful tool to
assist population-level rationing decisions, and the
threshold is a general rule of thumb as to whether
the benefits (generating a statistical QALY) are
worth the cost, thus leading to more equitable
distribution of finite societal resources. An
individual’s willingness to pay for a QALY for a
named relative or friend is likely to be very
different. Furthermore, the relevant budget
constraint is the household’s, not a ‘community
chest’. The household may therefore value 
health gains to a specific person much more
highly than those to society as a whole. Again, 
this emphasises the need to consider the societal
perspective when making societal resource
allocation decisions.
As the time-horizon extended, the cost-
effectiveness deteriorated. Whereas the
intervention was in a dominant situation at
6 months (intervention appeared to result in
health-related quality of life gains and be less
costly), at 24 months the point estimate ICER was
£381,000 per QALY gained. The apparent
deterioration in cost-effectiveness is because the
costs were increasing at a faster rate than the
corresponding health gain; therefore, the cost-
effectiveness deteriorates. 
Complete data were available for only 61 out of
218 care dyads included in the economic
evaluation. The results from this limited analysis
were strongly in favour of befriending; however,
the authors believe this to be a biased analysis as,
first, only a small proportion of the valid data was
used in this analysis and, secondly, the probability
of a respondent providing a complete data set is
likely to be related to the health status of the carer
and/or PwD. Therefore, the imputed data set is
likely to provide a more appropriate
representation of costs and outcomes.
When taking into account quality of life of the
PwD as well as the carers, the analysis found
slightly in favour of befriending: the point
estimate ICER was approximately £27,000 per
QALY gained, with a 51% probability of being
under £30,000.
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
36

T
he BECCA trial evaluated the impact of access
to a befriender facilitator for family carers of
people with dementia. The trial represents the
largest RCT of befriending for carers of PwD, and
involved an ambitious framework for costing care
for carers of PwD.
Main findings
The primary cost and cost-effectiveness analyses
did not show any benefit of intervention over
control in terms of psychological well-being or
cost. That is, at 15 months postrandomisation,
access to a BF in the context of usual care did not
significantly improve carer well-being as measured
by HADS depression, and was associated with a
trend towards higher costs to society. There was a
trend towards increased health-related quality of
life for those randomised to intervention, but this
was not statistically significant. In terms of the
main outcomes for the ITT analyses, therefore,
this is a strongly negative study. 
Secondary analyses on measures of carer anxiety,
loneliness, positive affect and perceived global
health showed no significant benefits for
intervention over control, and similarly there were
no differences between intervention and control
on either a subgroup analysis with spouse carers or
a comparison of proportions of people with
dementia entering residential or nursing care.
Looking from alternative perspectives (statutory,
household and voluntary sector) did not offer any
convincing evidence for the value of the
intervention, and extending the time-frame
strengthened the evidence against the
intervention.
However, two further analyses that suggest the
negative findings may be due to methodological
limitations. First, a cost–utility analysis using the
QALYs for the PwD in addition to the carer
indicated that access to a BF may be a cost-
effective intervention. Given the importance of
care recipient well-being to family carers, it could
be argued that health economic analyses of
interventions for family carers should include care
recipient quality of life as part of the primary
analysis. Secondly, a per-protocol subgroup
analysis comparing control carers with the small
number of intervention carers who engaged with
befrienders for at least 6 months before 15-month
follow-up reported a difference in HADS
depression scores that approached statistical
significance in favour of the intervention. While
providing only weak evidence of any beneficial
effect, this finding indicates that if uptake can be
improved, positive findings in the ITT population
are more likely. 
Implications for healthcare
Should befriending interventions be
withdrawn?
Given the largely negative findings, should
befriending still be provided as a support
intervention for carers? It should be emphasised
that the negative results reported here are for the
intervention ‘access to a befriender facilitator’ and
not ‘receipt of befriending’. Given that only
around half of the carers offered befriending
chose to take up the offer, should it be concluded
that befriending is not a service that carers want?
Lack of service uptake by carers is well known for
both standard services and research interventions.
Although awareness is a vital precursor to service
use,83 awareness alone does not account for
whether or not carers uptake services. Other
factors include work status, socio-economic status
and level of burden.84,85 Lack of time is associated
with non-uptake,86 although increased burden,
depression or distress may increase uptake.86–88
It is apparent that no one service is appropriate
for all carers, and that each carer may have
differing needs over the years spent supporting
the care recipient. In their work on the ‘caregiving
career’, Aneshensel and colleagues20 suggested
that different interventions are appropriate at
difference stages of the care recipient’s illness, for
example, before and after diagnosis, during in-
home care, before and after admission of the care
recipient into long-term residential or nursing
care, and after the death of the care recipient.
This research had been expected to show that a
social support intervention would be of greatest
relevance to those carers for whom the demands
of caring had impacted adversely on their social
networks, but were still providing care for the PwD
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
37
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Chapter 6
Discussion and conclusions

at home. This study used the ‘time spent caring’
marker of 20 hours or more per week to increase
the chance that participants were immersed in the
caring role. Further analysis of the demographic,
psychological and social characteristics of carers
who did and did not take up the offer of
befriending may inform the inclusion or exclusion
criteria for any future research on befriending
interventions or referral criteria for befriending
services.
An important consideration for provision of
befriending services and funding of befriending
schemes is the ‘minimum effective dose’ of
befriending. When drawing up the protocol, the
researchers proposed providing befriending
weekly for 6 months. For the 60 carers who were
matched with befrienders, 42 (71%) were
befriended for at least 6 months before the end of
the befriending scheme (37 before 15-month
follow-up). Many carers found weekly commitment
difficult in the context of their caring role. A large
proportion opted for fortnightly contact, but there
was no frequency that suited all participants. Once
relationships were established, they endured, with
39 matches lasting over 1 year, and 30 matched
carers continuing to meet their befriender beyond
the end of the befriending scheme. Of these, 22
became informal friendships and moved away
from ‘managed’ befriending schemes. That is, 37%
befriending relationships became friendships (22
out of 60 matched carers) over the course of the
intervention. The remaining eight remained
‘formal’ befriending relationships, transferred to
being supported within other ongoing befriending
schemes. The percentage of matches lasting for at
least 6 months was slightly below expectation,
whereas the percentage lasting for 1 year was
within the expected range. As a comparison, the
UK-wide survey of 234 general befriending
services indicated that 89% of befriending
relationships lasted for over 6 months.80 For
befriending services for older people, 96% 
of befriending relationships lasted for 6 months 
and 87% lasted for over 1 year, whereas for 
people with mental ill-health the corresponding
figures were 90% and 54%. For matches lasting 
for at least 6 months, the mean duration of 
match (to the end of the relationship or the 
end of the befriending schemes, whichever was
sooner) was 677 days (just under 1 year and 10
months), ranging from 6 months and 13 days 
to 3 years and 6 months for one of the earliest
matches. The duration is in keeping with other
schemes. For example, in the Norfolk befriending
audit, users received services for between 1 and 4
years.89
Is the cost of intervention data
generalisable to locally commissioned
schemes?
The mean cost of the intervention was £1138 per
carer at 15 months. Costs varied by scheme, with
the largest and longest running scheme having
lower costs per carer than the smaller schemes.
There are economies of scale for both fixed and
running costs, but once a scheme grows beyond
the size at which a BF can support the befrienders
and carers within it, additional staff costs will be
necessary. 
The BECCA befriending schemes were set up
specifically for the research trial. The local
voluntary organisations involved in setting up the
county-wide BECCA befriending services
commented on the difference between the scope
of these services and the more localised scope of
the services that they would usually run. Factors
that would increase the expense of the
intervention include the ratio of carers to
befrienders, the travel distances involved and
criteria for matching. 
In terms of carer to befriender ratios, 49
befriending volunteers were matched with carers,
giving a ratio of 1.2 to 1. Nationally, the average
number of users to volunteers is 170 to 52 (3.3 to
1) for befriending services to older people, with an
average of 44 users and 32 volunteers (1.4 to 1)
for people with mental health difficulties.80 In a
Norfolk-wide audit of befriending schemes for
people who are aged 65 and over,89 the average
number of users and volunteers was 210 and 42,
respectively (5 to 1). In a befriending scheme
specifically for carers of people with dementia, ten
volunteers support 50 family carers (Mid-Essex
Alzheimer’s Society befriending programme,
personal communication). In this context, the
BECCA schemes required more trained volunteers
per scheme user than any of the previously
reported schemes, and would therefore be more
costly per carer. This, in part, was due to a policy
decision to require all volunteers to establish one
match before volunteering for a second match, so
that they could assess for themselves the level of
emotional demand that they experienced in their
befriending role.
Voluntary sector-generated befriending services
would more often cover a town and its immediate
rural hinterland in order to minimise volunteer
travel costs and times. Some BECCA volunteers
living in rural areas sometimes had to travel for
up to an hour each way to undertake their
befriending task. In some instances this led to
Discussion and conclusions
38

decisions to minimise volunteer travel by mixing
face-to-face meetings with telephone befriending
or to meet fortnightly rather than weekly, but for
2 hours rather than 1 hour. This will also have
meant that initial face-to-face assessment and
introductory visits by BFs would have entailed
more travel than non-BECCA befriending schemes
might have entailed. For these reasons, costs for
the BECCA befriending service may have been
higher than in a more usual locally implemented
befriending service. 
Is it safe to involve volunteers?
Overall, few risk issues arose. Active steps were
taken to follow guidelines on good practice in
supporting volunteers working in settings with
potentially vulnerable people.90,91 A code of
confidentiality was maintained, risk assessments
carried out by BFs, and health and safety
guidelines were developed in partnership with the
voluntary organisations helping to provide the
befriending services. Written information and
training were provided to ensure that volunteers
were fully informed about these issues and about
how they needed to be applied in practice. 
There were a few occasions where issues affecting
the safety of befrienders as well as the safety of
carers, people cared for or other family members
had to be explicitly considered and responded to
by the BF. These usually followed instances where
the carer sought to step outside the boundaries of
the befriending relationship in some way. These
were picked up at an early stage by the befriender,
who brought them to the attention of the BF. 
It was found that the early development of a risk-
assessment procedure as well as befriender
training in risk management proved useful in
deciding how to respond to such incidents, and
responses ranged from BF reminders to the carer
involved about their agreement to respect
boundaries to changes in the terms of the
befriender arrangement. These, on two occasions,
included a change of befriender and type of
contact from face-to-face visits to telephone
befriending. In all such cases, good working
relationships were successfully maintained.
User involvement
The local consultation groups were formed to
support and develop the befriending scheme
intervention. However, their remit soon expanded
to include consultation on aspects of research
design and project literature. The authors would
strongly endorse the involvement of carers and
their representatives from the early stages of
project development, including opportunity to
comment on project information sheets and in
planning recruitment strategies. Consultation
groups can also suggest local links and small area
initiatives. Such microknowledge is useful in all
areas, but especially so in rural areas, where the
difficulties with disseminating information to
hidden communities has already been highlighted. 
Volunteer support
Many of the volunteers were above retirement age
and there were instances where befriending
arrangements needed also to take account of
volunteer health. Some had episodes of ill-health
which in some cases prevented them from driving
to visit carers or meant that they had to withdraw
from volunteering completely. Both volunteers
and carers were supported by the BF through such
episodes to maintain the continuity of the
befriending relationship according to the wishes of
the participants. Recent studies such as that of
older volunteers in Newcastle92 have illustrated
how older people have valued their own
engagement as befrienders of frailer elders, in
which they were able to connect meaningfully with
previous roles in which they had been able to
make a contribution.
Factors to consider in carer
support research
Recruitment
Recruitment to the project was one of the main
challenges for BECCA, and led to both the
extension of the recruitment period and the
consequent changes in follow-up schedule. There
were considerable difficulties in recruiting only
through primary care, and the recognition of
carers in primary care is an ongoing area of
concern.93 A move towards multiple strategies, as
recommended by Adams and colleagues94 and
DiBartolo and McCrone,95 improved overall
recruitment, but barriers remained, including
non-identification with the term ‘carer’, non-
facilitative gatekeepers, burden of written
information and a disperse client group.96
Reflecting on the recruitment activity, from the
identification of potential participants through to
randomisation, it appears that the recruitment
strategy that produced the highest number of
expressions of interest was not necessarily the most
productive strategy for identifying eligible
participants. Twenty-seven out of 54 GP practices
(20 out of 35 in Norfolk; seven out of 19 in
Suffolk) sent out a total of 484 standard invitation
letters and approved participant information
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
39
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

sheets. There were 107 responses to the research
team, representing a response rate of 22% in
primary care. Of the 107 respondees, 86 were
randomised; that is, 18% of invitees and 80% of
respondees were randomised. From the figures
available from some of the voluntary- and
charitable-sector organisations (especially in
Havering and Suffolk), 303 invitations resulted in
45 responses (response rate of 15%) and 25
randomisations; that is, 8% invitees and 55%
respondees were randomised. Figures from the
voluntary- and charitable-sector mailings do not
represent all of the organisations involved, but
seem to indicate that although most expressions of
interest for the trial arose from recruitment activity
within the voluntary sector, activity within primary
care produced a higher proportion of eligible
carers from those expressing interest.
Improving uptake
The issue of intervention uptake arises in much of
the research on carer intervention. A possible
strategy for increasing uptake could be to use a
patient preference design, or to use eligibility
criteria that narrow the participant population to
those most likely to take up the intervention
offered. Both strategies would reduce the
generalisability to the total carer population, but
increase specificity. In the BECCA trial, the
researchers sought the opinion of the user
consultation group on the reasons for low uptake.
The term ‘befriending’ was seen as offputting, in
that it could imply that a carer was unable to make
friends and needed to have one provided. Other
schemes have used terms such as ‘friendly visiting’
or ‘peer support’. Another point made was the
time taken by carers to choose to take up a service.
Lack of initial uptake does not mean that the
service is not wanted, simply that it is not wanted
at that time. In the BECCA trial, a proportion of
carers did indeed take up the service some time
after it was initially offered; on one occasion a
carer came back to the facilitator after 2 years.
The befriending scheme was still running, but it
was after the completion of the research interviews
for that individual.
Measures and data collection
Costs reported include PwD and carer medication,
primary and secondary care use, day-care services,
home-care and other service use such as meals on
wheels, specialist consultant, nurse or other
healthcare professional visits to the home, respite
stays, aids and adaptations, and time spent caring
for the PwD by carer and friends and family.
However, questions on PwD visits from other
professionals (counsellor, chiropodist or other),
continence and complementary therapy, carer use
of support services such as telephone helplines
and support groups, visits to professionals
(counsellor, chiropodist or other) and childcare
costs were excluded. The costs associated with lost
employment to care for a PwD were also excluded,
for two reasons: first, approximately 66% of carers
were retired and therefore had zero cost of lost
employment and, secondly, caring time was valued
at a shadow price equal to the average gross wage
rate. Therefore, forgoing employment to care for a
PwD does not represent a loss of productivity to
society, merely a transfer of direct cost from the
household (lost wages) to indirect benefit (value of
care given). Thus, there is no net change in
productivity from a societal perspective, although
this would have impacts on the analysis from a
household perspective.
The value of carer time was calculated on the basis
of the simple question: ‘how many hours in a 
24-hour day are you “on duty” to care for your
relative?’ Many carers responded ‘24 hours per
day’. This is undoubtedly the case for many, but
for others this was interpreted as being available
on the telephone at any time. This is not the 
same as actually being present for 24 hours, 
and thus the value of the time may be
overestimated. 
To obtain a societal cost within the BECCA trial,
the aim was to measure resource use in the key
sectors affected, namely statutory services (health
and social care), voluntary sector and the
household. Data were collected for service use by
both the carer and the PwD, as difficulties arise in
identifying the boundaries of costs between family
carers and care recipients, and the aim was to
construct a comprehensive longitudinal model of
costs, rather than taking repeated cross-sectional
snapshots of services at the time of each follow-up.
Carer and PwD resource-use data were collected
through carer interview, and therefore the data are
subject to the vagaries of the individual carer’s
recall. Data were not collected from agencies’
records, given the large number of agencies
potentially involved, sensitivity to data protection
issues and the limitations of using primary care
records to measure secondary and tertiary care
use.97 The economic data were collected alongside
clinical data and therefore a balance had to be
found between comprehensive data collection 
and the need to minimise interview burden 
on carers. Resource-use diaries were not used in
this trial as it was thought that face-to-face
interviewers would be more engaging for
participants in a longitudinal trial. Diaries form
Discussion and conclusions
40

part of the methodology for the Canadian
Outcomes Study in Dementia (COSID). Analysis 
of the economic data for the COSID trial was
hampered by the non-return of the monthly
diaries, with 22% of participants failing to return
at least six out of 12 diaries over the course of 
the year.98
Measures
The main quality of life measure for the trial was
the EQ-5D. Given the limited information on
reliability and validity of the EQ5D with the carer
population, and the measure being limited to
health-related quality of life, broader measures of
quality of life should be considered in any future
research. The HTA review panel recommended
use of the Carer Generated Index of Quality of
Life (CGI-QoL) as a user-defined outcome in
addition to a measure of health-related quality of
life. The CGI-QoL was still under development at
the start of 2002. Its use was piloted within the
BECCA project and found to be very time-
consuming, leading to interviewee burden. It was
therefore dropped from the interview schedule.
Health-related quality of life for the PwD also
relied on the EQ-5D, using proxy ratings by the
carer. Although the EQ-5D has better
measurement qualities than some other health-
related quality of life measures when carers are
used as proxies,99 proxy ratings are known to
differ from patients’ ratings.99,100 Given the
suggestion that cost-effectiveness analyses should
take account of the outcomes for both the carer
and PwD, future carer intervention research
should include direct measurement of the clinical
characteristics of the PwD, including behavioural
and psychological symptoms.
Impact of interviewers
In carer intervention research, good relations
between the interviewers and carers were vital to
ensure completion of interviews at each time-
point, and retention in the study over time. In the
BECCA trial, many participating carers expressed
an appreciation of having the space to talk with
someone about their caring experiences. While
there are advantages to carers feeling positive
about their interview involvement, this also leads
to the potential narrowing of the difference
between intervention and control conditions in a
low-level social support trial. 
Blinding
Although interviewers did not ask directly about
befriending, it was not possible for interviewers to
remain blind to group when carers specifically
commented on their befriending receipt. 
Recommendations for future
research
This research is strongly suggestive that further
research into access to a befriender facilitator is
redundant. However, the weak evidence of efficacy
in the analysis of befrienders receiving at least
6 months’ intervention may suggest that further
research into befriending as a form of carer
support is warranted. Based on the per-protocol
analysis, the effect size was 0.31. A future study
with 90% power at 5% significance would need
around 220 participants per group. In addition,
the befriending interventions could be used as a
control for more formal psychotherapeutic
interventions for carers.
Before undertaking further intervention research
on befriending, it would be of value to establish
the characteristics of carers most likely to take up
befriending and the befriender–carer
characteristics of successful matches. Information
relevant to these areas could be derived from
further analysis of the BECCA data. 
Carer intervention research is complicated by the
wide range of services offered to and used by
carers over the course of the dementia. The
service receipt of carers is often not fully taken
into account, nor is the interplay between statutory
and voluntary support services and support from
families. Greater knowledge of the interaction
between formal and informal care is needed.101
The BECCA database could be exploited to
explore the interplay of statutory and voluntary
sectors and the family, and indeed a Small Grant
has been provided by the Economic and Social
Research Council (ESRC) to do so. A further
complication in carer intervention research is
assessing well-being in the context of receipt of
befriending and placement of the care recipient in
long-term residential or nursing care. The BECCA
trial completed follow-up irrespective of location
of the PwD, as carers were keen to see support
continue beyond their life as a hands-on carer.
Such ongoing support should be considered in
other carer interventions. 
Future cost-effectiveness evaluations of carer
support should include outcomes for both the
carer and care recipient, and further work is
required on economic methods for carer
intervention research, including: 
●explorations of the relationship between 
health-related quality of life measures and 
other outcome measures
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
41
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

●identification of methods for minimising work
for respondents and interviewers of resource-
use data collection in economic studies 
●methods for measuring and valuing carer time
and other informal care inputs for economic
analysis 
●additional work to confirm or refute the cost-
effectiveness of befriending from a societal
point of view.
Conclusions
Access to a befriender facilitator is neither an
effective nor a cost-effective intervention in the
support of carers of people with dementia,
although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness
for the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In
common with many services for carers of PwD,
uptake of befriending services was not high.
However, the small number of carers who engaged
with befrienders for 6 months or more reported a
reduction in scores on HADS depression that
approached statistical significance compared with
controls. Although this study provides only weak
evidence of any beneficial effect, further research
into befriending interventions for carers is
warranted.
Discussion and conclusions
42

T
he Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA)
project (ISRCTN 08130075) was funded by
the Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
Programme (project 99/34/07) granted to
Charlesworth (University College London),
Mugford, Poland, Harvey, Price, Reynolds and
Shepstone (University of East Anglia). Befriender
expenses were funded by Norfolk and Suffolk
Social Services, the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk
Branch of the Alzheimer’s Society and an AdHoc
grant from the Department of Health to North
East London Mental Health Trust. 
The views expressed in this report do not
necessarily reflect those of the funders.
The Project Management Group met throughout
the project, and included the Grantholders Shirley
Reynolds (Professor in Clinical Psychology, UEA)
David Price (University of Aberdeen) and Ian
Harvey (in addition to the authors contributing to
this report).
The befriender facilitators in the three host
schemes are thanked for their support of carers
and volunteers. The BFs were: Susan Vaughan
(Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary Services), Carol
Higgins, Wendy Herber and Thelma Wingfield
(Age Concern Suffolk), and Jacqui Burke, Lyn
Taylor and Elizabeth Palfreman (Age Concern
Havering). 
Research staff on the project included Sylvia
Morley, Liz Hooper, Kim Shutt, Sandra Picken and
Nicky Knights at UEA; Hilary Clarke and Amy
Bartlett in North East London Mental Health
Trust (London Borough of Havering) and
Xanthippe Tzimoula at UCL, with additional
support from Jamie Murdoch (SAND), Nick
Healey (UEA) and Sarah Pennington (UEA).
The staff and volunteers from the contributing
voluntary organisations (Appendix 1) are thanked,
especially those who contributed to the
consultation groups and in befriender training
and support, as are all the participating family
carers. 
The Steering and Advisory Group is also thanked
for their support throughout the project, and
included Emeritus Professor Tom Arie (Chair),
whose suggestion inspired the project, and Ionne
Hammond (formerly of the Alzheimer’s Society,
Eastern Region).
Administrative support was provided by Lesley
Barrett, Lynne Wright, Claire Powell and Helen
Sayer at different stages of the project.
Contribution of authors
Georgina Charlesworth (Lecturer in Clinical and
Health Psychology of Old Age) had overall
responsibility for all aspects of the trial including
drafting of the final report. Miranda Mugford
(Professor in Health Economics) had overall
responsibility for economic evaluation and its
reporting. Lee Shepstone (Lecturer in Medical
Statistics) carried out the efficacy analysis. Edward
Wilson (Health Foundation Research Training
Fellow) carried out and reported the economic
analyses. Mariamma Thalanany (Research
Associate) drew up the resource-use data collection
instrument, identified unit costs and designed the
costing of the befriending intervention. Fiona
Poland (Senior Lecturer in Therapy Research)
held overall responsibility for the befriending
intervention.
Papers published in other peer-reviewed
journals relating to this research
Charlesworth G, Tzimoula X, Higgs P, Poland F.
Social networks, befriending and support for
family carers of people with dementia. Quality in
Ageing: Policy, Practice and Research 2007;8:37–44.
Charlesworth GM, Tzimoula XM, Newman SP.
Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index (CADI):
psychometric properties for use with carers of
people with dementia. Aging Ment Health 2007;
11:218–25.
Hooper E, Charlesworth G, Poland F, Vaughan S.
Recruiting carers and befrienders – experiences
from the Befriending and Cost of Caring (BECCA)
study. Signpost 2004;9:7–10.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
43
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Acknowledgements


1.
Department of Health. Carers (Recognition and
Services) Act 1995. London: HMSO; 1995.
2.
Department of Health. Caring about carers: 
a national strategy for carers. London: Department
of Health; 1999.
3.
Department of Health. National Service Framework
for Mental Health. London: Department of Health;
1999.
4.
Department of Health. National Service Framework
for Older People. London: Department of Health;
2001.
5.
Office for National Statistics. Carers in Britain.
2002. URL: www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/
cib0602.pdf. Accessed 13 October 2006.
6.
Schulz R, O’Brien AT, Bookwala J, Fleissner K.
Psychiatric and physical morbidity effects of
dementia caregiving: prevalence, correlates, and
causes. Gerontologist 1995;35:771–91.
7.
Ory MG, Hoffman RR, Yee JL, Tennstedt S,
Schulz R. Prevalence and impact of caregiving: 
a detailed comparison between dementia and
nondementia caregivers. Gerontologist 1999;
39:177–85.
8.
Schulz R, Beach SR. Caregiving as a risk factor for
mortality – the caregiver health effects study. JAMA
1999;282:2215–19.
9.
Bowling A. Social support and social networks –
their relationship to the successful and
unsuccessful survival of elderly people in the
community – an analysis of concepts and a review
of the evidence. Fam Pract 1991;8:68–83.
10.
Bowling A, Grundy E. The association between
social networks and mortality in later life. Rev Clin
Gerontol 1998;8:353–61.
11.
Lofgren AC, Bucht G, Eriksson S, Winblad B. 
A comparative study of the social conditions of
spouses of long term patients cared for either in
nursing home or home care. Scand J Caring Sci
1992;6:45–52.
12.
Croog SH, Burleson JA, Sudilovsky A, Baume RM.
Spouse caregivers of Alzheimer patients: problem
responses to caregiver burden. Aging Ment Health
2006;10:87–100.
13.
Sharlach A, Del Santo T, Greenlee J, Whittier S,
Coon D, Kietzman K, et al. Family caregivers in
California: needs, interventions and programs. San
Francisco, CA: University of California; 2001.
14.
Rook KS. Social support versus companionship:
effects on life stress, loneliness, and evaluations by
others. J Pers Soc Psychol 1987;52:1132–47.
15.
Hall-Elston C, Mullins LC. Social relationships,
emotional closeness, and loneliness among older
meal program participants. Soc Behav Pers 1999;
27:503–18.
16.
The role of the voluntary and community sector in
service delivery: a cross cutting review. London: The
Stationery Office; 2002. URL: http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/media/8/4/CCRVolSec02.pdf 
17.
Taylor M. The best of both worlds: partnership between
government and voluntary organisations. York: Joseph
Rowntree Foundation; 1997.
18.
Ware P, Matosevic T, Forder J, Hardy B, Kendall J,
Knapp K, et al. Movement and change:
independent sector domiciliary care providers
between 1995 and 1999. Health Soc Care Community
2001;9:334–40.
19.
Ware T, Matosevic T, Hardy B, Knapp K, Kendall J,
Forder J. Commissioning care services for older
people in England: the view from care managers,
users and carers. Ageing Soc 2003;23:411–28.
20.
Aneshensel CS, Pearlin LI, Mullan JT, Zarit SH,
Whitlatch CJ. Profiles in caregiving, the unexpected
career. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1995.
21.
Schulz R, O’Brien A, Czaja S, Ory M, Norris R,
Martire LM, et al. Dementia caregiver intervention
research: in search of clinical significance.
Gerontologist 2002;42:589–602.
22.
Charlesworth G, Newman S. Lessons from
psychosocial interventions aimed at caregivers of
people with dementia. In Rockwood G, editor. Trial
designs and outcomes in dementia therapeutic research.
London: Taylor & Francis; 2005. pp. 235–49.
23.
Brodaty H, Green A, Koschera A. Meta-analysis of
psychosocial interventions for caregivers of people
with dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51:657–64.
24.
Marriott A, Donaldson C, Tarrier N, Burns A.
Effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural family
intervention in reducing the burden of care in
carers of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Br J
Psychiatry 2000;176:557–62.
25.
Barker C, Pistrang N. Psychotherapy and social
support. Clin Psychol Rev 2002;22:361–79.
26.
Faust D, Zlotnick C. Another dodo bird verdict?
Revisiting the comparative effectiveness of
professional and paraprofessional therapists. Clin
Psychol Psychother 1995;2:157.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
45
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
References

27.
Andersson L. Loneliness research and
interventions: a review of the literature. Aging Ment
Health 1998;2:264–74.
28.
Cattan M, White M, Bond J, Learmouth A.
Preventing social isolation and loneliness among
older people: a systematic review of health
promotion interventions. Ageing Soc 2005;
25:41–67.
29.
Hogan BE, Linden W, Najarian B. Social support
interventions: do they work? Clin Psychol Rev 2002;
22:381–440.
30.
Taggart AV, Short SD, Barclay L. She has made me
feel human again; an evaluation of a volunteer
home-based visiting project for mothers. Health
Soc Care Community 2000;8:1–8.
31.
Andrews GJ, Gavin N, Begley S, Brodie D.
Assessing friendships, combating loneliness: users’
views on a ‘befriending scheme’ scheme. Aging Soc
2003;23:349–62.
32.
Brown SL, Ness RM, Vinkour AD, Smith DM.
Providing social support may be more beneficial
than receiving it: results from a prospective study
of mortality. Psychol Sci 2003;14:320–7.
33.
Sensky T, Turkington D, Kingdon D, Scott JL,
Scott J, Siddle R, et al. A randomized controlled
trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy for persistent
symptoms in schizophrenia resistant to
medication. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000;57:165–73.
34.
Milne D, Wharton S, James I, Turkington D.
Befriending versus CBT for schizophrenia: 
a convergent and divergent fidelity check.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy 2006;
34:25–30.
35.
Harris T, Brown GW, Robinson R. Befriending as
an intervention for chronic depression among
women in an inner city I: Randomised controlled
trial. Br J Psychiatry 1999;174:219–24.
36.
Calsyn RJ, Munson M, Peaco D, Kupferberg J,
Jackson J. A comparison of the effectiveness of
various approaches to visiting various community
elders. J Gerontol Soc Work 1984;7:31–7.
37.
MacIntyre I, Corradetti P, Roberts J, Browne G,
Watt S, Lane A. Pilot study of a visitor volunteer
programme for community elderly people
receiving home health care. Health Soc Care
Community 1999;7:225–8.
38.
Pillemer K, Suitor JJ. Peer support for Alzheimer’s
caregivers: is it enough to make a difference?
Research on Aging 2002;24:171–92.
39.
Patel A, Knapp M, Evans A, Perez I, Kalra L.
Training care givers of stroke patients: economic
evaluation. BMJ 2004;328:1102–4A.
40.
Brodaty H, Peters KE. Cost effectiveness of a
training program for dementia carers. Int
Psychogeriatr 1991;3:11–22.
41.
Drummond MF, Mohide EA, Tew M, Streiner DL,
Pringle DM, Gilbert JR. Economic evaluation of a
support program for caregivers of demented
elderly. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 1991;
7:209–19.
42.
Knapp M, Marks I, Wolstenholme J, Beecham J,
Astin J, Audini B, et al. Home-based versus
hospital-based care for serious mental illness –
controlled cost-effectiveness study over four years.
Br J Psychiatry 1998;172:506–12.
43.
Donaldson C, Gregson B. Prolonging life at home
– what is the cost? Community Med 1989;11:200–9.
44.
Payton FC, Brennan PF, Silvers JB. Cost
justification of a community health information
network: the ComputerLink for AD caregivers. In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual Symposium on
Computer Applications in Medical Care; 1995.
pp. 566–70.
45.
Brouwer WBF, van Exel NJA, Koopmanschap MA,
Rutten FFH. The valuation of informal care in
economic appraisal – a consideration of individual
choice and societal costs of time. Int J Technol Assess
Health Care 1999;15:147–60.
46.
McDaid D. Estimating the costs of informal care
for people with Alzheimer’s disease:
methodological and practical challenges. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 2001;16:400–5.
47.
Wimo A, Jonsson B, Karlsson G, Winblad B. Health
economics of dementia. Chichester: John Wiley &
Sons; 1998.
48.
Koopmanschap MA, Rutten FFH, Vanineveld BM,
Vanroijen L. The friction cost method for
measuring indirect costs of disease. J Health Econ
1995;14:171–89.
49.
Lipsey MW, Wilson DB. The efficacy of
psychological, educational, and behavioral
treatment. Confirmation from meta-analysis. Am
Psychol 1993;48:1181–209.
50.
Elashoff JD. nQuery Advisor version 5.0 user’s guide.
Los Angeles, CA; 2002.
51.
Grant G, Goodenough T, Harvey I. A randomised
controlled trial and economic evaluation of a
referrals facilitator between primary care and the
voluntary sector. BMJ 2000;320:419–23.
52.
Milne A, Hatzidimitriadou E,
Chryssamthoupoulou C, Owen T. Caring in later
life. Reviewing the role of older carers. Executive
Summary. University of Kent; 2001.
53.
Carers UK. Rural carers. Policy Briefing. London:
Carers UK; 2003.
54.
Rybarczyk B, Lopez M. Research methods with
older adults. In Kendall PC, Butcher JN, editors.
Handbook of research methods in clinical psychology.
2nd ed. New York: Wiley; 1999. pp. 662–80.
References
46

55.
Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;
67:361–70.
56.
Stroebe W, Stroebe M, Abakoumkin G, Schut H.
The role of loneliness and social support in
adjustment to loss: a test of attachment versus
stress theory. J Pers Soc Psychol 1996;70:1241–9.
57.
Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development
and validation of brief measures of positive and
negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol
1988;54:1063–70.
58.
Nolan MR, Grant GJ. Regular respite: an evaluation
of a hospital rota bed scheme for elderly people.
London: Age Concern; 1992.
59.
Charlesworth G, Tzimoula X, Newman S. 
Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index (CADI):
psychometric properties for use with carers of
people with dementia. Aging Ment Health 2007;
11:218–25.
60.
Williamson GM, Schulz R. Caring for a family
member with cancer – past communal behavior
and affective reactions. J Appl Soc Psychol 1995;
25:93–116.
61.
Wenger GC. Support networks and dementia. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 1994;9:181–94.
62.
Scharf T, Smith AE. Older people in urban
neighbourhoods: addressing the risk of social
exclusion in later life. In Phillipson C, Allan G,
Morgan D, editors. Social networks and social
exclusion: sociological and policy perspectives.
Aldershot: Ashgate; 2004.
63.
Zimet GD, Dahlem NW, Zimet SG, Farley GK. 
The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social
Support. J Pers Assess 1988;52:30–41.
64.
Stanley MA, Beck JG, Zebb BJ. Psychometric
properties of the MSPSS in older adults. Aging
Ment Health 1998;2:186–93.
65.
Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your
protocol’s too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J
Behav Med 1997;4:92–100.
66.
Brugha T, Bebbington P, Tennant C, Hurry J. 
The list of threatening experiences – a subset of
12 life event categories with considerable long-
term contextual threat. Psychol Med 1985;
15:189–94.
67.
Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play.
Health Policy 1996;37:53–72.
68.
Dixon S, Deverill M, Gannon M, Brazier J,
Haggard M. Improving the validity of economic
evaluations alongside controlled trials. J Health
Serv Res Pol 1999;4:161–3.
69.
Beecham J. The Client Service Receipt Inventory.
Discussion Paper 1492. Canterbury: University of
Kent at Canterbury, Personal Social Services
Research Unit; 1995.
70.
Blesa R. Galantamine: therapeutic effects beyond
cognition. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2000;
11:28–34.
71.
Davis KL, Marin DB, Kane R, Patrick D, Peskind ER,
Raskind MA, et al. The Caregiver Activity Survey
(CAS): development and validation of a new
measure for caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s
disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 1997;12:978–88.
72.
Marin DB, Dugue M, Schmeidler J, Santoro J,
Neugroschl J, Zaklad G, et al. The Caregiver
Activity Survey (CAS): longitudinal validation of an
instrument that measures time spent caregiving
for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry 2000;15:680–6.
73.
Rubin D. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in
surveys. New Jersey: Wiley & Sons; 1987.
74.
Matthews J. An introduction to randomized controlled
trials. London: Arnold/Hodder Headline; 2000.
75.
Dolan P. Modelling valuations for EuroQol health
states. Med Care 1997;35:1095–108.
76.
Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Torrance GW,
O’Brien BJ, Stoddart GL. Methods for the economic
evaluation of healthcare programmes. 3rd ed. Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2005.
77.
Rawlins MD. 5 NICE years. Lancet 2005;365:907–8.
78.
National Centre for Volunteering. Safe and alert:
good practice advice on volunteers working with
vulnerable clients. London: National Centre for
Volunteering; 2000.
79.
Scottish Befriending Development Forum. 
Code of Practice: working together to promote
good practice in befriending. Falkirk: Scottish
Befriending Development Forum; 1997.
80.
Dean J, Goodlad R. Supporting community
participation: the role and impact of befriending.
Pavilion Publishing/Joseph Rowntree Foundation;
1998.
81.
Cuijpers P. Depressive disorders in caregivers of
dementia patients: a systematic review. Aging Ment
Health 2005;9:325–30.
82.
Richards K, Moniz-Cook E, Duggan P, Carr I,
Wang M. Defining ‘early dementia’ and
monitoring intervention: what measures are useful
in family caregiving? Aging Ment Health 2003;
7:7–14.
83.
Brodaty H, Thomson C, Thompson C, Fine M.
Why caregivers of people with dementia and
memory loss don’t use services. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry 2005;20:537–46.
84.
Bass DM, Noelker LS. The influence of family
caregivers on elders’ use of in-home services. 
J Health Soc Behav 1987;28:184–96.
85.
Miller B, McFall S. The effect of caregivers’ burden
on change in frail older person’s use of formal
helpers. J Health Soc Behav 1991;32:165–79.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
47
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

86.
Monahan DJ, Green VL, Coleman P. Caregiver
support groups: factors affecting use of services.
Soc Work 1992;37:254–60.
87.
Curry C, Cossich T, Matthews JP, Beresford J,
McLachlan SA. Uptake of psychosocial referrals in
an outpatient cancer setting: improving service
accessibility via the referral process. Support Cancer
Care 2002;10:549–55.
88.
Cowley M, Orbell S. Towards a psychology of
service use in informal care: social and
psychological variables associated with service
need and uptake amongst carers of learning
disabled adults. Psychol Health 1999;14:217–39.
89.
Moseley A. Befriending schemes in Norfolk; how
should these be developed? Discussion Paper.
Norwich: Norfolk Social Services; 2000.
90.
Green T, Stuart M. The good practice guide, National
Centre for Volunteering. London: National Centre
for Volunteering; 1998.
91.
Hawkins S, Restall M. Volunteers across the NHS:
improving the patient experience and creating a patient-
led service. London: Volunteering England; 2006.
92.
Baines S, Lie M, Wheelock J. Volunteering, self-help
and citizenship in later life. Newcastle: University of
Newcastle; 2006.
93.
Princess Royal Trust. Primary carers – identifying and
providing support to carers in primary care. Executive
Summary. Princess Royal Trust; 2003.
94.
Adams J, Silverman M, Musa D, Peele P.
Recruiting older adults for clinical trials. Control
Clin Trials 1997;18:14–26.
95.
DiBartolo MC, McCrone S. Recruitment of rural
dwelling older adults: barriers, challenges,
strategies. Aging Ment Health 2003;7:75–82.
96.
Hooper E, Charlesworth G, Poland F, Vaughan S.
Recruiting carers and befrienders: experiences
from the Befriending and Cost of Caring (BECCA)
study. Signpost 2004;9:7–10.
97.
Byford S, Leese M, Knapp M, Seivewright H,
Cameron S, Jones V, et al. Comparison of
alternative methods of collection of service use
data for the economic evaluation of health care
interventions. Health Econ 2007;16:531–6.
98.
Herrmann N, Lanctot KL, Sambrook R,
Lesnikova N, Hebert R, McCracken P, Robillard A,
Nguyen E and The COSID Investigators. The
contribution of neuropsychiatric symptoms to the
cost of dementia care. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
2006;21:972–76.
99.
Naglie G, Tomlinson G, Tansey C, Irvine J, Ritvo P,
Black SE, et al. Utility-based quality of life
measures in Alzheimer’s disease. Qual Life Res
2006;15:631–43.
100. Coucill W, Bryan S, Bentham P, Buckley A, 
Laight A. EQ-5D in patients with dementia: an
investigation of inter-rater agreement. Med Care
2001;39:760–71.
101. Nordberg G, von Strauss E, Kareholt I, 
Johansson L, Wimo A. The amount of informal
and formal care among non-demented and
demented elderly persons – results from a Swedish
population-based study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
2005;20:862–71.
102. Netten A, Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care
2002. Canterbury: Personal Social Services
Research Unit, University of Kent; 2002.
103. Department of Health. National schedule of
performance costs 2005. URL: http://www.dh.
gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/
PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_4133221.
Accessed 10 December 2007.
104. Netten A, Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care
2005. Canterbury: Personal Social Services
Research Unit, University of Kent; 2005.
105. National Audit Office. NHS Direct in England.
Report 2002. URL: http://www.nao.org.uk/
publications/nao_reports/01-02/0102505.pdf.
Accessed 10 December 2007. 
106. The AA. Motoring costs 2005. URL: http://www.
theaa.com/motoring_advice/running_costs/
petrol2005.pdf. Accessed 10 December 2007. 
107. Office for National Statistics. 2005 Annual survey
of hours and earnings. Analysis by all employees,
Table 1.5a. URL: http://www.statistics.gov.uk/
downloads/theme_labour/ASHE_2005/
2005_all_employees.pdf. Accessed 10 December
2007.
References
48

ACCESS, Age Concern Suffolk
ACCESS, Younger People with Dementia, Age
Concern Suffolk
Age Concern, Havering, London
Age Concern, Norfolk
Alzheimer’s Society
Beccles Volunteer Bureau, Beccles, Suffolk
Bury Volunteer Group, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk
Community Mental Health Nursing Services,
Norwich
Experience Corps, Cambridge
Hadleigh Volunteer Centre, Suffolk
Halesworth Volunteer Group, Suffolk
Health Centre, Ipswich, Suffolk
Ipswich Volunteer Centre, Suffolk
Ixworth GP Surgery, Ixworth, Suffolk
Julian Hospital, Norwich
Lowestoft Volunteer Group, Suffolk
Norfolk Social Services
Norwich & Norfolk Voluntary Services (NVS)
Norwich & District Carers Forum, Norwich
Nursing & Patient Services, Ipswich Hospital NHS
Trust, Suffolk
Pabulum Project, Norwich
Rethink Disability, Stowmarket, Suffolk
Rookery Medical Centre, Newmarket, Suffolk
Suffolk Social Services
Stowmarket Volunteer Centre, Stowmarket, Suffolk
Suffolk Acre, Ipswich, Suffolk
Suffolk Association Voluntary Organisation (SAVO)
Suffolk Carers, Suffolk
Waveney Primary Care Trust, Suffolk
The SAND group of practices (Thorpewood
Surgery; Manor Farm Close, Drayton; Bacon Road
Medical Centre; Orchard St 1; Botesdale H/C,
Diss; Bungay) is thanked for their assistance in
recruitment, as are the following: Acle, Coastal
Villages Practices (Mensby, Ormesby, Caister,
Martham), King Street, Great Yarmouth; Central
Surgery, Great Yarmouth; Aldborough; Holt
Medical Practice; Old Palace Medical Practice;
Castle Partnership; Trinity St (& Bowthorpe); Oak
St Medical Practice; Manor Dr, Litcham;
Watlington Medical Centre; Carole Brown H/C,
Dersingham; Gayton Road; Grimston Medical
Centre, Kings Lynn; Woodbridge Road, Ipswich;
Chesterfield Drive, Ipswich; Dr Jones & Partners,
Bury.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
49
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 1
Organisations involved in the trial


Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
51
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 2
Unit costs and sources
Item
Unit
Cost
Source/notes
Hospital visits
NHS inpatient
per night
£309.77
2002 cost of £273 inflated to 2005 (PSSRU, 2002)102
NHS A&E attendance
per visit
£106.00
NHS reference costs 2005,103 NHS trust and PCT
combined schedule, TOPS FA, code 180 
NHS outpatient attendance
per visit
£93.04
2002 cost of £82 inflated to 2005 (PSSRU, 2002)102
NHS day-case attendance
per visit
£93.04
Assumed same as outpatient cost
NHS other attendance
per visit
£93.04
Assumed same as outpatient cost
Primary care
GP surgery visit
per visit
£24.00
Per surgery consultation lasting 10 minutes (PSSRU,
2005, P133)104
GP home visit
per visit
£69.00
Per home visit lasting 13.2 minutes +12 minutes travel
(PSSRU 2005, P133)104
GP telephone contact
per call
£25.00
Per telephone conversation lasting 10.8 minutes (PSSRU,
2005, P133)104
Nurse surgery visit
per visit
£10.00
Per consultation, including qualification costs (PSSRU,
2005, P130)104
Nurse home visit
per visit
£23.00
Per district nurse home visit, including qualification costs
(PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
Nurse telephone contact
per call
£18.02
National Audit Office report on NHS Direct in England,
2002, inflated to 2005105
Other surgery visit
per visit
£10.00
Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Other home visit
per visit
£23.00
Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Other telephone contact
per call
£18.02
Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Travel costs
Private car
per mile
£0.34
AA motoring costs (2005)106
Community transport
per mile
£1.75
Trial data, average patient transport service journey
Visits to other professionals
NHS counsellor, home visit
per visit
£167.81
NHS psychologist domiciliary visit (NHS reference costs,
2005)103
NHS counsellor, clinic visit
per visit
£39.00
Per hour counselling service in primary care (PSSRU,
2005, P160)104
NHS chiropodist, home visit
per visit
£20.00
Per home visit, community chiropodist (PSSRU, 2005,
P120)104
NHS chiropodist, clinic visit
per visit
£11.00
Per clinic visit, community chiropodist (PSSRU, 2005,
P120)104
NHS other, home visit
per visit
£20.00
Assumed same as chiropodist
NHS other, clinic visit
per visit
£11.00
Assumed same as chiropodist
Day care/day hospital
Local authority day care
per day
£38.00
Per day, local authority social services day care for
people with mental health problems (PSSRU, 2005,
P58)104
continued

Appendix 2
52
Item
Unit
Cost
Source/notes
Voluntary-sector day care
per day
£37.00
Per day, voluntary/not-for-profit organisation providing
day care for people with mental health problems
(PSSRU, 2005, P59)104
Day hospital
per day
£57.00
Per day, NHS trust day care for people with mental
health problems (PSSRU, 2005, P57)104
Home care
Sitting service
per session
£11.50
Mean cost of five agencies in Torbay
Home care
per weekday 
£13.00
Local authority home care worker (PSSRU, 2005, 
hour
P141)104
Other
per session
£12.25
Assumed mean of sitting service and home care service
Other services
Meals on wheels
per meal
£2.27
Mean cost of ten councils (Haringey, Trafford,
Manchester, Powys, Isle of Man, Northamptonshire,
Medway, North Tyneside, Birmingham, Tameside)
Other
per unit
£13.00
1 hour of housework, local authority care worker
(PSSRU, 2005, P141)104
Occasional visits to the home/community services
NHS district nurse, home visit
per visit
£23.00
District nurse home visit (PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
NHS district nurse, clinic visit
per visit
£46.00
District nurse per hour in clinic (PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
NHS district nurse, telephone 
per call
£46.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
contact
NHS occupational therapist, 
per visit
£54.00
Per home visit, NHS community occupational therapist 
home visit
(PSSRU, 2005, P118)104
NHS occupational therapist, 
per visit
£20.00
Per clinic visit, NHS community occupational therapist 
clinic visit
(PSSRU, 2005, P118)104
NHS occupational therapist, 
per call
£20.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
telephone contact
NHS psychiatrist, home visit
per visit
£87.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS psychiatrist, clinic visit
per visit
£87.00
Consultant: psychiatric cost per hour, including
qualification costs (PSSRU, 2005, P186)104
NHS psychiatrist, telephone contact
per call
£87.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS psychologist, home visit
per visit
£167.81
Domiciliary visit, clinical/consultant psychologist (NHS
reference, costs, 2005)104
NHS psychologist, clinic visit
per visit
£44.00
Per professional chargeable hour, clinic psychologist
(PSSRU, 2005, P121)104
NHS psychologist, telephone contact
per call
£44.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS CPN, home visit
per visit
£31.00
Per home visit, including qualification costs (PSSRU,
2005, P126)104
NHS CPN, clinic visit
per visit
£64.00
Per hour clinic contact, including qualification costs
(PSSRU, 2005, P126)104
NHS CPN, telephone contact
per call
£64.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
Social worker, home visit
per visit
£58.00
Per hour of home visiting (PSSRU, 2005, P139)104
(children social worker; adult home visit cost not
available)
Social worker, clinic visit
per visit
£35.00
Per hour of client-related work (PSSRU, 2005, P139)104
Social worker, telephone contact
per call
£35.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS physiotherapist, home visit
per visit
£54.00
Per physiotherapist home visit, including qualification
cost (PSSRU, 2005, P117)104
continued

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
53
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Item
Unit
Cost
Source/notes
NHS physiotherapist, clinic visit
per visit
£20.00
Per physiotherapist clinic visit, including qualification cost
(PSSRU, 2005, P117)104
NHS physiotherapist, telephone 
per call
£20.00
Assumed same as clinic cost
contact
NHS other, home visit
per visit
£23.00
Assumed same as district nurse
NHS other, clinic visit
per visit
£46.00
Assumed same as district nurse
NHS other, telephone contact
per call
£46.00
Assumed same as district nurse
Respite stays and care-home admission
NHS residential care
per day
£62.43
Local authority residential care, based on weekly rate/7
(PSSRU, 2005, P49)104
NHS respite care
per day
£62.43
Assumed same as residential care
NHS nursing care
per day
£75.14
Private nursing home for older people, based on weekly
rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P31)104
NHS EMI care
per day
£175.14
Psychiatric reprovision package, nursing home
placement, weekly rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P64)104
Voluntary residential care
per day
£55.00
Voluntary agency residential care, based on weekly
rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P51)104
Voluntary respite care
per day
£62.43
Assumed same as NHS residential care
Voluntary nursing care
per day
£75.14
Assumed same as NHS nursing care
Voluntary EMI care
per day
£175.14
Assumed same as NHS EMI care
Dual registered
per week
£437.00
Assumed same as local authority residential care, weekly
rate
Other
per week
£437.00
Assumed same as local authority residential care, weekly
rate
Complementary therapy
Complementary therapy
per session
£35.00
Notional average cost of range of interventions costing
between £20 and £65 per session, collected from
Internet price lists from range of clinics
Carer’s assessment
Carer’s assessment
per 
£74.25
Community mental health team per hour of patient 
assessment
contact, including travel costs (PSSRU, 2005, P150)104
Carer social support
Social support
per session
£10.00
Notional cost, e.g. of yoga class, outings, tea dance club
Indirect costs – value of caring time
Gross average wage rate
per hour
£13.11
Gross hourly rate for women and men, UK, 2005
(ONS)107
EMI, elderly mentally infirm; PSSRU, Personal Social Services Research Unit. 


Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
55
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 3
Resource-use quantities at 15 months 
(complete case analysis)
Intervention
Control
Difference 
Units
Valid n
Mean
SD
Valid n
Mean
SD
in mean
PwD hospital visits
Inpatient nights
nights
93
6.89
16.25
102
11.51
24.80
–4.63
A&E visit
visits
94
0.30
0.96
103
0.31
1.24
–0.01
Outpatient visit
visits
94
1.78
2.73
103
1.57
2.40
0.21
Day case
visits
94
0.13
0.58
103
0.23
1.09
–0.10
PwD GP surgery visits
Surgery visits
visits
94
4.32
6.46
102
4.91
7.56
–0.59
Home visits
visits
94
1.82
3.53
102
3.52
12.91
–1.69
Telephone calls
calls
94
1.54
4.18
102
1.58
7.60
–0.04
PwD day care/day hospital
visits
94
54.97
86.27
104
51.43
68.55
3.54
PwD home care
hours
87
185.80
549.98
100
99.72
177.91
86.08
PwD other services
Meals
meals
90
5.25
26.22
97
7.62
49.58
–2.37
Other service NHS/voluntary
hours
90
1.08
5.44
97
0.27
2.64
0.81
Other service private
weeks
90
13.61
26.46
97
19.72
39.61
–6.11
PwD occasional visits to home
Home visits
visits
93
5.87
7.39
104
8.52
18.41
–2.65
Clinic visits
visits
94
1.50
4.19
104
2.01
5.22
–0.51
Telephone calls
call
94
1.10
5.09
104
0.22
1.15
0.87
PwD respite stays
Residential care
nights
94
6.54
16.11
104
6.24
17.14
0.31
Respite care
nights
94
2.31
8.51
104
0.37
2.78
1.94
Nursing home
nights
94
1.00
6.58
104
1.87
9.84
–0.86
EMI
nights
94
1.28
5.17
104
2.33
21.09
–1.05
Hours spent caring for PwD 
hours
94
7529.64 3448.35
105
7768.59 3587.45
–238.95
by carer
Hours spent caring for PwD 
hours
81
282.70
720.84
87
269.55
364.79
13.14
by family/friends
Carer assessment
number
94
0.26
0.53
100
0.23
0.47
0.03
Carer GP surgery visits
Surgery visits
visits
99
6.70
7.22
106
6.61
5.88
0.08
Home visits
visits
99
0.19
0.84
106
0.49
2.35
–0.30
Telephone calls
calls
99
0.39
1.32
106
0.65
1.85
–0.25
Carer hospital visits
Inpatient nights
nights
99
0.49
1.53
105
1.20
3.62
–0.71
A&E visit
visits
99
0.12
0.58
105
0.29
1.12
–0.17
Outpatient visit
visits
98
2.21
3.38
105
2.16
4.12
0.05
Day case
visits
99
0.81
6.32
105
0.12
0.43
0.69
Other
visits
99
0.13
0.89
105
0.05
0.25
0.08
Carer community services
Home visits
visits
99
1.13
4.87
106
0.68
3.89
0.45
Clinic visits
visits
99
0.22
1.17
106
0.41
2.28
–0.18
Carer complementary therapy
sessions
98
3.11
12.60
106
2.60
8.05
0.51
Carer social support
sessions
98
30.65
51.07
103
31.21
52.66
–0.56
Carer social worker
visits
115
0.35
2.56
118
0.14
0.42
0.21
Carer other services
units
98
6.79
16.78
104
4.79
13.60
2.01
PwD in care
weeks
88
5.47
13.95
98
2.58
10.21
2.89


Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
57
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 4
Detailed breakdown of per-carer/person with 
dementia costs at 15 months

58
Appendix 4
Intervention group
Control group
Direct costs
Indirect
Direct costs
Indirect
Statutory
Voluntary
Household
Societal
Statutory
Voluntary
Household
Societal
PwD medication
£715
£0
£73
£788
£788
£0
£52
£840
PwD hospital visits
£2,413
£0
£1
£2,413
£3,509
£0
£43
£3,552
PwD travel to hospital
£17
£0
£14
£30
£89
£0
£28
£117
PwD GP surgery visits
£217
£0
£0
£217
£242
£0
£0
£242
PwD travel to GP surgery
£1
£0
£6
£6
£0
£0
£7
£7
PwD day care/day hospital
£1,583
£249
£292
£2,125
£1,634
£195
£133
£1,962
PwD travel to day care
£412
£0
£146
£558
£405
£0
£60
£464
PwD home care
£1,943
£346
£1,600
£3,889
£1,025
£232
£1,084
£2,341
PwD other services
£10
£1
£297
£309
£24
£0
£364
£389
PwD occasional visits to home
£279
£19
£2
£300
£320
£48
£1
£368
PwD respite stays
£332
£47
£253
£631
£549
£56
£168
£773
PwD aids and adaptations
£25
£2
£185
£211
£30
£7
£212
£249
£7,945
£665
£2,869
£11,478
£8,614
£537
£2,152
£11,304
Value of time spent caring for PwD
£98,711
£98,711
£100,751
£100,751
Travel to PwD in care
£200
£173
£374
£38
£128
£166
£200
£173
£98,711
£99,084
£38
£128
£100,751
£100,916
Value of time in help/support from 
£4,286
£4,286
£4,148
£4,148
family/friends
Carer assessment
£20
£20
£17
£17
Carer medication
£711
£173
£884
£373
£106
£479
Carer GP surgery visits
£142
£0
£142
£166
£166
Carer travel to GP surgery
£3
£8
£11
£3
£8
£11
Carer hospital visits
£449
£75
£524
£627
£401
£1,028
Transport to carer hospital visits
£4
£20
£23
£5
£16
£21
Carer community services
£31
£1
£3
£35
£34
£15
£49
Carer complementary therapy
£3
£4
£51
£59
£22
£17
£38
£77
Carer aids and adaptations
£0
£0
£20
£20
£3
£10
£12
Carer social support
£99
£46
£66
£211
£128
£53
£90
£272
Carer social support travel
£5
£37
£42
£4
£66
£70
Carer social worker
£22
£22
£11
£11
Carer other services
£109
£109
£68
£68
£1,489
£51
£561
£2,101
£1,392
£71
£817
£2,280
PwD gone into care
£2,968
£1,208
£4,176
£1,682
£99
£393
£2,174
Intervention cost
Direct
£1,138
£1,138
£11
£11
Indirect
£401
£401
£20
£20
£13,740
£716
£4,811
£103,398
£122,665
£11,737
£707
£3,489
£104,918
£120,852

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
59
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Volume 1, 1997
No. 1
Home parenteral nutrition: a systematic
review.
By Richards DM, Deeks JJ, Sheldon
TA, Shaffer JL.
No. 2
Diagnosis, management and screening
of early localised prostate cancer.
A review by Selley S, Donovan J,
Faulkner A, Coast J, Gillatt D.
No. 3
The diagnosis, management, treatment
and costs of prostate cancer in England
and Wales.
A review by Chamberlain J, Melia J,
Moss S, Brown J.
No. 4
Screening for fragile X syndrome.
A review by Murray J, Cuckle H,
Taylor G, Hewison J.
No. 5
A review of near patient testing in
primary care.
By Hobbs FDR, Delaney BC,
Fitzmaurice DA, Wilson S, Hyde CJ,
Thorpe GH, et al.
No. 6
Systematic review of outpatient services
for chronic pain control.
By McQuay HJ, Moore RA, Eccleston
C, Morley S, de C Williams AC.
No. 7
Neonatal screening for inborn errors of
metabolism: cost, yield and outcome.
A review by Pollitt RJ, Green A,
McCabe CJ, Booth A, Cooper NJ,
Leonard JV, et al.
No. 8
Preschool vision screening.
A review by Snowdon SK, 
Stewart-Brown SL.
No. 9
Implications of socio-cultural contexts
for the ethics of clinical trials.
A review by Ashcroft RE, Chadwick
DW, Clark SRL, Edwards RHT, Frith L,
Hutton JL.
No. 10
A critical review of the role of neonatal
hearing screening in the detection of
congenital hearing impairment.
By Davis A, Bamford J, Wilson I,
Ramkalawan T, Forshaw M, Wright S.
No. 11
Newborn screening for inborn errors of
metabolism: a systematic review.
By Seymour CA, Thomason MJ,
Chalmers RA, Addison GM, Bain MD,
Cockburn F, et al.
No. 12
Routine preoperative testing: 
a systematic review of the evidence.
By Munro J, Booth A, Nicholl J.
No. 13
Systematic review of the effectiveness 
of laxatives in the elderly.
By Petticrew M, Watt I, Sheldon T.
No. 14
When and how to assess fast-changing
technologies: a comparative study of
medical applications of four generic
technologies.
A review by Mowatt G, Bower DJ,
Brebner JA, Cairns JA, Grant AM,
McKee L.
Volume 2, 1998
No. 1
Antenatal screening for Down’s
syndrome.
A review by Wald NJ, Kennard A,
Hackshaw A, McGuire A.
No. 2
Screening for ovarian cancer: 
a systematic review.
By Bell R, Petticrew M, Luengo S,
Sheldon TA.
No. 3
Consensus development methods, and
their use in clinical guideline
development.
A review by Murphy MK, Black NA,
Lamping DL, McKee CM, Sanderson
CFB, Askham J, et al.
No. 4
A cost–utility analysis of interferon 
beta for multiple sclerosis.
By Parkin D, McNamee P, Jacoby A,
Miller P, Thomas S, Bates D.
No. 5
Effectiveness and efficiency of methods
of dialysis therapy for end-stage renal
disease: systematic reviews.
By MacLeod A, Grant A, 
Donaldson C, Khan I, Campbell M,
Daly C, et al.
No. 6
Effectiveness of hip prostheses in
primary total hip replacement: a critical
review of evidence and an economic
model.
By Faulkner A, Kennedy LG, 
Baxter K, Donovan J, Wilkinson M,
Bevan G.
No. 7
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in colorectal
surgery: a systematic review of
randomised controlled trials.
By Song F, Glenny AM.
No. 8
Bone marrow and peripheral blood
stem cell transplantation for malignancy.
A review by Johnson PWM, Simnett SJ,
Sweetenham JW, Morgan GJ, Stewart LA.
No. 9
Screening for speech and language
delay: a systematic review of the
literature.
By Law J, Boyle J, Harris F, Harkness
A, Nye C.
No. 10
Resource allocation for chronic stable
angina: a systematic review of
effectiveness, costs and 
cost-effectiveness of alternative
interventions.
By Sculpher MJ, Petticrew M, 
Kelland JL, Elliott RA, Holdright DR,
Buxton MJ.
No. 11
Detection, adherence and control of
hypertension for the prevention of
stroke: a systematic review.
By Ebrahim S.
No. 12
Postoperative analgesia and vomiting,
with special reference to day-case
surgery: a systematic review.
By McQuay HJ, Moore RA.
No. 13
Choosing between randomised and
nonrandomised studies: a systematic
review.
By Britton A, McKee M, Black N,
McPherson K, Sanderson C, Bain C.
No. 14
Evaluating patient-based outcome
measures for use in clinical 
trials.
A review by Fitzpatrick R, Davey C,
Buxton MJ, Jones DR.
Health Technology Assessment reports 
published to date

No. 15
Ethical issues in the design and conduct
of randomised controlled trials.
A review by Edwards SJL, Lilford RJ,
Braunholtz DA, Jackson JC, Hewison J,
Thornton J.
No. 16
Qualitative research methods in health
technology assessment: a review of the
literature.
By Murphy E, Dingwall R, Greatbatch
D, Parker S, Watson P.
No. 17
The costs and benefits of paramedic
skills in pre-hospital trauma care.
By Nicholl J, Hughes S, Dixon S,
Turner J, Yates D.
No. 18
Systematic review of endoscopic
ultrasound in gastro-oesophageal
cancer.
By Harris KM, Kelly S, Berry E,
Hutton J, Roderick P, Cullingworth J, et al.
No. 19
Systematic reviews of trials and other
studies.
By Sutton AJ, Abrams KR, Jones DR,
Sheldon TA, Song F.
No. 20
Primary total hip replacement surgery: 
a systematic review of outcomes and
modelling of cost-effectiveness
associated with different prostheses.
A review by Fitzpatrick R, Shortall E,
Sculpher M, Murray D, Morris R, Lodge
M, et al.
Volume 3, 1999
No. 1
Informed decision making: an annotated
bibliography and systematic review.
By Bekker H, Thornton JG, 
Airey CM, Connelly JB, Hewison J,
Robinson MB, et al.
No. 2
Handling uncertainty when performing
economic evaluation of healthcare
interventions.
A review by Briggs AH, Gray AM.
No. 3
The role of expectancies in the placebo
effect and their use in the delivery of
health care: a systematic review.
By Crow R, Gage H, Hampson S,
Hart J, Kimber A, Thomas H.
No. 4
A randomised controlled trial of
different approaches to universal
antenatal HIV testing: uptake and
acceptability. Annex: Antenatal HIV
testing – assessment of a routine
voluntary approach.
By Simpson WM, Johnstone FD, Boyd
FM, Goldberg DJ, Hart GJ, Gormley
SM, et al.
No. 5
Methods for evaluating area-wide and
organisation-based interventions in
health and health care: a systematic
review.
By Ukoumunne OC, Gulliford MC,
Chinn S, Sterne JAC, Burney PGJ.
No. 6
Assessing the costs of healthcare
technologies in clinical trials.
A review by Johnston K, Buxton MJ,
Jones DR, Fitzpatrick R.
No. 7
Cooperatives and their primary care
emergency centres: organisation and
impact.
By Hallam L, Henthorne K.
No. 8
Screening for cystic fibrosis.
A review by Murray J, Cuckle H,
Taylor G, Littlewood J, Hewison J.
No. 9
A review of the use of health status
measures in economic evaluation.
By Brazier J, Deverill M, Green C,
Harper R, Booth A.
No. 10
Methods for the analysis of quality-of-
life and survival data in health
technology assessment.
A review by Billingham LJ, Abrams
KR, Jones DR.
No. 11
Antenatal and neonatal
haemoglobinopathy screening in the
UK: review and economic analysis.
By Zeuner D, Ades AE, Karnon J,
Brown J, Dezateux C, Anionwu EN.
No. 12
Assessing the quality of reports of
randomised trials: implications for the
conduct of meta-analyses.
A review by Moher D, Cook DJ, Jadad
AR, Tugwell P, Moher M, Jones A, et al.
No. 13
‘Early warning systems’ for identifying
new healthcare technologies.
By Robert G, Stevens A, Gabbay J.
No. 14
A systematic review of the role of human
papillomavirus testing within a cervical
screening programme.
By Cuzick J, Sasieni P, Davies P,
Adams J, Normand C, Frater A, et al.
No. 15
Near patient testing in diabetes clinics:
appraising the costs and outcomes.
By Grieve R, Beech R, Vincent J,
Mazurkiewicz J.
No. 16
Positron emission tomography:
establishing priorities for health
technology assessment.
A review by Robert G, Milne R.
No. 17 (Pt 1)
The debridement of chronic wounds: 
a systematic review.
By Bradley M, Cullum N, Sheldon T.
No. 17 (Pt 2)
Systematic reviews of wound care
management: (2) Dressings and topical
agents used in the healing of chronic
wounds.
By Bradley M, Cullum N, Nelson EA,
Petticrew M, Sheldon T, Torgerson D.
No. 18
A systematic literature review of spiral
and electron beam computed
tomography: with particular reference to
clinical applications in hepatic lesions,
pulmonary embolus and coronary artery
disease.
By Berry E, Kelly S, Hutton J, 
Harris KM, Roderick P, Boyce JC, et al.
No. 19
What role for statins? A review and
economic model.
By Ebrahim S, Davey Smith G,
McCabe C, Payne N, Pickin M, Sheldon
TA, et al.
No. 20
Factors that limit the quality, number
and progress of randomised controlled
trials.
A review by Prescott RJ, Counsell CE,
Gillespie WJ, Grant AM, Russell IT,
Kiauka S, et al.
No. 21
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in total hip
replacement: a systematic review.
By Glenny AM, Song F.
No. 22
Health promoting schools and health
promotion in schools: two systematic
reviews.
By Lister-Sharp D, Chapman S,
Stewart-Brown S, Sowden A.
No. 23
Economic evaluation of a primary care-
based education programme for patients
with osteoarthritis of the knee.
A review by Lord J, Victor C,
Littlejohns P, Ross FM, Axford JS.
Volume 4, 2000
No. 1
The estimation of marginal time
preference in a UK-wide sample
(TEMPUS) project.
A review by Cairns JA, van der Pol
MM.
No. 2
Geriatric rehabilitation following
fractures in older people: a systematic
review.
By Cameron I, Crotty M, Currie C,
Finnegan T, Gillespie L, Gillespie W, 
et al.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
60

No. 3
Screening for sickle cell disease and
thalassaemia: a systematic review with
supplementary research.
By Davies SC, Cronin E, Gill M,
Greengross P, Hickman M, Normand C.
No. 4
Community provision of hearing aids
and related audiology services.
A review by Reeves DJ, Alborz A,
Hickson FS, Bamford JM.
No. 5
False-negative results in screening
programmes: systematic review of
impact and implications.
By Petticrew MP, Sowden AJ, 
Lister-Sharp D, Wright K.
No. 6
Costs and benefits of community
postnatal support workers: a
randomised controlled trial.
By Morrell CJ, Spiby H, Stewart P,
Walters S, Morgan A.
No. 7
Implantable contraceptives (subdermal
implants and hormonally impregnated
intrauterine systems) versus other forms
of reversible contraceptives: two
systematic reviews to assess relative
effectiveness, acceptability, tolerability
and cost-effectiveness.
By French RS, Cowan FM, Mansour
DJA, Morris S, Procter T, Hughes D, 
et al.
No. 8
An introduction to statistical methods
for health technology assessment.
A review by White SJ, Ashby D, 
Brown PJ.
No. 9
Disease-modifying drugs for multiple
sclerosis: a rapid and systematic 
review.
By Clegg A, Bryant J, Milne R.
No. 10
Publication and related biases.
A review by Song F, Eastwood AJ,
Gilbody S, Duley L, Sutton AJ.
No. 11
Cost and outcome implications of the
organisation of vascular services.
By Michaels J, Brazier J, Palfreyman
S, Shackley P, Slack R.
No. 12
Monitoring blood glucose control in
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review.
By Coster S, Gulliford MC, Seed PT,
Powrie JK, Swaminathan R.
No. 13
The effectiveness of domiciliary health
visiting: a systematic review of
international studies 
and a selective review of the British
literature.
By Elkan R, Kendrick D, Hewitt M,
Robinson JJA, Tolley K, Blair M, et al.
No. 14
The determinants of screening uptake
and interventions for increasing uptake:
a systematic review.
By Jepson R, Clegg A, Forbes C,
Lewis R, Sowden A, Kleijnen J.
No. 15
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of prophylactic removal of wisdom
teeth. 
A rapid review by Song F, O’Meara S,
Wilson P, Golder S, Kleijnen J.
No. 16
Ultrasound screening in pregnancy: a
systematic review of the clinical
effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and
women’s views.
By Bricker L, Garcia J, Henderson J,
Mugford M, Neilson J, Roberts T, et al.
No. 17
A rapid and systematic review of the
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
the taxanes used in the treatment of
advanced breast and ovarian cancer.
By Lister-Sharp D, McDonagh MS,
Khan KS, Kleijnen J.
No. 18
Liquid-based cytology in cervical
screening: a rapid and systematic review.
By Payne N, Chilcott J, McGoogan E.
No. 19
Randomised controlled trial of non-
directive counselling,
cognitive–behaviour therapy and usual
general practitioner care in the
management of depression as well as
mixed anxiety and depression in
primary care.
By King M, Sibbald B, Ward E, Bower
P, Lloyd M, Gabbay M, et al.
No. 20
Routine referral for radiography of
patients presenting with low back pain:
is patients’ outcome influenced by GPs’
referral for plain radiography?
By Kerry S, Hilton S, Patel S, Dundas
D, Rink E, Lord J.
No. 21
Systematic reviews of wound care
management: (3) antimicrobial agents
for chronic wounds; (4) diabetic foot
ulceration.
By O’Meara S, Cullum N, Majid M,
Sheldon T.
No. 22
Using routine data to complement and
enhance the results of randomised
controlled trials.
By Lewsey JD, Leyland AH, 
Murray GD, Boddy FA.
No. 23
Coronary artery stents in the treatment
of ischaemic heart disease: a rapid and
systematic review.
By Meads C, Cummins C, Jolly K,
Stevens A, Burls A, Hyde C.
No. 24
Outcome measures for adult critical
care: a systematic review.
By Hayes JA, Black NA, 
Jenkinson C, Young JD, Rowan KM,
Daly K, et al.
No. 25
A systematic review to evaluate the
effectiveness of interventions to 
promote the initiation of 
breastfeeding.
By Fairbank L, O’Meara S, Renfrew
MJ, Woolridge M, Sowden AJ, 
Lister-Sharp D.
No. 26
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators:
arrhythmias. A rapid and systematic
review.
By Parkes J, Bryant J, Milne R.
No. 27
Treatments for fatigue in multiple
sclerosis: a rapid and systematic 
review.
By Brañas P, Jordan R, Fry-Smith A,
Burls A, Hyde C.
No. 28
Early asthma prophylaxis, natural
history, skeletal development and
economy (EASE): a pilot randomised
controlled trial.
By Baxter-Jones ADG, Helms PJ,
Russell G, Grant A, Ross S, Cairns JA, 
et al.
No. 29
Screening for hypercholesterolaemia
versus case finding for familial
hypercholesterolaemia: a systematic
review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
By Marks D, Wonderling D,
Thorogood M, Lambert H, Humphries
SE, Neil HAW.
No. 30
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
antagonists in the medical management
of unstable angina.
By McDonagh MS, Bachmann LM,
Golder S, Kleijnen J, ter Riet G.
No. 31
A randomised controlled trial of
prehospital intravenous fluid
replacement therapy in serious trauma.
By Turner J, Nicholl J, Webber L,
Cox H, Dixon S, Yates D.
No. 32
Intrathecal pumps for giving opioids in
chronic pain: a systematic review.
By Williams JE, Louw G, Towlerton G.
No. 33
Combination therapy (interferon alfa
and ribavirin) in the treatment of
chronic hepatitis C: a rapid and
systematic review.
By Shepherd J, Waugh N, 
Hewitson P.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
61
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 34
A systematic review of comparisons of
effect sizes derived from randomised
and non-randomised studies.
By MacLehose RR, Reeves BC,
Harvey IM, Sheldon TA, Russell IT,
Black AMS.
No. 35
Intravascular ultrasound-guided
interventions in coronary artery disease:
a systematic literature review, with
decision-analytic modelling, of outcomes
and cost-effectiveness.
By Berry E, Kelly S, Hutton J,
Lindsay HSJ, Blaxill JM, Evans JA, et al.
No. 36
A randomised controlled trial to
evaluate the effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of counselling patients with
chronic depression.
By Simpson S, Corney R, Fitzgerald P,
Beecham J.
No. 37
Systematic review of treatments for
atopic eczema.
By Hoare C, Li Wan Po A, Williams H.
No. 38
Bayesian methods in health technology
assessment: a review.
By Spiegelhalter DJ, Myles JP, 
Jones DR, Abrams KR.
No. 39
The management of dyspepsia: a
systematic review.
By Delaney B, Moayyedi P, Deeks J,
Innes M, Soo S, Barton P, et al.
No. 40
A systematic review of treatments for
severe psoriasis.
By Griffiths CEM, Clark CM, Chalmers
RJG, Li Wan Po A, Williams HC.
Volume 5, 2001
No. 1
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
donepezil, rivastigmine and
galantamine for Alzheimer’s disease: a
rapid and systematic review.
By Clegg A, Bryant J, Nicholson T,
McIntyre L, De Broe S, Gerard K, et al.
No. 2
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of riluzole for motor
neurone disease: a rapid and systematic
review.
By Stewart A, Sandercock J, Bryan S,
Hyde C, Barton PM, Fry-Smith A, et al.
No. 3
Equity and the economic evaluation of
healthcare.
By Sassi F, Archard L, Le Grand J.
No. 4
Quality-of-life measures in chronic
diseases of childhood.
By Eiser C, Morse R.
No. 5
Eliciting public preferences for
healthcare: a systematic review of
techniques.
By Ryan M, Scott DA, Reeves C, Bate
A, van Teijlingen ER, Russell EM, et al.
No. 6
General health status measures for
people with cognitive impairment:
learning disability and acquired brain
injury.
By Riemsma RP, Forbes CA, 
Glanville JM, Eastwood AJ, Kleijnen J.
No. 7
An assessment of screening strategies for
fragile X syndrome in the UK.
By Pembrey ME, Barnicoat AJ,
Carmichael B, Bobrow M, Turner G.
No. 8
Issues in methodological research:
perspectives from researchers and
commissioners.
By Lilford RJ, Richardson A, Stevens
A, Fitzpatrick R, Edwards S, Rock F, et al.
No. 9
Systematic reviews of wound care
management: (5) beds; (6) compression;
(7) laser therapy, therapeutic
ultrasound, electrotherapy and
electromagnetic therapy.
By Cullum N, Nelson EA, Flemming
K, Sheldon T.
No. 10
Effects of educational and psychosocial
interventions for adolescents with
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review.
By Hampson SE, Skinner TC, Hart J,
Storey L, Gage H, Foxcroft D, et al.
No. 11
Effectiveness of autologous chondrocyte
transplantation for hyaline cartilage
defects in knees: a rapid and systematic
review.
By Jobanputra P, Parry D, Fry-Smith
A, Burls A.
No. 12
Statistical assessment of the learning
curves of health technologies.
By Ramsay CR, Grant AM, 
Wallace SA, Garthwaite PH, Monk AF,
Russell IT.
No. 13
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of temozolomide for the treatment of
recurrent malignant glioma: a rapid and
systematic review.
By Dinnes J, Cave C, Huang S, 
Major K, Milne R.
No. 14
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of debriding agents in
treating surgical wounds healing by
secondary intention.
By Lewis R, Whiting P, ter Riet G,
O’Meara S, Glanville J.
No. 15
Home treatment for mental health
problems: a systematic review.
By Burns T, Knapp M, 
Catty J, Healey A, Henderson J, 
Watt H, et al.
No. 16
How to develop cost-conscious
guidelines.
By Eccles M, Mason J.
No. 17
The role of specialist nurses in multiple
sclerosis: a rapid and systematic review.
By De Broe S, Christopher F, 
Waugh N.
No. 18
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of orlistat in the
management of obesity.
By O’Meara S, Riemsma R, 
Shirran L, Mather L, ter Riet G.
No. 19
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of pioglitazone for type 2
diabetes mellitus: a rapid and systematic
review.
By Chilcott J, Wight J, Lloyd Jones
M, Tappenden P.
No. 20
Extended scope of nursing practice: a
multicentre randomised controlled trial
of appropriately trained nurses and
preregistration house officers in pre-
operative assessment in elective general
surgery.
By Kinley H, Czoski-Murray C,
George S, McCabe C, Primrose J, 
Reilly C, et al.
No. 21
Systematic reviews of the effectiveness of
day care for people with severe mental
disorders: (1) Acute day hospital versus
admission; (2) Vocational rehabilitation;
(3) Day hospital versus outpatient 
care.
By Marshall M, Crowther R, Almaraz-
Serrano A, Creed F, Sledge W, 
Kluiter H, et al.
No. 22
The measurement and monitoring of
surgical adverse events.
By Bruce J, Russell EM, Mollison J,
Krukowski ZH.
No. 23
Action research: a systematic review and
guidance for assessment.
By Waterman H, Tillen D, Dickson R,
de Koning K.
No. 24
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of gemcitabine for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.
By Ward S, Morris E, Bansback N,
Calvert N, Crellin A, Forman D, et al.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
62

No. 25
A rapid and systematic review of the
evidence for the clinical effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of irinotecan,
oxaliplatin and raltitrexed for the
treatment of advanced colorectal cancer.
By Lloyd Jones M, Hummel S,
Bansback N, Orr B, Seymour M.
No. 26
Comparison of the effectiveness of
inhaler devices in asthma and chronic
obstructive airways disease: a systematic
review of the literature.
By Brocklebank D, Ram F, Wright J,
Barry P, Cates C, Davies L, et al.
No. 27
The cost-effectiveness of magnetic
resonance imaging for investigation of
the knee joint.
By Bryan S, Weatherburn G, Bungay
H, Hatrick C, Salas C, Parry D, et al.
No. 28
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of topotecan for ovarian
cancer.
By Forbes C, Shirran L, Bagnall A-M,
Duffy S, ter Riet G.
No. 29
Superseded by a report published in a
later volume.
No. 30
The role of radiography in primary care
patients with low back pain of at least 6
weeks duration: a randomised
(unblinded) controlled trial.
By Kendrick D, Fielding K, Bentley E,
Miller P, Kerslake R, Pringle M.
No. 31
Design and use of questionnaires: a
review of best practice applicable to
surveys of health service staff and
patients.
By McColl E, Jacoby A, Thomas L,
Soutter J, Bamford C, Steen N, et al.
No. 32
A rapid and systematic review of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of paclitaxel, docetaxel,
gemcitabine and vinorelbine in non-
small-cell lung cancer.
By Clegg A, Scott DA, Sidhu M,
Hewitson P, Waugh N.
No. 33
Subgroup analyses in randomised
controlled trials: quantifying the risks of
false-positives and false-negatives.
By Brookes ST, Whitley E, 
Peters TJ, Mulheran PA, Egger M,
Davey Smith G.
No. 34
Depot antipsychotic medication in the
treatment of patients with schizophrenia:
(1) Meta-review; (2) Patient and nurse
attitudes.
By David AS, Adams C.
No. 35
A systematic review of controlled trials
of the effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of brief psychological
treatments for depression.
By Churchill R, Hunot V, Corney R,
Knapp M, McGuire H, Tylee A, et al.
No. 36
Cost analysis of child health
surveillance.
By Sanderson D, Wright D, Acton C,
Duree D.
Volume 6, 2002
No. 1
A study of the methods used to select
review criteria for clinical audit.
By Hearnshaw H, Harker R, Cheater
F, Baker R, Grimshaw G.
No. 2
Fludarabine as second-line therapy for
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: 
a technology assessment.
By Hyde C, Wake B, Bryan S, Barton
P, Fry-Smith A, Davenport C, et al.
No. 3
Rituximab as third-line treatment for
refractory or recurrent Stage III or IV
follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Wake B, Hyde C, Bryan S, Barton
P, Song F, Fry-Smith A, et al.
No. 4
A systematic review of discharge
arrangements for older people.
By Parker SG, Peet SM, McPherson A,
Cannaby AM, Baker R, Wilson A, et al.
No. 5
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of inhaler devices used in
the routine management of chronic
asthma in older children: a systematic
review and economic evaluation.
By Peters J, Stevenson M, Beverley C,
Lim J, Smith S.
No. 6
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of sibutramine in the
management of obesity: a technology
assessment.
By O’Meara S, Riemsma R, Shirran
L, Mather L, ter Riet G.
No. 7
The cost-effectiveness of magnetic
resonance angiography for carotid
artery stenosis and peripheral vascular
disease: a systematic review.
By Berry E, Kelly S, Westwood ME,
Davies LM, Gough MJ, Bamford JM,
et al.
No. 8
Promoting physical activity in South
Asian Muslim women through ‘exercise
on prescription’.
By Carroll B, Ali N, Azam N.
No. 9
Zanamivir for the treatment of influenza
in adults: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Burls A, Clark W, Stewart T,
Preston C, Bryan S, Jefferson T, et al.
No. 10
A review of the natural history and
epidemiology of multiple sclerosis:
implications for resource allocation and
health economic models.
By Richards RG, Sampson FC, 
Beard SM, Tappenden P.
No. 11
Screening for gestational diabetes: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Scott DA, Loveman E, McIntyre L,
Waugh N.
No. 12
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of surgery for people with
morbid obesity: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Clegg AJ, Colquitt J, Sidhu MK,
Royle P, Loveman E, Walker A.
No. 13
The clinical effectiveness of trastuzumab
for breast cancer: a systematic review.
By Lewis R, Bagnall A-M, Forbes C,
Shirran E, Duffy S, Kleijnen J, et al.
No. 14
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of vinorelbine for breast
cancer: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Lewis R, Bagnall A-M, King S,
Woolacott N, Forbes C, Shirran L, et al.
No. 15
A systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of metal-on-metal
hip resurfacing arthroplasty for
treatment of hip disease.
By Vale L, Wyness L, McCormack K,
McKenzie L, Brazzelli M, Stearns SC.
No. 16
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of bupropion and nicotine
replacement therapy for smoking
cessation: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Woolacott NF, Jones L, Forbes CA,
Mather LC, Sowden AJ, Song FJ, et al.
No. 17
A systematic review of effectiveness and
economic evaluation of new drug
treatments for juvenile idiopathic
arthritis: etanercept.
By Cummins C, Connock M, 
Fry-Smith A, Burls A.
No. 18
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of growth hormone in
children: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Bryant J, Cave C, Mihaylova B,
Chase D, McIntyre L, Gerard K, et al.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
63
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 19
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of growth hormone in
adults in relation to impact on quality of
life: a systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Bryant J, Loveman E, Chase D,
Mihaylova B, Cave C, Gerard K, et al.
No. 20
Clinical medication review by a
pharmacist of patients on repeat
prescriptions in general practice: a
randomised controlled trial.
By Zermansky AG, Petty DR, Raynor
DK, Lowe CJ, Freementle N, Vail A.
No. 21
The effectiveness of infliximab and
etanercept for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review
and economic evaluation.
By Jobanputra P, Barton P, Bryan S,
Burls A.
No. 22
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of computerised cognitive
behaviour therapy for depression and
anxiety.
By Kaltenthaler E, Shackley P, Stevens
K, Beverley C, Parry G, Chilcott J.
No. 23
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin hydrochloride for ovarian
cancer.
By Forbes C, Wilby J, Richardson G,
Sculpher M, Mather L, Reimsma R.
No. 24
A systematic review of the effectiveness
of interventions based on a stages-of-
change approach to promote individual
behaviour change.
By Riemsma RP, Pattenden J, Bridle C,
Sowden AJ, Mather L, Watt IS, et al.
No. 25
A systematic review update of the
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
antagonists.
By Robinson M, Ginnelly L, Sculpher
M, Jones L, Riemsma R, Palmer S, et al.
No. 26
A systematic review of the effectiveness,
cost-effectiveness and barriers to
implementation of thrombolytic and
neuroprotective therapy for acute
ischaemic stroke in the NHS.
By Sandercock P, Berge E, Dennis M,
Forbes J, Hand P, Kwan J, et al.
No. 27
A randomised controlled crossover 
trial of nurse practitioner versus 
doctor-led outpatient care in a
bronchiectasis clinic.
By Caine N, Sharples LD,
Hollingworth W, French J, Keogan M,
Exley A, et al.
No. 28
Clinical effectiveness and cost –
consequences of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors in the treatment of
sex offenders.
By Adi Y, Ashcroft D, Browne K,
Beech A, Fry-Smith A, Hyde C.
No. 29
Treatment of established osteoporosis: 
a systematic review and cost–utility
analysis.
By Kanis JA, Brazier JE, Stevenson M,
Calvert NW, Lloyd Jones M.
No. 30
Which anaesthetic agents are cost-
effective in day surgery? Literature
review, national survey of practice and
randomised controlled trial.
By Elliott RA Payne K, Moore JK,
Davies LM, Harper NJN, St Leger AS,
et al.
No. 31
Screening for hepatitis C among
injecting drug users and in
genitourinary medicine clinics:
systematic reviews of effectiveness,
modelling study and national survey of
current practice.
By Stein K, Dalziel K, Walker A,
McIntyre L, Jenkins B, Horne J, et al.
No. 32
The measurement of satisfaction with
healthcare: implications for practice
from a systematic review of the
literature.
By Crow R, Gage H, Hampson S,
Hart J, Kimber A, Storey L, et al.
No. 33
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of imatinib in chronic myeloid
leukaemia: a systematic review.
By Garside R, Round A, Dalziel K,
Stein K, Royle R.
No. 34
A comparative study of hypertonic
saline, daily and alternate-day 
rhDNase in children with cystic 
fibrosis.
By Suri R, Wallis C, Bush A,
Thompson S, Normand C, Flather M, 
et al.
No. 35
A systematic review of the costs and
effectiveness of different models of
paediatric home care.
By Parker G, Bhakta P, Lovett CA,
Paisley S, Olsen R, Turner D, et al.
Volume 7, 2003
No. 1
How important are comprehensive
literature searches and the assessment of
trial quality in systematic reviews?
Empirical study.
By Egger M, Jüni P, Bartlett C,
Holenstein F, Sterne J.
No. 2
Systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness, and economic
evaluation, of home versus hospital or
satellite unit haemodialysis for people
with end-stage renal failure.
By Mowatt G, Vale L, Perez J, Wyness
L, Fraser C, MacLeod A, et al.
No. 3
Systematic review and economic
evaluation of the effectiveness of
infliximab for the treatment of Crohn’s
disease.
By Clark W, Raftery J, Barton P, 
Song F, Fry-Smith A, Burls A.
No. 4
A review of the clinical effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of routine anti-D
prophylaxis for pregnant women who
are rhesus negative.
By Chilcott J, Lloyd Jones M, Wight
J, Forman K, Wray J, Beverley C, et al.
No. 5
Systematic review and evaluation of the
use of tumour markers in paediatric
oncology: Ewing’s sarcoma and
neuroblastoma.
By Riley RD, Burchill SA, Abrams KR,
Heney D, Lambert PC, Jones DR, et al.
No. 6
The cost-effectiveness of screening for
Helicobacter pylori to reduce mortality
and morbidity from gastric cancer and
peptic ulcer disease: a discrete-event
simulation model.
By Roderick P, Davies R, Raftery J,
Crabbe D, Pearce R, Bhandari P, et al.
No. 7
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of routine dental checks: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Davenport C, Elley K, Salas C,
Taylor-Weetman CL, Fry-Smith A, 
Bryan S, et al.
No. 8
A multicentre randomised controlled
trial assessing the costs and benefits of
using structured information and
analysis of women’s preferences in the
management of menorrhagia.
By Kennedy ADM, Sculpher MJ,
Coulter A, Dwyer N, Rees M, 
Horsley S, et al.
No. 9
Clinical effectiveness and cost–utility of
photodynamic therapy for wet age-related
macular degeneration: a systematic review
and economic evaluation.
By Meads C, Salas C, Roberts T,
Moore D, Fry-Smith A, Hyde C.
No. 10
Evaluation of molecular tests for
prenatal diagnosis of chromosome
abnormalities.
By Grimshaw GM, Szczepura A,
Hultén M, MacDonald F, Nevin NC,
Sutton F, et al.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
64

No. 11
First and second trimester antenatal
screening for Down’s syndrome: the
results of the Serum, Urine and
Ultrasound Screening Study 
(SURUSS).
By Wald NJ, Rodeck C, 
Hackshaw AK, Walters J, Chitty L,
Mackinson AM.
No. 12
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of ultrasound locating devices for
central venous access: a systematic
review and economic evaluation.
By Calvert N, Hind D, McWilliams
RG, Thomas SM, Beverley C, 
Davidson A.
No. 13
A systematic review of atypical
antipsychotics in schizophrenia.
By Bagnall A-M, Jones L, Lewis R,
Ginnelly L, Glanville J, Torgerson D, 
et al.
No. 14
Prostate Testing for Cancer and
Treatment (ProtecT) feasibility 
study.
By Donovan J, Hamdy F, Neal D,
Peters T, Oliver S, Brindle L, et al.
No. 15
Early thrombolysis for the treatment 
of acute myocardial infarction: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Boland A, Dundar Y, Bagust A,
Haycox A, Hill R, Mujica Mota R,
et al.
No. 16
Screening for fragile X syndrome: 
a literature review and modelling.
By Song FJ, Barton P, Sleightholme V,
Yao GL, Fry-Smith A.
No. 17
Systematic review of endoscopic sinus
surgery for nasal polyps.
By Dalziel K, Stein K, Round A,
Garside R, Royle P. 
No. 18
Towards efficient guidelines: how to
monitor guideline use in primary 
care.
By Hutchinson A, McIntosh A, Cox S,
Gilbert C. 
No. 19
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
acute hospital-based spinal cord injuries
services: systematic review.
By Bagnall A-M, Jones L, 
Richardson G, Duffy S, 
Riemsma R. 
No. 20
Prioritisation of health technology
assessment. The PATHS model:
methods and case studies.
By Townsend J, Buxton M, 
Harper G.
No. 21
Systematic review of the clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness 
of tension-free vaginal tape for
treatment of urinary stress 
incontinence.
By Cody J, Wyness L, Wallace S,
Glazener C, Kilonzo M, Stearns S,
et al.
No. 22
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
patient education models for diabetes: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Loveman E, Cave C, Green C,
Royle P, Dunn N, Waugh N. 
No. 23
The role of modelling in prioritising
and planning clinical trials.
By Chilcott J, Brennan A, Booth A,
Karnon J, Tappenden P. 
No. 24
Cost–benefit evaluation of routine
influenza immunisation in people 65–74
years of age.
By Allsup S, Gosney M, Haycox A,
Regan M. 
No. 25
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
pulsatile machine perfusion versus cold
storage of kidneys for transplantation
retrieved from heart-beating and non-
heart-beating donors.
By Wight J, Chilcott J, Holmes M,
Brewer N. 
No. 26
Can randomised trials rely on existing
electronic data? A feasibility study to
explore the value of routine data in
health technology assessment.
By Williams JG, Cheung WY, 
Cohen DR, Hutchings HA, Longo MF, 
Russell IT. 
No. 27
Evaluating non-randomised intervention
studies.
By Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, D’Amico R,
Sowden AJ, Sakarovitch C, Song F, et al.
No. 28
A randomised controlled trial to assess
the impact of a package comprising a
patient-orientated, evidence-based self-
help guidebook and patient-centred
consultations on disease management
and satisfaction in inflammatory bowel
disease.
By Kennedy A, Nelson E, Reeves D,
Richardson G, Roberts C, Robinson A,
et al.
No. 29
The effectiveness of diagnostic tests for
the assessment of shoulder pain due to
soft tissue disorders: a systematic review.
By Dinnes J, Loveman E, McIntyre L,
Waugh N.
No. 30
The value of digital imaging in diabetic
retinopathy.
By Sharp PF, Olson J, Strachan F,
Hipwell J, Ludbrook A, O’Donnell M, 
et al.
No. 31
Lowering blood pressure to prevent
myocardial infarction and stroke: 
a new preventive strategy.
By Law M, Wald N, Morris J.
No. 32
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
capecitabine and tegafur with uracil for
the treatment of metastatic colorectal
cancer: systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Ward S, Kaltenthaler E, Cowan J,
Brewer N.
No. 33
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of new 
and emerging technologies for early
localised prostate cancer: a systematic
review. 
By Hummel S, Paisley S, Morgan A,
Currie E, Brewer N.
No. 34
Literature searching for clinical and
cost-effectiveness studies used in health
technology assessment reports carried
out for the National Institute for
Clinical Excellence appraisal 
system.
By Royle P, Waugh N.
No. 35
Systematic review and economic
decision modelling for the prevention
and treatment of influenza 
A and B.
By Turner D, Wailoo A, Nicholson K,
Cooper N, Sutton A, Abrams K.
No. 36
A randomised controlled trial to
evaluate the clinical and cost-
effectiveness of Hickman line 
insertions in adult cancer patients by
nurses.
By Boland A, Haycox A, Bagust A,
Fitzsimmons L.
No. 37
Redesigning postnatal care: a
randomised controlled trial of 
protocol-based midwifery-led care
focused on individual women’s 
physical and psychological health 
needs.
By MacArthur C, Winter HR, 
Bick DE, Lilford RJ, Lancashire RJ,
Knowles H, et al.
No. 38
Estimating implied rates of discount in
healthcare decision-making. 
By West RR, McNabb R, 
Thompson AGH, Sheldon TA, 
Grimley Evans J.
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
65
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 39
Systematic review of isolation policies in
the hospital management of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus: a review of
the literature with epidemiological and
economic modelling. 
By Cooper BS, Stone SP, Kibbler CC,
Cookson BD, Roberts JA, Medley GF, 
et al.
No. 40
Treatments for spasticity and pain in
multiple sclerosis: a systematic review.
By Beard S, Hunn A, Wight J.
No. 41
The inclusion of reports of randomised
trials published in languages other than
English in systematic reviews. 
By Moher D, Pham B, Lawson ML,
Klassen TP.
No. 42
The impact of screening on future
health-promoting behaviours and health
beliefs: a systematic review.
By Bankhead CR, Brett J, Bukach C,
Webster P, Stewart-Brown S, Munafo M,
et al.
Volume 8, 2004
No. 1
What is the best imaging strategy for
acute stroke?
By Wardlaw JM, Keir SL, Seymour J,
Lewis S, Sandercock PAG, Dennis MS, 
et al. 
No. 2
Systematic review and modelling of the
investigation of acute and chronic chest
pain presenting in primary care.
By Mant J, McManus RJ, Oakes RAL,
Delaney BC, Barton PM, Deeks JJ, et al.
No. 3
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of microwave and thermal balloon
endometrial ablation for heavy
menstrual bleeding: a systematic review
and economic modelling. 
By Garside R, Stein K, Wyatt K,
Round A, Price A.
No. 4
A systematic review of the role of
bisphosphonates in metastatic disease. 
By Ross JR, Saunders Y, Edmonds PM,
Patel S, Wonderling D, Normand C, et al. 
No. 5
Systematic review of the clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
capecitabine (Xeloda®) for locally
advanced and/or metastatic breast cancer. 
By Jones L, Hawkins N, Westwood M,
Wright K, Richardson G, Riemsma R. 
No. 6
Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline
dissemination and implementation
strategies. 
By Grimshaw JM, Thomas RE,
MacLennan G, Fraser C, Ramsay CR,
Vale L, et al. 
No. 7
Clinical effectiveness and costs of the
Sugarbaker procedure for the treatment
of pseudomyxoma peritonei.
By Bryant J, Clegg AJ, Sidhu MK,
Brodin H, Royle P, Davidson P. 
No. 8
Psychological treatment for insomnia in
the regulation of long-term hypnotic
drug use. 
By Morgan K, Dixon S, Mathers N,
Thompson J, Tomeny M. 
No. 9
Improving the evaluation of therapeutic
interventions in multiple sclerosis:
development of a patient-based measure
of outcome. 
By Hobart JC, Riazi A, Lamping DL,
Fitzpatrick R, Thompson AJ. 
No. 10
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography compared
with diagnostic endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography.
By Kaltenthaler E, Bravo Vergel Y,
Chilcott J, Thomas S, Blakeborough T,
Walters SJ, et al. 
No. 11
The use of modelling to evaluate new
drugs for patients with a chronic
condition: the case of antibodies against
tumour necrosis factor in rheumatoid
arthritis. 
By Barton P, Jobanputra P, Wilson J,
Bryan S, Burls A. 
No. 12
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of neonatal screening for
inborn errors of metabolism using
tandem mass spectrometry: a systematic
review. 
By Pandor A, Eastham J, Beverley C,
Chilcott J, Paisley S.
No. 13
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of pioglitazone and
rosiglitazone in the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
review and economic 
evaluation. 
By Czoski-Murray C, Warren E,
Chilcott J, Beverley C, Psyllaki MA,
Cowan J. 
No. 14
Routine examination of the newborn:
the EMREN study. Evaluation of an
extension of the midwife role 
including a randomised controlled 
trial of appropriately trained midwives
and paediatric senior house 
officers. 
By Townsend J, Wolke D, Hayes J,
Davé S, Rogers C, Bloomfield L, 
et al. 
No. 15
Involving consumers in research and
development agenda setting for the
NHS: developing an evidence-based
approach. 
By Oliver S, Clarke-Jones L, 
Rees R, Milne R, Buchanan P, 
Gabbay J, et al. 
No. 16
A multi-centre randomised controlled
trial of minimally invasive direct
coronary bypass grafting versus
percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty with stenting for proximal
stenosis of the left anterior descending
coronary artery. 
By Reeves BC, Angelini GD, Bryan
AJ, Taylor FC, Cripps T, Spyt TJ, et al. 
No. 17
Does early magnetic resonance imaging
influence management or improve
outcome in patients referred to
secondary care with low back pain? 
A pragmatic randomised controlled
trial. 
By Gilbert FJ, Grant AM, Gillan
MGC, Vale L, Scott NW, Campbell MK,
et al. 
No. 18
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
anakinra for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis in adults: a
systematic review and economic analysis. 
By Clark W, Jobanputra P, Barton P,
Burls A.
No. 19
A rapid and systematic review and
economic evaluation of the clinical and
cost-effectiveness of newer drugs for
treatment of mania associated with
bipolar affective disorder. 
By Bridle C, Palmer S, Bagnall A-M,
Darba J, Duffy S, Sculpher M, et al. 
No. 20
Liquid-based cytology in cervical
screening: an updated rapid and
systematic review and economic 
analysis.
By Karnon J, Peters J, Platt J, 
Chilcott J, McGoogan E, Brewer N.
No. 21
Systematic review of the long-term
effects and economic consequences of
treatments for obesity and implications
for health improvement. 
By Avenell A, Broom J, Brown TJ,
Poobalan A, Aucott L, Stearns SC, et al.
No. 22
Autoantibody testing in children with
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes
mellitus. 
By Dretzke J, Cummins C,
Sandercock J, Fry-Smith A, Barrett T,
Burls A.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
66

No. 23
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of prehospital intravenous
fluids in trauma patients.
By Dretzke J, Sandercock J, Bayliss S,
Burls A. 
No. 24
Newer hypnotic drugs for the short-
term management of insomnia: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Dündar Y, Boland A, Strobl J,
Dodd S, Haycox A, Bagust A, 
et al. 
No. 25
Development and validation of methods
for assessing the quality of diagnostic
accuracy studies.
By Whiting P, Rutjes AWS, Dinnes J,
Reitsma JB, Bossuyt PMM, Kleijnen J.
No. 26
EVALUATE hysterectomy trial: a
multicentre randomised trial comparing
abdominal, vaginal and laparoscopic
methods of hysterectomy.
By Garry R, Fountain J, Brown J,
Manca A, Mason S, Sculpher M, et al. 
No. 27
Methods for expected value of
information analysis in complex health
economic models: developments on the
health economics of interferon- and
glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis.
By Tappenden P, Chilcott JB,
Eggington S, Oakley J, McCabe C.
No. 28
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
imatinib for first-line treatment of
chronic myeloid leukaemia in chronic
phase: a systematic review and economic
analysis. 
By Dalziel K, Round A, Stein K,
Garside R, Price A. 
No. 29
VenUS I: a randomised controlled trial
of two types of bandage for treating
venous leg ulcers. 
By Iglesias C, Nelson EA, Cullum NA,
Torgerson DJ on behalf of the VenUS
Team.
No. 30
Systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness, and economic
evaluation, of myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy for the diagnosis and
management of angina and myocardial
infarction. 
By Mowatt G, Vale L, Brazzelli M,
Hernandez R, Murray A, Scott N, et al. 
No. 31
A pilot study on the use of decision
theory and value of information analysis
as part of the NHS Health Technology
Assessment programme.
By Claxton K
on K, Ginnelly L, Sculpher
M, Philips Z, Palmer S. 
No. 32
The Social Support and Family Health
Study: a randomised controlled trial and
economic evaluation of two alternative
forms of postnatal support for mothers
living in disadvantaged inner-city areas. 
By Wiggins M, Oakley A, Roberts I,
Turner H, Rajan L, Austerberry H, et al. 
No. 33
Psychosocial aspects of genetic screening
of pregnant women and newborns: 
a systematic review. 
By Green JM, Hewison J, Bekker HL,
Bryant, Cuckle HS.
No. 34
Evaluation of abnormal uterine
bleeding: comparison of three
outpatient procedures within cohorts
defined by age and menopausal status. 
By Critchley HOD, Warner P, 
Lee AJ, Brechin S, Guise J, Graham B. 
No. 35
Coronary artery stents: a rapid systematic
review and economic evaluation. 
By Hill R, Bagust A, Bakhai A,
Dickson R, Dündar Y, Haycox A, et al. 
No. 36
Review of guidelines for good practice
in decision-analytic modelling in health
technology assessment. 
By Philips Z, Ginnelly L, Sculpher M,
Claxton K, Golder S, Riemsma R, et al.
No. 37
Rituximab (MabThera®) for aggressive
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: systematic
review and economic evaluation. 
By Knight C, Hind D, Brewer N,
Abbott V. 
No. 38
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of clopidogrel and
modified-release dipyridamole in the
secondary prevention of occlusive
vascular events: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By Jones L, Griffin S, Palmer S, Main
C, Orton V, Sculpher M, et al.
No. 39
Pegylated interferon -2a and -2b in
combination with ribavirin in the
treatment of chronic hepatitis C: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Shepherd J, Brodin H, Cave C,
Waugh N, Price A, Gabbay J. 
No. 40
Clopidogrel used in combination with
aspirin compared with aspirin alone in
the treatment of non-ST-segment-
elevation acute coronary syndromes: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Main C, Palmer S, Griffin S, 
Jones L, Orton V, Sculpher M, et al.
No. 41
Provision, uptake and cost of cardiac
rehabilitation programmes: improving
services to under-represented groups. 
By Beswick AD, Rees K, Griebsch I,
Taylor FC, Burke M, West RR, et al.
No. 42
Involving South Asian patients in
clinical trials. 
By Hussain-Gambles M, Leese B,
Atkin K, Brown J, Mason S, Tovey P. 
No. 43
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion for diabetes. 
By Colquitt JL, Green C, Sidhu MK,
Hartwell D, Waugh N. 
No. 44
Identification and assessment of
ongoing trials in health technology
assessment reviews. 
By Song FJ, Fry-Smith A, Davenport
C, Bayliss S, Adi Y, Wilson JS, et al. 
No. 45
Systematic review and economic
evaluation of a long-acting insulin
analogue, insulin glargine
By Warren E, Weatherley-Jones E,
Chilcott J, Beverley C. 
No. 46
Supplementation of a home-based
exercise programme with a class-based
programme for people with osteoarthritis
of the knees: a randomised controlled
trial and health economic analysis. 
By McCarthy CJ, Mills PM, 
Pullen R, Richardson G, Hawkins N,
Roberts CR, et al. 
No. 47
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of once-
daily versus more frequent use of same
potency topical corticosteroids for atopic
eczema: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By Green C, Colquitt JL, Kirby J,
Davidson P, Payne E. 
No. 48
Acupuncture of chronic headache
disorders in primary care: randomised
controlled trial and economic analysis. 
By Vickers AJ, Rees RW, Zollman CE,
McCarney R, Smith CM, Ellis N, et al. 
No. 49
Generalisability in economic evaluation
studies in healthcare: a review and case
studies. 
By Sculpher MJ, Pang FS, Manca A,
Drummond MF, Golder S, Urdahl H, 
et al. 
No. 50
Virtual outreach: a randomised
controlled trial and economic evaluation
of joint teleconferenced medical
consultations. 
By Wallace P, Barber J, Clayton W,
Currell R, Fleming K, Garner P, et al. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
67
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Volume 9, 2005
No. 1
Randomised controlled multiple
treatment comparison to provide a 
cost-effectiveness rationale for the
selection of antimicrobial therapy in
acne. 
By Ozolins M, Eady EA, Avery A,
Cunliffe WJ, O’Neill C, Simpson NB, 
et al.
No. 2
Do the findings of case series studies
vary significantly according to
methodological characteristics?
By Dalziel K, Round A, Stein K,
Garside R, Castelnuovo E, Payne L.
No. 3
Improving the referral process for
familial breast cancer genetic
counselling: findings of three
randomised controlled trials of two
interventions.
By Wilson BJ, Torrance N, Mollison J,
Wordsworth S, Gray JR, Haites NE, et al.
No. 4
Randomised evaluation of alternative
electrosurgical modalities to treat
bladder outflow obstruction in men with
benign prostatic hyperplasia. 
By Fowler C, McAllister W, Plail R,
Karim O, Yang Q. 
No. 5
A pragmatic randomised controlled trial
of the cost-effectiveness of palliative
therapies for patients with inoperable
oesophageal cancer. 
By Shenfine J, McNamee P, Steen N,
Bond J, Griffin SM. 
No. 6
Impact of computer-aided detection
prompts on the sensitivity and specificity
of screening mammography. 
By Taylor P, Champness J, Given-
Wilson R, Johnston K, Potts H. 
No. 7
Issues in data monitoring and interim
analysis of trials. 
By Grant AM, Altman DG, Babiker
AB, Campbell MK, Clemens FJ,
Darbyshire JH, et al. 
No. 8
Lay public’s understanding of equipoise
and randomisation in randomised
controlled trials.
By Robinson EJ, Kerr CEP, Stevens
AJ, Lilford RJ, Braunholtz DA, Edwards
SJ, et al. 
No. 9
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
electroconvulsive therapy for depressive
illness, schizophrenia, catatonia and
mania: systematic reviews and economic
modelling studies. 
By Greenhalgh J, Knight C, Hind D,
Beverley C, Walters S. 
No. 10
Measurement of health-related quality
of life for people with dementia:
development of a new instrument
(DEMQOL) and an evaluation of
current methodology. 
By Smith SC, Lamping DL, 
Banerjee S, Harwood R, Foley B, 
Smith P, et al. 
No. 11
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of drotrecogin alfa
(activated) (Xigris®) for the treatment of
severe sepsis in adults: a systematic
review and economic evaluation. 
By Green C, Dinnes J, Takeda A,
Shepherd J, Hartwell D, Cave C, 
et al. 
No. 12
A methodological review of how
heterogeneity has been examined in
systematic reviews of diagnostic test
accuracy. 
By Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kirby J,
Roderick P. 
No. 13
Cervical screening programmes: can
automation help? Evidence from
systematic reviews, an economic analysis
and a simulation modelling exercise
applied to the UK.
By Willis BH, Barton P, Pearmain P,
Bryan S, Hyde C. 
No. 14
Laparoscopic surgery for inguinal
hernia repair: systematic review of
effectiveness and economic evaluation. 
By McCormack K, Wake B, Perez J,
Fraser C, Cook J, McIntosh E, et al. 
No. 15
Clinical effectiveness, tolerability and
cost-effectiveness of newer drugs for
epilepsy in adults: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. 
By Wilby J, Kainth A, Hawkins N,
Epstein D, McIntosh H, McDaid C, et al.
No. 16
A randomised controlled trial to
compare the cost-effectiveness of
tricyclic antidepressants, selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
lofepramine. 
By Peveler R, Kendrick T, Buxton M,
Longworth L, Baldwin D, Moore M, 
et al. 
No. 17
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of immediate angioplasty
for acute myocardial infarction:
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Hartwell D, Colquitt J, Loveman
E, Clegg AJ, Brodin H, Waugh N, 
et al. 
No. 18
A randomised controlled comparison of
alternative strategies in stroke care. 
By Kalra L, Evans A, Perez I, 
Knapp M, Swift C, Donaldson N. 
No. 19
The investigation and analysis of critical
incidents and adverse events in
healthcare. 
By Woloshynowych M, Rogers S,
Taylor-Adams S, Vincent C. 
No. 20
Potential use of routine databases in
health technology assessment. 
By Raftery J, Roderick P, Stevens A. 
No. 21
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of newer
immunosuppressive regimens in renal
transplantation: a systematic review and
modelling study. 
By Woodroffe R, Yao GL, Meads C,
Bayliss S, Ready A, Raftery J, et al. 
No. 22
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of alendronate, etidronate,
risedronate, raloxifene and teriparatide
for the prevention and treatment of
postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
By Stevenson M, Lloyd Jones M, 
De Nigris E, Brewer N, Davis S, 
Oakley J. 
No. 23
A systematic review to examine the
impact of psycho-educational
interventions on health outcomes and
costs in adults and children with difficult
asthma. 
By Smith JR, Mugford M, Holland R,
Candy B, Noble MJ, Harrison BDW, et al. 
No. 24
An evaluation of the costs, effectiveness
and quality of renal replacement
therapy provision in renal satellite units
in England and Wales. 
By Roderick P, Nicholson T, Armitage
A, Mehta R, Mullee M, Gerard K, et al. 
No. 25
Imatinib for the treatment of patients
with unresectable and/or metastatic
gastrointestinal stromal tumours:
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Wilson J, Connock M, Song F, Yao
G, Fry-Smith A, Raftery J, et al. 
No. 26
Indirect comparisons of competing
interventions. 
By Glenny AM, Altman DG, Song F,
Sakarovitch C, Deeks JJ, D’Amico R, et al. 
No. 27
Cost-effectiveness of alternative
strategies for the initial medical
management of non-ST elevation acute
coronary syndrome: systematic review
and decision-analytical modelling. 
By Robinson M, Palmer S, Sculpher
M, Philips Z, Ginnelly L, Bowens A, et al. 
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
68

No. 28
Outcomes of electrically stimulated
gracilis neosphincter surgery. 
By Tillin T, Chambers M, Feldman R.
No. 29
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of pimecrolimus and tacrolimus for
atopic eczema: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By Garside R, Stein K, Castelnuovo E,
Pitt M, Ashcroft D, Dimmock P, et al. 
No. 30
Systematic review on urine albumin
testing for early detection of diabetic
complications. 
By Newman DJ, Mattock MB, Dawnay
ABS, Kerry S, McGuire A, Yaqoob M, et al. 
No. 31
Randomised controlled trial of the cost-
effectiveness of water-based therapy for
lower limb osteoarthritis. 
By Cochrane T, Davey RC, 
Matthes Edwards SM. 
No. 32
Longer term clinical and economic
benefits of offering acupuncture care to
patients with chronic low back pain. 
By Thomas KJ, MacPherson H,
Ratcliffe J, Thorpe L, Brazier J,
Campbell M, et al. 
No. 33
Cost-effectiveness and safety of epidural
steroids in the management of sciatica. 
By Price C, Arden N, Coglan L,
Rogers P. 
No. 34
The British Rheumatoid Outcome Study
Group (BROSG) randomised controlled
trial to compare the effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of aggressive versus
symptomatic therapy in established
rheumatoid arthritis. 
By Symmons D, Tricker K, Roberts C,
Davies L, Dawes P, Scott DL. 
No. 35
Conceptual framework and systematic
review of the effects of participants’ and
professionals’ preferences in randomised
controlled trials. 
By King M, Nazareth I, Lampe F,
Bower P, Chandler M, Morou M, et al. 
No. 36
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
implantable cardioverter defibrillators: 
a systematic review. 
By Bryant J, Brodin H, Loveman E,
Payne E, Clegg A. 
No. 37
A trial of problem-solving by community
mental health nurses for anxiety,
depression and life difficulties among
general practice patients. The CPN-GP
study. 
By Kendrick T, Simons L, 
Mynors-Wallis L, Gray A, Lathlean J,
Pickering R, et al. 
No. 38
The causes and effects of socio-
demographic exclusions from clinical
trials. 
By Bartlett C, Doyal L, Ebrahim S,
Davey P, Bachmann M, Egger M, 
et al. 
No. 39
Is hydrotherapy cost-effective? A
randomised controlled trial of combined
hydrotherapy programmes compared
with physiotherapy land techniques in
children with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis. 
By Epps H, Ginnelly L, Utley M,
Southwood T, Gallivan S, Sculpher M, 
et al. 
No. 40
A randomised controlled trial and cost-
effectiveness study of systematic
screening (targeted and total population
screening) versus routine practice for
the detection of atrial fibrillation in
people aged 65 and over. The SAFE
study. 
By Hobbs FDR, Fitzmaurice DA,
Mant J, Murray E, Jowett S, Bryan S, 
et al.
No. 41
Displaced intracapsular hip fractures 
in fit, older people: a randomised
comparison of reduction and fixation,
bipolar hemiarthroplasty and total hip
arthroplasty.
By Keating JF, Grant A, Masson M,
Scott NW, Forbes JF. 
No. 42
Long-term outcome of cognitive
behaviour therapy clinical trials in
central Scotland. 
By Durham RC, Chambers JA, 
Power KG, Sharp DM, Macdonald RR,
Major KA, et al. 
No. 43
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of dual-chamber pacemakers compared
with single-chamber pacemakers for
bradycardia due to atrioventricular
block or sick sinus syndrome: 
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Castelnuovo E, Stein K, Pitt M,
Garside R, Payne E. 
No. 44
Newborn screening for congenital heart
defects: a systematic review and 
cost-effectiveness analysis. 
By Knowles R, Griebsch I, Dezateux
C, Brown J, Bull C, Wren C. 
No. 45
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of left
ventricular assist devices for end-stage
heart failure: a systematic review and
economic evaluation.
By Clegg AJ, Scott DA, Loveman E,
Colquitt J, Hutchinson J, Royle P, 
et al. 
No. 46
The effectiveness of the Heidelberg
Retina Tomograph and laser diagnostic
glaucoma scanning system (GDx) in
detecting and monitoring glaucoma.
By Kwartz AJ, Henson DB, 
Harper RA, Spencer AF, 
McLeod D. 
No. 47
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
autologous chondrocyte implantation
for cartilage defects in knee joints:
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Clar C, Cummins E, McIntyre L,
Thomas S, Lamb J, Bain L, et al. 
No. 48
Systematic review of effectiveness of
different treatments for childhood
retinoblastoma. 
By McDaid C, Hartley S, 
Bagnall A-M, Ritchie G, Light K,
Riemsma R. 
No. 49
Towards evidence-based guidelines 
for the prevention of venous
thromboembolism: systematic 
reviews of mechanical methods, oral
anticoagulation, dextran and regional
anaesthesia as thromboprophylaxis. 
By Roderick P, Ferris G, Wilson K,
Halls H, Jackson D, Collins R,
et al. 
No. 50
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of parent training/education
programmes for the treatment of
conduct disorder, including oppositional
defiant disorder, in children. 
By Dretzke J, Frew E, Davenport C,
Barlow J, Stewart-Brown S, 
Sandercock J, et al. 
Volume 10, 2006
No. 1
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine
and memantine for Alzheimer’s 
disease.
By Loveman E, Green C, Kirby J,
Takeda A, Picot J, Payne E, 
et al. 
No. 2
FOOD: a multicentre randomised trial
evaluating feeding policies in patients
admitted to hospital with a recent
stroke. 
By Dennis M, Lewis S, Cranswick G,
Forbes J. 
No. 3
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of computed tomography
screening for lung cancer: systematic
reviews.
By Black C, Bagust A, Boland A,
Walker S, McLeod C, De Verteuil R, 
et al. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
69
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 4
A systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of neuroimaging
assessments used to visualise the 
seizure focus in people with refractory
epilepsy being considered for 
surgery. 
By Whiting P, Gupta R, Burch J,
Mujica Mota RE, Wright K, Marson A, 
et al. 
No. 5
Comparison of conference abstracts 
and presentations with full-text 
articles in the health technology
assessments of rapidly evolving
technologies. 
By Dundar Y, Dodd S, Dickson R,
Walley T, Haycox A, Williamson PR. 
No. 6
Systematic review and evaluation of
methods of assessing urinary
incontinence. 
By Martin JL, Williams KS, Abrams
KR, Turner DA, Sutton AJ, Chapple C,
et al.
No. 7
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of newer drugs for children
with epilepsy. A systematic review. 
By Connock M, Frew E, Evans B-W, 
Bryan S, Cummins C, Fry-Smith A, 
et al.
No. 8
Surveillance of Barrett’s oesophagus:
exploring the uncertainty through
systematic review, expert workshop and
economic modelling. 
By Garside R, Pitt M, Somerville M,
Stein K, Price A, Gilbert N. 
No. 9
Topotecan, pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin hydrochloride and
paclitaxel for second-line or subsequent
treatment of advanced ovarian cancer: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Main C, Bojke L, Griffin S,
Norman G, Barbieri M, Mather L, 
et al. 
No. 10
Evaluation of molecular techniques 
in prediction and diagnosis of
cytomegalovirus disease in
immunocompromised patients. 
By Szczepura A, Westmoreland D,
Vinogradova Y, Fox J, Clark M. 
No. 11
Screening for thrombophilia in high-risk
situations: systematic review and cost-
effectiveness analysis. The Thrombosis:
Risk and Economic Assessment of
Thrombophilia Screening (TREATS)
study. 
By Wu O, Robertson L, Twaddle S,
Lowe GDO, Clark P, Greaves M, 
et al. 
No. 12
A series of systematic reviews to inform
a decision analysis for sampling and
treating infected diabetic foot 
ulcers. 
By Nelson EA, O’Meara S, Craig D,
Iglesias C, Golder S, Dalton J, 
et al. 
No. 13
Randomised clinical trial, observational
study and assessment of cost-
effectiveness of the treatment of varicose
veins (REACTIV trial). 
By Michaels JA, Campbell WB,
Brazier JE, MacIntyre JB, Palfreyman
SJ, Ratcliffe J, et al. 
No. 14
The cost-effectiveness of screening for
oral cancer in primary care. 
By Speight PM, Palmer S, Moles DR,
Downer MC, Smith DH, Henriksson M
et al. 
No. 15
Measurement of the clinical and cost-
effectiveness of non-invasive diagnostic
testing strategies for deep vein
thrombosis. 
By Goodacre S, Sampson F, Stevenson
M, Wailoo A, Sutton A, Thomas S, et al. 
No. 16
Systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of HealOzone®
for the treatment of occlusal pit/fissure
caries and root caries. 
By Brazzelli M, McKenzie L, Fielding
S, Fraser C, Clarkson J, Kilonzo M, 
et al. 
No. 17
Randomised controlled trials of
conventional antipsychotic versus new
atypical drugs, and new atypical drugs
versus clozapine, in people with
schizophrenia responding poorly 
to, or intolerant of, current drug
treatment. 
By Lewis SW, Davies L, Jones PB,
Barnes TRE, Murray RM, Kerwin R, 
et al. 
No. 18
Diagnostic tests and algorithms used in
the investigation of haematuria:
systematic reviews and economic
evaluation.
By Rodgers M, Nixon J, Hempel S,
Aho T, Kelly J, Neal D, et al. 
No. 19
Cognitive behavioural therapy in
addition to antispasmodic therapy for
irritable bowel syndrome in primary
care: randomised controlled 
trial.
By Kennedy TM, Chalder T, 
McCrone P, Darnley S, Knapp M, 
Jones RH, et al. 
No. 20
A systematic review of the clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
enzyme replacement therapies for
Fabry’s disease and
mucopolysaccharidosis type 1. 
By Connock M, Juarez-Garcia A, Frew
E, Mans A, Dretzke J, Fry-Smith A, et al. 
No. 21
Health benefits of antiviral therapy for
mild chronic hepatitis C: randomised
controlled trial and economic
evaluation. 
By Wright M, Grieve R, Roberts J,
Main J, Thomas HC on behalf of the
UK Mild Hepatitis C Trial Investigators. 
No. 22
Pressure relieving support surfaces: a
randomised evaluation.
By Nixon J, Nelson EA, Cranny G,
Iglesias CP, Hawkins K, Cullum NA, et al. 
No. 23
A systematic review and economic
model of the effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of methylphenidate,
dexamfetamine and atomoxetine for the
treatment of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in children and
adolescents. 
By King S, Griffin S, Hodges Z,
Weatherly H, Asseburg C, Richardson G,
et al.
No. 24
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of enzyme replacement
therapy for Gaucher’s disease: 
a systematic review. 
By Connock M, Burls A, Frew E, 
Fry-Smith A, Juarez-Garcia A, 
McCabe C, et al. 
No. 25
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
salicylic acid and cryotherapy for
cutaneous warts. An economic decision
model. 
By Thomas KS, Keogh-Brown MR,
Chalmers JR, Fordham RJ, Holland RC,
Armstrong SJ, et al. 
No. 26
A systematic literature review of the
effectiveness of non-pharmacological
interventions to prevent wandering in
dementia and evaluation of the ethical
implications and acceptability of their
use. 
By Robinson L, Hutchings D, Corner
L, Beyer F, Dickinson H, Vanoli A, et al. 
No. 27
A review of the evidence on the effects
and costs of implantable cardioverter
defibrillator therapy in different patient
groups, and modelling of cost-
effectiveness and cost–utility for these
groups in a UK context. 
By Buxton M, Caine N, Chase D,
Connelly D, Grace A, Jackson C, et al. 
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
70

No. 28
Adefovir dipivoxil and pegylated
interferon alfa-2a for the treatment of
chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. 
By Shepherd J, Jones J, Takeda A,
Davidson P, Price A. 
No. 29
An evaluation of the clinical and cost-
effectiveness of pulmonary artery
catheters in patient management in
intensive care: a systematic review and a
randomised controlled trial. 
By Harvey S, Stevens K, Harrison D,
Young D, Brampton W, McCabe C, et al. 
No. 30
Accurate, practical and cost-effective
assessment of carotid stenosis in the UK.
By Wardlaw JM, Chappell FM,
Stevenson M, De Nigris E, Thomas S,
Gillard J, et al. 
No. 31
Etanercept and infliximab for the
treatment of psoriatic arthritis: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Woolacott N, Bravo Vergel Y,
Hawkins N, Kainth A, Khadjesari Z,
Misso K, et al. 
No. 32
The cost-effectiveness of testing for
hepatitis C in former injecting drug
users. 
By Castelnuovo E, Thompson-Coon J,
Pitt M, Cramp M, Siebert U, Price A, 
et al. 
No. 33
Computerised cognitive behaviour
therapy for depression and anxiety
update: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By Kaltenthaler E, Brazier J, 
De Nigris E, Tumur I, Ferriter M,
Beverley C, et al. 
No. 34
Cost-effectiveness of using prognostic
information to select women with breast 
cancer for adjuvant systemic therapy. 
By Williams C, Brunskill S, Altman D,
Briggs A, Campbell H, Clarke M, 
et al. 
No. 35
Psychological therapies including
dialectical behaviour therapy for
borderline personality disorder: 
a systematic review and preliminary
economic evaluation. 
By Brazier J, Tumur I, Holmes M,
Ferriter M, Parry G, Dent-Brown K, et al.
No. 36
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of tests for the diagnosis
and investigation of urinary tract
infection in children: a systematic review
and economic model. 
By Whiting P, Westwood M, Bojke L,
Palmer S, Richardson G, Cooper J, et al.
No. 37
Cognitive behavioural therapy in
chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomised
controlled trial of an outpatient group
programme. 
By O’Dowd H, Gladwell P, Rogers CA,
Hollinghurst S, Gregory A. 
No. 38
A comparison of the cost-effectiveness of
five strategies for the prevention of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced
gastrointestinal toxicity: a systematic
review with economic modelling. 
By Brown TJ, Hooper L, Elliott RA,
Payne K, Webb R, Roberts C, et al. 
No. 39
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of computed tomography screening for
coronary artery disease: systematic
review. 
By Waugh N, Black C, Walker S,
McIntyre L, Cummins E, Hillis G. 
No. 40
What are the clinical outcome and cost-
effectiveness of endoscopy undertaken
by nurses when compared with doctors?
A Multi-Institution Nurse Endoscopy
Trial (MINuET). 
By Williams J, Russell I, Durai D,
Cheung W-Y, Farrin A, Bloor K, et al. 
No. 41
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
oxaliplatin and capecitabine for the
adjuvant treatment of colon cancer:
systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Pandor A, Eggington S, Paisley S,
Tappenden P, Sutcliffe P. 
No. 42
A systematic review of the effectiveness
of adalimumab, etanercept and
infliximab for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis in adults and an
economic evaluation of their cost-
effectiveness. 
By Chen Y-F, Jobanputra P, Barton P,
Jowett S, Bryan S, Clark W, et al. 
No. 43
Telemedicine in dermatology: 
a randomised controlled trial. 
By Bowns IR, Collins K, Walters SJ,
McDonagh AJG. 
No. 44
Cost-effectiveness of cell salvage and
alternative methods of minimising
perioperative allogeneic blood
transfusion: a systematic review and
economic model. 
By Davies L, Brown TJ, Haynes S,
Payne K, Elliott RA, McCollum C. 
No. 45
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of laparoscopic surgery for
colorectal cancer: systematic reviews and
economic evaluation. 
By Murray A, Lourenco T, 
de Verteuil R, Hernandez R, Fraser C,
McKinley A, et al. 
No. 46
Etanercept and efalizumab for the
treatment of psoriasis: a systematic
review. 
By Woolacott N, Hawkins N, 
Mason A, Kainth A, Khadjesari Z, 
Bravo Vergel Y, et al. 
No. 47
Systematic reviews of clinical decision
tools for acute abdominal pain.
By Liu JLY, Wyatt JC, Deeks JJ,
Clamp S, Keen J, Verde P, et al. 
No. 48
Evaluation of the ventricular assist
device programme in the UK.
By Sharples L, Buxton M, Caine N,
Cafferty F, Demiris N, Dyer M, 
et al. 
No. 49
A systematic review and economic
model of the clinical and cost-
effectiveness of immunosuppressive
therapy for renal transplantation in
children. 
By Yao G, Albon E, Adi Y, Milford D,
Bayliss S, Ready A, et al. 
No. 50
Amniocentesis results: investigation of
anxiety. The ARIA trial. 
By Hewison J, Nixon J, Fountain J,
Cocks K, Jones C, Mason G, et al. 
Volume 11, 2007
No. 1
Pemetrexed disodium for the treatment
of malignant pleural mesothelioma: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Dundar Y, Bagust A, Dickson R,
Dodd S, Green J, Haycox A, et al. 
No. 2
A systematic review and economic
model of the clinical effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of docetaxel in
combination with prednisone or
prednisolone for the treatment of
hormone-refractory metastatic prostate
cancer. 
By Collins R, Fenwick E, Trowman R,
Perard R, Norman G, Light K, 
et al. 
No. 3
A systematic review of rapid diagnostic
tests for the detection of tuberculosis
infection. 
By Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kunst H,
Gibson A, Cummins E, Waugh N, et al. 
No. 4
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of strontium ranelate for
the prevention of osteoporotic 
fragility fractures in postmenopausal
women. 
By Stevenson M, Davis S, 
Lloyd-Jones M, Beverley C. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
71
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 5
A systematic review of quantitative and
qualitative research on the role and
effectiveness of written information
available to patients about individual
medicines.
By Raynor DK, Blenkinsopp A,
Knapp P, Grime J, Nicolson DJ, 
Pollock K, et al.
No. 6
Oral naltrexone as a treatment for
relapse prevention in formerly 
opioid-dependent drug users: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Adi Y, Juarez-Garcia A, Wang D,
Jowett S, Frew E, Day E, et al. 
No. 7
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: 
a systematic review and cost–utility 
analysis. 
By Kanis JA, Stevenson M, 
McCloskey EV, Davis S, Lloyd-Jones M. 
No. 8
Epidemiological, social, diagnostic and
economic evaluation of population
screening for genital chlamydial 
infection. 
By Low N, McCarthy A, Macleod J,
Salisbury C, Campbell R, Roberts TE, 
et al. 
No. 9
Methadone and buprenorphine for the
management of opioid dependence: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Connock M, Juarez-Garcia A,
Jowett S, Frew E, Liu Z, Taylor RJ, 
et al. 
No. 10
Exercise Evaluation Randomised Trial
(EXERT): a randomised trial comparing
GP referral for leisure centre-based
exercise, community-based walking and
advice only.
By Isaacs AJ, Critchley JA, 
See Tai S, Buckingham K, Westley D,
Harridge SDR, et al.
No. 11
Interferon alfa (pegylated and 
non-pegylated) and ribavirin for the
treatment of mild chronic hepatitis C: 
a systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Shepherd J, Jones J, Hartwell D,
Davidson P, Price A, Waugh N. 
No. 12
Systematic review and economic
evaluation of bevacizumab and
cetuximab for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer. 
By Tappenden P, Jones R, Paisley S,
Carroll C. 
No. 13
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of epoetin alfa, epoetin beta
and darbepoetin alfa in anaemia
associated with cancer, especially that
attributable to cancer treatment. 
By Wilson J, Yao GL, Raftery J,
Bohlius J, Brunskill S, Sandercock J, 
et al. 
No. 14
A systematic review and economic
evaluation of statins for the prevention
of coronary events. 
By Ward S, Lloyd Jones M, Pandor A,
Holmes M, Ara R, Ryan A, et al. 
No. 15
A systematic review of the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of different
models of community-based respite 
care for frail older people and their
carers.
By Mason A, Weatherly H, Spilsbury
K, Arksey H, Golder S, Adamson J, 
et al. 
No. 16
Additional therapy for young children
with spastic cerebral palsy: 
a randomised controlled trial. 
By Weindling AM, Cunningham CC,
Glenn SM, Edwards RT, Reeves DJ. 
No. 17
Screening for type 2 diabetes: literature
review and economic modelling. 
By Waugh N, Scotland G, 
McNamee P, Gillett M, Brennan A,
Goyder E, et al.
No. 18
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of cinacalcet for secondary
hyperparathyroidism in end-stage 
renal disease patients on dialysis: a
systematic review and economic
evaluation.
By Garside R, Pitt M, Anderson R,
Mealing S, Roome C, Snaith A, 
et al. 
No. 19
The clinical effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of gemcitabine for
metastatic breast cancer: a systematic
review and economic evaluation. 
By Takeda AL, Jones J, Loveman E,
Tan SC, Clegg AJ. 
No. 20
A systematic review of duplex
ultrasound, magnetic resonance
angiography and computed tomography
angiography for the diagnosis 
and assessment of symptomatic, lower
limb peripheral arterial disease. 
By Collins R, Cranny G, Burch J,
Aguiar-Ibáñez R, Craig D, Wright K, et al. 
No. 21
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of treatments for children
with idiopathic steroid-resistant
nephrotic syndrome: a systematic review. 
By Colquitt JL, Kirby J, Green C,
Cooper K, Trompeter RS. 
No. 22
A systematic review of the routine
monitoring of growth in children of
primary school age to identify 
growth-related conditions. 
By Fayter D, Nixon J, Hartley S,
Rithalia A, Butler G, Rudolf M, et al. 
No. 23
Systematic review of the effectiveness of
preventing and treating Staphylococcus
aureus carriage in reducing peritoneal
catheter-related infections. 
By McCormack K, Rabindranath K,
Kilonzo M, Vale L, Fraser C, McIntyre L,
et al. 
No. 24
The clinical effectiveness and cost of
repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation versus electroconvulsive
therapy in severe depression: 
a multicentre pragmatic randomised
controlled trial and economic 
analysis. 
By McLoughlin DM, Mogg A, 
Eranti S, Pluck G, Purvis R, Edwards D,
et al. 
No. 25
A randomised controlled trial and
economic evaluation of direct versus
indirect and individual versus group
modes of speech and language therapy
for children with primary language
impairment. 
By Boyle J, McCartney E, Forbes J,
O’Hare A. 
No. 26
Hormonal therapies for early breast
cancer: systematic review and economic
evaluation. 
By Hind D, Ward S, De Nigris E,
Simpson E, Carroll C, Wyld L. 
No. 27
Cardioprotection against the toxic 
effects of anthracyclines given to
children with cancer: a systematic 
review. 
By Bryant J, Picot J, Levitt G, 
Sullivan I, Baxter L, Clegg A. 
No. 28
Adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab
for the treatment of ankylosing
spondylitis: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By McLeod C, Bagust A, Boland A,
Dagenais P, Dickson R, Dundar Y, et al. 
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
72

No. 29
Prenatal screening and treatment
strategies to prevent group B
streptococcal and other bacterial
infections in early infancy: cost-
effectiveness and expected value of
information analyses.
By Colbourn T, Asseburg C, Bojke L,
Philips Z, Claxton K, Ades AE, et al.
No. 30
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of bone morphogenetic
proteins in the non-healing of fractures
and spinal fusion: a systematic 
review. 
By Garrison KR, Donell S, Ryder J,
Shemilt I, Mugford M, Harvey I, 
et al. 
No. 31
A randomised controlled trial of
postoperative radiotherapy following
breast-conserving surgery in a
minimum-risk older population. The
PRIME trial. 
By Prescott RJ, Kunkler IH, Williams
LJ, King CC, Jack W, van der Pol M, 
et al. 
No. 32
Current practice, accuracy, effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of the school
entry hearing screen. 
By Bamford J, Fortnum H, Bristow K,
Smith J, Vamvakas G, Davies L, et al. 
No. 33
The clinical effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of inhaled insulin 
in diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and economic evaluation. 
By Black C, Cummins E, Royle P,
Philip S, Waugh N. 
No. 34
Surveillance of cirrhosis for
hepatocellular carcinoma: systematic
review and economic analysis. 
By Thompson Coon J, Rogers G,
Hewson P, Wright D, Anderson R,
Cramp M, et al. 
No. 35
The Birmingham Rehabilitation Uptake
Maximisation Study (BRUM). Home-
based compared with hospital-based
cardiac rehabilitation in a multi-ethnic
population: cost-effectiveness and
patient adherence. 
By Jolly K, Taylor R, Lip GYH,
Greenfield S, Raftery J, Mant J, et al. 
No. 36
A systematic review of the clinical,
public health and cost-effectiveness 
of rapid diagnostic tests for the
detection and identification of 
bacterial intestinal pathogens in 
faeces and food. 
By Abubakar I, Irvine L, Aldus CF, 
Wyatt GM, Fordham R, Schelenz S, et al.
No. 37
A randomised controlled trial
examining the longer-term outcomes of
standard versus new antiepileptic drugs. 
The SANAD trial.
By Marson AG, Appleton R, Baker GA,
Chadwick DW, Doughty J, Eaton B, et al. 
No. 38
Clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of different models 
of managing long-term oral
anticoagulation therapy: a systematic
review and economic modelling. 
By Connock M, Stevens C, Fry-Smith A,
Jowett S, Fitzmaurice D, Moore D, et al. 
No. 39
A systematic review and economic
model of the clinical effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of interventions for
preventing relapse in people with
bipolar disorder. 
By Soares-Weiser K, Bravo Vergel Y,
Beynon S, Dunn G, Barbieri M, Duffy S,
et al. 
No. 40
Taxanes for the adjuvant treatment of
early breast cancer: systematic review
and economic evaluation. 
By Ward S, Simpson E, Davis S, 
Hind D, Rees A, Wilkinson A. 
No. 41
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of screening for open angle
glaucoma: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. 
By Burr JM, Mowatt G, Hernández R,
Siddiqui MAR, Cook J, Lourenco T, 
et al. 
No. 42
Acceptability, benefit and costs of early
screening for hearing disability: a study
of potential screening tests and 
models.
By Davis A, Smith P, Ferguson M,
Stephens D, Gianopoulos I. 
No. 43
Contamination in trials of educational
interventions. 
By Keogh-Brown MR, Bachmann
MO, Shepstone L, Hewitt C, Howe A,
Ramsay CR, et al. 
No. 44
Overview of the clinical effectiveness of
positron emission tomography imaging
in selected cancers. 
By Facey K, Bradbury I, Laking G,
Payne E. 
No. 45
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
carmustine implants and temozolomide
for the treatment of newly diagnosed
high-grade glioma: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. 
By Garside R, Pitt M, Anderson R,
Rogers G, Dyer M, Mealing S, et al. 
No. 46
Drug-eluting stents: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. 
By Hill RA, Boland A, Dickson R, 
Dündar Y, Haycox A, McLeod C, 
et al. 
No. 47
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of cardiac resynchronisation
(biventricular pacing) for heart failure:
systematic review and economic model. 
By Fox M, Mealing S, Anderson R,
Dean J, Stein K, Price A, et al. 
No. 48
Recruitment to randomised trials:
strategies for trial enrolment and
participation study. The STEPS study. 
By Campbell MK, Snowdon C,
Francis D, Elbourne D, McDonald AM,
Knight R, et al. 
No. 49
Cost-effectiveness of functional 
cardiac testing in the diagnosis and
management of coronary artery disease: 
a randomised controlled trial. 
The CECaT trial. 
By Sharples L, Hughes V, Crean A,
Dyer M, Buxton M, Goldsmith K, et al. 
No. 50
Evaluation of diagnostic tests when
there is no gold standard. A review of
methods.
By Rutjes AWS, Reitsma JB,
Coomarasamy A, Khan KS, 
Bossuyt PMM. 
No. 51
Systematic reviews of the clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
proton pump inhibitors in acute upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. 
By Leontiadis GI, Sreedharan A,
Dorward S, Barton P, Delaney B,
Howden CW, et al. 
No. 52
A review and critique of modelling in
prioritising and designing screening
programmes.
By Karnon J, Goyder E, Tappenden P,
McPhie S, Towers I, Brazier J, et al. 
No. 53
An assessment of the impact of the 
NHS Health Technology Assessment
Programme. 
By Hanney S, Buxton M, Green C,
Coulson D, Raftery J. 
Volume 12, 2008
No. 1
A systematic review and economic
model of switching from non-
glycopeptide to glycopeptide antibiotic
prophylaxis for surgery.
By Cranny G, Elliott R, Weatherly H,
Chambers D, Hawkins N, Myers L, et al. 
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
73
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

No. 2
‘Cut down to quit’ with nicotine
replacement therapies in smoking
cessation: a systematic review of
effectiveness and economic analysis. 
By Wang D, Connock M, Barton P,
Fry-Smith A, Aveyard P, Moore D. 
No. 3
A systematic review of the effectiveness
of strategies for reducing fracture risk in
children with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis with additional data on long-
term risk of fracture and cost of disease
management. 
By Thornton J, Ashcroft D, O’Neill T,
Elliott R, Adams J, Roberts C, et al. 
No. 4
Does befriending by trained lay 
workers improve psychological well-
being and quality of life for carers of
people with dementia, and at what cost?
A randomised controlled trial. 
By Charlesworth G, Shepstone L,
Wilson E, Thalanany M, Mugford M,
Poland F. 
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
74

Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
75
Health Technology Assessment
Programme
Prioritisation Strategy Group
Members
Chair,
Professor Tom Walley, 
Director, NHS HTA Programme,
Department of Pharmacology &
Therapeutics,
University of Liverpool
Professor Bruce Campbell,
Consultant Vascular & General
Surgeon, Royal Devon & Exeter
Hospital
Professor Robin E Ferner,
Consultant Physician and
Director, West Midlands Centre
for Adverse Drug Reactions,
City Hospital NHS Trust,
Birmingham
Dr Edmund Jessop, Medical
Adviser, National Specialist,
Commissioning Advisory Group
(NSCAG), Department of
Health, London
Professor Jon Nicholl, Director,
Medical Care Research Unit,
University of Sheffield, 
School of Health and 
Related Research
Dr Ron Zimmern, Director,
Public Health Genetics Unit,
Strangeways Research
Laboratories, Cambridge
Director, 
Professor Tom Walley, 
Director, NHS HTA Programme,
Department of Pharmacology &
Therapeutics,
University of Liverpool
Deputy Director, 
Professor Jon Nicholl,
Director, Medical Care Research
Unit, University of Sheffield,
School of Health and Related
Research
HTA Commissioning Board
Members
Programme Director, 
Professor Tom Walley, 
Director, NHS HTA Programme,
Department of Pharmacology &
Therapeutics,
University of Liverpool
Chair,
Professor Jon Nicholl,
Director, Medical Care Research
Unit, University of Sheffield,
School of Health and Related
Research
Deputy Chair, 
Dr Andrew Farmer, 
University Lecturer in General
Practice, Department of 
Primary Health Care, 
University of Oxford
Dr Jeffrey Aronson,
Reader in Clinical
Pharmacology, Department of
Clinical Pharmacology,
Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford
Professor Deborah Ashby,
Professor of Medical Statistics,
Department of Environmental
and Preventative Medicine,
Queen Mary University of
London
Professor Ann Bowling,
Professor of Health Services
Research, Primary Care and
Population Studies,
University College London
Professor John Cairns, 
Professor of Health Economics,
Public Health Policy, 
London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, 
London
Professor Nicky Cullum,
Director of Centre for Evidence
Based Nursing, Department of
Health Sciences, University of
York
Professor Jon Deeks, 
Professor of Health Statistics,
University of Birmingham
Professor Jenny Donovan,
Professor of Social Medicine,
Department of Social Medicine,
University of Bristol
Professor Freddie Hamdy,
Professor of Urology, 
University of Sheffield
Professor Allan House, 
Professor of Liaison Psychiatry,
University of Leeds
Professor Sallie Lamb, Director,
Warwick Clinical Trials Unit,
University of Warwick
Professor Stuart Logan,
Director of Health & Social
Care Research, The Peninsula
Medical School, Universities of
Exeter & Plymouth
Professor Miranda Mugford,
Professor of Health Economics,
University of East Anglia
Dr Linda Patterson, 
Consultant Physician,
Department of Medicine,
Burnley General Hospital
Professor Ian Roberts, 
Professor of Epidemiology &
Public Health, Intervention
Research Unit, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine
Professor Mark Sculpher,
Professor of Health Economics,
Centre for Health Economics,
Institute for Research in the
Social Services, 
University of York
Professor Kate Thomas,
Professor of Complementary
and Alternative Medicine,
University of Leeds
Professor David John Torgerson,
Director of York Trial Unit,
Department of Health Sciences,
University of York
Professor Hywel Williams,
Professor of 
Dermato-Epidemiology,
University of Nottingham
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment Programme
76
Diagnostic Technologies & Screening Panel
Members
Chair,
Dr Ron Zimmern, Director of
the Public Health Genetics Unit,
Strangeways Research
Laboratories, Cambridge
Ms Norma Armston,
Freelance Consumer Advocate,
Bolton
Professor Max Bachmann,
Professor of Health Care
Interfaces, Department of
Health Policy and Practice,
University of East Anglia
Professor Rudy Bilous
Professor of Clinical Medicine &
Consultant Physician,
The Academic Centre,
South Tees Hospitals NHS Trust
Ms Dea Birkett, Service User
Representative, London
Dr Paul Cockcroft, Consultant
Medical Microbiologist and
Clinical Director of Pathology,
Department of Clinical
Microbiology, St Mary's
Hospital, Portsmouth
Professor Adrian K Dixon,
Professor of Radiology,
University Department of
Radiology, University of
Cambridge Clinical School
Dr David Elliman, Consultant in
Community Child Health,
Islington PCT & Great Ormond
Street Hospital, London 
Professor Glyn Elwyn, 
Research Chair, Centre for
Health Sciences Research,
Cardiff University, Department
of General Practice, Cardiff
Professor Paul Glasziou,
Director, Centre for 
Evidence-Based Practice,
University of Oxford
Dr Jennifer J Kurinczuk,
Consultant Clinical
Epidemiologist, National
Perinatal Epidemiology Unit,
Oxford
Dr Susanne M Ludgate, 
Clinical Director, Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency, London
Mr Stephen Pilling, Director,
Centre for Outcomes, 
Research & Effectiveness, 
Joint Director, National
Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health, University College
London
Mrs Una Rennard, 
Service User Representative,
Oxford
Dr Phil Shackley, Senior
Lecturer in Health Economics,
Academic Vascular Unit,
University of Sheffield
Dr Margaret Somerville,
Director of Public Health
Learning, Peninsula Medical
School, University of Plymouth
Dr Graham Taylor, Scientific
Director & Senior Lecturer,
Regional DNA Laboratory, The
Leeds Teaching Hospitals
Professor Lindsay Wilson
Turnbull, Scientific Director,
Centre for MR Investigations &
YCR Professor of Radiology,
University of Hull
Professor Martin J Whittle,
Clinical Co-director, National
Co-ordinating Centre for
Women’s and Childhealth 
Dr Dennis Wright, 
Consultant Biochemist &
Clinical Director, 
The North West London
Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Middlesex
Pharmaceuticals Panel
Members
Chair,
Professor Robin Ferner,
Consultant Physician and
Director, West Midlands Centre
for Adverse Drug Reactions, 
City Hospital NHS Trust,
Birmingham
Ms Anne Baileff, Consultant
Nurse in First Contact Care,
Southampton City Primary Care
Trust, University of
Southampton
Professor Imti Choonara,
Professor in Child Health,
Academic Division of Child
Health, University of
Nottingham
Professor John Geddes,
Professor of Epidemiological
Psychiatry, University of 
Oxford
Mrs Barbara Greggains, 
Non-Executive Director,
Greggains Management Ltd
Dr Bill Gutteridge, Medical
Adviser, National Specialist
Commissioning Advisory Group
(NSCAG), London
Mrs Sharon Hart, 
Consultant Pharmaceutical
Adviser, Reading
Dr Jonathan Karnon, Senior
Research Fellow, Health
Economics and Decision
Science, University of Sheffield
Dr Yoon Loke, Senior Lecturer
in Clinical Pharmacology,
University of East Anglia
Ms Barbara Meredith,
Lay Member, Epsom 
Dr Andrew Prentice, Senior
Lecturer and Consultant
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, University of
Cambridge 
Dr Frances Rotblat, CPMP
Delegate, Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency, London
Dr Martin Shelly, 
General Practitioner, 
Leeds
Mrs Katrina Simister, Assistant
Director New Medicines,
National Prescribing Centre,
Liverpool
Dr Richard Tiner, Medical
Director, Medical Department,
Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry,
London
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)

Therapeutic Procedures Panel
Members
Chair, 
Professor Bruce Campbell,
Consultant Vascular and
General Surgeon, Department
of Surgery, Royal Devon &
Exeter Hospital
Dr Mahmood Adil, Deputy
Regional Director of Public
Health, Department of Health,
Manchester
Dr Aileen Clarke,
Consultant in Public Health,
Public Health Resource Unit,
Oxford
Professor Matthew Cooke,
Professor of Emergency
Medicine, Warwick Emergency
Care and Rehabilitation,
University of Warwick
Mr Mark Emberton, Senior
Lecturer in Oncological
Urology, Institute of Urology,
University College Hospital
Professor Paul Gregg,
Professor of Orthopaedic
Surgical Science, Department of
General Practice and Primary
Care, South Tees Hospital NHS
Trust, Middlesbrough
Ms Maryann L Hardy, 
Lecturer, Division of
Radiography, University of
Bradford
Dr Simon de Lusignan,
Senior Lecturer, Primary Care
Informatics, Department of
Community Health Sciences,
St George’s Hospital Medical
School, London
Dr Peter Martin, Consultant
Neurologist, Addenbrooke’s
Hospital, Cambridge
Professor Neil McIntosh,
Edward Clark Professor of Child
Life & Health, Department of
Child Life & Health, University
of Edinburgh
Professor Jim Neilson,
Professor of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Liverpool
Dr John C Pounsford,
Consultant Physician,
Directorate of Medical Services,
North Bristol NHS Trust
Dr Karen Roberts, Nurse
Consultant, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Gateshead
Dr Vimal Sharma, Consultant
Psychiatrist/Hon. Senior 
Lecturer, Mental Health
Resource Centre, Cheshire and
Wirral Partnership NHS Trust,
Wallasey 
Professor Scott Weich, 
Professor of Psychiatry, 
Division of Health in the
Community, University of
Warwick
Disease Prevention Panel
Members
Chair, 
Dr Edmund Jessop, Medical
Adviser, National Specialist
Commissioning Advisory Group
(NSCAG), London
Mrs Sheila Clark, Chief
Executive, St James’s Hospital,
Portsmouth
Mr Richard Copeland, 
Lead Pharmacist: Clinical
Economy/Interface, 
Wansbeck General Hospital,
Northumberland
Dr Elizabeth Fellow-Smith,
Medical Director, 
West London Mental Health
Trust, Middlesex
Mr Ian Flack, Director PPI
Forum Support, Council of
Ethnic Minority Voluntary
Sector Organisations, 
Stratford
Dr John Jackson, 
General Practitioner, 
Newcastle upon Tyne
Mrs Veronica James, Chief
Officer, Horsham District Age
Concern, Horsham
Professor Mike Kelly, 
Director, Centre for Public
Health Excellence, 
National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence, 
London
Professor Yi Mien Koh, 
Director of Public Health and
Medical Director, London 
NHS (North West London
Strategic Health Authority),
London
Ms Jeanett Martin, 
Director of Clinical Leadership
& Quality, Lewisham PCT,
London
Dr Chris McCall, General
Practitioner, Dorset
Dr David Pencheon, Director,
Eastern Region Public Health
Observatory, Cambridge
Dr Ken Stein, Senior Clinical
Lecturer in Public Health,
Director, Peninsula Technology
Assessment Group, 
University of Exeter, 
Exeter
Dr Carol Tannahill, Director,
Glasgow Centre for Population
Health, Glasgow
Professor Margaret Thorogood,
Professor of Epidemiology,
University of Warwick, 
Coventry
Dr Ewan Wilkinson, 
Consultant in Public Health,
Royal Liverpool University
Hospital, Liverpool
Health Technology Assessment 2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
77
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)

Health Technology Assessment Programme
78
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
Expert Advisory Network
Members
Professor Douglas Altman,
Professor of Statistics in
Medicine, Centre for Statistics
in Medicine, University of
Oxford
Professor John Bond,
Director, Centre for Health
Services Research, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, School of
Population & Health Sciences,
Newcastle upon Tyne
Professor Andrew Bradbury,
Professor of Vascular Surgery,
Solihull Hospital, Birmingham
Mr Shaun Brogan, 
Chief Executive, Ridgeway
Primary Care Group, Aylesbury
Mrs Stella Burnside OBE,
Chief Executive, 
Regulation and Improvement
Authority, Belfast
Ms Tracy Bury, 
Project Manager, World
Confederation for Physical
Therapy, London
Professor Iain T Cameron,
Professor of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Head of the
School of Medicine,
University of Southampton
Dr Christine Clark,
Medical Writer & Consultant
Pharmacist, Rossendale
Professor Collette Clifford,
Professor of Nursing & Head of
Research, School of Health
Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham
Professor Barry Cookson,
Director, Laboratory of
Healthcare Associated Infection,
Health Protection Agency,
London
Dr Carl Counsell, Clinical
Senior Lecturer in Neurology,
Department of Medicine &
Therapeutics, University of
Aberdeen
Professor Howard Cuckle,
Professor of Reproductive
Epidemiology, Department of
Paediatrics, Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, University of
Leeds
Dr Katherine Darton, 
Information Unit, MIND – 
The Mental Health Charity,
London
Professor Carol Dezateux, 
Professor of Paediatric
Epidemiology, London
Dr Keith Dodd, Consultant
Paediatrician, Derby
Mr John Dunning,
Consultant Cardiothoracic
Surgeon, Cardiothoracic
Surgical Unit, Papworth
Hospital NHS Trust, Cambridge
Mr Jonothan Earnshaw,
Consultant Vascular Surgeon,
Gloucestershire Royal Hospital,
Gloucester
Professor Martin Eccles, 
Professor of Clinical
Effectiveness, Centre for Health
Services Research, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne
Professor Pam Enderby,
Professor of Community
Rehabilitation, Institute of
General Practice and Primary
Care, University of Sheffield
Professor Gene Feder, Professor
of Primary Care Research &
Development, Centre for Health
Sciences, Barts & The London
Queen Mary’s School of
Medicine & Dentistry, London
Mr Leonard R Fenwick, 
Chief Executive, Newcastle
upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust
Mrs Gillian Fletcher, 
Antenatal Teacher & Tutor and
President, National Childbirth
Trust, Henfield
Professor Jayne Franklyn,
Professor of Medicine,
Department of Medicine,
University of Birmingham,
Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
Edgbaston, Birmingham
Dr Neville Goodman, 
Consultant Anaesthetist,
Southmead Hospital, Bristol
Professor Robert E Hawkins, 
CRC Professor and Director of
Medical Oncology, Christie CRC
Research Centre, Christie
Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester
Professor Allen Hutchinson, 
Director of Public Health &
Deputy Dean of ScHARR,
Department of Public Health,
University of Sheffield
Professor Peter Jones, Professor
of Psychiatry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge
Professor Stan Kaye, Cancer
Research UK Professor of
Medical Oncology, Section of
Medicine, Royal Marsden
Hospital & Institute of Cancer
Research, Surrey
Dr Duncan Keeley,
General Practitioner (Dr Burch
& Ptnrs), The Health Centre,
Thame
Dr Donna Lamping,
Research Degrees Programme
Director & Reader in Psychology,
Health Services Research Unit,
London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London
Mr George Levvy,
Chief Executive, Motor 
Neurone Disease Association,
Northampton
Professor James Lindesay,
Professor of Psychiatry for the
Elderly, University of Leicester,
Leicester General Hospital
Professor Julian Little,
Professor of Human Genome
Epidemiology, Department of
Epidemiology & Community
Medicine, University of Ottawa
Professor Rajan Madhok, 
Consultant in Public Health,
South Manchester Primary 
Care Trust, Manchester
Professor Alexander Markham, 
Director, Molecular Medicine
Unit, St James’s University
Hospital, Leeds
Professor Alistaire McGuire,
Professor of Health Economics,
London School of Economics
Dr Peter Moore, 
Freelance Science Writer, Ashtead
Dr Andrew Mortimore, Public
Health Director, Southampton
City Primary Care Trust,
Southampton
Dr Sue Moss, Associate Director,
Cancer Screening Evaluation
Unit, Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton
Mrs Julietta Patnick, 
Director, NHS Cancer Screening
Programmes, Sheffield
Professor Robert Peveler,
Professor of Liaison Psychiatry,
Royal South Hants Hospital,
Southampton
Professor Chris Price, 
Visiting Professor in Clinical
Biochemistry, University of
Oxford
Professor William Rosenberg,
Professor of Hepatology and
Consultant Physician, University
of Southampton, Southampton
Professor Peter Sandercock,
Professor of Medical Neurology,
Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of
Edinburgh
Dr Susan Schonfield, Consultant
in Public Health, Hillingdon
PCT, Middlesex
Dr Eamonn Sheridan,
Consultant in Clinical Genetics,
Genetics Department,
St James’s University Hospital,
Leeds
Professor Sarah Stewart-Brown, 
Professor of Public Health,
University of Warwick, 
Division of Health in the
Community Warwick Medical
School, LWMS, Coventry
Professor Ala Szczepura, 
Professor of Health Service
Research, Centre for Health
Services Studies, University of
Warwick
Dr Ross Taylor, 
Senior Lecturer, Department of
General Practice and Primary
Care, University of Aberdeen
Mrs Joan Webster, 
Consumer member, HTA –
Expert Advisory Network


The National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment,
Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood,
University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
Fax: +44 (0) 23 8059 5639
Email: hta@hta.ac.uk
http://www.hta.ac.uk
ISSN 1366-5278
Feedback
The HTA Programme and the authors would like to know 
your views about this report.
The Correspondence Page on the HTA website
(http://www.hta.ac.uk) is a convenient way to publish 
your comments. If you prefer, you can send your comments 
to the address below, telling us whether you would like 
us to transfer them to the website.
We look forward to hearing from you.

