This article was downloaded by: [University of Louisville]
On: 31 January 2015, At: 21:28
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Social Work in Health Care
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wshc20
Caring for Depressed Elderly in the
Emergency Department: Establishing
Links Between Sub-Acute, Primary, and
Community Care
Lynette Joubert D Litt et Phil a , Jinsu Lee MSW a , Una McKeever b &
Lucy Holland MSc MSWQ c
a Department of Social Work, Melbourne School of Health Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences , The University
of Melbourne , Melbourne , Victoria , Australia
b Assessment, Liaison and Early Referral Team (ALERT), St. Vincent's
Melbourne, Fitzrog , Melbourne , Victoria , Australia
c ONTrac at Peter Mac Victorian Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer
Service, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre , Melbourne , Victoria ,
Australia
Published online: 22 Mar 2013.
To cite this article: Lynette Joubert D Litt et Phil , Jinsu Lee MSW , Una McKeever & Lucy Holland
MSc MSWQ (2013) Caring for Depressed Elderly in the Emergency Department: Establishing Links
Between Sub-Acute, Primary, and Community Care, Social Work in Health Care, 52:2-3, 222-238, DOI:
10.1080/00981389.2012.737896
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00981389.2012.737896
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Social Work in Health Care, 52:222–238, 2013
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0098-1389 print/1541-034X online
DOI: 10.1080/00981389.2012.737896
Caring for Depressed Elderly in the Emergency
Department: Establishing Links Between
Sub-Acute, Primary, and Community Care
LYNETTE JOUBERT, D Litt et Phil and JINSU LEE, MSW
Department of Social Work, Melbourne School of Health Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
UNA McKEEVER
Assessment, Liaison and Early Referral Team (ALERT), St. Vincent’s Melbourne,
Fitzrog, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
LUCY HOLLAND, MSc, MSWQ
ONTrac at Peter Mac Victorian Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer Service,
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Elderly patients presenting to St. Vincent’s Health Emergency
Department (ED) constitute approximately one third of pre-
sentations. A signiﬁcant proportion of these involve preexisting
conditions including depression that, within elderly patients, is
associated with social isolation, physical and mental health prob-
lems, and barriers to accessing community services. It is also
often overlooked as a clinical diagnosis among the elderly. This
study aimed to assess the efﬁcacy of a brief depression screen-
ing tool and examine the change over time in quality of life
and social factors for elderly patients who present to ED. Patients
aged 65 years and over were screened for depression using a
short form of the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15). Participants
were randomized into control (usual care) and intervention (an
assertive outreach community management program) groups and
Received August 22, 2012; accepted October 4, 2012.
The authors formally acknowledge funding received from beyondblue which supported
this research.
Address correspondence to A/Prof. Lynette Joubert, Melbourne School of Health Sciences,
The University of Melbourne, 200 Berkeley Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail:
ljoubert@unimelb.edu.au
222
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
223
assessed in relation to depression, quality of life, and social
support/functioning at recruitment and 6 weeks post discharge.
Approximately one in four participants experienced mild to mod-
erate depression that was related to medical factors and associated
reduced mobility. This study suggests that an assertive outreach
program, with the inclusion of community intervention and links
to social supports and services, could improve the management of
depression in the elderly and associated health outcomes.
KEYWORDS
multidisciplinary intervention, elderly depression
management, community resources, social support
INTRODUCTION
Elderly patients presenting to St. Vincent’s Emergency Department (ED) con-
stitute approximately one third of all presentations. This situation is common
to metropolitan hospitals in Victoria, Australia and internationally, with those
aged 65 and over disproportionately represented. Speciﬁcally, while this age
group currently comprise 13% of the population in Australia, they account
for 33% of hospital admissions and 20% of ED presentations (Emergency
Demand Coordination Group, 2001). In addition, approximately 15.2% of
overall growth in demand on EDs within Australia stems from individu-
als within this age group (Emergency Demand Coordination Group, 2001).
Further, the number of individuals aged 60 and over within Victoria is
projected to increase from 1 million (19% of the population) in 2010 to
1.4 million (23%) in 2020 and 2.4 million (29%) in 2050 (Department of
Planning and Community Development, 2010). The aging nature of our
population emphasizes the importance of examining the aetiology of ED
admissions among the elderly and the patient experience of these pre-
sentations to ensure both positive health outcomes and a reduction in the
associated public health burden.
A signiﬁcant proportion of elderly presentations to ED involve exacer-
bations or episodes of underlying or preexisting conditions. In older adults,
depression speciﬁcally is known to cause signiﬁcant distress and disability,
which exacerbates, and is often exacerbated by, existing medical condi-
tions (Frazer, Christensen, & Grifﬁths, 2005). However, depression in the
elderly is often characterized by different symptomatology from that seen
in younger adults. Speciﬁcally, depressed mood may be less commonly
reported by health care professionals and the presentation of somatic symp-
toms, including a loss of appetite, lack of energy, irritability, sleeplessness,
rumination, and physical pain may be more prominent (Frazer et al., 2005).
Within the cohort of patients aged over 65, depression has signiﬁcant impli-
cations for psychosocial health and well-being and is associated with social
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

224
L. Joubert et al.
isolation, carer stress, and barriers to effective access of community resources
(Achterberg et al., 2003; Ell, 2006; Fessman & Lester, 2000; VanItallie, 2005).
Not surprisingly, depression in the elderly is also associated with increased
health service use, medical costs, and general health burden (Ell, 2006).
However, it is also often considered to be a normal response to aging,
physical deterioration, and other life events including the loss of loved
ones (Birrer & Vemuri, 2004; Frazer et al., 2005). Accordingly, depression
is often overlooked as a clinical diagnosis and, as a result, elderly patients
may not receive optimal treatment during, or following, hospital admissions
for depressive episodes (Ell, 2006; Koenig et al., 1992; Raj, 2004; VanItallie,
2005). For these reasons, recent research has investigated the efﬁcacy of cur-
rent treatment and management strategies for depression in the elderly in
both primary health and community settings.
International literature suggests that the appropriate management of
depression in the elderly, who present at the ED with complex care needs,
should involve an integrated approach across a continuum of care from
presentation to follow up with telephone tracking and supported linkages
established between primary care and community services (Aminzadeh &
Dalziel, 2002). Speciﬁcally, research has investigated the involvement of
general practitioners, geriatricians, and allied health in appropriate care of
the elderly, in conjunction with carers who are commonly the main source
of support for these patients (Jeon, 2004). Research has focused speciﬁ-
cally on integrating internal liaison with effective networking within the
patient’s community to improve long-term outcomes (Spillane et al., 1997).
These studies have assessed the use of screening, geriatric and psychiatric
assessment, education, the promotion of self-care (Hendriksen & Harrison,
2001), rehabilitation services and counseling (Lee, Ross, & Tracy, 2001),
referral to appropriate community services (Aminzadeh & Dalziel, 2002) and
community–carer linkages (Jeon, 2004). Such research shows that collabora-
tive, holistic care is effective in improving outcomes for elderly patients with
depression (Birrer & Vemuri, 2004; Frazer et al., 2005; Jeon, 2004; McGarry,
Hegarty, & Gunn, 2005; Raj, 2004).
In response to the increasing recognition of this best practice care for
elderly patients who present with depressive episodes, St. Vincent’s Health
in Melbourne undertook a recent analysis of elderly patients presenting to
the ED. The ﬁndings indicate that the majority of individuals live alone (44%)
with many more living with a primary carer (29%) (Joubert, Vale, Brock, &
Braddy, 2005). However, minimal attention was paid to carer liaison or the
linkages between primary health and community services. In response to
this discrepancy, and given international literature supporting continuums of
care for the elderly, St. Vincent’s Health has implemented three integrated
care programs under the Victorian Hospital Demand Management Strategy
to develop alternative treatment plans for elderly individuals whose con-
ditions are chronic or complex and who present frequently to ED. These
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
225
programs are of speciﬁc relevance to the elderly as their main purpose
is to increase linkages with, and the use of, primary health and commu-
nity services in instances where presentation at ED could be prevented or
care more appropriately provided elsewhere. These programs are: ALERT
(Assessing, Liaison and Early Referral Team), HiT (Holding it Together), and
TRAAC (Treating the elderly in the right place: Facilitating appropriate com-
munity care). The directive of both the ALERT and HiT programs stipulates
the importance of risk management, screening, early discharge planning for
ED patients, and case management for patients who have complex care
needs. The major objectives are to: screen for high-risk patients at all stages
of care; coordinate a central referral process for sub-acute care; ensure early
communication with relevant community agencies and programs; follow up
with patients who are at risk of unplanned readmissions; ensure community
supports are in place prior to discharge; centralize and improve timeli-
ness of the referral process; and avoid unnecessary duplication of services.
By contrast, the TRAAC program provides rapid assessment response and
short-term case management for older people living in the community or in
residential care settings. This service aims to prevent unnecessary ED presen-
tations by offering alternative options where appropriate, through building
linkages with community-based services. Rather then establishing another
service structure, this model seeks to enhance existing services within the
community. These three projects have cut across professional and skill
boundaries and focus on an integrated systems approach to service delivery.
However, there are no screening tools or management guidelines for patients
who present with depressive symptomatology within the protocols of these
programs.
This study sought to evaluate the patient experience and the resulting
change over time in reported depression, quality of life, and social support
factors for patients who present to ED and receive intervention in accordance
with the ALERT, HiT, and TRACC programs, by comparison with those who
receive usual care. The objective of this study was to improve the identiﬁca-
tion of, and response to, depression in elderly patients, aged over 65 years,
who present with complex care needs, to improve health outcomes. The
speciﬁc aims of this project were twofold. The ﬁrst was to implement and
assess the efﬁcacy of a brief screening assessment for depression into exist-
ing protocols in the three integrated care programs at St. Vincent’s Health
and assess the efﬁcacy of this assessment compared to standardized mea-
sures. The second aim was to develop a protocol for the identiﬁcation and
management of depression in elderly patients based on assertive outreach
programs, linking patients and carers into existing integrated care programs
at St. Vincent’s Health and with primary and community care resources.
This project was undertaken with the vision of contributing to the evidence
base for best practice care with elderly patients presenting to ED and the
identiﬁcation and management of depression in this population.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

226
L. Joubert et al.
METHODOLOGY
Participants
The study was conducted at St. Vincent’s Health, an acute health care facil-
ity, in Melbourne, Australia. The participants for this study included male and
female patients aged 65 years and over who presented to the ED between
March 2005 and August 2005. The inclusion criteria for participation were
extensive due to the sensitive nature of screening for depression in elderly
patients who present to an ED. To qualify for inclusion, patients had to be
English speaking, have a nominated general practitioner (GP) in the local
community, and have no known psychiatric history and no identiﬁed medi-
cal issues that would hinder participation. Over the 6-month period, a total
of 771 participants aged 65 and over presented to St. Vincent’s Health ED.
Of these, 363 (47.08%) identiﬁed as non-English speaking and 126 (16.34%)
did not have a nominated local GP, 118 (15.30%) had an identiﬁed psy-
chiatric history, and 99 (12.84%) reported medical problems that excluded
them from participating including profound deafness, dysphasia, and cogni-
tive impairment. Therefore, in total, within this 6-month period, 66 patients
were determined eligible for participation in this study. The mean age of
these participants was 76.63 years (SD = 7.32) and 71% were female.
Procedure
All 771 patients who presented during this time were screened during Phase
1 for depressive symptomatology using a brief version of the Geriatric
Depression Screening (GDS-15) tool. This allowed for the evaluation of the
efﬁcacy of this tool in screening for depression in this patient cohort.
During Phase 2, the sample was reﬁned based on the exclusion cri-
teria described above and the remaining 66 patients were fully screened
for depression using the 15-item form of the GDS-15 tool (Sheikh &
Yesavage, 1986). The aim of this was to assess the efﬁcacy and accu-
racy of the initial screen in the identiﬁcation of depression. Using this
full screen, a total of 15 patients scored positively and the remaining
51 patients screened negatively. Of the 15 patients who screened positively
for depression, 7 refused to consent to participate in ongoing research. This
reﬂects complexities inherent to conducting research with elderly patients
demonstrating depression. During Phase 2, all participants who screened
positively and consented to ongoing participation were randomized into
control (n = 4) and intervention groups (n = 4). The characteristics of these
participants are presented in Table 1. Both groups then completed mea-
sures designed to assess depression (GDS-15), quality of life (Manchester
Short Assessment of Quality of Life), social support and social functioning
(Person-In-Environment Classiﬁcation System and Medical Outcome Study
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
227
Social Support Scale), and patient experience using a semi-structured inter-
view. These measures are described below. Following the completion of
these measures, the control group received usual care. The intervention
group received a comprehensive, integrated management plan in accor-
dance with the ALERT, HiT, and TRACC programs. This involved assessment
outcome reports, patient education about depression in a one-on-one
session with a social worker at St. Vincent’s Health, emotional support, and
counseling utilizing a problem-solving framework. Contact was also made
with the participant’s GP who received assessment outcome reports and
links were established to community agencies for the provision of ongoing
monitoring and support.
During Phase 3, participants in both the intervention and control groups
were followed up with at 6 weeks post discharge from the ED. This fol-
low up was conducted via phone to examine between-group differences in
depression, quality of life, social support and social functioning, and patient
satisfaction as examined in Phase 2.
TABLE 1 Proﬁle of Intervention and Control Groups
Intervention group
Case 1: 68-year-old Italian male with congestive heart failure and renal
failure
Case 2: 72-year-old Italian male, with cardiomyopathy and diabetes
Case 3: 67-year-old German female with sciatica and diabetes
Case 4: 66-year-old Australian female, with renal failure and diabetes
Control group
Case 1: 79-year-old Italian female with chest pain
Case 2: 70-year-old Egyptian female with abdomen pain
Case 3: 65-year-old Greek female with chest pain
Case 4: 83-year-old Australian female with limb pain
Measures
BRIEF GERIATRIC DEPRESSION SCREENING TOOL
This tool was used during Phase 1 to screen elderly ED patients who had
depressive symptoms. It was adapted from the GDS-15 and consisted of four
questions. A score of two or more was indicative of depression.
GERIATRIC DEPRESSION SCALE (GDS-15)
This measure has been used and validated extensively in past research to
examine depressive symptomatology, present during the past week, in older
patient populations and in primary and community health settings (Friedman,
Heisel, & Delavan 2005; Pomeroy, Clark, & Philp, 2001; Rinaldi et al., 2003;
Scogin & Shah, 2006; Sutcliffe et al., 2000; VanItallie, 2005; Watson & Pignone,
2003). It contains 15 questions (Sheikh & Yesavage, 1986) and evidence
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

228
L. Joubert et al.
of acceptable but moderate internal consistency and reliability has been
found with the Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁcient for the total scale previously
reported as 0.75 (Friedman et al., 2005). Construct validity for the assess-
ment of depressed mood has also been determined (Friedman et al., 2005).
Participant scores of 0–4 are considered within the range of normal function,
dependant on age, education, and complaints; a score of 5–8 indicates mild
depression, 9–11 indicates moderate depression, and 12–15 indicates severe
depression. Within this study, participants who scored at or above a score of
ﬁve were categorized as a positive screen, whereas those who scored below
ﬁve were categorized as a negative screen.
MANCHESTER SHORT ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY OF LIFE (MANSA)
Quality of life was examined using the MANSA scale (Priebe, Huxley, Knight,
& Evans, 1999). This scale consists of 16 items comprising 4 objective
questions and 12 subjective questions examining satisfaction with life, job,
ﬁnancial situation, friendships, leisure activities, accommodation, personal
safety, people, sex life, family, physical health, and mental health. Participant
responses are reported on a 7-point Likert scale. A higher score, calculated
as the mean scores of these scales, is indicative of a better reported quality
of life. Cronbach’s alpha for ratings using this measure has been reported at
0.74 and it has been found to be comparable to the Lancashire Quality of
Life Proﬁle (Priebe et al., 1999).
PERSON-IN-ENVIRONMENT (PIE) CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The PIE classiﬁcation system (Karls & Wandrei, 1994) is widely ﬁeld-tested
and determines social functioning in four domains: role functioning, the
environment, mental health, and physical health. It has good reliability and
validity and assesses social functioning using a systemic model. The PIE
was used in this study to examine the contribution of social functioning to
depressive symptomatology, quality of life, representation rates at ED, and
the use of primary care and community resources (Karls & Wandrei, 1994;
Karls, Lowery, Mattaini, & Wandrei, 1997).
MEDICAL OUTCOME STUDY (MOS) SOCIAL SUPPORT SURVEY
The MOS social support survey allows for the examination of medical
events and other stressors by assessing the availability of perceived social
support in four categories including emotional/informational, tangible,
affectionate, and positive social interaction (Sherbourne & Stewart, 1991).
This self-administered scale uses a ﬁve-category Likert response for each of
19 items. Scores range from 0 (none of the time) to 5 (all of the time) and
a higher score indicates greater social support. High internal consistency
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
229
and reliability have been reported for this measure with Cronbach’s alpha
coefﬁcients reported as 0.97 for the total social support scale (Sherbourne &
Stewart, 1991).
PATIENT SATISFACTION AND EXPERIENCE QUESTIONNAIRE
A semi-structured questionnaire was used to examine the needs of patients,
their perceptions of the ED experience, the lived experience of depression,
social supports and functioning, practical considerations including accom-
modation, transportation and ﬁnancial concerns, and satisfaction with the
health care service.
Data Analysis
Trends in quantitative results were examined as data could not be statis-
tically compared due to a small sample size and the associated lack of
power. Qualitative results ascertained from the semi-structured interview
were analyzed using thematic analysis based on the framework of Grounded
Theory (Liamputtong & Ezzy, 2005). Two independent raters, who were
blind to the aims of the study, examined and coded qualitative data based
on the identiﬁcation of recurrent words, phrases, patterns, and themes. These
categories were further reﬁned to enable the formation of sub-categories as
deﬁned by similar coding (Morse & Field, 1995). Inter-rater agreement was
established by comparing the coding of data and creation of sub-categories
between raters. Analyses were reﬁned until agreement was reached about all
major coding categories and subcategories.
RESULTS
During Phase 1, a total of 771 patients participated in this study. Based on
exclusion criteria, 66 patients were then fully screened for depression. Of these,
15 patients screened positively and the 8 who provided informed consent
were randomized into intervention (n = 4) and control (n = 4) groups.
Depression
The overall mean score for depression screening during Phase 1 (n =
66), was 0.90 (SD = 1.08) (Figure 1). After randomization of the patients
who screened positively and consented to ongoing participation, the mean
screening score for the intervention group was 2.75 (SD = 0.43) and the
mean score for the control group was 2.00 (SD = 0.00).
By comparison, the overall mean score for the GDS-15 (n = 66) was
3.13 (SD = 2.56) (Figure 2) with 22.72% experiencing mild to moderate
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

230
L. Joubert et al.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Frequency
0
1
2
3
4
Screening Score
FIGURE 1 Spread of depression screening scores for patients assessed at Phase 1 who
proceeded to Phase 2 (N = 66) (color ﬁgure available online).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Frequency
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
GDS Score
FIGURE 2 Spread of GDS-15 depression scores for patients assessed during Phase 2 (color
ﬁgure available online).
depression. After randomization of the patients who screened positively and
consented to ongoing participation, the mean GDS-15 score for the inter-
vention group was 7.75 (SD = 3.30) and the mean score for the control
group was 5.50 (SD = 2.65). The differences between GDS-15 scores at
presentation and 6-weeks post discharge indicate fairly stable averages for
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
231
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
Average Depression Score
Control
Intervention
Group
Recruitment
6 months
FIGURE 3 Change in mean GDS-15 score between recruitment and testing 6 months post
discharge for control and intervention groups (color ﬁgure available online).
both groups with a slight reduction in the average depression score observed
over time for the control group and a slight increase for the intervention
group (Figure 3).
Quality of Life, Social Support, and Social Functioning
Trends in quantitative results compared at recruitment and 6-weeks post
discharge (Figure 4) indicate that quality of life scores remained consis-
tent for both groups, with a slight decrease observed for the intervention
group. Social support and positive social interaction declined for the control
group and improved for the intervention group. Emotional support increased
slightly for the control group and remained relatively stable for the interven-
tion group whereas affectionate social support improved for both groups.
Overall social functioning, as examined with the PIE classiﬁcation system,
appeared stable for the control group but improved for the intervention
group over time.
Thematic Analysis: Recurring Themes
PSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTIONING
Overall, those who scored positively on the depression scale expressed mild
to moderate depression. Thematic analyses of the semi-structured interview
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

232
L. Joubert et al.
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Recruitment
6 months
Recruitment
6 months
Recruitment
6 months
Recruitment
6 months
Recruitment
6 months
Recruitment
6 months
QoL (MANSA)
Social Support
(MOS)
Emotional Social
Support (MOS)
Affeectionate
Social Support
(MOS)
Positive Social
Interaction (MOS)
Overall Functional
Support (PIE)
Measures
Score
Intervention
Control
FIGURE 4 Quality of life (QoL), social support measures, and functional support scores at
recruitment and 6 weeks post discharge for control and intervention groups and the measures
used for examination (color ﬁgure available online).
indicate that participants reported multiple medical problems and frustra-
tion, primarily related to decreased mobility, as the most signiﬁcant causes
for depressed mood, rather than psychological dysfunction. In relation to
reduced mobility, being unable to do what they would normally be able to
do, and prefer to do, was cited as the main reason for this frustration, not-
ing that they would lead normal happy lives if they were mobile. In terms
of participants’ perception of their mood, they described their feelings as
“ﬂat,” “down,”,/ “weak,” and “very bad” but never used the words “sad” or
“depressed.” In addition, no participants expressed a fear of dying in this
study, appearing instead to adopt an attitude of acceptance about the fact
that when their time comes, it comes, although this was not perceived as
giving up, but rather acceptance by participants. However, mixed feelings
of worthlessness and hopelessness were reported with 62.5% reporting not
feeling worthless but the same percentage (62.5%) reported feeling that their
situation was hopeless.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONING
Mixed reports of good and poor social supports from family and friends
resulted from this study. Those who lived alone tended to have less social
supports available to them in the community and were more isolated.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
233
Overall, social supports appeared to be important in the management of
depression, although socializing outside the family was perceived as less
important to participants’ general well-being. Speciﬁcally, they noted great
joy in talking about their grandchildren.
PRACTICAL FACTORS
In general, all participants enjoyed being retired and reported high sat-
isfaction with their accommodation. They also reported frequent use of
public transport, including buses, trams, and taxis and no reported prob-
lems relating to service accessibility. However, the majority of participants
noted dissatisfaction with their ﬁnancial situation; with the common com-
ments being that “it’s hard to make ends meet” and that “the pension doesn’t
go very far.” No problems in accessing health services were reported and
health care staff were generally rated as “wonderful,” although a minority
expressed a preference for the private health system over the public system.
DISCUSSION
Depression is increasingly recognized as an important issue in the elderly
who present to ED, particularly in those with complex physical health and
social problems. This study aimed to examine depression in patients aged
over 65 years presenting to the ED at St. Vincent’s Health in Melbourne; to
examine the efﬁcacy of a screening tool for the identiﬁcation of depression
and a protocol for the management of depression utilizing linkages between
primary care and community care. The objective of this research was to
contribute to the knowledge base about appropriate care of elderly patients
who present with complex needs and depression, and to improve health
outcomes for these patients. The signiﬁcance of this research is supported
by Highet, Luscombe, Davenport, Burns, and Hickie (2006) who assert that
although depression is commonly recognized as a mental health problem, it
is not yet considered a major general health problem throughout Australia.
This is despite evidence to illustrate the increasing public health burden
of depression in the elderly, particularly within the context of an aging
Australian population.
The results of this study indicate that the mean scores for the brief
screening tool and GDS-15 were comparable, with no clinical depression
evident in the majority of patients but approximately one in four patients
(22.72%) experiencing mild to moderate depression. This suggests that a
brief screening for depression is appropriate in the context of ED presen-
tation within the elderly. The majority of patients, encouragingly, did not
feel worthless, but did report that their situation felt hopeless. According
to patient reports, lowered mood was most signiﬁcantly attributed to the
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

234
L. Joubert et al.
presence of multiple medical problems and associated decreased mobility.
Although quantitative results in this study have to be interpreted with caution
due to the relatively small sample size obtained, differences in depression
scores between recruitment and 6 months indicate relatively stable scores for
both the control and intervention groups. This may support patient reports
that depression may largely reﬂect factors related to medical circumstance
and functionality, an assertion that is supported by Travis, Lyness, Shields,
King, and Cox (2004) who found that depressive symptoms were signiﬁcantly
associated with functional impairment and disability. It may therefore be
hypothesized that as, over time, functionality increases or worsens in elderly
patients, depression similarly changes. This requires further investigation in
future research.
Like previous studies, this research also showed that the elderly will
often not talk about symptoms of sadness and depression but will rather talk
about ‘feeling weak’, or ‘very bad’. These terms may often disguise depres-
sion by making feelings of sadness appear to relate to persistent physical
complaints and health issues, rather than psychological dysfunction. This
is likely to exacerbate poor recognition and management of depression in
elderly patients (Ell, 2006; Koenig et al., 1992; Raj, 2004; VanItallie, 2005)
and suggests that the use of patient education about depression, as inte-
grated into the three integrated care management approaches (ALERT, HiT,
and TRACC) at St. Vincent’s Health, is essential to engender change in the
perception and discussion of depression among the elderly to ensure early
intervention and appropriate management.
Within this study, the intervention group demonstrated the most notable
trends in increased social support and functioning between recruitment and 6-
weeks post discharge in areas of social support and positive social interaction
and social functioning, with the control group experiencing a reduction in
scores over time or no change. Emotional support was the only aspect of
social functioning that appeared to increase for the control group although
this remained stable for the intervention group. The experience of affectionate
social support improved for both groups. As iterated above, these results have
not been statistically compared and therefore must be interpreted with caution.
However, within this study, the qualitative reports of patients conﬁrmed the
signiﬁcance of social support to the management of depression, particularly
in relation to support received from family members. This is supported by
Jeon (2004) who illustrates that family caregivers play an essential role in the
care of elderly patients, particularly those engaged primarily in community-
based care. The improvement trends in several areas of social support and
functioning over time for the intervention group illustrates the importance
of integrated care approaches for the management of depression not only
incorporating patient education about depression but also promoting family
and community linkages to ensure adequate social support, consistency in
care, and the promotion of positive health outcomes for these patients.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
235
The emergency health care environment can present challenges in
responding to the elderly with depression as it is a high-stress, high-volume
environment. Yet, it provides a window of opportunity. The use of screen-
ing tools for depression in elderly patients and the provision of integrated
care teams, such at those within the ALERT, HiT, and TRACC programs at
St. Vincent’s Health, provide the opportunity for assessing and respond-
ing to patients screening positively for depression within this environment.
This facilitates appropriate follow-up medical care with the general prac-
titioner and supports the isolated elderly person with limited mobility to
access community resources and services. This is supported by research that
demonstrates that EDs in Australia are appropriate settings for the detection
of mental health problems as the prevalence is high and patients may not
present elsewhere (Kinner et al., 2005; Scogin & Shah, 2006; VanItallie, 2005).
This research also stresses the importance of appropriate screening, assess-
ment, and referral processes to ensure adequate support within emergency
health to facilitate consistent patient assessment and ensure appropriate,
ongoing patient care.
There are limitations inherent to the nature of this study. These primarily
relate to complex factors related to the assessment of elderly patients who
present to ED, particularly those with depression. Within this particular study,
although 771 patients were initially screened for depression and 66 were fully
assessed, the rate of consent for the participation in ongoing research was
signiﬁcantly reduced with a ﬁnal sample of 8 participants. As discussed, this
signiﬁcantly reduced the power of this study, particularly related to the use of
quantitative measures. However, the corresponding use of both quantitative
and qualitative measures in this study ensured that the results obtained holis-
tically reﬂect the experience of the sample recruited, despite this reduced
power. Signiﬁcant factors that contributed to the reduced number of par-
ticipants recruited for this study included previous psychiatric history and
complex medical needs. This is an area that requires future research to
ensure that the identiﬁcation of depression in primary care settings for such
patients is accurate and timely.
It was anticipated that the ﬁndings of this research would contribute to
knowledge about the psychosocial and cultural factors that may contribute
to the presentation of depression in this patient cohort and about the role
and function of practitioners in the management of depression. It was also
anticipated that this research would illuminate the key outcome indicators
that are signiﬁcant in directing the most appropriate management of depres-
sion in elderly patients while taking into consideration the needs of the
patient, co-morbid health conditions, and the role of community services.
Most signiﬁcantly, it was hoped that this research would improve care and
health outcomes for elderly patients. Through the indication of the impor-
tance of patient education and depression, physical mobility and functioning,
and social support, this research suggests that the use of integrated care
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

236
L. Joubert et al.
approaches to the management of depression in the elderly who present
to ED is essential. This is necessary to improve health outcomes within this
patient population and work to reduce the high associated public health
burden.
Stemming from this research is the recommendation of the need for a
controlled study, with adequate power, into the efﬁcacy of integrated care
approaches to the management of depression in elderly patients presenting
to ED; especially those with multiple medical problems who are socially
isolated and, or, ﬁnancially vulnerable. This intervention may involve the
four screening questions for depression and Geriatric Depression Scale as
part of routine protocols for integrated care services, in combination with an
immediate treatment response and referral to a general practitioner in the
community for further management. The importance of concurrent linkage
and telephone follow up to facilitate and reduce barriers to community social
supports and where possible, engagement of the carer in this process, cannot
be underestimated.
REFERENCES
Achterberg, W., Pot, A.M., Kerkstra, A., Ooms, M., Muller, M., & Ribbe, M. (2003).
The effect of depression on social engagement in newly admitted Dutch nursing
home residents. Gerontologist, 43(2), 213–218.
Aminzadeh, F., & Dalziel, W.B. (2002). Older adults in the emergency department:
A systematic review of patterns of use, adverse outcomes and effectiveness of
interventions. Annuls of Emergency Medicine, 39(3), 238–247.
Birrer, R.B., & Vemuri, S.P. (2004). Depression in later life: A diagnostic and
therapeutic challenge. American Family Physician, 69(10), 2375–2382.
Department of Planning and Community Development. (2010). Ageing in Victoria:
A Plan for an Age-Friendly Society 2010–2020. Victoria, Australia: State
Government of Victoria.
Ell, K. (2006). Depression care for the elderly: Reducing barriers to evidence-based
practice. Home Health Care Services Quarterly, 25(1–2), 115–148.
Emergency
Demand
Coordination
Group
(2001).
Emergency Demand and
Management. Victoria Australia: Victorian Government Department of Human
Services.
Fessman, N., & Lester, D. (2000). Loneliness and depression among elderly nursing
home patients. The International Journal of Aging and Human Development,
51(2), 137–141.
Frazer, C.J., Christensen, H., & Grifﬁths, K.M. (2005). Effectiveness of treatments for
depression in older people. Medical Journal of Australia, 182(12), 627–632.
Friedman, B., Heisel, M.J., & Delavan, R.L. (2005). Psychometric properties of the
15-item Geriatric Depression Scale in functionally impaired, cognitively intact,
community-dwelling elderly primary care patients. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, 53(9), 1570–1576.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

Emergency Care for Elderly With Depression
237
Hendriksen, H., & Harrison, R.A. (2001). Occupational therapy in accident and emer-
gency departments: A randomised controlled trial. Journal of Advanced Nursing,
36(6), 727–732.
Highet, N.J., Luscombe, G.M., Davenport, T.A., Burns, J.M., & Hickie, I.B. (2006).
Positive relationships between public awareness activity and recognition of
the impacts of depression in Australia. Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 40(1), 55–58.
Jeon, Y.H. (2004). Shaping mutuality: Nurse-family caregiver interactions in caring for
older people with depression. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing,
13(2), 126–134.
Joubert, L., Vale, S., Brock, K., & Braddy, L. (2005). Allied Health Domains Study.
Victoria, Australia: St Vincent’s Health Report.
Karls, J.M., & Wandrei, K.E. (1994). Person-In-Environment System: The PIE
Classiﬁcation System for Social Functioning Problems. San Bernardino, CA:
National Association of Social Workers.
Karls, J.M., Lowery, C.T., Mattaini, M.A., & Wandrei, K.E. (1997). The use of the
PIE (Person-In-Environment) system in social work education. Journal of Social
Work Education, 33(1), 49–59.
Kinner, S.A., Alati, R., Watt, K., Najman, J.M., Fowler, G., & Green, D. (2005).
Substance misuse, anxiety and depression and urgency of presentation to a
public emergency department in Australia. Emergency Medicine Australasia,
17(4), 363–370.
Koenig, H.G., Goli, V., Shelp, F., Kundler, H.S., Cohen, H.J., & Blazer, D.G. (1992).
Major depression in hospitalized medically ill men: Documentation, treatment
and prognosis. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 7, 25–34.
Lee, V., Ross, B., & Tracy, B. (2001). Functional assessment of older adults in
an emergency department. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 68(2),
121–129.
Liamputtong, P., & Ezzy, D. (2005). Qualitative Research Methods (2nd ed.).
Melbourne, Australia: Oxford University Press.
McGarry, H., Hegarty, K., & Gunn, J. (2005). How do Victorian GPs manage patients
with depression? Australian Family Physician, 34(7), 603–606.
Morse, J., & Field, P. (1995). Qualitative Research Methods for Health Professionals
(2nd ed.). London, UK: SAGE Publications.
Pomeroy, I.M., Clark, C.R., & Philp, I. (2001). The effectiveness of very short scales
for depression screening in elderly medical patients. International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 16, 321–326.
Priebe, S., Huxley, P., Knight, S., & Evans, S. (1999). Application and results of the
Manchester Short Assessment of Quality of Life (MANSA). International Journal
of Social Psychiatry, 45, 7–12.
Raj, A. (2004). Depression in the elderly. Tailoring medical therapy to their special
needs. Postgraduate Medicine, 115(6), 26–28.
Rinaldi, P., Mecocci, P., Benedetti, C., Ercolani, S., Bregnocchi, M., Menculini, G.,
Catani, M., Senin, U., & Cherubini, A. (2003). Validation of the ﬁve-item Geriatric
Depression Scale in elderly subjects in three different settings. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 51(5), 694–698.
Scogin, F., & Shah, A. (2006). Screening older adults for depression in primary care
settings. Health Psychology, 25(6), 675–677.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

238
L. Joubert et al.
Sheikh, J.I., & Yesavage, J.A. (1986). Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Recent
evidence and development of a shorter version. In T.L. Brink (ed.), Clinical
Gerontology: A Guide to Assessment and Intervention (pp. 165–173). New York,
NY: The Haworth Press.
Sherbourne, C.D., & Stewart, A.L. (1991). The MOS social support survey. Social
Science and Medicine, 32(6), 705–714.
Spillane, L., Lumb, E.W., Cobaugh, D.J., Wilcox, S.R., Clark, J.S., & Schneider,
S.M. (1997). Frequent users of the emergency department: Can we intervene?
Academic Emergency Medicine, 4(6), 574–580.
Sutcliffe, C., Cordingley, L., Burns, A., Mozley, C.G., Bagley, H., Huxley, P., &
Challis, D. (2000). A new version of the Geriatric Depression Scale for nursing
and residential home populations: The Geriatric Depression Scale (Residential)
(GDS-12r). International Psychogeriatrics, 12, 173–181.
Travis, L.A., Lyness, J.M., Shields, C.G., King, D.A., & Cox, C. (2004). Institution
social support, depression, and functional disability in older adult primary-care
patients. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12(3), 265–271.
VanItallie, T.B. (2005). Subsyndromal depression in the elderly: Underdiagnosed and
undertreated. Metabolism: Clinical & Experimental, 54(5), 39–44.
Watson, L.C., & Pignone, M.P. (2003). Screening accuracy for late-life depression in
primary care: A systematic review. Journal of Family Practice, 52(12), 956–964.
Downloaded by [University of Louisville] at 21:28 31 January 2015 

