Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232
Pilot study of a visitor volunteer programme for
community elderly people receiving home
health care
Irene MacIntyre1 RegN, Pat Corradetti1 BScN,
Jacqueline Roberts2,4 BScN, MSc,
Gina Browne2,4 PhD, RegN, Susan Watt 3,4 DSW, CSW
and Adele Lane2 BScN
1St. Elizabeth Visiting Nurses, Volunteer Programme,
2Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Nursing, 3Faculty
of Social Sciences, School of Social Work, Gerontological
Studies and 4System-Linked Research Unit on Health
and Social Service Utilization
Abstract
There is a need to evaluate community support
programmes for elderly people. In this randomized
control trial (RCT), we determined the effectiveness of
Ôfriendly visitorsÕ in a volunteer programme of a visiting
nurses organization in Southern Ontario, Canada. The
Volunteer Friendly Visitor Programme was developed
to support elderly people receiving homemaking and
nursing care in the community. Volunteers are
screened, trained, interviewed and matched to
homebound elderly clients for general interest, visit
expectations and personality. Volunteers spend three to
four hours on average per week with clients socializing
in mutually agreed-upon ways. The nursing staff
identified clients who were lonely for this additional
support. These newly-referred clients were randomly
allocated to receive a friendly visitor or not for six
weeks. Those receiving the volunteer visitor improved
in life satisfaction and two social support measures:
worth and social integration. Thus, the addition of
volunteer visitors to planned homemaking and nursing
care made a difference for elderly in the community.
Introduction
Local surveys of frail elderly in the community fre-
quently cite some problems of loneliness that arise
from being isolated from social supports (Chambers
& Kirby 1988, Milne 1990). The Volunteer Friendly
Visitor Programme at a visiting nursesÕ organization
was developed as an addition to nursing care to sup-
port elderly people with health problems who are
socially isolated in the community. Visitor need is
based on the clinical judgement of the nurses provid-
ing service to this group. Volunteers for the pro-
gramme are screened, interviewed and matched to
homebound elderly clients for general interest,
expectations 
for 
the 
visits 
and 
personality.
Volunteers spend 3Ð4 h on average per week with
clients socializing in mutually agreed-upon ways.
Community nurses and homemakers give home care
as required for the health problem.
A review of the literature indicated that there was
only one controlled trial that identified the impact of
volunteer visitor programmes for elderly people in the
community. From a computerized Medline and
CINAHL search of the literature, only one randomized
control trial (RCT) (Munson et al. 1980, Calsyn et al.
1984) was found and 1.5 weekly hours of senior citizen
or undergraduate student volunteer visiting report-
edly had no impact on the life satisfaction of home-
bound elderly people over a 12-week period.
The purpose of our study was to evaluate this volun-
teer community programme by determining the effec-
tiveness of a friendly visitor in the volunteer pro-
gramme. Specific outcomes thought to be responsive to
this programme were life satisfaction and social support.
Methods
All clients who were new referrals to a community
nursing agencyÕs friendly visiting programme (n = 26)
were selected randomly to receive a friendly volun-
teer, or not. Three subjects in the experimental group
and one in the control group were unable to complete
the questionnaires themselves; thus 12 experimental
and 10 controlled clients, respectively, were followed
for 6 weeks. Sociodemographic, health perceptions,
activity level, social support, and satisfaction with life
variables were measured by independent research
assistants before clients received the intervention and
health perceptions, social support and life satisfaction
were again measured 6 weeks later. Thus, change
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd
225
Short papers
Edited by Carl May
Correspondence: Jacqueline Roberts, Associate Professor, School
of Nursing, McMaster University, Room 3N28, 1200 Main Street
West, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5.

Short papers
scores before and after the intervention were compared
between groups.
Sample
Visitors
All volunteer visitors for this study were undergradu-
ate students studying gerontology at the local
University. They had provided references, and
attended an interview process with the Coordinator of
the Volunteer Programme so as to clarify their goals,
assess their suitability and receive an orientation to the
organizationÕs nursesÕ service in the community.
The initial training programme is specifically
designed to meet the needs of the individual volunteer
and the client. Issues discussed include safety in
relation to mobility aids, walkers, canes, wheelchairs
and pertinent information related to the clientÕs
medical diagnosis. The Coordinator of the Volunteer
Programme monitors the client/volunteer match by
monthly written reports submitted by the volunteer,
contact by telephone calls to client and volunteer, as
well as their availability for visiting. Ongoing educa-
tional and training needs are met at the monthly
volunteer meetings where topics identified by volun-
teers are discussed and, where necessary, presentations
by professionals in the community will add additional
information and encouragement. The success of a
volunteer/client match depended a great deal upon the
clinical judgement of the Coordinators in assessing the
volunteer and the client for their suitability, as well as
the ongoing support and recognition given to each
volunteer. The Coordinators were not involved in the
research data collection.
Clients
The clients were receiving the professional nursing
services of the organization to assist in their personal
needs, e.g. bathing, monitor medications, monitor
mobility. The visiting homemaking services were also
assisting in the household work activities, e.g. prepara-
tion of meals, household chores, shopping for 3Ð8 h per
week. This ongoing assistance is thought to help clients
remain in the community and maintain some indepen-
dence. Eligibility criteria for the study included: (a) able
to understand English (b) not cognitively impaired and
(c) voluntary consent to be randomized.
Each of the clients included in the research were
identified by the visiting nurses as requiring the
support of volunteer services. The needs included
social support in a lonely and/or isolated situation and
the volunteer was expected to provide some physical
and emotional support in the clientsÕ own home or
during an outing in the community.
Measures
Personal and sociodemographic information were
collected by self report and included age, gender,
marital status, level of education and income status.
These were measured at baseline.
Their functional ability was measured using the
Eastern Co-operative Oncology Group (ECOG)
Performance Status Scale (Skeel 1982) at baseline. The
ECOG is a subjective assessment of how an illness
affects oneÕs ability to function.
The Health Perceptions Questionnaire (HPQ)
(Davies & Ware 1981) measures peopleÕs perceptions of
their own health and is intended for use in population
assessments of general health status. Three single item
measures of general health were used in this study.
Subjects rated their health (excellent to poor), amount
of pain and concern about health (Ôa great dealÕ to
ÔnoneÕ) on a scale from 1 to 4.
The Personal Resource Questionnaire (PRQ) (Weinert
1987) is a second generation multidimensional 25 item,
7-point scale measure of social support consisting of five
dimensions of support: intimacy, social integration,
nurturance, worth, assistance/guidance.
The Life Satisfaction Index (LSIZ) (Neugarten et al.
1961, Wood et al. 1969) measures the psychological
well-being of older people with the goal of identifying
Ôsuccessful agingÕ. The LSIZ consists of 13 items, rated
from 0 to 2 (disagree, neutral, agree).
Intervention
The nurses referred clients in the programme who were
thought to be lonely and socially isolated. The volun-
teers met their clients weekly and on average visited for
3 h. As hours of visiting were part of their university
course work, volunteers indicated their contact hours.
Activities included walks around the house, talking,
assisting with care activities, reading, writing letters
and often just listening. Clients indicated the visitors
provided ÔcompanyÕ and gave them Ôsomething to doÕ.
Volunteers rated the programme as an extremely
valuable learning experience and a rewarding activity.
Results
Sample descriptive statistics
Of 26 people who entered in this study, four were
dropped from the study due to their mental confusion
(n=3) and entering a nursing home (n=1). Participating
subjects were mainly females (68%), widowed (68%)
with a mean age of 80 years. Their mean education level
was grade 9, and most were retired or never worked
(73%). Over half (55%) were Canadian-born and they
226
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232

Short papers
reported their income at low to medium levels (95%).
Their functional capacity level indicated that 86%
needed some assistance to look after their personal
needs or household work activities.
Group comparability
As indicated in Table 1, sociodemographic variables
were found comparable at baseline between groups
except the experimental group had more persons born in
Canada, whereas most in the control group were born in
England (P = 0.03). However, this variable had no effect
on outcome measures when used as a covariate.
At baseline, levels of health, life satisfaction, func-
tional status, and social supports were not different
between groups (Table 2). Subjects indicated, at base-
line, only fair health, some pain and some health con-
cerns. Their life satisfaction scores were only moderate
and their social support scores were lowest in the areas
of social integration and nurturance.
Effectiveness of intervention
The change scores of the group receiving the friendly
visitor were compared to the control group change
scores (Table 3). The subjects receiving the friendly
volunteer showed a statistically significant difference
in life satisfaction (Mann Whitney U-test = 23, P = 0.01)
and two social support measures: worth (t20= 2.41,
P = 0.03), and social integration (t20 = 2.38, P = 0.03).
ÔWorthÕ indicated a greater feeling of worth and inte-
gration as others let them know that they were impor-
tant and were appreciated as a person. ÔSocial integra-
tionÕ indicated that they had people to share activities
with. It is unknown if this improvement in social inte-
gration included others as well as the volunteer visi-
tor. 
Other 
clinically 
important 
improvements
occurred in level of health. There were no statistically
significant differences in nurturance, intimacy and
assistance or guidance subscales of social support.
These results must be viewed with caution due to
multiple testing.
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232
227
Total
Volunteer visitor
Control
n = 22
n = 12
n = 10
x
–
SD
x
–
SD
x
–
SD
Life satisfaction (0–26)
12.0
(5.2)
11.9
(6.0)
12.2
(4.5)
Social support:
Intimacy (0–35)
23.4
(8.5)
23.6
(8.7)
23.2
(8.6)
Social integration (0–35)
19.1
(8.5)
20.6
(9.6)
17.4
(7.0)
Nurturance (0–35)
19.1
(7.8)
21.6
(8.8)
16.2
(5.5)
Worth (0–35)
23.4
(7.8)
22.9
(8.1)
24.0
(7.7)
Assistance (0–35)
24.2
(7.5)
23.5
(8.1)
25.0
(7.0)
Poor health (1–4)
3.1
(0.8)
3.0
(0.9)
3.3
(0.7)
Pain (1–4)
2.1
(1.2)
2.3
(1.4)
1.9
(1.1)
Health concern (1–4)
2.2
(1.2)
2.6
(1.2)
1.7
(1.1)
Table 2 Comparison of health and social
variables between groups at baseline
Total 
Volunteer visitor 
Control 
n = 22
n = 12
n = 10
x
–
SD
x
–
SD
x
–
SD
Age (years)
79.4
(7.0)
79.7
(7.0)
79.0
(7.5)
Education level 
(years)
8.6
(2.8)
8.3
(2.9)
9.0
(2.8)
Functional ability 
1–5 (5 poor)
3.2
(0.8)
3.3
(0.8)
3.2
(0.9)
n
%
n
%
n
%
Gender: males
7
32
5
42
2
20
Widowed
15
68
9
75
6
60
Canada country of birth
13
59
10
83
3
30
Income poor
7
32
4
33
3
30
Table 1 Comparison of
sociodemographic variables between
volunteer visiting and control clients at
baseline (n = 22)

Short papers
Discussion
More extensive research is needed to verify the pro-
grammes effectiveness.
Although this pilot study was limited by the small
sample size (n = 22), the short time period (6 weeks),
and nonblinded subjective reporting by clients, there
were statistically significant improvements in life sat-
isfaction and social support by the subjects receiving
friendly volunteer visitors.
The improvement in life satisfaction was contrary
to the Calsyn et al. (1984) study. It is thought that the
studied samples were different as our research sub-
jects also received Home Health Care visits by nurses
and homemakers. In addition, volunteerÐclient
matches related to choice and interests of volunteer
were a result of a specifically prepared interview
process of each client and volunteer, who were
undergraduate students studying gerontology. The
volunteer time of 3Ð4 h weekly visits (as opposed to
1Ð1/2 h weekly in the Calsyn et al. (1984) study) on a
consistent basis was a requirement that was identi-
fied in the friendly visitor job description and reaf-
firmed during the volunteer interview process.
Although this short-term study of clients who were
recipients of careful matching of volunteer to client
with a high contact of 3Ð4 h weekly provided some evi-
dence of the value of a friendly volunteer visitor, more
extensive research is needed to verify the pro-
grammeÕs effectiveness.
References
Calsyn R., Munson M., Penco D., Kupferberg J. & Jackson J.
(1984) Comparison of the effectiveness of various
approaches to visiting isolated community elderly. Journal
of Gerontological Social Work 7 (4), 29Ð42.
Chambers L. & Kirby R. (1988) Services for seniors study, map-
ping the way to the future for the elderly: Report of findings and
recommendations. Prepared by the Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth 
and 
the 
Hamilton-Wentworth
District Health Council.
Davies A.R. & Ware J.E. Jr (1981) Measuring health percep-
tions in the health insurance experiment. Rand: Publication
no. R-2711-HHS. Rand Corp, Santa Monica. 
Milne C. (1990) (Chair person) Strategic Plan for Health and
Social Services for Seniors in Halton Region (1990). Prepared
for Halton District Health Council and Elderly Services
Advisory Committee (Region of Halton) by the ARA
Consulting Group Inc.
Munson M., Calsyn R.J., Penco D. & Kupferberg J. (1980)
Do friendly visiting programs help the homebound elderly?
Final Report. Funded by US Administration on Aging
#7AT0180, Ageline Abstract 00005330. University of
Missouri, St. Louis.
Neugarten B.L., Havighurst R.J. & Tobin S.S. (1961) The
measurement of life satisfaction. Journal of Gerontology 16,
134Ð143.
Skeel R.T. (1982) Systematic assessment of the patient with
cancer. In: R.T. Skeel (Ed.) Manual of Cancer Therapy. Little,
Brown and Co., Boston, p. 13.
Weinert C. (1987) A social support measure: PRQÕs ′85.
Nursing Research 36 (5), 273Ð277.
Wood V., Wylie M.L. & Sheafor B. (1969) An analysis of a
short self-report measure of life satisfaction: correlation
with rater judgements. Journal of Gerontology 24 (4), 465Ð469.
228
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232
Volunteer visitor
Control
n = 12
n = 10
x
–
SD
x
–
SD
t20
P
Life satisfaction
– 2.83
(1.7)
– 3.3
(5.6)
3.34
< 0.01*
Social support
Intimacy
– 0.08
(6.5)
– 0.40
(8.8)
0.15
< 0.88
Social integration
– 3.08
(5.3)
– 2.40
(5.5)
2.38
< 0.03*
Nurturance
– 0.75
(5.7)
– 0.70
(6.2)
0.57
< 0.57
Worth
– 1.25
(5.1)
– 4.80
(6.6)
2.41
< 0.03*
Assistance
– 1.08
(5.5)
– 2.80
(7.0)
1.45
< 0.16
Health improvement
– 0.3
(0.6)
– 0
(.8)
0.82
< 0.42
Pain improvement
– 0
(0.6)
– 0.2
(.9)
0.61
< 0.55
More health concerns
– 0.4
(1.3)
– 0
(1.2)
0.78
< 0.44
*P < 0.05.
Table 3 Comparison of changes after
6 weeks in health and social variables
between groups

Short papers
Collaboration between health and social care:
coterminosity in the ‘New NHS’
Mark Exworthy and Stephen Peckham
1LSE Health, LSE, London and 2School of Health and
Applied Social Studies, Faculty of Health and Social
Care, University of the West of England, Stapleton,
Bristol
Abstract
Policy-makers and practitioners have seen coterminosity
as a way of enhancing collaboration between health and
social care agencies. Its role in promoting such
collaboration has varied over time; LabourÕs reforms
suggest a different role for coterminosity in inter-agency
collaboration. 
For 
example, 
Social 
ServicesÕ
representation on Primary Care Groups highlights the
localised nature of collaboration. This article defines
coterminosity, reviews recent policy changes towards it,
and interprets the role that it might play in the future.
The article concludes that coterminosity offers an
important contribution, especially at local levels, but is
insufficient in resolving all inter-agency issues.
Introduction
Improving collaboration between health and social
care agencies has been a long sought-after goal in both
organizations. Coterminosity of geographical bound-
aries has been one measure often proposed to improve
such collaboration. However, the context in which
coterminosity operates is crucial to its role. This article
assesses the contribution that coterminosity is likely to
play in health and social care following the publication
of the 1997 White Paper, The New NHS.
Collaboration: an enduring issue
Ever since the formation of the NHS in 1948 (but
especially since the 1974 re-organization), the need to
collaborate has been of paramount concern to health
and social care agencies at both operational and
strategic levels. Various measures have been imple-
mented (and often evaluated) over this period to fos-
ter collaboration including shared values/strategy
and joint finance (Wistow 1990). However, one mea-
sure that continues to preoccupy policy-makers and
practitioners is coterminosity and yet its contribution
remains elusive.
Collaboration is significant in terms of the organi-
zational structures and relationships that are formed,
the processes that are employed and the variations in
(policy and service) outcomes that result. In particu-
lar, the relative contribution of different mechanisms
to improved collaboration in different areas remains
an important (research) issue. Here, we shall consider
one mechanism of collaborative strategies, viz. coter-
minosity.
What is coterminosity?
Despite being frequently proposed as a solution to col-
laborative difficulties, coterminosity remains an
ambiguous concept; it has evaded detailed analysis by
policy analysts and practitioners. Policy documents at
central and local levels have frequently cited the value
of coterminosity without ever subjecting it to rigorous
scrutiny (Exworthy & Peckham 1998). A re-examina-
tion of its role in collaboration is therefore vital given
the type of policy changes introduced by the Labour
government as part of the 1997 White Paper, The New
NHS (Department of Health 1998).
It is relatively easy to find statements supporting the
concept of coterminosity. For example, in the 1960s,
unity of boundaries was an accepted policy goal:
The best available solution would be to align the boundaries
of health and local authorities: the assumption being that
cohabitation [i.e. coterminosity] would lead to coordination
(Klein 1990, p. 91).
Similarly, coterminosity was promoted in the 1970
Green Paper, a fore-runner of the 1974 re-organization.
Although the 1974 changes moved most community
health services to the NHS, coterminosity between
health authorities (HAs) and local authorities (LAs)
was largely achieved. Policy in the 1970s and 1980s still
sought coterminosity although in less directive ways: 
[HA] boundaries, either singly or jointly, were to be cotermi-
nous with those of social services or education authorities
(Ottewill & Wall 1990). 
GriffithsÕs (1988) supported the concept, seeing coter-
minosity as a self-evident benefit:
Collaboration and joint planning are admirable provided
that É responsibilities are clear É [Of course], this would be
helped by restructuring at a local level with HAs, Social
Services and Family Practitioner Committees (FPCs) enjoy-
ing coterminosity É(para. vi.).
More recently, joint purchasing/commissioning has
sometimes looked to coterminosity. Hudson (1995)
claims that joint purchasing is capable, inter alia,
securing a better picture of need in the population unhindered
by organizational boundaries (p. 235; emphasis added).
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232
229
Correspondence: Mark Exworthy, Room J.307, London School of
Economics, Health, London School of Economics, Houghton
Street, London WC2A 2AE.

Short papers
This policy desirability reflects three benefits that
coterminosity is assumed to confer: ease of communica-
tion between officers in different organizations, clear
responsibility for the same population, and a corre-
spondence between service purchasing and provision.
The scale and nature of these benefits will depend on
the extent of boundary coincidence. It is possible to
distinguish between unitary (e.g. one HA to one LA),
multiple (e.g. one-to-many) and partial forms of coter-
minosity (i.e. overlapping HA/LA boundaries)
(Exworthy & Peckham 1998). Intuitively, unitary coter-
minosity would be expected to confer the most benefit
to both agencies.
‘The New NHS’ and recent policy changes
The key antecedent of the reforms announced in late
1997 was the introduction of the quasi-market in 1991
(see Robinson & Le Grand 1994). Perhaps one of the
most significant impacts of the reforms upon collabo-
ration and coterminosity was the effect of the quasi-
market upon the planned boundaries of statutory
agencies. In the NHS, only HAs retained explicit geo-
graphical boundaries in the 1991 reforms, their fund-
ing being derived according to the size of their resident
population. However,  
[HAs] could, in theory, purchase health care from whichever
provider was most able to meet the purchaser's require-
ments. Crucially, the provider need not be located within the
HA area (Exworthy 1998, p. 451).
However, despite this potential, strong links remain
between HAs and local providers. Recent evidence has
shown that 80-85% of HAsÕ budgets have been spent
with providers located within the HAÕs geographical
boundaries (Exworthy 1998).
The 1997 White Paper The New NHS set a new direc-
tion for the NHS and, in conjunction with other policy
developments (such as Health Action Zones and the
1998 Green Paper ÔOur Healthier NationÕ), the context
for health and social care collaboration has been sub-
stantially altered. Although implementation of these
policies is not yet complete, it is possible to identify
emergent themes with respect to collaboration and
coterminosity.
The key development is the creation of Primary
Care Groups (PCGs), responsible for commissioning
services from providers. These PCGs represent (a
revised re-emergence of) a locality approach as they
will contiguous with each other within each HA. HAs
will oversee PCGs and undertake strategic develop-
ment with all relevant local organizations including
LAs. The outcome of this development will be the
Health Improvement Programme (HIP), an agreed
programme 
of 
service 
development 
over 
the
mediumÐlong-term. In supporting their collaborative
role with HAs, LAs are to have a broader social, eco-
nomic and environmental duty, thereby emphasizing
the partnership approach.
The partnership theme is developed in the Green
Paper Our Healthier Nation (Department of Health
1998) which sets out the governmentÕs proposals for
improving public health. The Green Paper seeks to
establish a Ôcontract for healthÕ in each area in which
Ôgovernment and national playersÕ, Ôlocal players
and communitiesÕ, and individuals have responsibil-
ities for improving health, individually and collec-
tively within a framework of national targets (for
heart disease and stroke, accidents, cancer and men-
tal health) and locally agreed priorities.
One strategy that combines both White and Green
Papers is the Health Action Zone (HAZ). These HAZs
are networks of local statutory and/or independent
agencies who have been given greater flexibility in the
use of financial, material and human resources. Thus,
usual regulations and organizational barriers are
being eliminated or lowered with the intention of pro-
moting greater effectiveness in tackling interrelated
health and social care issues. HAZs tend to cover
whole authority areas and, even though the focus may
be upon subgroups within those areas (e.g. young and
elderly people, diabetes patients), this serves to
emphasize the role that coterminosity could play at
the local (cf. authority) level.
A more symbolic, but equally powerful, shift associ-
ated with recent Labour policies has been the change
in language. Markets and competition have been
down-played (though not entirely removed) in favour
of cooperation. Such a change may augur well for col-
laboration and possibly coterminosity.
A new focus for commissioning
Two consequences of the development of purchaser
organizations in the NHS in the 1990s have been the
aggrandisement of Health Authorities (to populations
of 500 000 to 1 million) and the renewed interest in col-
laboration, as manifest through joint purchasing initia-
tives. The consequence of the former was that HAs
sought to introduce Ôlocality purchasingÕ schemes to
facilitate public consultation exercises or liaison with
GPs. The consequence of the latter was that agencies
sought ways to work together. One outcome of both
trends was the search for coterminosity. Though
highly constrained by other factors (such as finance
and cultural differences), coterminosity was often
achieved at the locality level, if not (always) at the
authority level.
230
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232

Short papers
A key element of recent health care policy has been
the development of primary care as a focus for provi-
sion and for purchasing leading to current proposals
for PCGs. There are, however, a number of problems
with this approach. First, GPs, who play prominent (or
dominant) roles in primary care-based purchasing,
have traditionally had poor collaborative links with
social care agencies (Hudson 1994). The development
of PCGs might suggest that such poor collaboration
will continue although some proposals (e.g. HIPs)
point towards the opportunity for greater collaboration
between health and social care.
The government has stated that, 
[in developing PCGs] É account must be taken of social ser-
vices as well as Health Authority boundaries, to help pro-
mote integration in service planning and provision
(Department of Health 1997: section 5.15). 
However, in reality, the geographical basis of
PCGs (between 46 000 and 255 000 population) is
unlikely to match with the spatial organization of
most Social Services (or other LA departments).
Whilst PCGs of above 100 000 will be epidemiologi-
cally stable (thereby reducing risk), it does not augur
well for close collaboration with social care.
However, PCGs will be geographically delimited,
contiguous units, which may give some opportunity
for collaboration. Inevitably, the degree of collabora-
tion in each area will be a function of the particular
configuration of authorities and their decentralised
units. Moreover, as individual practices are not geo-
graphically delimited, collaboration will involve
overlapping sets of relationships, thereby hampering
joint working.
The Government acknowledges some of these
issues and has argued that, 
[PCGs] should develop around natural communities, but
take into account also the benefits of coterminosity with
social services [and that] . Épractices based close to the
borders of a Group will be able to join with others in the
way which makes best sense locally. (Department of Health
1997: section 5.16).
Unfortunately, the notion of natural communities
may not fit easily with the tests for population size and
agency coterminosity, as is often the case in boundary
determination (Exworthy 1994). Further problems
may also arise where PCGs draw together practices
that have traditionally used different (possibly nonlo-
cal) health care providers creating contracting tensions
within the group.
Combined, these issues do not suggest that the
primary care focus of current reforms will necessarily
facilitate collaboration, through coterminosity or any
other mechanism (Peckham et al. 1998). However,
evidence from the national evaluation of Total
Purchasing Pilots does show that TPPs have been mak-
ing important operational links with social services at
both practice and TPP levels which hold out the poten-
tial to create more vertical and horizontal integration
of service provision (Myles et al. 1998). Total purchas-
ing appeared to be a catalyst rather than an initiator of
change and key to this catalytic role was the TPPÕs con-
trol over resources as perceived by themselves and
others such as social services.
Service provision
The geographical organization of service provision is
highly dependent upon the nature of that service.
Some services are (apparently) more amenable to col-
laboration and coterminosity than others. Even ser-
vices that are normally associated with provision in
fixed locations and/or limited multiagency working
have important collaborative connotations.
The notion of a hierarchy of (health) services based
upon epidemiology (and by implication, geography)
has long been recognized (Curtis & Taket 1996); those
services associated with ÔrarerÕ conditions are (gener-
ally) not provided on a ÔlocalÕ basis, and vice versa. This
reflects the epidemiology of conditions, but also has
policy relevance in terms of subsidiarity Ð the principle
where decisions are devolved to the most appropriate
local level (i.e. practice, Primary Care Group, HA or
supra HA level) (Exworthy 1993). Two examples illus-
trate this. Cancer services in the UK are being re-orga-
nized on the basis of a Ôhub-and-spokeÕ model in
which specialist regional centres complement the work
of generalist district (local) units. However, such ser-
vices operate at such large scales that they do not eas-
ily correspond to collaboration with other agencies. By
contrast, community nursing has strong links with its
local communities and in the mid-1980s was re-orga-
nized on the basis of neighbourhoods, geographical
units of between 10 000 and 25 000 population
(Cumberlege 1986, Ottewill & Wall 1990). This facili-
tated coterminosity, and in turn, collaboration because
of the similar spatial scale at which social services (and
others) operated.
Community-oriented health services tend to have
closest links with social care services although the role
of coordination between hospital staff and social work-
ers in terms of discharge planning from hospital to
patient's homes, for example, should not be underesti-
mated. Links between health neighbourhoods or local-
ities and LA area offices are perhaps the most easily
identifiable form of collaboration in terms of service
provision and the most obvious scale at which coter-
minosity may be achieved. The ÔsuccessÕ of collabora-
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232
231

Short papers
tion at this level is dependent on more than just coter-
minosity as evidenced by the above example from total
purchasing.
Conclusions
The current reforms indicate that some signs of
progress are apparent but that the nirvana of collabo-
ration is still somewhat distant, if only because accept-
able policies have to be put into practical action.
Similarly, the role of coterminosity has re-surfaced fol-
lowing Labour's health and social care reforms. The
notion that Ôjoined-upÕ solutions are required to tackle
complex problems might tend to suggest that cotermi-
nosity  (Ôjoined up boundariesÕ) would contribute to
collaboration Ð the complex problem. Indeed policies
based on defined geographical area are prominent in
the reforms (including HAZs, PCGs and HIPS) which
may facilitate collaboration.
It is noticeable that the scale at which these geo-
graphically based reforms are occurring is at both the
authority and locality level. Policy change has sig-
nalled some re-alignment of agency roles and
responsibilities but nonetheless many structural and
organizational obstacles persist which hinder full
and effective collaboration. For example, general
practices are based upon lists of patients who may or
may not be resident locally. This contrasts with, say,
the praxis of Social Service Departments which tend
to be geographically oriented. Likewise, health
service accountability has tended to be financial and
managerial whereas LA accountability has drawn
upon a democratic model. These are fundamental
differences which geographical boundary re-align-
ment may only ameliorate.
In conclusion, coterminosity thus has a continued
role to play but, as at other times, it has to be balanced
with other imperatives. However, the nature of recent
policies highlights that coterminosity will have a small
but significant function in the success or otherwise of
policies in this ÔnewÕ era of collaboration.
References
Cumberlege J. (1986) Neighbourhood Nursing. HMSO, London.
Curtis S. & Taket A. (1996) Health and Societies: changing per-
spectives. Arnold, London.
Department of Health (1997) The New NHS: Modern,
Dependable. Cmd. 3807 HMSO, London.
Department of Health (1998) Our Healthier Nation Cmd. 3852.
HMSO, London.
Exworthy M. (1993) A review of recent structural changes to
district health authorities as purchasing organisations.
Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 11,
279Ð289.
Exworthy M. (1994) The contest for control in community
health services: general managers and professionals dis-
pute decentralisation. Policy and Politics 22 (1), 17Ð29.
Exworthy M. (1998) Localism in the NHS quasi-market. In
Environment and Planning C: government and policy, 16,
449-462.
Exworthy M. & Peckham S. (1998) The contribution of coter-
minosity to purchasing health and social care. Health and
Place 4 (3), 233Ð243.
Griffiths R. (1988) Community care: agenda for action. Report to
Secretary of State for Social Services. HMSO, London.
Hudson B. (1994) General practice and community care:
developing the links.
Health and Social Care in the
Community 1 (4), 373Ð378.
Hudson B. (1995) Joint commissioning: organisational revo-
lution or misplaced enthusiasm? Policy and Politics 23 (3),
233Ð249.
Klein R. (1990) The Politics of the NHS. Longman, Harlow,
2nd edn.
Myles S., Wyke S., Popay J. & et al. (1998) Total Purchasing and
Community and Continuing Care: Lessons for future policy
developments in the NHS. National Evaluation of Total
Purchasing Pilot Projects Working Paper. KingÕs Fund (TP-
NET), London.
Ottewill R. & Wall A. (1990) The Growth and Development of
Community Health Services. Business Education Publishers
Limited, Sunderland.
Peckham S., Taylor P. & Turton P. (1998) A public health model
of primary care: from concept to reality. Public Health
Alliance, Birmingham.
Robinson R. & Le Grand J. (eds) (1994) Evaluating the NHS
reforms. Hermitage Policy Journals.
Wistow G. (1990) Community Care Planning: a Review of Past
Experiences and Future Imperatives. Department of Health,
London.
232
© 1999 Blackwell Science Ltd, Health and Social Care in the Community 7(3), 225–232

