INT’L. J. AGING AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, Vol. 57(4) 313-337, 2003
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES THROUGH A
VOLUNTEER ROLE: IMPLICATIONS FOR
OLDER-ADULTS’ PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH*
KAREN S. ROOK
DARA H. SORKIN
University of California, Irvine
ABSTRACT
This study examined the effects on older adults’ psychological health of
participation in a volunteer role that afforded opportunities to form friend-
ships with age peers and to express nurturance toward another person. Access
to these important social provisions was expected, in turn, to contribute to
greater self-esteem, less loneliness, and less depression. The study hypotheses
were tested by comparing older adults who served as foster grandparents to a
developmentally disabled child (N = 52) with older adults in two comparison
groups (Ns = 69, 59). Three assessments were conducted over a two-year
period. The analyses revealed that the foster grandparents exhibited a sig-
nificant increase in the number of new ties formed, but participation in the
Foster Grandparent Program was not associated with the expected gains
in emotional health. Explanations for the limited findings and implications
for future research are discussed.
Evidence amassed from several different traditions of research has demonstrated
persuasively that social relationships function as a source of important provisions
that enhance health and well-being (e.g., House, Landis & Umberson, 1988;
Seeman, 1996). These provisions are most often conceptualized in terms of
*This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging, AG03975.
313
 2003, Baywood Publishing Co., Inc.

various forms of support and companionship that people receive from others
(Barrera, 1986; Cohen & Wills, 1985). Access to emotional support, instrumental
support, and companionship has been linked to a wide variety of health outcomes
in diverse age groups, including older adults (Everard, Lach, Fisher, & Baum,
2000; Seeman et al., 1995; Uchino, Cacioppo, & Kiecolt-Glaser, 1996). Moreover,
although much of this work has been cross-sectional in nature, an emerging body
of longitudinal work has yielded evidence that the support and companionship
available through one’s informal social ties are associated prospectively with
important health outcomes, including mortality (House, Robbins, & Metzner,
1982; Krause, 1997).
An exclusive emphasis on the aid and affection received from others, however,
overlooks another important element of many social relationships—the oppor-
tunity to provide aid and affection to others. Giving support to others has been
identified as an aspect of involvement in informal social relationships that confers
health-related benefits in its own right (Krause, Herzog, & Baker, 1992). An
early proponent of this view was Weiss (1973, 1974), who argued that the
opportunity to express nurturance toward another person is a core provision of
social relationships. Without opportunities to express nurturance, in his view,
people will experience psychological distress, most often in the form of dimin-
ished feelings of self-worth (Weiss, 1974). Consistent with this, the feelings of
independence and self-worth that arise from being able to reciprocate support to
members of one’s social network has been found to be associated with enhanced
well-being in the elderly (e.g., Krause et al., 1992; Roberto, 1989).
Obviously, unique life circumstances may impose upper limits on, or even
reverse, these associations. Having to provide inordinate amounts of support to
others may compromise rather than enhance health (Schulz & Beach, 1999).
Similarly, receiving excessive support from others may contribute to feelings
of dependence or indebtedness, thereby detracting from well-being (Barrera,
2000; Newsom, 1999). More typically, though, receiving and providing aid and
affection constitute basic functions of informal social bonds that serve to enhance
psychological health.
For many older adults, these dual “receiving and giving” functions are readily
available in their close relationships with other people (Antonucci, Fuhrer, &
Jackson, 1990; Rook, 1987). For others, however, opportunities to express one
or both functions may be missing. Widowhood, retirement, and other social role
losses that affect the elderly may limit opportunities for maintaining and devel-
oping close relationships that involve reciprocal exchanges of support (Crohan
& Antonucci, 1989). Given this, it is important to learn how opportunities can
be created that both facilitate the formation of supportive social bonds and allow
for the expression of nurturance. The goal of the current study was to investigate
the effect of participating in a volunteer program that afforded both kinds of
opportunities on older adults’ psychological health. The theoretical underpinnings
of the study are developed below.
314
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

Facilitating the Formation of Supportive
Social Bonds in Later Life
The burgeoning literature on the health-related benefits of receiving social
support and companionship has offered relatively few guidelines about programs
or interventions that might be effective in fostering the formation of supportive
social bonds (Cohen, Gottlieb, & Underwood, 2000; Rook & Dooley, 1985).
Theory-driven interventions to facilitate the formation of social ties in later
life have been quite scarce. Most of the interventions conducted thus far have
focused on mobilizing social support programs for people experiencing stressful
life changes, such as those who are coping with a life-threatening illness (Helgeson
& Cohen, 1996) or caring for a disabled family member (Kennet, Burgio, &
Schulz, 2000).
A notable exception in this regard is an influential study by Heller, Thompson,
Trueba, Hogg, and Vlachos-Weber (1991). These researchers sought to foster
the formation of supportive peer ties among lonely older women living in a
rural area. They drew upon the available theoretical and empirical literature to
identify several intervention objectives that, if realized, were expected to affect the
elderly participants’ psychological well-being in the following ways: 1) to help
participants form a close tie with another person (confidant) (Crohan & Antonucci,
1989); 2) to increase their receipt of emotional support (given the distinctive
importance of emotional support) (Seeman et at., 1995); 3) to encourage recip-
rocal exchanges of support (thereby allowing participants to draw benefits from
both providing as well as receiving support) (Roberto, 1989; Rook, 1987); and
4) to facilitate the formation of indigenous peer networks that could become
self-sustaining after the termination of the intervention (Rook & Dooley, 1985).
The rural location of the study influenced the mode of delivery of the inter-
vention. Given the logistical difficulties of arranging in-person contacts among
the geographically dispersed participants, the researchers sought to foster social
ties that could be maintained through regular telephone contact. The older women
were helped to become comfortable with such telephone contact through an
initial 10-week period in which they had weekly telephone conversations with
trained staff members. After this period, the women were randomly assigned to:
1) continue with regular staff contacts; 2) initiate or receive weekly telephone calls
with a fellow study participant; or 3) become no-contact controls. An additional
control group completed the study assessments only and did not participate
in any staff or peer telephone contacts. Detailed measures of women’s social
network membership and psychological well-being were obtained at baseline and
at several follow-up assessments.
Thus, the intervention was carefully conceived on the basis of existing theory
and research, painstakingly implemented, and rigorously evaluated. Despite this,
the intervention proved to have little impact on the elderly participants’ social
ties or emotional health. Relatively few of the women formed enduring ties with
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
315

their telephone partners, and those who did exhibited few significant psycho-
logical benefits. Additionally, the significant psychological benefits that were
observed generally did not persist over time.
Numerous ideas have been offered about why this intervention yielded null
results (see commentaries in the American Journal of Community Psychology, 19,
1991). One set of ideas, derived from the social psychological literature on friend-
ship formation, suggests that friendships develop most easily when people engage
in regular contact structured around shared activities and meaningful social roles
(Heller et al., 1991; Rook, 1991). Consistent with this, Blieszner (1989) found that
friendships in later life tend to be initiated through casual interactions between
people who have similar interests or who are engaged in collaborative activities.
Volunteer work, adult education classes, and other activities help to structure
participants’ interactions, thereby reducing ambiguity and social anxiety (Jerome,
1981). Such shared activities and roles not only permit people to avoid the
inhibiting self-consciousness and awkward expectations that often accompany
interactions explicitly directed toward friendship formation, they allow people to
make discrete assessments of each other’s potential as friends and also provide
the “grist” for their interactions: topics to discuss, experiences to compare, and so
forth (Rook, 1991). Thus, programs that take an indirect approach to fostering
friendships by providing comfortable, natural bases for social engagement are
likely to be more successful than programs that directly and explicitly emphasize
friendship formation as their objective (Pilisuk & Minkler, 1980; Rook, 1984).
Although these conditions have been hypothesized to provide an optimal foun-
dation for friendship formation, they have rarely been investigated empirically.
The current study investigated the effects of involvement in a program that
brought older adults into daily contact with age peers who were involved in similar
activities—helping to care for a developmentally-disabled child through par-
ticipation in a local chapter of the nationwide Foster Grandparent Program. We
anticipated that such regular contact, organized around shared activities, would
facilitate the acquaintanceship process. Moreover, the program involved frequent
contact extended over a sufficiently long period of time to allow such relation-
ships to emerge gradually and in the relatively natural and familiar context of
shared activities. For these reasons, we expected involvement in this program to
contribute to the formation of new friendships among participants and, in turn,
to greater emotional well-being.
Facilitating Opportunities to
Provide Care to Others
Another key feature of the Foster Grandparent Program that we expected to
contribute to the older adults’ psychological health was the fact that the work
involved providing care to another person, in this case a developmentally-disabled
child with significant needs. Although some older adults may have adequate
316
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

opportunities to express nurturance in their existing social relationships, others do
not. Certain kinds of volunteer work can provide such opportunities.
Research on older adults’ motivations for volunteer work indicates that the
desire to feel useful or to fulfill altruistic strivings is often cited as a primary
reason for volunteering (Morrow-Howell & Mui, 1989; Okun, Barr, & Herzog,
1998). Consistent with this, participation in volunteer roles has been shown to
be a significant predictor of older adults’ feelings of usefulness and self-respect
(Cutler, 1982; Hunter & Linn, 1981; Rietschlin, 1998). Volunteering has also been
described as satisfying communication needs, helping to combat loneliness, and
providing a source of social status (Kuehne & Sears, 1993; Midlarsky & Kahana,
1994). Volunteers, relative to nonvolunteers, report greater satisfaction with
their lives, a stronger will to live, and fewer symptoms of psychological distress
(Hunter & Linn, 1981; Wheeler, Gorey, & Greenblatt, 1998). The elderly volun-
teers in the current research were each involved in providing aid and affection to a
child with special needs, and we hypothesized that this outlet for the regular
expression of nurturance would contribute to their self-esteem and emotional
well-being.
The Current Study
In sum, the current study investigated the effects of involvement in a social role
that was conceptualized as contributing to older adults’ psychological well-being
through two different pathways: first, by creating conditions hypothesized to be
conducive to friendship formation, the participants’ activities were expected to
facilitate the formation of new social ties and thereby enhance their psycho-
logical health; and second, by providing a context in which participants regularly
helped to nurture and care for a developmentally-disabled child, the program was
expected to bolster feelings of self-worth. Investigating the hypothesized benefits
of this program was appealing for pragmatic as well as theoretical reasons.
Volunteer programs similar to the one we studied exist in many communities. If
such programs were found to be beneficial and their underlying mechanisms were
understood, they could represent cost-effective alternatives to expensive and
typically time-limited interventions aimed at the same objectives.
METHOD
Study Design
The study involved comparison of three groups of older adults: 1) participants
in the nationwide Foster Grandparent Program (FGP); 2) participants in an alter-
native group program for older adults (AGP); and 3) a community sample of older
adults (CS). The first two groups consisted of individuals who had expressed
an interest in participating in the FGP, with actual participation determined
by random assignment. Inclusion of the second group (AGP) controlled for
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
317

participation in a non-volunteer program that offered access to age peers. Inclusion
of the third group (CS) controlled for volunteerism (individual differences asso-
ciated with the willingness to perform volunteer work).
Extensive assessments of study participants’ psychosocial and psychobio-
logical functioning (e.g., information processing, memory, cardiopulmonary func-
tioning, perceptual-motor skills, sleep patterns) were conducted at baseline (T1)
and then annually for a two-year period (T2, T3). The current study, however,
focused exclusively on participants’ emotional well-being and specific social
network characteristics.1
Participants
Sample Recruitment
The study recruitment strategies were designed to recruit a total of 75 older
adults to each of the three groups (FGP, AGP, CS) by enrolling 25 participants per
group per year over a three-year period. The target figure of 25 individuals per year
per group was based on the maximum number of openings for volunteers expected
to become available annually (N = 20-25) as the existing foster grandparents
vacated their positions through naturally occurring program attrition. (It would
have been unethical to displace the existing foster grandparents from their roles for
the sake of the study, and it would have been prohibitively expensive to establish
an entirely new foster grandparent program.) Analyses revealed no significant
effects of enrollment cohort (year of enrollment). Therefore, the analyses to be
reported are based on data that collapse across enrollment cohorts.
The FGP and AGP participants were recruited from the pool of older adults who
attended regional centers that provide subsidized lunches and limited activity
programming for lower-income older adults on a daily basis. Standardized oral
and slide presentations about the FGP were made at centers within a 15-mile radius
of the project site, and prospective volunteers were recruited at the end of each
presentation.
Participants in the CS group were recruited through mailings and follow-up
telephone calls to older adults chosen randomly from an age- and economically-
stratified sampling frame for the local region that was purchased from a com-
mercial vendor. The mailings invited prospective participants to take part in a
longitudinal study of aging. Eligibility screening was conducted by telephone to
ensure that the CS participants were comparable in age and socioeconomic status
to the FGP and AGP participants.
318
/
ROOK AND SORKIN
1 Findings from the same longitudinal study have been reported in earlier papers, but these
findings have dealt with the differential associations between psychological well-being and positive
and negative social exchanges (using diary data) (Rook, 2001), and with the effects of social control
as an element of participants’ social network transactions (Rook & Ituarte, 1999; Rook, Thuras, &
Lewis, 1990).

Eligibility Criteria
Following federal guidelines for participating in the FGP, all study participants
were required to be 60 or older and have an income that did not exceed the poverty
level by 20%. In addition, participants in the FGP group had to pass annual
health examinations to rule out contraindicated health conditions.
Random Assignment
Those individuals who volunteered to become foster grandparents were ran-
domly assigned either to the FGP or AGP groups. Those assigned to the FGP
condition were assigned a primary “client” (a developmentally-disabled child in
residence at the state hospital) and, after receiving a standard orientation and
training, were given duties typical of a foster grandparent (e.g., spending time with
their client, taking their client on excursions available on the hospital grounds,
transporting the client to on-site clinics and doctors’ appointments). The foster
grandparents worked four hours per day for five mornings each week, and received
a modest stipend for their work (set by federal policy to correspond roughly to
minimum wage). In addition, the foster grandparents ate lunch (provided by the
program) together at the end of each workday.
Those older adults assigned to the AGP group continued their participation
in the meals and activity programming at the regional nutrition centers. They
received a monthly stipend of $50, to both provide a symbolic control for the
effects of the monetary compensation received by the foster grandparents, and
to compensate them for the time spent in the annual assessments. They understood
that they were important participants in the research study but that they were
not on a waiting list for eventual inclusion in the Foster Grandparent Program.
Participants in the CS group received $50 annually, plus travel expenses, to
compensate them for the time and costs associated with the annual assessments.
Sample Characteristics
Recruitment difficulties and funding cutbacks experienced over the course
of the study made it difficult to reach the targeted figure of 75 participants
per group, yielding a sample of 180 elderly individuals who met the eligibility
criteria. The resulting group sizes were: FGP (N = 52), AGP (N = 69), CS (N = 59).
Participants’ demographic characteristics and health status at baseline (T1) are
summarized in Table 1. Participants ranged in age from 60 to 92 years, with
a mean age of 70.52 years. The majority of participants (65.6%) were women,
and most (90%) were Caucasian. Nearly two-thirds (63.9%) were widowed,
divorced, or single, and 68.9% had annual incomes of $15,000 or less. Most
participants (85%) reported that they enjoyed good or excellent health.
Analyses that address the initial equivalence of the three participant groups are
reported later.
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
319

Study Attrition
We anticipated an annual attrition rate of 20% based on previous longitudinal
studies with older adults, and also on the average annual attrition rate in the
particular Foster Grandparent Program studied. The actual rate of attrition was
higher, however: 28.3% (N = 51) from T1 to T2, and 23.3% (N = 30) from T2 to
T3. In addition, the rates of attrition differed across the study groups, with higher
320
/
ROOK AND SORKIN
Table 1. Sample Characteristics at T1
Variable
Category
Full sample
(N = 180)
FGP
(N = 52)
AGP
(N = 69)
CS
(N = 59)
Age
Sex
Education
Marital
status
Ethnicity
Income
Number of
chronic health
problems
—
Male
Female
—
Never married
Widowed
Divorced/separated
Married
White
Non-white
$<5,000
$5,000-7,5000
$7,500-10,000
$10,000-15,000
$>15,000
—
70.52
(6.89)
34.4%
65.6
3.94
(1.51)
2.8%
44.4
16.7
36.1
90.0%
10.0
6.8%
14.1
19.8
28.2
31.1
2.26
(1.56)
69.63
(6.71)
32.7%
67.3
3.75
(1.55)
3.8%
48.1
15.4
32.7
76.9%
23.1
5.8%
19.2
34.6
30.8
9.6
2.62
(1.66)
68.91
(6.30)
30.4%
69.6
4.33
(1.32)
1.4%
39.1
21.7
37.7
95.7%
4.3
6.1%
9.1
10.6
31.8
42.4
1.78
(1.24)
73.17
(7.03)
40.7%
59.3
3.64
(1.61)
3.4%
47.5
11.9
37.3
94.9%
5.1
8.5%
15.3
16.9
22.0
37.3
2.49
(1.71)
Note: For the categorical variables, entries shown are percentages. For the continuous
variables, entries shown are means and, in parentheses, standard deviations. FGP = Foster
Grandparent Program; AGP = Alternative Group Program; CS = Community Sample.
Education is coded 1 “Grade school or less,” 2 “Some high school,” 3 “High school
degree,” 4 “Some college,” 5 “College degree,” 6 “Some post-graduate training,” and
7 “Post-graduate degree.”

rates in the FGP group (50.0% from T1 to T2, N = 26; 23.1% from T2 to T3, N = 6)
and the CS group (35.6% from T1 to T2, N = 21; 28.9% from T2 to T3, N = 11)
relative to the AGP group (5.8% from T1 to T2, N = 4; 20.06% from T2 to T3,
N = 13).
The reasons for attrition over the three-year study included death (8.4%, N = 7),
health problems or illness (36.1%, N = 30), and nonhealth-related factors (55.4%,
N = 46). The latter category included residential relocation, time constraints
(expressed by participants who felt they were too busy to continue their partici-
pation in the study), and difficulty in meeting the demands of some of the
psychobiological assessment protocols (e.g., having to spend time in a sleep
laboratory or to undergo electrophysiological testing). In addition, some of the
participants who were accepted into the Foster Grandparent Program found the
volunteer role (which involved helping to provide care for a developmentally-
disabled child or adolescent) to be more demanding than they had anticipated,
based on exit interviews with those who left the program. Chi-square analyses
indicated that the specific reasons for attrition did not differ across the three
groups. Analyses of the differences between participants who did versus those
who did not complete the study are reported later.
Measures
In-person interviews lasting approximately 90 minutes were conducted
annually by trained interviewers in an interview room at the project site. The
interviewers were blind to the study hypotheses and to participants’ assign-
ment to groups. The interviews included extensive questions about partici-
pants’ background characteristics, social networks, activity patterns, and emo-
tional well-being.
Emotional Health
Three dimensions of psychological health were assessed: self-esteem, loneli-
ness, and depression. Self-esteem was assessed with the 10-item Rosenberg
Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965), which has been widely used in studies of
the elderly and was found to be highly reliable in this sample ( = .80). Loneliness
was assessed with 10 items drawn from the 20-item UCLA Loneliness Scale
(Russell, Peplau, & Cutrona, 1980). Abbreviated and full-length versions of this
scale have been used frequently to assess loneliness in varying age groups,
including the elderly. The 10-item scale had adequate reliability in the current
sample ( = .80). Depression was assessed with the 20-item Center for
Epidemiological Studies–Depression Scale (CES-D) (Radloff, 1977), which has
been validated against clinical measures (Himmelfarb & Murrell, 1983) and
has been used extensively in community surveys, including surveys of older
adults (Pachana, Gallagher-Thompson, & Thompson, 1994). The CES-D had
good internal consistency in this sample ( = .87). Ratings for these three
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
321

measures of emotional health were made on a 4-point scale (0 = “Never,”
3 = “Most of the time”). The mean levels for self-esteem, loneliness, and depres-
sion at T1 were 34.54, 14.85 (equivalent to 29.70 on the 20-item UCLA Loneliness
scale), and 11.04, respectively. These values are comparable to those reported
in other studies of community-residing older adults (e.g., Gatz & Hurwicz, 1990;
Himmelfarb & Murrell, 1983; Russell, 1996; Schultz & Moore, 1984).
Social Ties
Participants’ social ties were assessed using name-eliciting questions adapted
from the work of Fischer and his colleagues (Fischer, 1982; McCallister &
Fischer, 1978). This method has been used in a number of studies of older adults
(e.g., Finch, Okun, Barrera, Zautra, & Reich, 1989; Rook, 1994). A series of
questions asked participants who, if anyone, performed particular functions in
their lives such as providing social support or companionship. Questions asked
about negative as well as positive exchanges with others. In response to each
question, participants provided the first names of any individuals who performed
the specified function. After the complete set of name-eliciting questions had been
presented, the interviewer compiled a list of the unique names that had been
generated and elicited additional information about each person named, including
the role relationship (responses were coded as: spouse, child, other relative,
in-law, friend, neighbor, co-worker, supervisor/staff member, acquaintance, foster
grandchild, romantic partner, and other) and the duration of the relationship
(number of years). In addition, for all non-kin network members, we also inquired
how the relationship had originated. Specifically, for each non-kin tie we asked the
participants how they had met the individual named. Participants’ responses were
coded as: friend of friend, neighbor, Foster Grandparent Program, alternative
group program (county transportation, lunch, and counseling program), work (for
participants with full- or part-time jobs), childhood/school/college, and other.
Participants also were shown a list of the people they had mentioned in response
to the name-eliciting questions, and were asked whether anyone important to
them was missing. Few additional names were generated this way (Mdn = 2.00);
those mentioned were typically grandchildren, nieces, or nephews. Thus, the set
of name-eliciting questions appeared to succeed in capturing participants’ most
important social ties.
We derived from this information a measure of the number of new relationships,
if any, formed in the past year. Any relationships with a reported duration of one
year or less at T1 were classified as new prior to T1. Those with a reported duration
of one year or less at T2 were classified as new for the T1-T2 time period, and
those with a reported duration of two years or less were classified as new for
the T1-T3 time period. We believe that this procedure is less susceptible to
social desirability bias than simply asking participants whether they had formed
new relationships. This measure allowed us to evaluate whether participants in
322
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

the FGP condition were more likely than participants in the other groups to
forge new social ties over the course of the study. The availability of a measure
of new relationships formed prior to the start of the study also allowed us to
determine whether the rate of new relationship formation was greater after the
study began (as a result of participation in the Foster Grandparent Program, for
example) or merely reflected a continuation of relationship-seeking processes
initiated before the study began.
The information we obtained from all participants about the nature of the
role relationship with their social network members, how they had met non-kin
social network members, and the kinds of positive and negative exchanges in
which each network member was engaged allowed us to gain a more complete
understanding of the kinds of new social relationships that might have formed
as a result of participation in the Foster Grandparent Program. Specifically,
we used this information in the analyses reported below to determine whether
the new relationships reported by the foster grandparents included people whom
they regarded as friends, people who functioned as a source of positive exchanges
(vs. negative exchanges), and people whom they had met through the Foster
Grandparent Program.
Finally, because this study focused on support provision as well as support
receipt, we also examined the extent to which participants felt that others counted
on them for support. One of the name-eliciting questions asked participants
whether anyone depended on them on a regular basis for care, help, or social
contact and, if so, who depended on them. From their responses, we derived a
count of the number of people who depended on the participant. We anticipated
that this number would increase for FGP participants, relative to the other par-
ticipants, because of their involvement in providing care on daily basis to a
developmentally-disabled child.
Background Characteristics
In addition to assessing standard demographic characteristics such as age,
sex, marital status, income, and ethnicity, we also assessed chronic health
problems that participants might have experienced by asking whether they had
been diagnosed with any of 10 chronic conditions (e.g., high blood pressure,
diabetes, arthritis, 0 = “health problem not reported,” 1 = “health problem
reported”). A measure of the number of chronic health problems was derived from
their responses.
RESULTS
Initial Equivalence and Attrition
The first set of analyses examined the initial equivalence (at T1) of the three
groups of participants and the factors associated with attrition from the study. The
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
323

analyses examined participants’ background characteristics and T1 scores on the
primary outcome measures. For the continuous variables, 3 × 2 analyses of
variance (ANOVA) were conducted in which the two independent variables
were condition (FGP, AGP, or CS) and attrition status (did vs. did not complete
the study), and the dependent variables were participants’ background charac-
teristics (age, number of chronic health conditions, and education), emotional
health (self-esteem, loneliness, and depression), and characteristics of their social
ties (number of new relationships formed in the year prior to the baseline assess-
ment; number of network members who depended on the participant at baseline).
A main effect of condition would indicate that the groups of participants were
not equivalent at baseline; a main effect of attrition status would indicate that
participants who completed the study differed from those who did not, and a
significant interaction would indicate that the effects of attrition differed across
conditions (Jurs & Glass, 1971). For categorical variables, the initial equivalence
of participants in the conditions and the effects of attrition were examined with
chi-square analyses.
The ANOVAs revealed no significant interaction effects, but several main
effects of condition and of attrition status did emerge. Significant univariate Fs are
reported below. For significant effects of condition, post-hoc contrast analyses
were conducted to clarify the group differences.
Initial Equivalence
These analyses indicated that some baseline (T1) differences existed among the
three groups, despite random assignment to two of the groups (FGP, AGP) and
efforts to recruit a socioeconomically matched group of older adults for the third
group (CS). Participants in the CS group were older than were participants in the
FGP and AGP groups, F(2, 174) = 8.24, p < .001, 2 = .09 (see Table 1 for Ms).
Participants in the AGP group had fewer chronic health problems than did
participants in the FGP and CS groups, F(2, 174) = 3.86, p < .02, 2 = .04 (see
Table 1). Participants in the three groups did not differ with respect to sex
or marital status (married vs. not married), but the FGP group included more
non-white participants than did the other two groups, 2 (2) = 13.91, p < .001;
(see Table 1). Additionally, income (dichotomized for the chi-square analysis,
<$10,000 vs. $10,000) varied across the conditions, with more participants in the
FGP and CS conditions falling into the lower income group (58.8% and 40.7,
respectively) than in the AGP condition (25.8%), 2 (2) = 13.07, p < .001.
With respect to their baseline emotional health, participants in the FGP group
had higher depression scores than did participants in the AGP and CS groups
(Ms = 12.23, 8.28, and 7.92, respectively, F(2, 179) = 4.96, p < .01), 2 = .05,
but no differences were observed for self-esteem or loneliness. The analysis of
baseline social network characteristics indicated that the three groups of partici-
pants did not differ significantly with respect to the number of new relationships
324
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

they had formed in the previous year or the number of people who depended on
the participants for support.
Because some baseline group differences emerged, the analyses that examined
the effects of participation in the FGP included controls for participants’
age, number of chronic health conditions, ethnicity, income (0 = “<$10,000,”
1 = “$10,000”), and depression. The implications of these baseline differences
will be considered more fully later.
Attrition
The ANOVAs and chi-square analyses revealed several significant differences
between participants who did versus did not complete the study. Of this generally
low-income group of participants, those with lower incomes (<$10,000) were
less likely to complete the study than were participants with higher incomes
($10,000) (39.4% vs. 64.8%, respectively, 2 (2) = 10.96, p < .001). Participants
who did not complete the study also had less education than did those who
completed the study, Ms = 4.36 vs. 3.45 , F(1, 174) = 12.18, p < .001, 2 = .07. No
significant differences were observed for age, sex, marital status (married vs. not
married), ethnicity, number of chronic health problems, depression, self-esteem,
loneliness, the number of new relationships formed prior to the baseline assess-
ment, or the number of people who depended on the participant at baseline.
The differences that emerged are consistent with prior research on the charac-
teristics of older adults who drop out of longitudinal studies (e.g., Cooney, Schaie,
& Willis, 1988). They suggest that the findings of the current study may not
generalize to older adults with very low incomes or limited education.2
Effects of Participation in the
Foster Grandparent Program
Emotional Health
A primary hypothesis of the study was that older adults in the FGP condition,
relative to those in the other two conditions, would show greater improvements in
emotional health from baseline (T1) to the follow-up assessments conducted one
and two years later (T2, T3). The participants included in the T1-T2 analyses were
those who completed the assessments at both T1 and T2, and the participants
included in the T1-T3 analyses were those who completed the assessments at all
time periods. To examine the hypothesized changes from T1 to T2, univariate
analyses of covariance were conducted in which each of the T2 emotional health
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
325
2 Parellel initial equivalence and attrition analyses examined the baseline (T1) characteristics of
those who completed the first follow-up assessment (T2), rather than participants who completed both
follow-up assessments (T2 and T3). These analyses revealed virtually identical results to those reported
here. A summary of these analyses is available upon request from the first author.

measures (self-esteem, loneliness, and depression) was treated as the dependent
measure, condition (FGP, AGP, CS) was treated as the independent variable, and
the T1 emotional health measure was included as a covariate, as were T2 age,
number of chronic health conditions, ethnicity, income, and depression. Parallel
analyses examined changes between T1 and T3, with the T3 emotional health
measure treated as the dependent variable, condition as the independent variable,
and the T1 emotional health measure and T3 age, chronic health problems,
ethnicity, income, and depression included as covariates. The latter analyses
allowed us to evaluate whether any gains observed between T1 and T2 persisted to
T3, and also allowed us to detect any gains that might have required longer than
one year to emerge (i.e., evident by T3 but not by T2).
The means and standard deviations of the emotional health variables for the
three conditions at each assessment (T1, T2, T3) are shown in Table 2, upper
panel. Contrary to expectation, no significant group differences emerged.3
Social Ties
Our next analysis examined whether participants in the three groups were
differentially likely to form new social network ties during the course of the study.
We first report findings for new relationships formed from T1 to T2 (those with
a reported duration of one year or less at T2), and then report findings for new
relationships formed from T1 to T3 (those with a reported duration of two years
or less at T3).
An analysis of covariance revealed that participants in the FGP reported sig-
nificantly more new relationships from T1 to T2 (M = 2.26) than did participants
in the AGP (M = .52) or CS (M = .44), F(2, 120) = 15.66, p < .001, 2 = .22 (see
Table 2, lower panel).4 Moreover, participation in the FGP did appear to account
for the significantly greater formation of new social ties, as indicated by par-
ticipants’ responses to questions about how they had met each of the people
named in response to the name-eliciting questions. Of the new ties formed
from T1 to T2 by FGP participants, 70.3% involved people affiliated with the
FGP, and these included friends made through the program (40.0%), individuals
who the participant identified as a co-worker but not as a friend (20.0%), the
foster grandchild (20.0%), staff members and supervisors (15.6%), and romantic
partners met through the program (4.4%). In the AGP and CS groups, the major
categories of new ties formed from T1 to T2 involved friends, neighbors, in-laws,
and other relatives (such as a grandchild born during this time period).
326
/
ROOK AND SORKIN
3 These T1-T2 and T1-T3 analyses of emotional health outcomes were repeated with all covariates
except the relevant T1 emotional health measure removed. The findings were unchanged. A summary
of the analyses with the covariates trimmed is available upon request from the first author.
4 The T1-T2 analyses of social network characteristics were repeated with all covariates except
the relevant T1 variable removed. The findings were unchanged. A summary of the analyses with the
covariates trimmed is available upon request.

Table 2. Group Differences in Emotional Health and Social Network Characteristics
FGP
AGP
CS
Variable
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
Emotional Health
Self-esteem
M
(SD)
Loneliness
M
(SD)
Depression
M
(SD)
Social Network Characteristics
Relationships formed
M
(SD)
Number of people who
depend on the participant
M
(SD)
34.54
(4.37)
16.08
(4.46)
11.04
(7.90)
0.65
(1.20)
0.85
(0.88)
35.83
(3.08)
15.08
(4.24)
9.39
(6.97)
2.26a
(2.00)
0.96
(1.10)
35.22
(4.32)
14.39
(3.27)
9.94
(5.57)
1.94c
(1.92)
1.00
(0.94)
36.33
(3.11)
13.86
(3.81)
7.77
(5.98)
0.66
(1.10)
1.06
(1.02)
36.35
(3.34)
13.34
(3.51)
7.95
(5.68)
0.52b
(0.88)
0.97
(0.92)
36.53
(3.23)
13.70
(3.85)
6.98
(6.94)
0.94d
(1.48)
1.18
(1.22)
36.42
(4.34)
15.33
(5.67)
7.03
(6.73)
0.35
(0.92)
1.08
(0.97)
36.16
(4.60)
14.66
(5.12)
8.46
(9.26)
0.44b
(0.56)
1.26
(1.29)
36.59
(3.92)
14.19
(3.86)
7.70
(5.48)
1.00d
(1.39)
1.48
(1.45)
Note:
FGP = Foster Grandparent Program; AGP = Alternative Group Program; CS = Community Sample. The T1 means and standard
deviations, and the T1-T2 comparisons are based on all participants who completed the T1 and T2 assessments (N = 128); the T1-T3 comparisons
included those who completed all three assessments (N = 92). The analyses of group differences included controls for the T1 dependent variable
and (not shown) for current age, income, ethnicity, chronic health problems, and depression. Means with different subscripts differ significantly
from each other (T1-T2 analysis, a vs. b; T1-T3 analyses, c vs. d). Original scores, rather than covariate-adjusted scores, are shown for ease
of interpretation.
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
327

We also examined the supportive or nonsupportive nature of these new ties
by classifying each new tie as a source of positive exchanges exclusively, a source
of negative exchanges exclusively, or a source of both positive and negative
exchanges (Finch et al., 1989; Rook 1984) based on participants’ responses about
the people with whom they experienced the positive and negative exchanges we
assessed. The number of new network members who functioned as a source
of both positive and negative exchanges was too small to analyze as a function of
participants’ group status. We conducted chi-square analyses to examine the
percent of participants in each group who formed new social ties from T1 to T2
that were sources of either positive or negative exchanges exclusively. The overall
rates of positive and negative interaction did not differ significantly across groups,
but the FGP participants were more likely than other participants to have formed
new positive ties as well as new negative ties from T1 to T2. The results indicated
that 61.5% of the FGP participants formed one or more exclusively positive new
social ties from T1 to T2, as compared with 23.4% of the AGP participants and
31.6% of the CS participants, 2 (2) = 12.13, p < .01. The FGP participants also
were marginally more likely to form an exclusively negative social tie from T1
to T2, with 21.3% of them doing so as compared with 9.4% of AGP participants
and 5.3% of CS participants, 2 (2) = 5.35, p < .07.
Because the FGP participants were somewhat more likely to have formed
negative, as well as positive, social ties through their involvement in the FGP from
T1 to T2, we conducted additional analyses to determine who in the program
served as the primary source of negative exchanges. These analyses indicated that
supervisors and staff members were engaged in the greatest number of negative
exchanges (M = .43, SD = .54), followed by fellow FGP participants identified
as friends (M = .20, SD = .41), and by those identified as co-workers (M = .11,
SD = .33). The foster grandchildren were never named by the participants as
a source of negative exchanges. Fellow FGP participants identified as friends
also functioned as sources of positive exchanges in this setting (M = 1.93,
SD = 2.31), as did those identified as co-workers (M = 1.22, SD = .67), and the
foster grandchild (M = 1.00, SD = 0). Staff members and supervisors were the
source of the fewest positive exchanges (M = .71, SD = .95).
Our next analyses examined changes in participants’ social network charac-
teristics over a two-year period, from T1 to T3. These analyses are based on those
participants who remained in the study by T3. The FGP participants reported a
significantly larger number of new social ties (M = 2.11, SD = 1.88) than did either
AGP (M = .94, SD = 1.50) or CS participants (M = 1.00, SD = 1.39), F(2, 90) =
3.05, p < .05, 2 = .07. These data suggest that the new social ties formed by the
FGP participants in the first year of the study persisted into the second year.
In the next analysis, we examined the extent to which participants felt that
others counted on them for support. We anticipated that this number would
increase for FGP participants, relative to the other participants, because of their
involvement with the foster grandchildren. The results indicated, however, that
328
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

there were no group differences in the number of people named by the study
participants as depending on them at T2 or T3, relative to the number named as
depending on them at T1 (see Table 2, lower panel).
Finally, because participants’ emotional health did not vary significantly across
groups over time, we could not examine whether the formation of new, positive
social ties mediated the effects of participation in the Foster Grandparent Program.
Therefore, mediational analyses were not undertaken.
DISCUSSION
The goal of this study was to investigate the effects on older adults’ psycho-
logical health of participating in a volunteer role that provided opportunities to
form ties with age peers and to express nurturance toward another person, in
this case a developmentally-disabled child. These interpersonal benefits, in turn,
were expected to reduce feelings of loneliness and depression and to boost
participants’ self-esteem.
The results of the study, however, did not bear out these expectations entirely.
Participation in the Foster Grandparent Program did appear to facilitate the
formation of peer ties, by providing opportunities for regular social contract
structured around shared activities and meaningful social roles. The formation
of these new ties was not associated, however, with the expected gains in
emotional health.
Explanations and Implications
A key question raised by these results is why the anticipated gains in emotional
health did not occur. We consider substantive and methodological explanations
in this section, and we suggest implications for future research.
Substantive Considerations
The foster grandparents were immersed in a fairly complex social system that
exposed them to the possibility of negative, as well as positive, interactions with
others. As indicated by our results, the foster grandparents were more likely
than other study participants to form an exclusively negative social tie, as well
as one or more exclusively positive new social ties. Many of these new negative
ties were with supervisors and staff members. The detrimental impact of these
negative interactions may have served to cancel the beneficial impact of the
positive interactions. This interpretation received only limited support, however,
in post-hoc analyses that examined the number of new positive and new negative
social ties formed as predictors of emotional health (at T2 or T3), while controlling
for T1 emotional health, new positive and negative social ties formed prior to T1,
and the covariates included in the core hypothesis tests (age, number of chronic
health conditions, ethnicity, income, and depression). These analyses indicated
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
329

that neither new positive nor new negative social ties formed during the course
of the study predicted emotional health at the T2 or T3 follow-up assessments.5
We also had anticipated that the opportunity to provide care to a child with
special needs would contribute to the foster grandparent’s self-esteem and emo-
tional well-being. Although many of the foster grandparents listed their foster
grandchild as a new social tie, they did not tend to regard the foster grandchild
as someone who counted on them, as there were no significant differences in the
number of people who the participants named as regularly depending on them for
support and companionship.
We also considered whether participation in the Foster Grandparent Program
might have caused participants to reduce their contact with pre-existing friends,
thereby canceling possible benefits of the program. We examined changes in both
the number of friends named by participants at each time period and in the
frequency of contact with these friends. These analyses revealed that decreases in
either the number of, or frequency of contact with, friends were relatively rare.
More importantly, such decreases were not more common among the foster
grandparents than among participants in the two comparison groups. Thus, we do
not believe that participation in the Foster Grandparent Program caused partici-
pants to restrict their contacts with pre-existing friends.
The Foster Grandparent Program involved a substantial commitment of time
each week (20 hours) and interaction not only with age peers and a vulnerable
child, but also with supervisors and other staff members. Volunteer work that
requires a significant commitment of time and that involves interactions with
supervisors may take on some of the qualities of a work role, thereby detracting
from the potential benefits of the volunteer role. Assessment of participants’
expectations and reactions to the volunteer work would be valuable in future
studies to evaluate how often such shifts occur in volunteers’ perceptions of
their work.
In a related vein, some research suggests that the benefits of volunteering in
later life decline, and may even reverse, as the time commitment exceeds certain
optimal thresholds. Volunteering was associated with a reduced risk of mortality
in a study by Musick, Herzog, and House (1999), but this link was only found for
those individuals who reported having volunteered fewer than 40 hours in the
past year; individuals who volunteered for more than 40 hours did not exhibit
a reduced risk of mortality. Van Willigen (2000) found, in an analysis of the same
data set, that volunteering more than 140 hours per year (or 2.7 hours per week)
was related to poorer perceived health among older adults. The elderly volunteers
in the current study committed 20 hours per week to the volunteer role and also
assumed challenging responsibilities. Mastery of this demanding role could have
contributed to beneficial effects on self-esteem for some participants, but the
330
/
ROOK AND SORKIN
5 A summary of these post-hoc analyses is available upon request.

intensity of the volunteer work may have caused other participants to derive
limited benefits from their involvement.
The mode of recruitment into the Foster Grandparent Program, necessitated by
the experimental design of the study, also may have changed the experience of
being a foster grandparent in subtle but important ways that offer lessons for future
research. A common mode of recruitment into the Foster Grandparent Program,
and into many other volunteer programs, is by word of mouth. In fact, a majority
of volunteers report becoming involved at the request of another person such as
a friend or acquaintance (Morrow-Howell & Mui, 1989). People who enjoy a
volunteer program tell others about it, and may try to enlist friends to join them.
During the course of this study, some of the elderly individuals who were
randomly assigned to the Foster Grandparent Program asked to have a friend
or neighbor admitted into the study. Similarly, some of the older adults who
were already in the Foster Grandparent Program sought to nominate friends or
neighbors for inclusion in the project (and, specifically, into the FGP group).
Such requests could not be honored without compromising the study design,
which meant that the participants in our Foster Grandparent Program, unlike those
in other programs, would not have the benefit of sharing their volunteer work with
pre-existing friends. Future researchers may want to consider a study design that
allows for dyadic recruitment (e.g., two friends entering the program together)
because it mirrors a naturally-occurring mode of recruitment. Whether people
recruited as part of a dyad would exhibit less attrition and greater benefits than
those recruited individually is an interesting question that could have important
implications for the operation and evaluation of volunteer programs.
Methodological Considerations
Methodological factors also may have contributed to the nonsignificant effects
on emotional health. It is possible, for example, that the measures of emotional
health used to evaluate the effects of volunteer participation (self-esteem, depres-
sion, and loneliness) were too global or insensitive to change (cf. Heller et al.,
1991). To explore this possibility, we conducted post-hoc analyses of measures
of daily positive and negative mood collected from daily diary assessments
conducted annually (described more fully in Rook, 2001). These analyses revealed
the same pattern of null results. Nonetheless, it remains possible that other
measures, such as those that explicitly tap a sense of purpose or usefulness, might
have revealed greater evidence of the hypothesized benefits of involvement as
a foster grandparent.
It is also possible that participants in the AGP group, who had expressed an
interest in the Foster Grandparent Program at the outset of the study but who were
not assigned to the program, subsequently became involved in other forms of
volunteer work, thereby diluting the hypothesized group differences. Analyses
that examined changes over time in the total number of community and volunteer
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
331

organizations to which participants belonged revealed no significant group differ-
ences from T1 to T2 or T1 to T3. Similarly, it is possible that participants in the
community sample were involved in organizations that provided some of the same
benefits as the foster grandparent program. The three groups did not differ
significantly at the start of the study in the number of organizational affiliations,
but we lack information about the extent to which these affiliations involved
frequent or meaningful interaction with other people.
The attrition rate from this study was higher than anticipated, and it left a
relatively healthy, robust sample with which to test hypotheses about improve-
ment over time. To the extent that the remaining participants were characterized
by relatively high self-esteem and low depression and loneliness, it would have
been difficult to show improvement over time. Attrition also limited the power
of the analyses to detect effects. When the study was designed, the anticipated
sample size was projected to have sufficient power to detect effects of medium
size. The observed power was lower than this in most of our analyses, Mpower = .29.
Compounding this, the effect sizes were smaller than anticipated, M2 = .04.
These problems are common, however, in intervention studies. Maddock and
Rossi (2001) recently examined statistical power in 187 journal articles and found
that intervention studies tend to have less power than do nonintervention studies.
For example, average power was .17 for intervention studies versus .42 for
nonintervention studies when small effects were reported. With respect to ettect
sizes, Wheeler et al. (1998) reported in a meta-analysis of studies examining the
effects of volunteering for older adults that the average effect size was small to
medium (mean r-indices = .186; corresponding to 2 = .035) when controlling for
the potentially confounding influence of health or socioeconomic status. Thus,
although our average power and effect sizes are comparable to those reported in
previous studies of this type, they make the interpretation of our nonsignificant
findings inconclusive.
The substantial attrition in the study also precluded subgroup analyses to
determine whether a particular subset of the elderly participants derived greater
benefits from the volunteer role. Some researchers (e.g., Fengler, 1984) believe
that volunteer participation contributes to health and well-being only when it
serves to compensate for personal and social resources that may be missing in a
person’s life. The design of the study and the modest sample size did not allow us
to test hypotheses about compensation for specific kinds of social deficits that
participants may have experienced.
The fact that the rate of attrition was distinctively high in the FGP group during
the first year of the study was also unexpected, but it appears that attrition from
volunteer programs in general is higher in the first year than in subsequent
years (Fischer & Schaffer, 1993). This attrition also pointed to another factor
that may have worked against our finding more evidence of the hypothesized
benefits of the volunteer role. At the time the study was conceived, many of the
developmentally-disabled children residing in state facilities had a moderate level
332
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

of disability. By the time the study was funded and implemented, however, a
change in state policies had led most of the higher-functioning children to be
placed in community settings. Those who remained in the state facilities tended to
be more severely impaired and older than had been typical earlier. Thus, although
some of the foster grandparents in this study did work with higher-functioning
infants and children, many worked with older children and adolescents whose
level of functioning was quite limited and who often lacked communication skills.
This meant that the foster grandparent role was considerably more emotionally
and physically demanding than anticipated. Some of the older adults who volun-
teered for the Foster Grandparent Program in this study were simply unprepared
for the rigors of the program. If older volunteers’ work is particularly demanding
in nature, it may be important for them to have access to social support in the
volunteer setting (Morrow-Howell & Mui, 1989).
In a related vein, the severe level of disability among many of the foster
grandchildren may have led some foster grandparents to feel that they were not
making a meaningful contribution to the quality of life of their clients. We lack
information about the foster grandparents’ expectations of, and reactions to, their
work. We can report anecdotally, however, that the nursing personnel and other
hospital staff generally regarded the work of the foster grandparents as quite
valuable both because it was perceived as improving the quality of the clients’
lives, even if modestly, and because it helped to alleviate the day-to-day demands
on the staff, allowing them to concentrate more on the patients’ medical needs
than their psychosocial needs. The foster grandparents were recognized for their
work formally and informally throughout the year (e.g., annual appreciation
ceremonies, birthday cards, etc.). Thus, we believe that the social environment
in which the foster grandparents functioned underscored the value of their
contributions, although we do not have information about the perceptions and
reactions of individual participants in the program. In future studies, it would
be valuable to examine how the expectations and reactions of the participants
evolve over time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Martha Ryan Pedersen and Paul Thuras for their invaluable
help in overseeing the data collection and data management, and a large group
of undergraduate students who provided assistance with data collection and
data coding.
REFERENCES
Antonucci, T. C., Fuhrer, R., & Jackson, J. S. (1990). Social support and reciprocity:
A cross-ethnic and cross-national perspective. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 7, 519-530.
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
333

Barrera, M. (1986). Distinctions between social support concepts, measures, and
models. American Journal of Community Psychology, 14, 413-445.
Barrera, M., Jr. (2000). Social support research in community psychology. In
J. Rappaport & E. Seidman (Eds.), Handbook of community psychology (pp. 215-245).
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Blieszner, R. (1989). Developmental processes of friendship. In R. G. Adams
& R. Blieszner (Eds.), Older adult friendship (pp. 108-126). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cohen, S., Gottlieb, B. H., & Underwood, L. G. (2000). Social relationships and health.
In S. Cohen, L. G. Underwood, & B. H. Gottlieb (Eds.), Social support measurement
and intervention: A guide for health and social psychologists. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis.
Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310-357.
Cooney, T. M., Schaie, K. W., & Willis, S. L. (1988). The relationship between prior
functioning on cognitive and personality dimensions and subject attrition in longitudinal
research. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 43, P12-P17.
Crohan, S. E., & Antonucci, T. C. (1989). Friends as a source of social support in old
age. In R. G. Adams & R. Blieszner (Eds.), Older adult friendship: Structure and process.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cutler, N. E. (1982). Voluntary association participation and life satisfaction: Repli-
cation, revision, and extension. International Journal of Aging and Human Development,
14, 127-137.
Everard, K. M., Lach, H. W., Fisher, E. B., & Baum, M. C. (2000). Relationship of
activity and social support to the functional health of older adults. Journal of Gerontology:
Social Sciences, 55, S208-S212.
Fengler, A. P. (1984). Life satisfaction of subpopulations of elderly: The comparative
effects of volunteerism, employment, and meal site participation. Research on Aging, 6,
189-212.
Finch, J. F., Okun, M. A., Barrera, M., Jr., Zautra, A. J., & Reich, J. W. ( 1989). Positive
and negative social ties among older adults: Measurement models and the prediction of
psychological distress and well-being. American Journal of Community Psychology, 17,
585-605.
Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends: Personal networks in town and city.
Chicago: University of Chicago.
Fischer, L. R., & Schaffer, K. B. (1993). Older volunteers: A guide to research and
practice. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gatz, M., & Hurwicz, M. L. (1990). Are old people more depressed? Cross-sectional
data on Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale Factors. Psychology and
Aging, 5, 284-290.
Helgeson, V., & Cohen, S. (1996). Social support and adjustment to cancer: Recon-
ciling descriptive, correlational, and intervention research. Health Psychology, 15,
135-148.
Heller, K., Thompson, M. G., Trueba, P. E., Hogg, J. R., & Vlachos-Weber, I.
(1991). Peer support telephone dyads for elderly women: Was this the wrong intervention?
American Journal of Community Psychology, 19, 53-74.
Himmelfarb, S., & Murrell, S. A. (1983). Reliability and validity of five mental health
scales in older persons. Journal of Gerontology, 38, 333-339.
334
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships and health.
Science, 241, 540-545.
House, J. S., Robbins, C., & Metzner, H. L. (1982). The association of social relation-
ships and activities with mortality: Prospective evidence from the Tecumseh Community
Health Study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 116, 123-140.
Hunter, K. I., & Linn, M. Q. (1981). Psychosocial difference between the elderly
volunteers and non-volunteers. International Journal of Aging and Human Development,
12, 205-213.
Jerome, D. (1981). The significance of friendship for women in later life. Ageing and
Society, 1, 175-197.
Jurs, S. G., & Glass, G. V. (1971). The effect of mortality on the internal and external
validity of the randomized comparative experiment. Journal of Experimental Education,
40, 62-66.
Kennet, J., Burgio, L., & Schulz, R. (2000). Interventions for in-home caregivers:
A review of research 1990 to present. In R. Schulz (Ed.), Handbook on dementia
caregiving: Evidence-based interventions for family caregivers (pp. 61-125). New York:
Springer.
Krause, N. (1997). Received support, anticipated support, social class, and mortality.
Research on Aging, 19, 387-422.
Krause, N., Herzog, A. R., & Baker, E. (1992). Providing support to others
and well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 47,
P300-P311.
Kuehne, V. S., & Sears, H. A. (1993). Beyond the call of duty: Older volunteers
committed to children and families. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 12, 425-438.
Maddock, J. E., & Rossi, J. S. (2001). Statistical power in three health-psychology
related journals. Health Psychology, 20, 76-78.
McCallister, L., & Fischer, C. S. (1978). A procedure for surveying personal networks.
Sociological Methods and Research, 7, 131-148.
Midlarsky, E., & Kahana, E. (1994). Altruism in late life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morrow-Howell, N., & Mui, A. (1989). Elderly volunteers: Reasons for initiating and
terminating service. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 13, 21-34.
Musick, M. A., Herzog, A. R., & House, J. S. (1999). Volunteering and mortality among
older adults: Findings from a national sample. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences,
54, S173-S180.
Newsom, J. T. (1999). Another side to caregiving: Negative reactions to being helped.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 6, 183-187.
Okun, M. A., Barr, A., & Herzog, A. R. (1998). Motivation to volunteer by older
adults: A test of competing measurement models. Psychology and Aging, 13, 608-621.
Pachana, N. A., Gallagher-Thompson, D., & Thompson, L. W. (1994). Assessment of
depression. In M. P. Lawton & J. Teresi (Eds.), Annual Review of Gerontology and
Geriatrics (Vol. 14, pp. 234-256). New York: Springer.
Pilisuk, M., & Minkler, M. (1980). Supportive networks: Life ties for the elderly.
Journal of Social Issues, 36, 95-116.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research
in the general population. Applied Psychology and Measurement, 1, 385.
Rietschlin, J. (1998). Voluntary association membership and psychological distress.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 39, 348-355.
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
335

Roberto, K. (1989). Exchange and equity in friendships. In R. G. Adams & R. Blieszner
(Eds.), Older adult friendship: Structure and process. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rook, K. S. (1984). The negative side of social interaction. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 46, 1097-1108.
Rook, K. S. (1987). Reciprocity of social exchange and social satisfaction among
older women. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 145-154.
Rook, K. S. (1991). Facilitating friendship formation in late life: Puzzles and challenges.
American Journal of Community Psychology, 19, 103-110.
Rook, K. S. (2001). Emotional health and positive versus negative social exchanges:
A daily diary analysis. Applied Developmental Science, 5, 87-97.
Rook, K. S., & Dooley, D. (1985). Applying social support research: Theoretical
problems and future directions. Journal of Social Issues, 41, 5-28.
Rook, K. S., & Ituarte, P. H. G. (1999). Social control, social support, and companion-
ship in older adults’ family relationships and friendships. Personal Relationships, 6,
199-211.
Rook, K. S., Thuras, R. D., & Lewis, M. (1990). Social control, health-risk-taking,
and psychological distress. Psychology and Aging, 5, 327-334.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Russell, D. W. (1996). UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity,
and factor structure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 20-40.
Russell, D. W., Peplau, L. A., & Cutrona, C. (1980). The revised UCLA Loneliness
Scale: Concurrent and discriminant validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39, 472-480.
Schulz, R., & Beach, S. R. (1999). Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: The
caregiving health effects study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 282,
2215-2219.
Schultz, N. R., & Moore, D. (1984). Loneliness: Correlates, attributions, and coping
among older adults. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10, 67-77.
Seeman, T. E. (1996). Social ties and health: The benefits of social integration. Annals
of Epidemiology, 6, 442-451.
Seeman, T. E., Berkman, L. F., Charpentier, P. A., Blazer, D. G., Albert, M. S., &
Tinetti, M. E. (1995). Behavioral and psychosocial predictors of physical performance:
MacArthur studies of successful aging. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 50,
M177-M183.
Uchino B. N., Cacioppo, J. T., & Kiecolt-Glaser J. K. (1996). The relationship between
social support and physiological processes: A review with emphasis on underlying
mechanisms and implications for health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 488-531.
Van Willigen, M. (2000). Differential benefits of volunteering across the life course.
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 55B, S308-S318.
Weiss R. S. (Ed.) (1973). Loneliness: The experience of emotional and social isolation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weiss, R. S. (1974). The provisions of social relationships. In Z. Rubin (Ed.), Doing
unto others: Joining molding, conforming, helping, loving (pp. 17-26). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
336
/
ROOK AND SORKIN

Wheeler, J. A., Gorey, K. M., & Greenblatt, B. (1998). The beneficial effects of
volunteering for older volunteers and the people they serve: A meta-analysis. International
Journal of Aging and Human Development, 47, 69-79.
Direct reprint requests to:
Karen S. Rook
Department of Psychology and Social Behavior
3340 Social Ecology II
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-7085
e-mail: ksrook@uci.edu
FOSTERING SOCIAL TIES
/
337

