


Immunogenicity and safety of MF59-adjuvanted and full-dose 
unadjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccines among 
vaccine-naïve children in a randomized clinical trial in rural 
Senegal 
Aldiouma Diallo#a, John C. Victor#b, Jodi Feserb, Justin R. Ortizc, Niranjan Kanesa-thasand, 
Moussa Ndiayea, Bou Diarrae, Sathie Cheikha, Djibril Dienea, Tofene Ndiayea, Assane 
Ndiayea, Kathryn E. Lafondf, Marc-Alain Widdowsong,h, and Kathleen M. Neuzilc,* 
aUMR Vitrome, Institut de Recherche Pour le Développement, Dakar, Senegal 

cCenter for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, USA 


fInfluenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, USA 
gDivision of Global Health Protection, CDC Kenya, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Nairobi, Kenya 
*Corresponding author at: Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 W. 
Baltimore Street, Room 480, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. 
Contributions 
AD, JCV, JRO, MAW, KMN conceived of the study. AD, JCV, JRO, JF, KEL, MAW, KMN designed the study. AD, MN, SC, DD, TN, 
AN, BD acquired the data. All authors analyzed and interpreted the data. AD, JCV, JF, JRO, KMN drafted the article and all authors 
provided critical revisions to the content. All authors had full access to the data, took part in meetings to discuss and interpret the 
results, drafted or critically revised the report, and approved its final version. 
Disclaimer 
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of PATH or 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Conflicts of interest 
Sathie Cheikh: none. 
Aldiouma Diallo: none. 
Bou Diarra: none. 
Djibril Diene: none. 
Jodi Feser: none. 
Niranjan Kanesa-thasan: Was an employee with Novartis Vaccines at the time of study design and conduct. 
Kathryn E Lafond: none. 
Assane Ndiaye: none. 
Moussa Ndiaye: none. 
Tofene Ndiaye: none. 
Marc-Alain Widdowson: none. 
Kathleen M Neuzil: none. 
Justin R Ortiz: none. 
John C Victor: none. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
accine. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 October 15. 
V 


hDivision of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, USA 


Introduction: Effective, programmatically suitable influenza vaccines are needed for low- 
resource countries. 
Materials and methods: This phase II, placebo-controlled, randomized safety and 
immunogenicity trial (NCT01819155) was conducted in Senegal using the 2012–2013 Northern 
Hemisphere trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV) formulation. Participants were allocated in a 2:2:1 
ratio to receive TIV (full-dose for all age groups), adjuvanted TIV (aTIV), or placebo. Participants 
were stratified into age groups: 6–11,12–35, and 36–71 months. All participants were vaccine- 
naïve and received two doses of study vaccine 4weeks apart. The two independent primary 
objectives were to estimate the immunogenicity of TIV and of aTIV as the proportion of children 
with a hemagglutination inhibition (HI) antibody titer of ≥1:40 to each vaccine strain at 28 days 
post-dose two. Safety was evaluated by solicited local and systemic reactions, unsolicited adverse 
events, and serious adverse events. 
Results: 296 children received TIV, aTIV, or placebo, and 235 were included in the final 
analysis. After two doses, children aged 6–11, 12–35, and 36–71 months receiving TIV had HI 
titers >1:40 against A/H1N1 (73.1%, 94.1%, and 97.0%), A/H3N2 (96.2%, 100.0%, and 100.0%), 
and B (80.8%, 97.1%, and 97.0%), respectively. After two doses, 100% children aged 6–11, 12– 
35, and 36–71 months receiving aTIV had ≥1:40 titers against A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and B. After a 
single dose, the aTIV response was comparable to or greater than the TIV response for all vaccine 
strains. TIV and aTIV reactogenicity were similar, except for mild elevation in temperature (37.5– 
38.4 °C) which occurred more frequently in aTIV than TIV after each vaccine dose. TIV and aTIV 
had similarly increased pain/tenderness at the injection site compared to placebo. 
Conclusions: Both aTIV and full-dose TIV were well-tolerated and immunogenic in children 
aged 6–71 months. These vaccines may play a role in programmatically suitable strategies to 
prevent influenza in low-resource settings. 




Influenza is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in children. In most cases, 
influenza virus infection causes a selflimited respiratory infection, although it may cause 
severe disease, particularly in young children [1]. Globally, 1.4% of early childhood deaths 
are attributed to influenza [2], and 99% of all such deaths occur in low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs) [3]. Influenza disease burden data are limited from tropical Africa where 
influenza can circulate year-round. In rural Senegal, influenza surveillance and vaccine trials 
have measured attack rates up to 15–20% for laboratory-confirmed influenza illness among 
children younger than 6 years of age [4,5]. Further, rates of influenza- associated 




hospitalizations among Kenyan children have been shown to be around 5 to 10 times higher 
than contemporaneous rates in the United States [6]. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified children <5 years as a risk group for 
severe influenza illness, and it recommends that they and other high-risk groups be 
immunized annually against influenza [7]. Nevertheless, few LMlCs have national influenza 
vaccine programs [7], and only around 5% of the world’s annual vaccine supply is used 
outside of Europe and the Americas [8]. Most inactivated seasonal influenza vaccines used 
in LMlCs have achieved prequalification by WHO for procurement by UN agencies. 
Unfortunately, immune responses in young children to these products have been suboptimal 
[9,10]. WHO has identified prevention of severe influenza illness among children in LMlCs 
as an unmet public health need that requires better vaccines and new immunization strategies 
[11]. 
To help address this unmet need, we conducted a randomized clinical trial to compare the 
immunogenicity and reactogenicity of unadjuvanted, inactivated trivalent influenza vaccine 
(TIV) and of an adjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (aTIV) in children in rural 
Senegal 


This study was an individual-randomized, observer-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group 
field trial conducted at a single site in the rural village of Niakhar, Senegal, approximately 
110 km southeast of Dakar. Ethical review was provided by the National Ethics Committee 
for Health Research (Senegal Ministry of Health and Social Welfare), Western Institutional 
Review Board (Puyallup, Washington, USA), and with US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) reliance on WIRB. Participant safety was also overseen by an 
independent safety monitoring committee convened by PATH. The study, clinicaltrials.gov- 
NCT01819155, was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of 
Helsinki (2008) and in compliance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines. 

Healthy children 6 through 71 months of age were eligible for the study. Given the local 
social structure and the low literacy rate, information about the study and informed consent 
process was conducted via a series of procedures: (1) meetings were scheduled with the 
community and the study was explained in detail by trained study staff fluent in both French 
and in the local Sereer spoken language; (2) in addition to the official ethics approvals, 
community chiefs provided approval for conduct of the study; (3) a study physician 
informed the subject’s parent or legal guardian of all pertinent aspects of the study; and (4) 
parent or legal guardian consent was documented by a signature and/or signature of an 
impartial literate witness of the consent form. Participants received the study vaccine after 
the written informed consent was obtained. 
Exclusionary criteria included hypersensitivity to any component of the study vaccines or 
previous hypersensitivity to any vaccine, previous receipt of any influenza vaccine or receipt 




of any non-study vaccine within two weeks prior to enrollment or refusal to postpone such 
receipt for 8 weeks, and acute illness accompanied by a fever of 37.5 °C or greater (axillary) 
within 14 days of enrollment. Because acute malnutrition is common in Senegal, particularly 
during the typical influenza season from June through October prior to the harvest, 
malnourished children were not specifically excluded. 

Participants were randomly allocated to TIV, aTIV, or placebo. The allocation sequence was 
computer-generated by an unblinded PATH researcher not otherwise involved in the trial 
using a ratio of 2:2:1, TlV:aTlV:placebo, and block sizes of 5 participants. The sequence was 
delivered to unblinded site personnel who prepared and coded vaccines and placebo. These 
personnel were not involved in any other part of the study. Randomization was stratified into 
three age-groups: 6 through 11 months, 12 through 35 months, and 36 through 71 months. 
For participants younger than 36 months of age, manufacturer- prefilled syringes of TIV of 
0.5 ml dose volume (full-dose) were coded and administered. For participants of these same 
ages, aTIV and placebo were prepared on-site with 0.25 ml dose volumes in identical coded 
syringes, as follows: for aTlV, manufacturer- prefilled syringes containing 0.5 ml dose 
volumes were expelled into sterile vials and 0.25 ml dose volumes (half-dose) were drawn 
into disposable sterile syringes and administered, and for placebo, 0.25 ml dose volumes 
were drawn from manufacturer-supplied vials into disposable sterile syringes and 
administered. For participants 36 months and older, manufacturer-prefilled syringes of TIV 
and aTlV containing 0.5 ml dose volumes were coded, and for placebo, 0.5 ml dose volumes 
were drawn into disposable sterile syringes, which were then coded. All participants 36 
months and older were administered 0.5 ml dose volumes. Nurses administering study 
vaccines and placebo were not informed of which product was being given, and they were 
trained not to communicate any information about the possible identity of the administered 
product to participants or their parents. These nurses also did not participate in follow-up 
visits for safety. 

Study vaccines were unadjuvanted TIV (Vaxigrip, Lot 17153–3, Sanofi-Pasteur, Lyon, 
France) and MF59-adjuvanted TIV (FLUAD®, Lot 129501, produced by Novartis Vaccines). 
Novartis’ influenza vaccine business was acquired by the CSL Group on July 31, 2015, and 
is currently operating as Seqirus. Both vaccines were formulated according to WHO 
recommendations for the 2012–2013 Northern Hemisphere influenza season and contained 
15 μg hemagglutinin (HA) per 0.5 ml dose (or 7.5 μg HA per 0.25 ml dose for aTIV) of each 
of the following three influenza virus strains: A/ California/7/2009 (H1N1) pdm09-like 
virus, A/Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2)-like virus, and B/Wisconsin/1/2010-like virus (Yamagata 
lineage). The placebo was saline (bacteriostatic 0.9% saline for injection). 
Eligible participants were administered a first dose of either of the two study vaccines or 
placebo at study entry and a corresponding second dose 28 days later. The vaccine was 
administered with 25 gauge needles via intramuscular (IM) injection in the thigh (6–12 
months of age) or deltoid muscle (>12 months of age). Participants were then observed for 




30 min for immediate adverse events. Trained field workers visited the home of the child on 
study days 1, 3 or 4, and 7 post-vaccination to record solicited local and systemic reactions 
and unsolicited adverse events (AEs), including serious adverse events (SAEs). For day 29 
through day 112 (i.e., the full duration of the study), all children were assessed monthly for 
SAEs during home visits. Physicians performed physical examinations on each participant 
on study days 0, 28, 56, and 112. For all participants, 3 ml of blood was collected at study 
entry (prior to receipt of dose one of study vaccine or placebo), at 28 days postdose one 
(prior to receipt of dose two), and at 28 days post-dose two. 


2.5.1. 
after the second vaccine dose for each vaccine strain, as determined by hemagglutination 
inhibition (HI) assay, using turkey red blood cells [12]. HI antibody titers to the influenza B 
Victoria lineage virus not included in the 2012–2013 vaccine were also determined. Sera 
from each time point were tested in triplicate for each virus strain with no more than a 2-fold 
difference between readings allowed for acceptance of results, which were then averaged. 
All laboratory testing was performed by Focus Diagnostics (Cypress, CA, USA). 
2.5.2. Safety—Safety endpoints included solicited local reactions (ecchymosis, 
erythema, edema, induration, pain/tenderness), solicited systemic reactions (children 6–35 
months of age: fever, change in eating habits, diarrhea, irritability, shivering, sleepiness, 
unusual crying, vomiting; children 36–71 months of age: fever, muscle/joint pain, chills, 
diarrhea, fatigue, headache, malaise, sleepiness, sweating, vomiting), unsolicited AEs, and 
SAEs. 

The study was designed with two independent co-primary objectives of estimating the 
immunogenicity for the two study vaccines (TIV and aTIV) as the proportion of children 
with an HI antibody titer of ≥1:40 to each vaccine strain at 28 days post-dose two, one 
recommended criterion for establishing the effectiveness of seasonal inactivated influenza 
vaccine based on immune responses [13]. Secondary immunogenicity endpoints were the 
proportion of participants with an antibody titer ≥1:40 at 28 days post-dose one, the 
proportions of participants with a four-fold or greater rise in HI titer between baseline and 
either post-dose one or post-dose two sera, the geometric mean HI titer at each serum 
collection time point, and the ratio of geometric mean HI titers between baseline and either 
post-dose one or post-dose two sera. A composite end-point of the proportion of participants 
achieving seroconversion was also analyzed, with seroconversion defined as the percentage 
of subjects with either a pre-vaccination HI titer <1:10 and a post-vaccination HI titer ≥1:40 
or a pre-vaccination HI titer ≥1:10 and a minimum four-fold rise in post-vaccination HI 
antibody titer. 
Immunogenicity analyses were conducted on the per-protocol (PP) set, defined as those who 
met inclusion criteria, were correctly enrolled in the age group of interest, did not receive 
any influenza vaccine outside of the study, received two doses of study vaccine or placebo 
according to the planned windows, and had three valid serology laboratory results. 




Stratification of immunogenicity results by baseline serostatus (defined as seronegative, HI 
titer <1:10, and seropositive, HI titer ≥1:10) was conducted post-hoc. Proportions with exact 
95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated on the basis of the binomial distribution, and 
geometric mean titers (GMTs) with approximate 95% CIs on the basis of the normal 
distribution. GMTs and corresponding 95% CIs were calculated for the antibody titers to 
influenza by age group pre-vaccination (Day 0), post-dose one (Day 28) and post-dose two 
(Day 56) using the t-test after logarithm transformation of the individual titers and 
calculating the estimated 95% CI of the mean log-transformed titers. Analyses were 
conducted using SAS software (Version 9, SAS Institute Inc., North Carolina, USA). Safety 
was described as the proportion of all enrolled subjects in each study arm that received each 
dose and experienced reactions or events of any severity (and by severity grade) with its 
corresponding exact 95% CI. 
The study was descriptive and not intended to test statistical hypotheses nor designed to 
detect significant differences between vaccines or age groups. Nonetheless, the study was 
powered to estimate the proportion of children with a post-vaccination HI titer of ≥1:40 to 
vaccine antigens with a predefined level of precision. That was, assuming 90% of children 
receiving active vaccine reached an HI titer of at least 1:40, 34 children in each vaccine arm 
in each age group (17 in the placebo arm in each age group) would be required to 
demonstrate that the lower bound of the 95% CI was ≥70%. Assuming 85% evaluability, 40 
children in each vaccine arm in each age group (20 in placebo) translated into a total sample 
size of 300 children enrolled. Baseline seropositivity for any vaccine strain was not 
considered in calculations of sample size. 


A total of 296 children were enrolled, randomized, and administered either study vaccine or 
placebo between April 15 and May 31 in 2013. Of these, 119 received TIV, 118 received 
aTIV, and 59 received placebo, and 93 (78.2%), 99 (83.9%) and 43 (72.9%), respectively, 
adhered to the protocol and were included in the PP analysis set. The most common reasons 
for not completing the study were refusing blood draws and withdrawing consent. 
Participants were monitored through four months following the first study vaccination. Full 
details of subject disposition are shown in the trial profile in Supplemental Fig. 1. No 
substantive differences between study arms were observed for baseline characteristics of all 
randomized subjects (all ages) or those subjects entered into the PP analysis of each age 
group (Table 1). 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.08.032. 

Baseline antibody levels indicated substantial previous exposure to two of three influenza 
strains recommended by WHO for inclusion in 2012–2013 Northern Hemisphere influenza 
vaccines (Fig. 1). Baseline seropositivity to A/Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2), which circulated 




extensively in October and November of 2012 in Senegal [14], was high, especially among 
children 12 months of age and older. Additionally, >70% of children in all age groups had 
detectable antibodies to B/Wisconsin/1/2010-like (Yamagata lineage) influenza virus. 
Only baseline seropositivity (HI titer ≥10) to A/California/ 07/2009 (H1N1) was relatively 
low, especially in the youngest two age groups, as this virus strain had not circulated widely 
in Senegal since 2011 [14]. 


3.3.1. TIV—The percentages of participants receiving full-dose TIV with HI titers ≥1:40 
for each strain are shown in Table 2. For the 12 through 35 months and 36 through 71 
months age groups, the percentage of participants achieving post dose two HI antibody titers 
≥1:40 were high and the lower bounds of the two-sided 95% CIs exceeded 70%. However, 
among infants, the post dose two responses to full-doseTIV for A/California (H1N1) and B/ 
Wisconsin failed to meet this criterion (73.1% [lower bound of 95% CI, 52.2%]and 80.8% 
[lower bound of 95% CI, 60.7%], respectively). 
Results for the composite endpoint of seroconversion (see Methods for definition) are also 
presented in Table 2. Again, seroconversion post dose two was higher among children in the 
older two age groups receiving full-dose TIV than among infants. Post dose two responses to 
all three strains had a lower bound of the two-sided 95% CI for the percentage of subjects 
achieving seroconversion of at least 40%, another FDA- recommended criterion for 
establishing the effectiveness of seasonal inactivated influenza vaccine [13]. Among infants, 
seroconversion rates post dose two were again lowest for A/California (H1N1) and B/ 
Wisconsin (Yamagata lineage) [73.1% and 57.7%, respectively]. The seroconversion rate for 
A/California met the recommended criterion for the lower bound of 95% CI but failed for B/ 
Wisconsin (52.2% and 36.9% respectively). 
Additionally, in no age group did post dose one responses to full-dose TIV meet either 
recommended criterion for all three strains contained in the vaccine (Table 2). Notably, 
among infants, post dose one responses to full-dose TIV did not meet either criterion for any 
strain, and among children in the older than two age groups post dose one responses to the 
influenza B strain did not meet these criteria. Geometric mean HI titers are shown in Table 
3. GMTs post dose one were also substantially lower than post dose two levels in all age 
groups for all strains in the vaccine. Post dose two GMTs again illustrate that infant 
responses to full-dose TIV were substantially lower than those of older children. 
Percentages of baseline seronegative participants who achieved HI titers ≥1:40 after either 
dose of TIV and their corresponding GMTs are shown in Supplemental Table 1. 
3.3.2. aTIV—The percentages of participants receiving aTIV with HI titers ≥1:40 for each 
strain are shown in Table 2. For all age groups receiving aTIV, including infants, the 
percentage of participants achieving post dose two HI antibody titers ≥1:40 was 100% and 
the lower bounds of the two-sided 95% CIs exceeded 70% in every age group for all three 
strains contained in the vaccine. Likewise, for the composite endpoint of seroconversion, 
post dose two sero-conversion rates were high across age groups receiving aTIV, with all 




rates achieving a lower bound of the 95% CI of at least 40% (Table 2); in fact, all post dose 
two seroconversion rate lower bounds exceeded 70%. 
Post dose one responses to aTIV for influenza A strains contained in the vaccine were 
moderately high in all age groups, and met one of the two recommended criteria for 
establishing the effectiveness of seasonal inactivated influenza vaccines (Table 2). In 
contrast, post dose one responses to the vaccine influenza B strain did not meet either 
recommended criterion in any age group. GMTs among aTIV recipients are shown in Table 
3 and further illustrate the strong immunogenicity of aTIV. GMTs post dose two among 
recipients of aTIV were generally substantially higher than post dose one levels. Among 
infants, post dose one GMTs were lower than those in their older counterparts, but post dose 
two GMTs in this age group were high and essentially equivalent to those among children 12 
through 71 months of age. 
Percentages of baseline seronegative participants who achieved HI titers ≥1:40 after either 
dose of aTIV and their corresponding GMTs are also shown in Supplemental Table 1. 
3.3.3. TIV versus aTIV—This study was not designed to compare statistically the 
immune responses to each vaccine. Nonetheless, GMTs post either dose were higher among 
aTIV recipients for every vaccine strain in every age group except for A/Victoria (H3N2) in 
the 12–35 month old age group where the point estimate of the GMT was higher among 
those receiving TIV (Table 3). Children in this age group in the TIV arm, however, had 
higher baseline GMTs for A/Victoria. When responses to this strain were examined among 
those 12–35 month olds seronegative at baseline, A/Victoria GMTs were equivalent in both 
TIV and aTIV group (post dose two GMT for TIV, 320.0 [95% CI, 126.4–810.4]; post dose 
two GMT for aTIV, 320.0 [95% CI, 238.0–430.3]) (Supplemental Table 1). 
We compared immune responses to study vaccines by baseline serostatus (HI titer <1:10 or 
≥1:10), age group, and vaccine strain (Supplemental Figs. 2 and 3). In general, responses to 
TIV and aTIV were similar in seropositive children. Among those seronegative at baseline, 
HI titers after the first dose were generally higher for aTIV than for TIV for all antigens, 
however the effect was greatest against A/H1N1, particularly among those <36 months (Fig. 
2). 
3.3.4. Alternative B lineage responses—Responses to the B lineage strain not 
contained in the trivalent study vaccines were generally poor (Supplemental Tables 2a and 
2b). 
3.3.5. Placebo responses—Responses among children receiving placebo are shown in 
Supplemental Table 3. Data from the placebo groups showed an absence of additional 
seroconversion or GMT rises, indicating little or no intervening wild-type influenza virus 
exposure among participants during the time of the study. 

No adverse events met SAE criteria in this study. For non- serious adverse events, mild or 
moderate injection site pain and/ or tenderness was common after dose 1 in both vaccine 




groups and both age groups (Table 4). No severe injection site pain and/or tenderness was 
reported for any vaccine group. Among children 6 through 35 months of age, mild febrile 
reactions (Grade 1 reactions, defined as measured temperature 37.0 −37.4 °C) were reported 
among 2.6%, 11.4% and 23.1% of placebo, TIV and aTIV recipients, respectively. Among 
children 36 through 71 months of age, mild febrile reactions were reported among 15.0%, 
15.0% and 30.0% of placebo, TIV and aTIV recipients, respectively. While infrequent, 
elevations in body temperature of 38.5 °C or higher (Grade 3 or Grade 4 reactions) post-dose 
one only occurred among aTIV recipients (2.6% and 2.5% among recipients 6–35 months 
and 36–71 months of age, respectively). Post dose 2, only 6–35 month olds receiving aTIV 
had such elevations (4.1%). Frequencies of all solicited systemic events among children 6– 
36 months of age are shown in Supplemental Tables 4a (post dose one) and 4b (post dose 
two), and frequencies of all solicited systemic events among children 36–71 months of age 
are shown in Supplemental Tables 5a (post dose one) and 5b (post dose two). 

Recently, WHO published Preferred Product Characteristics for Next-Generation Influenza 
Vaccines [11]. This document describes WHO preferences for parameters of influenza 
vaccines with high public health impact and suitability in LMICs. The document calls 
attention to the unmet public health need for improved influenza vaccines that prevent severe 
illness in young children, have a duration of protection that lasts through the influenza 
season, and are programmatically suitable for use in low resource settings [11,15]. 
Adding adjuvants is one option for improving the performance and suitability of influenza 
vaccines for children. MF-59- adjuvanted influenza vaccines enhance the magnitude and 
kinetics of serum antibody titers and induce a greater frequency of vaccine- specific 
multifunctional cytokine-producing CD4 T cells as compared to unadjuvanted vaccines 
[32,33]. This may account for the superior immune responses and superior efficacy 
demonstrated in young, predominantly seronegative children [34,35]. Further, adjuvanted 
vaccines may have dose-sparing properties, which may be particularly relevant in pandemic 
situations. 
In this safety and immunogenicity study in Senegalese children, both TIV given at full-dose 
and aTIV were immunogenic and well tolerated. The majority of participants in both 
treatment groups and across all age groups seroconverted to each of the vaccine strains by 28 
days following the second dose of vaccine. The first dose of aTIV resulted in high 
proportions of participants with seroprotective levels against the influenza A virus vaccine 
strains (A/California and A/Victoria) for all age groups, but not against the influenza B virus 
strain included in the vaccine (B/Wisconsin). Two doses of aTIV achieved 100% 
seroprotection for all three vaccine strains in all age groups. In contrast, the first dose of TIV 
did not achieve seroprotection in any age group. Two doses of TIV were protective, except 
in infants, among whom the response to the B/Wisconsin influenza vaccine strain was 
notably poor. As expected, immune responses were generally greater in older children and 
better in children with previous natural exposure to the influenza strains included in the 
study vaccine. Additionally, we saw that neither TIV nor aTIV provided cross-protection 




against the Victoria-lineage influenza B viral strain, not included in the vaccine 
formulations. 
Our immunogenicity results are similar to those seen in European children [16,17], and in 
children enrolled in a global multicenter study in Argentina, Australia, Chile, The 
Philippines and South Africa [18]. Further, in European children, aTIV, has been shown to 
be more efficacious and to elicit a superior and more durable antibody response than half- 
dose TIV in children aged 6–71 months [18,19]. In Canada, MF-59-adjuvanted TIV 
(FLUAD Pediatric™, Sequris) is licensed for use in children 6 through 23 months of age 
[20], and efficacy studies of the quadrivalent formulation of this vaccine are underway in the 
United States and other countries [21]. The second study vaccine, full-dose TIV, has been 
shown to be consistently well-tolerated and similarly or more immunogenic than half-dose 
formulations in children <3 years [22–24]. Administering the same full-dose formulation to 
all age groups would be programmatically easier in low resource settings, and may 
overcome suboptimal influenza vaccine immunogenicity and effectiveness seen with half- 
dose formulations widely used in children aged 6–35 months [25]. Several countries have 
recently adopted the full-dose regimen for some products starting at 6 months of age [26– 
28], and this may be ultimately be added as an indication for new inactivated influenza 
vaccines [29]. 
Our trial had limitations. The study was not powered to formally compare the immune 
responses between the two study vaccines, or the minimum number of doses of each vaccine 
necessary for protection. We did not assess the half-dose formulation, which is the dose 
recommended by Sanofi for TIV in children <3 years [30]. It is possible that the differences 
in the immuno- genicity between aTIV and TIV demonstrated in our study would be more 
pronounced had the younger children received a half dose of TIV. As the selected study 
population was vaccine-naive, we were not able to study the effects of prior vaccination on 
the safety and immunogenicity of TIV and aTIV. Our study used immuno- genicity 
endpoints and did not directly measure efficacy against influenza illness or other outcomes. 
While we defined ‘‘seroprotective” as 1:40, we acknowledge that higher antibody titers may 
be necessary for protection in children [31]. While aTIV was well-tolerated in our small 
study, rare outcomes associated with vaccines are best-assessed through larger clinical trials 
and prospective post-marketing surveillance. In this study, we evaluated potential strategies 
to improve the prevention of influenza in low resource settings. Our study incorporated two 
influenza vaccination regimens with the potential for increased benefit in a low resource 
pediatric population. Full-dose TIV and aTIV may be suitable for use in Senegal, although 
further study is warranted and more programmatically feasible strategies are needed. TIV is 
prequalified by WHO for procurement by UN agencies and is widely available globally 
[8,30]. However, affordability of influenza vaccines is a key concern. It is unlikely that 
LMICs will adopt any influenza vaccine formulation in their routine immunization 
schedules without significant price reductions or support from Gavi. 
Future research should assess the potential for a single dose of aTIV to prevent influenza 
illness in children from LMICs, and the duration of protection, important in settings with 
year-round influenza circulation. Additional efforts to demonstrate influenza vaccine 
programmatic feasibility and value proposition, including assessing protection against severe 




disease and value for money, evaluating its safety when given within routine pediatric 
vaccine schedules, and assessing the duration of vaccine benefit, are needed to determine 
whether the study vaccines meet WHO objectives for influenza vaccines in LMICs. 



Our sincere thanks to all the volunteers who participated in this trial and to their families. Sequris provided FLUAD 
vaccine used in this trial at no cost. PATH purchased Vaxigrip vaccine used in this trial. Focus Diagnostics 
conducted all laboratory testing. AARSH performed clinical trial monitoring. FHI360 performed study data 
management. We are indebted to the members of our Safety Monitoring Committee who generously volunteered 
their time to provide independent safety review and oversight for this trial. We also thank Joyce Erickson and 
Lionel Martellet of PATH for assistance with coordination of the trial, Amanda Balish of CDC for coordination of 
laboratory testing, Shannon Emery of CDC for laboratory support, and Elizabeth Rotrosen for editorial assistance. 
Finally, we wish to acknowledge the assistance of study staff and administrative offices of URMITE, IRD, and 
Senegal. 

This work was funded through a Cooperative Agreement to PATH from the US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (U01IP000476). 


contributor to childhood pneumonia in a tropical developing country. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2010;29:216–21. [PubMed: 20190613] 

expectancy, all-cause mortality, and cause-specific mortality for 249 causes of death, 1980–2015: 
a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2015. Lancet (London, England) 
2016;388:1459–544. 
[3]. Nair H, Brooks WA, Katz M, Roca A, Berkley JA, Madhi SA, et al. Global burden of respiratory 
infections due to seasonal influenza in young children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet (London, England). 2011;378:1917–30. 
[4]. Victor JC, Lewis KD, Diallo A, Niang MN, Diarra B, Dia N, et al. Efficacy of a Russian-backbone 
live attenuated influenza vaccine among children in Senegal: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 2016. 

influenza vaccination of children in tropical developing Africa: a cluster-randomized trial. 
Options for the control of influenza. Cape Town (South Africa): Options for the Control of 
Influenza Conference; 2013. 
[6]. Ml McMorrow, Emukule GO Njuguna HN, Bigogo G Montgomery JM, Nyawanda B, et al. The 
Unrecognized Burden of Influenza in Young Kenyan Children, 2008–2012. PLoS ONE 
2015;10:e0138272. [PubMed: 26379030] 


[8]. Palache A, Abelin A, Hollingsworth R, Cracknell W,Jacobs C,Tsai T, et al. Survey of distribution 
of seasonal influenza vaccine doses in 201 countries (2004–2015): the 2003 World Health 
Assembly resolution on seasonal influenza vaccination coverage and the 2009 influenza 
pandemic have had very little impact on improving influenza control and pandemic preparedness. 
Vaccine 2017;35:4681–6. [PubMed: 28754488] 





inactivated influenza vaccine in young children less than 4 years of age, with a focus on age and 
baseline antibodies. Clin Vacc Immunol: CVI 2014;21:1253–60. 

influenza vaccine (TIV) immunogenicity in children 6 through 23 months of age: do children of 
all ages respond equally? Vaccine 2010;28:4376–83. [PubMed: 20447477] 




[13]. United States Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry: clinical data needed to 
support the licensure of seasonal inactivated influenza vaccines Silver Spring (MD):: United 
States Food and Drug Administration; 2014. 
[14]. Flunet. World Health Organization; 2017. 
[15]. Neuzil KM, Bresee JS, de la Hoz F,Johansen K, Karron RA, Krishnan A, et al. Data [26 and 
product needs for influenza immunization programs in low- and middle- income countries: 
Rationale and main conclusions of the WHO preferred product characteristics for next-generation 
influenza vaccines. Vaccine 2017;35:5734–7. [PubMed: 28893473] 

immune response to MF59-adjuvanted and nonadjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccines in children 
less than three years of age. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2015;34:73–8. [PubMed: 25037034] 
[17]. Cruz-Valdez A, Valdez-Zapata G, Patel SS, Castelli FV, Garcia MG, Jansen WT, et al. MF59- 
adjuvanted influenza vaccine (FLUAD(R)) elicits higher immune responses than a non- 
adjuvanted influenza vaccine (Fluzone(R)): a randomized, multicenter, Phase III pediatric trial in 
Mexico. Hum Vacc [31 Immunotherapeut 2017. 

antibody response against homologous and heterologous strains elicited by a MF59-adjuvanted 
influenza vaccine in infants and young children. Vaccine 2014;32:6146–56. [PubMed: 25223266] 
[19]. Vesikari T, Knuf M, Wutzler P, Karvonen A, Kieninger-Baum D, Schmitt HJ, et al. Oil-in-water 
emulsion adjuvant with influenza vaccine in young children. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1406–16. 
[PubMed: 21995388] 
[20]. Gemmill I, on behalf of the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI). Summary 
of the National Advisory Committee on Immunization [34 (NACI) Statement on Seasonal 
Influenza Vaccine 2015–2016. Canada Commun Dis Rep; 2015 p. 41:10; 227–32. 


[22]. Skowronski DM, Hottes TS, Chong M, De Serres G, Scheifele DW, Ward BJ, et al. Randomized 
controlled trial of dose response to influenza vaccine in children aged 6 to 23 months. Pediatrics 
2011;128:e276-89. [PubMed: 21768314] 
[23]. Halasa NB, Gerber MA, Berry AA, Anderson EL, Winokur P, Keyserling H, et al. Safety and 
immunogenicity of full-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV) compared with half- 
dose TIV administered to children 6 through 35 months of age. J Pediatr Infect Dis Soc 
2015;4:214–24. 
[24]. Pavia-Ruz N, Angel Rodriguez Weber M, Lau YL, Nelson EA, Kerdpanich A, Huang LM, et al. 
A randomized controlled study to evaluate the immunogenicity of a trivalent inactivated seasonal 
influenza vaccine at two dosages in children 6 to 35 months of age. Hum Vacc Immunotherapeut 
2013;9:1978–88. 
[25]. Osterholm MT, Kelley NS, Sommer A, Belongia EA. Efficacy and effectiveness of influenza 
vaccines: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2012;12:36–44. [PubMed: 
22032844] 









[29]. Langley JM, Wang L, Aggarwal N, Bueso A, Chandrasekaran V, Cousin L, et al. Immunogenicity 
and reactogenicity of an inactivated quadrivalent influenza vaccine administered intramuscularly 
to children 6 to 35 months of age in 2012–2013: a randomized, double-blind, controlled, 
multicenter, multicountry, clinical trial. J Pediatr Infect Dis Soc 2015;4:242–51. 
[30]. World Health Organization. WHO prequalified vaccines; 2017 
[31]. Black S, Nicolay U, Vesikari T, Knuf M, Del Giudice G, Della Cioppa G, et al. Hemagglutination 
inhibition antibody titers as a correlate of protection for inactivated influenza vaccines in 
children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011;30:1081–5. [PubMed: 21983214] 

antigen-specific plasmablast and memory B cell subsets in human blood after viral infection or 
vaccination. Nat Immunol 2016;17:1226–34. [PubMed: 27525369] 
[33]. Nakaya HI, Clutterbuck E, Kazmin D, Wang L, Cortese M, Bosinger SE, et al. Systems biology 
of immunity to MF59-adjuvanted versus nonadjuvanted trivalent seasonal influenza vaccines in 
early childhood. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016;113:1853–8. [PubMed: 26755593] 

immunogenicity of seasonal influenza vaccines in young children using MF59 adjuvant. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J 2009;28:563–71. [PubMed: 19561422] 
[35]. Vesikari T, Kirstein J, Go GD, Leav B, Ruzycky ME, Isakov L, et al. Efficacy, immunogenicity, 
and safety evaluation of an MF59 adjuvanted quadrivalent influenza virus vaccine compared to 
non-adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children: a randomised clinical trial. Lancet Respir Med 
2018. 




Fig. 1. 
Age group specific percentages of participants with baseline seropositivity (HI titer ≥1:10) 
against influenza strains recommended by WHO for inclusion in 2012–2013 northern 
hemisphere influenza vaccines. Note: Among seropositive participants, percentages with HI 
titer levels ≥1:40, a level frequently considered seroprotective, are also shown. 




Fig. 2. 
Reverse cumulative distributions of hemagglutination inhibition antibody titers for WHO- 
recommended influenza strains contained in trivalent study vaccines among participants of 
all ages who were seronegative at baseline for the particular strain. Note: x axis is the HI 
titer by vaccine and antigen, and the y axis is the percentage of vaccine recipients achieving 
the measured HI titer. 





t 
S 
t 
E 






W 
/ 
B 
/ 
A 
t 
c 
i 
V 
/ 
A 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



W 
/ 
B 
t 
c 
i 
V 
/ 
A 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Age group specific percentages of participants experiencing injection site pain or tenderness and fever from 30 
min through 7 days following each dose of study vaccines. 







































































































































































(pain without touching or tenderness as pain when the area is touched), was graded as follows: mild, pain/tenderness causing no or minimal 
limitation of use of limb; moderate, pain/tenderness limiting use of limb OR pain/tenderness causing greater than minimal interference with usual 
social and functional activities, severe, pain/tenderness causing inability to perform usual social and functional activities. 


