


Linguistic and Cultural Adaptation of a Computer-Based 
Counseling Program (CARE+ Spanish) to Support HIV Treatment 
Adherence and Risk Reduction for People Living With HIV/AIDS: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial 
Ann E Kurth1, CNM, MPH, PhD; Nok Chhun1, MS, MPH; Charles M Cleland2, PhD; Michele Crespo-Fierro2, RN, 
AACRN, MS/MPH; José A Parés-Avila3, RN, MA, ANP-C, DNP, AAHIVS; John A Lizcano1, MPH; Robert G 
Norman4†, PhD; Michele G Shedlin2, PhD; Barbara E Johnston5, MD; Victoria L Sharp6, MD 
1Yale University School of Nursing, Orange, CT, United States 
2New York University Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York, NY, United States 
3University of Arizona College of Nursing, Tucson, AZ, United States 
4New York University College of Dentistry, New York, NY, United States 
5Lincoln Community Health Center, Durham, NC, United States 
6St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, Center for Comprehensive Care, New York, NY, United States 
†deceased 
Corresponding Author: 
Ann E Kurth, CNM, MPH, PhD 
Yale University School of Nursing 
400 West Campus Drive 
Orange, CT, 06477 
United States 
Phone: 1 203 785 2393 
Fax: 1 203 785 3554 
Email: ann.kurth@yale.edu 

Background: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease in the United States disproportionately affects minorities, including 
Latinos. Barriers including language are associated with lower antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence seen among Latinos, yet 
ART and interventions for clinic visit adherence are rarely developed or delivered in Spanish. 
Objective: The aim was to adapt a computer-based counseling tool, demonstrated to reduce HIV-1 viral load and sexual risk 
transmission in a population of English-speaking adults, for use during routine clinical visits for an HIV-positive Spanish-speaking 
population (CARE+ Spanish); the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) was the theoretical framework guiding program 
development. 
Methods: A longitudinal randomized controlled trial was conducted from June 4, 2010 to March 29, 2012. Participants were 
recruited from a comprehensive HIV treatment center comprising three clinics in New York City. Eligibility criteria were (1) 
adults (age ≥18 years), (2) Latino birth or ancestry, (3) speaks Spanish (mono- or multilingual), and (4) on antiretrovirals. Linear 
and generalized mixed linear effects models were used to analyze primary outcomes, which included ART adherence, sexual 
transmission risk behaviors, and HIV-1 viral loads. Exit interviews were offered to purposively selected intervention participants 
to explore cultural acceptability of the tool among participants, and focus groups explored the acceptability and system efficiency 
issues among clinic providers, using the TAM framework. 
Results: A total of 494 Spanish-speaking HIV clinic attendees were enrolled and randomly assigned to the intervention (arm 
A: n=253) or risk assessment-only control (arm B, n=241) group and followed up at 3-month intervals for one year. Gender 
distribution was 296 (68.4%) male, 110 (25.4%) female, and 10 (2.3%) transgender. By study end, 433 of 494 (87.7%) participants 
were retained. Although intervention participants had reduced viral loads, increased ART adherence and decreased sexual 
transmission risk behaviors over time, these findings were not statistically significant. We also conducted 61 qualitative exit 
interviews with participants and two focus groups with a total of 16 providers. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 1 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Conclusions: A computer-based counseling tool grounded in the TAM theoretical model and delivered in Spanish was acceptable 
and feasible to implement in a high-volume HIV clinic setting. It was able to provide evidence-based, linguistically appropriate 
ART adherence support without requiring additional staff time, bilingual status, or translation services. We found that language 
preferences and cultural acceptability of a computer-based counseling tool exist on a continuum in our urban Spanish-speaking 
population. Theoretical frameworks of technology’s usefulness for behavioral modification need further exploration in other 
languages and cultures. 
Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01013935; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01013935 (Archived by WebCite 
at http://www.webcitation.org/6ikaD3MT7) 


antiretroviral therapy adherence; computer-based counseling; cultural adaptation; HIV; linguistic adaptation; prevention with 
positives; Technology Acceptance Model; viral load 

women will be diagnosed with HIV at some point in their lives 
[1]. 
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease in the United 
States disproportionately affects minorities, including Latinos 
[1]. Barriers such as language are associated with lower 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence among Latinos, yet ART 
and interventions for clinic visit adherence are rarely developed 
or delivered in Spanish. Although treatment of HIV has 
advanced tremendously with the development of ARTs, these 
medication regimens require lifelong adherence to achieve 
therapeutic goals [2-5]. 
The computer-based counseling tool known as the Computer 
Assessment & Rx Education for HIV-positives (CARE+) is an 
evidence-based intervention for people living with HIV and 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) (PLHA) [6,7]. 
The purpose of the program is to support users in achieving 
medication adherence and reduce their risk of secondary HIV 
infections (also known as “positive prevention”). This program, 
when evaluated in a university-affiliated public HIV clinic and 
a community-based AIDS service organization 
in an 
English-speaking population in Seattle, was found to be effective 
in reducing HIV-1 viral load and sexual transmission risk 
behaviors [6]. Technology tools such as CARE+ present 
significant opportunities to bridge the gap in health promotion 
delivery, especially if linguistically and culturally adapted for 
often-neglected groups such as Latinos. In this paper, we use 
the term Latino; however, in the literature, Latino and Hispanic 
are used interchangeably, reflecting a lack of consensus as well 
as the political and demographic implications of both terms [8]. 
Latinos make up approximately 17% of the US population, but 
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
account for 23% of all new HIV infections reported in 2013 in 
the United States [9]. Furthermore, Latino men account for 85% 
of all new infections among Latinos in the United States and 
81% acquired HIV infection through sexual contact with another 
male [9]. In contrast, in 2013, Latino women accounted for 15% 
of all new infections among Latinos in the United States [9]. It 
is estimated that one in 36 Latino men and one in 106 Latino 


In this manuscript, we describe the adaptation of the CARE+ 
tool for a Spanish-speaking population (CARE+ Spanish; Figure 
1). The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [10] was the 
conceptual framework that guided the Spanish adaptation of 
the computer-based counseling program. New information and 
communication technologies (ICT) must be culturally acceptable 
if they are to be effective in daily clinical practice, rather than 
just in the context of a controlled trial. Acceptability is defined 
as the “degree to which a[n]...intervention or any one of the 
attributes of 
the 
patient/consumer to be consonant with well-being” [11]. 
Acceptability centers on perception of an innovation (ie, ICT 
tool) as clusters of perceived attributes. These can be categorized 
as follows, using ART as an example: (1) perceived inherent 
attributes (eg, ART is effective or requires scheduling); (2) 
perceived associational attributes (eg, ART demands periodic 
clinic visits; is encouraged by medical personnel, but perhaps 
not by others); and (3) perceived effects (eg, lifestyle and other 
changes). Each perceived attribute has cultural meaning, and 
the individual continually weighs the positive and negative 
aspects of the attributes throughout treatment. The resulting 
balancing act influences the acceptability of the intervention. 
Cultural and linguistic factors determine the perception of 
relevancy of these attributes, as well as other factors, such as 
age, life cycle stage, health status, motivation to be healthier, 
and perceptions of the source of the information and intervention 
[11,12]. 
The study aims were to (1) conduct usability testing of CARE+ 
Spanish; (2) establish a real-world utility of CARE+ Spanish 
by conducting a 12-month longitudinal randomized controlled 
trial (RCT) to evaluate the impact of the CARE+ Spanish 
intervention on outcomes, which included ART adherence, 
sexual transmission risk behaviors, and HIV-1 viral loads; and 
(3) to assess technology uptake factors, explore the cultural 
acceptability of 
technology 
barriers/facilitators among participants and health care providers 
using the TAM framework. 



XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 2 
(page number not for citation purposes) 




The CARE+ program incorporates motivational interviewing 
and principles of chronic HIV disease self-management to 
enhance health-promoting behavior. Formative research to test 
the usability and acceptability of the CARE+ computer-based 
counseling tool has been previously described [7], and the tool 
was shown in an English-speaking population to improve ART 
adherence, viral suppression, and reduced secondary sexual 
transmission risk behavior [6]. Given that computer-based 
counseling proved promising in an English-speaking population 
in Seattle, translation into practice and applicability to other 
populations that could benefit, such as Spanish-speaking Latinos 
or Spanish-dominant bilingual Latinos living with HIV, guided 
the adaptation of the CARE+ tool for a Spanish-speaking 
population. 
The recommended process for adaptation and translation from 
English to a different language version is the forward-back 
translation method in order to ensure cultural and linguistic 
equivalence [13]. Given budgetary constraints, and the large 
amount of software content, an expert panel review was utilized 
in place of back translation of the CARE+ tool. The expert panel 
consisted of clinical experts who were bilingual and bicultural 
with ancestry from major Latino subgroups (ie, Mexican and 
Puerto Rican). For the forward translation, a translator with a 
master’s degree experienced with HIV health-related materials 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 3 
(page number not for citation purposes) 






translated the CARE+ content into Spanish. Because the 
professional translator’s work had been used with predominantly 
Mexican-American populations, a member of our study team 
(JAP), who is of Puerto Rican origin and has experience in 
AIDS research with Mexican and Puerto Rican populations, 
took on the role of assuring quality of translation and 
applicability across Latino subgroups. Additionally, there was 
a secondary reviewer, a health educator and curriculum writer 
with a master of public health, who has done substantial 
translation work for HIV interventions in California, Florida, 
Puerto Rico, and the Northeastern United States. She performed 
final 
content. 
Spanish-speaking actors of Mexican and Colombian heritage 
recorded the narration, and text changes were also made if the 
two voice actors reading the script made recommendations. 
Then, a panel of bilingual HIV health care providers (two 
physicians, a nurse practitioner, a nurse, and a health educator) 
reviewed the translation of the content independently to confirm 
the appropriateness of the terminology and the minimization of 
idiomatic regional expressions unique to their culture. After 
discussion to reach consensus, words identified as idiomatic 
were deleted and substituted with words that were not specific 
to only one Latino subgroup. Furthermore, an additional local 
expert advisory panel (composed of one Spanish-speaking 
person living with HIV, and HIV providers from medicine, 
nursing, and social work) was convened in New York City to 
review the CARE+ Spanish tool content and shorten it for use 
in a real-world high-volume HIV clinic setting. Once a 
test-ready version of CARE+ Spanish was available, the program 
was tested with HIV-positive Spanish-speaking individuals to 
explore acceptability and usability of the intervention. Feedback 
from the usability testing was incorporated into the final version 
of the CARE+ Spanish program used for the RCT. In addition, 
we conducted exit interviews to explore cultural acceptability 
of the tool among purposively selected intervention participants, 
and focus groups among clinic providers to explore program 
acceptability and system efficiency issues. 

Usability Testing 
Participants for the usability portion of the study were recruited 
and verbally consented from St Vincent’s Catholic Medical 
Center HIV clinic in New York City the last week of March 
2010 (IRB #09-096). Because we were interested in the 
participants’ opinions about CARE+ Spanish, and not its 
efficacy or effectiveness, participants were informed that they 
could make up answers and skip questions to avoid disclosing 
personal health information. Using the “think aloud” method 
[14,15], participants were observed as they completed the 
CARE+ Spanish program. The observation was timed and 
careful notes were taken, paying attention to any difficulties 
navigating the program or understanding the content. While 
working with the program, the participant was encouraged to 
“think aloud” and share thoughts in their own words as they 
worked through the various tasks. A series of structured 
questions and verbal prompts were also used to elicit 
participants’ reactions to the program. Participants were given 
a US $20 MetroCard for their time and to reimburse their 
transportation costs. As a result of St Vincent’s closing in April 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
2010, the study was moved to St Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital for 
the initiation of the RCT and remainder of the project. 
Randomized Controlled Trial 
Study participants for the RCT were recruited in the waiting 
areas from three urban HIV clinic sites of St Luke’s-Roosevelt 
Hospital in New York City from June 4, 2010 to January 3, 
2011. Eligibility criteria were (1) adults (age ≥18 years), (2) 
Latino birth or ancestry, (3) speaks Spanish (mono- or 
multilingual), and (4) on antiretrovirals at any of the three clinic 
study sites. 
Written informed consent was obtained from all RCT 
participants. All study procedures were approved by St 
Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital, Center for Health Sciences, 
Institutional Review Board (#10-068) and New York University 
School of Medicine’s Institutional Review Board (#09-0740). 
This RCT is reported according to the CONSORT checklist 
[16] and the CONSORT-EHEALTH extension [17] (Multimedia 
Appendix 1). The RCT participants received a US $20 
MetroCard for their time and to reimburse their transportation 
costs at the end of each study visit (five sessions total and an 
additional US $20 MetroCard if they participated in the exit 
interview). 
The RCT participants were enrolled by research assistants, some 
of whom were part of the HIV-positive peer program at St 
Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital. Participants of the peer program 
were Spanish-speaking PLHA, who were also receiving care at 
the St Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital HIV clinics. Peers in the 
program were selected as study staff based on their language 
skills and experience working with other Spanish-speaking 
PLHA in the HIV clinics. All research assistants completed 
human subjects’ protection certification, which included Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and 
received training on the study protocol and procedures, and the 
use of the CARE+ Spanish program. 
Focus Groups 
The health care providers who participated in the focus groups 
were engaged in the care of participants (eg, prescribed 
antiretrovirals and/or supported ART adherence) and were 
recruited from the same three urban HIV clinic sites of St 
Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital in New York City as the RCT 
participants. The two focus groups took place on February 21, 
2012 and February 28, 2012. Participants in the health care 
focus groups were a variety of psychological and medical 
professionals who had provided care to PLHA for a wide range 
of years. 

Intervention 
The CARE+ Spanish computer-based counseling program was 
delivered on touchscreen computers with content based on the 
f o l l o w i n g 
f r a m e w o r k s : 
information-motivation-behavior [18], social cognitive role 
modeling [19], and motivational interviewing [20]; and it was 
evaluated in a prospective longitudinal two-arm RCT design. 
Participants were automatically randomized by the software to 
the control or intervention arms following an anonymous study 
log in by the user. All participants were guided through the 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 4 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


program with audio narration of all content. The intervention 
session lasted approximately 45 to 60 minutes; the control 
session lasted approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The control 
group received only the computer-based audio-narrated risk 
assessment, which included questions about sexual risk 
behaviors, substance use, mental health, social support, partner 
status and disclosure, ART regimen and adherence in last 7 and 
30 days, and side effects. In addition to the computer-based 
audio-narrated risk assessment, the intervention group received 
tailored feedback through the skill-building videos, health plan, 
and printout at the end of the session, within the CARE+ Spanish 
software program. The skill-building videos automatically 
launched; afterwards, participants could choose to watch 
additional videos. Video topics included demonstration of 
healthy behaviors, such as condom use and medication 
adherence, and discussions about HIV and provider 
relationships. In the final step, users developed a risk reduction 
plan related to either ART adherence or safer sex practices to 
prevent secondary HIV transmission. After the risk reduction 
plan, participants could opt to watch more videos. At the 
conclusion of the session, participants received a printout of 
their tailored feedback and health promotion plan that they could 
share with their health care provider. 
Both study arms also received standard clinical care per 
Department of Health and Human Services HIV Guidelines [2]. 
In addition, the computer-based tool identified participants who 
were experiencing severe depression as measured by the Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9; score ≥20) [21], intimate partner 
violence, or suicidal ideation. Per study protocol, case managers 
were then notified for appropriate follow-up and referral. Each 
group underwent five sessions total at 3-month intervals (at 0, 
3, 6, 9, and 12 months). At the 12-month session, the control 
group was switched over to the intervention condition. Study 
sessions were scheduled to coincide with clinic visits whenever 
possible. 
Exit Interviews 
The purpose of the qualitative exit interview (Multimedia 
Appendix 2) was to explore the cultural acceptability of the tool 
and assess perceived technology barriers and facilitators among 
participants. Exit interviews were offered to purposively selected 
intervention participants using systematic sampling. At the 
12-month session, every third eligible candidate was offered a 
face-to-face exit interview. We purposively sampled females 
and males, older (age ≥35 years) and younger (age ≤35 years), 
and US- or foreign-born participants. Exit interviews were 
performed using a semistructured interview guide by research 
assistants in either English or Spanish as requested by the 
participant. The interview guide was developed to explore the 
main concepts of TAM and other cultural factors known to 
impact the Latino community, such as stigma related to HIV, 
language, health insurance coverage, and immigration status. 
Notes were taken by research assistants in English and/or 
Spanish, including verbatim quotes to capture illustrative 
comments from respondents. 
Health Care Provider Focus Groups 
Health care providers who participated in the focus groups gave 
written informed consent and received US $50 for their time 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
and travel. Two focus groups were conducted; the sessions 
lasted approximately 2 hours. The focus groups were conducted 
using a semistructured interview guide (Multimedia Appendix 
3), which outlined topics to be discussed along with suggested 
probes. Topics included challenges that providers faced in 
delivering care to HIV-positive patients, adherence-related 
issues, and usefulness of the CARE+ Spanish computer-based 
counseling tool. To improve attendance of the providers, the 
focus groups were conducted before required staff meetings. 
Prior to the start of the focus group, the providers were given 
an opportunity to view the counseling program (tablet and 
headphones), as well as a sample session printout. Due to 
scheduling issues, different teams of study staff conducted the 
two focus groups. 
Outcome Measures 
The primary outcome was HIV-1 viral load collected from 
medical chart reviews. This biomarker, along with adherence 
to medications (measured by 30-day visual analog scale [VAS]) 
and sexual transmission risk behaviors (defined as lack of 
condom use with either a main or other partner) identified 
through the CARE+ Spanish program, were the outcome 
measures for the assessment of intervention effectiveness. These 
outcome measures were collected at 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. 
Although the outcome measures were not collected from every 
participant at each time interval, a minimum of three data points 
were collected from all participants. 
Sample Size Determination 
For the usability testing, sample sizes greater than five 
participants have been shown to have sufficient power to detect 
the majority of usability problems [22]. For the RCT, sample 
size was calculated based on the target intervention effect on 
the proportion of participants who are ART adherent, HIV viral 
load at log10 scale, and occurrence of unprotected sex with 
HIV-negative/unknown partner(s). All calculations control type 
I error rate at 0.05. Considering a decrease of 0.5 log10 HIV 
viral load as a meaningful reduction, with 200 retained 
participants in each group in a time point-specific post hoc test, 
there was an expected >97% power to detect this difference 
with a standard deviation of 1.25 (effect size=0.4). 
Statistical Analysis 
Fisher exact and Wilcoxon rank sum tests assessed differences 
between intervention and control groups in population study 
characteristics at the baseline assessment. Linear and generalized 
mixed linear effect models were used to longitudinally assess 
differences between the intervention and control groups at all 
available time points for sexual transmission risk behavior, 
medication adherence (30-day VAS), and viral load variables. 
These models accommodate missing data (equal numbers of 
measurements and time intervals between measurements were 
not required) and, therefore, do not require deletion of 
participants with incomplete data. A P ≤.05 was used as the 
cutoff for significance. Primary outcomes included ART 
adherence, sexual transmission risk, and HIV-1 viral loads. 
Baseline analyses were performed using SAS version 9.3 (SAS 
Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA) and, for the longitudinal analysis, 
the lme4 package [23] of the R statistical computing 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 5 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


environment [24]. Given that the control group received the 
intervention at 12 months, data analysis was limited to four time 
periods (0, 3, 6, and 9 months). Effect sizes for undetectable 
viral load and sexual transmission risk were presented in the 
odds ratio metric. For viral load and 30-day VAS, Cohen’s f2 
was calculated to convey effect sizes for group differences in 
change over time [25]. 
Table 1 illustrates participant characteristics at baseline by study 
arm. There were no significant differences between the treatment 
and control groups at baseline except that the CARE+ 
intervention group had a higher proportion of transgendered 
individuals (4.0%, 9/225 vs 0.50%, 1/206; P=.05) and were 
younger than those in the control group (mean 46.8, SD 9.7 vs 
mean 48.9, SD 9.1; P=.02, respectively). 
Interview Analysis 
Data from the exit interviews were transcribed onto spreadsheets 
by two researchers from the study team (MGS and MCF), while 
the focus groups were recorded by a stenographer, with 
transcripts provided from the two sessions. Data were analyzed 
using content analysis within a framework of technology transfer 
[10] to identify factors affecting acceptability, utilization, and 
impact. The exit interview spreadsheets and the focus group 
transcripts were analyzed by MS and MCF; emergent themes 
and issues were categorized by each. Saturation of themes was 
determined after 61 participant exit interviews and the two 
provider focus groups. Inconsistencies in the themes were 
discussed between MS and MCF until consensus was reached; 
selected quotations were agreed on as salient examples of 
themes. 

Usability Testing 
Software usability 
testing was conducted with eight 
Spanish-speaking PLHA (6 male, 2 female). Five of six males 
identified their language preference as bilingual and one as 
English-dominant; one female identified as bilingual and the 
other as English-dominant. All usability participants reported 
the program was easy to use and navigate; questions were clear, 
specific, and understandable. All participants who identified as 
bilingual (6/8) reported that the Spanish used was basic and 
easy to understand. The two English-dominant participants 
reported there were some “big (high-register) words,” but they 
were able to navigate the program and follow instructions 
without any major problems. All participants agreed that the 
counseling tool supported privacy and confidentiality, especially 
for people who are more quiet and reserved about their HIV 
status. They agreed when using this counseling tool, one can 
be more open and honest about responses because of the feeling 
of not being judged. Seven of eight reported that they would 
prefer to use this tool rather than counseling with a person. 
Overall, the counseling tool met with everyone’s expectations; 
on average, it was rated a nine out of 10. It was described as 
user friendly and self-explanatory. 
Randomized Controlled Trial 
We approached 1224 individuals at three study sites; 556 
consented (45.42% acceptance), 494 were randomized and 
completed baseline assessments, and 86.2% (426/494) were 
retained for the 12-month study duration (Figure 2). 
Figure 3 shows the mean and 95% confidence intervals for 
outcome means or proportions by time point and treatment 
condition. Although intervention participants had reduced viral 
loads, increased ART adherence, and decreased sexual 
transmission risk behaviors over time, patterns of change in the 
intervention group were not more favorable than in the control 
group. 
Figure 4 summarizes main outcomes of interest at each 
follow-up time point. Figure 4 A illustrates 95% confidence 
intervals for log10 viral load mean differences and change at 
each different time point as well as overall change in the control 
versus the CARE+ intervention group. Although there was a 
decrease in viral loads among participants with a detectable 
load at baseline (greater in the intervention vs control group), 
this difference in change was not statistically significant. In 
addition, among those with detectable viral loads at baseline, 
the CARE+ intervention group had higher odds of being 
undetectable at the 9-month follow-up when compared to 
controls (Figure 4 B), but this difference was not statistically 
significant. Figure 4 C shows 95% confidence intervals for VAS 
differences at each follow-up time point; although ART 
adherence was higher in the CARE+ intervention group vs 
control in the total sample overall and among participants with 
detectable viral loads at baseline, no differences in change or 
at any follow-up point were statistically significant. Finally, 
although sexual transmission risk behaviors decreased over 
time, when intervention and control groups were compared, no 
differences in change or at any follow-up point were statistically 
significant. 
Differences between the CARE+ intervention group and the 
control group in change on viral load were small both for the 
total sample (f2=0.0003) and for those with detectable viral load 
at baseline (f2=0.006). Similarly, group differences in change 
on VAS were small for both the total sample (f2=0.002) and for 
those with detectable viral load at baseline (f2=0.005). Figures 
4 B and 4D show effect sizes for the sexual transmission risk 
and undetectable viral load outcomes in the odds ratio metric. 
Differences in undetectable viral load between the CARE+ 
intervention group and the control group were consistently small 
at baseline and across follow-ups. Differences in sexual 
transmission risk were small at baseline and became even 
smaller with each follow-up. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 6 
(page number not for citation purposes) 














































XSL•FO 
RenderX 




























































































J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 7 
(page number not for citation purposes) 






























a Comparisons by Fisher exact test or Wilcoxon rank sum test; All categorical tests performed without the unknown category. 
b Did not use a condom with either main partner or other partner. 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 8 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Figure 3. Adjusted mean values or proportions by time and treatment condition of the total sample and those with detectable viral loads at baseline 
(BL) for (a) log10 viral load, (b) undetectable viral load, (c) visual analog scale for ART adherence, and (d) sexual transmission risk. Whiskers represent 
95% confidence intervals. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 9 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Figure 4. Mean differences or odds ratios contrasting CARE+ and control conditions at each follow-up time point, and baseline (BL) and final time 
points within each condition, for (a) log10 viral load, (b) undetectable viral load, (c) visual analog scale for ART adherence, and (d) sexual transmission 
risk. Whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals. 
Exit Interviews 
The open-ended exit interview identified a range of HIV-related 
concerns, lack of confidence in providers, multiple sources for 
HIV-related information, and experiences using the CARE+ 
Spanish computer-based counseling program. 
Characteristics of exit interview participants (N=61) are 
summarized. In all, 37 (61%) men, 21 (34%) women, and 3 
(5%) transgendered persons participated in the interviews. 
Participant ages ranged from 21 to 69 years, with a mean age 
of 48.0 (SD 12.0) years. The participants included those born 
in the United States and Puerto Rico, and immigrants from 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 10 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, 
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Panama, with a range of 4 
to 50 years residing in the United States. 
Concerns Related to Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
In total, 95% (58/61) had disclosed their HIV status to someone. 
The main issues affecting the interviewed participants included 
insurance/benefits-related issues, side effects from medications 
(both antiretrovirals and other medications), being able to work, 
immigration documentation, and housing issues. The majority 
of participants did not feel that their issues related to medications 
or the virus were any different because they were Latino. 
However, some did feel there was a difference if the issue(s) 
related to documentation (ie, “having papers”). One participant 
noted, “illegal status, it leaves us without options.” Another 
participant shared additional comments regarding obstacles 
faced by their undocumented status: “Of course, because we 
are immigrants and we don’t have legal papers to get around or 
anything.” Some noted that English-speaking/non-Latinos have 
more information and receive different care. Other participants 
discussed the problems Latinos face that keep them from 
focusing on their illness, fears of engaging in care, not trusting 
to reveal their diagnosis, parents not teaching their children 
about safer sex, and fears relating to stigma and discrimination: 
“Spanish people appear stronger around other(s) and don’t share 
their weakness” and “Latinos have machista behavior in not 
taking care of themselves...” Language barriers were a concern 
in accessing information, understanding, and being understood 
by providers and navigating the health care system. 
Multiple Sources of Information Related to Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus 
Participants reported a range of resources for obtaining 
HIV-related and general health information. Overwhelmingly, 
doctors and clinic staff were reported to be reliable sources of 
information because they were said to have studied and practiced 
HIV care for some time: “I put my health in her hands, because 
she knows what is good and what isn’t for me.” (Note that 
participants may be referring to their prescribing providers as 
“doctors” whether they are medical doctors, nurse practitioners, 
or physician assistants.) 
Some participants purposefully seek out other sources for HIV 
and general health information. The Internet, because “broader 
information (is) available,” and the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention “made the first concrete studies on managing 
care” were more trusted sources for some clients. Others cited 
support groups and peers at AIDS service organizations and 
clinics as expert voices for comparison of experiences. The 
media (radio, television, and print) were identified as potential 
sources of information for the general public. Lastly, families, 
friends, and spiritual leaders were seen as another source of 
information for some. 
A majority of participants reported that they did receive 
messages from their providers regarding the importance of 
taking their medications regularly, having a sexual life with 
HIV/AIDS, and measures to prevent the transmission of HIV 
to others. Some participants reported not receiving medication 
information from their providers: “They have never told me 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
anything.” Others knew that medications lessen viral loads, 
increase CD4 counts, avoid creating resistance, reduce infections, 
and maintain overall health. One participant added, “It is a 
marriage with the medications.” Some participants were 
motivated to have these discussions about taking the medications 
because they reported needing to be there for their children and 
to maintain their quality of life. 

For some participants, any discussion of sexual behavior was 
one they were not comfortable having with their providers. A 
few reported giving up on relationships and sex after receiving 
their HIV diagnosis. Overall, there was a clear awareness that 
condoms should be used to protect themselves and their partners 
infections. 
from HIV and other sexually 
Communication was discussed as another way to enhance 
protection. One of the participants stated that he did not use 
condoms with his wife who was also HIV-positive. Another 
discussed using withdrawal when his viral load is undetectable. 
A few participants stated that their providers did not discuss 
this topic with them. The participants’ answers were similar 
when discussing modes of reducing transmission (ie, condom 
use and open discussions with partners). They added abstinence 
and masturbation as ways to practice safer sex. Medicines were 
also seen as helping reduce transmission to infants. 
For the most part, the majority of participants were comfortable 
discussing medications and sex with their providers. Some noted 
that they initiated discussions on medications and sex, whereas 
for others it was their providers. Some stated that they had 
“confidence” in their providers, whereas others felt it was 
necessary for their own well-being to take the initiative: “After 
receiving treatment with the same doctor for so long, this person 
becomes part of your family.” A salient finding was that some 
participants did not discuss medications with their providers 
because they felt they had other resources for information. 
Regarding sex, some reported preferring to speak with a provider 
of the same sex or same sexual orientation. A few did not have 
any discussions regarding medications or sex with their 
providers: “They don’t have the time.” Another participant 
summed up her sexual situation and the need to discuss it as 
follows: “There’s not much to say, my status was so traumatic 
that I don’t believe in love.” 
CARE+ Spanish Computer-Based Counseling Program 
The majority of participants reported a positive experience with 
using the tablet computer. They thought it was “interesting,” 
“easier to talk to than a person,” “it was like having another 
doctor,” “better than having a piece of paper,” “the computer 
doesn’t judge,” and “I educated myself and came out of such 
ignorance.” On the other hand, some had some issues with the 
questions being repetitive and the structure of the sentences. 
their 
Participants 
medications, and things they would not think of asking the 
provider. 


“Likes” of the computer included the ease of use, the 
touchscreen, the videos, the confidentiality (through the 
headphones), and the information provided about medications, 
safer sex, the narrators, and avatars. “Dislikes” of the computer 
were the long sessions, computer problems such as taking a 
long time to reboot, the videos, the headphones, not knowing 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 11 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


how to silence the program, and not having an option for 
English. Some participants were not comfortable with the 
directness of the language and some of the topics (drugs, sexual 
abuse). One participant noted, “Some questions were very 
strong, too direct, and a bit long.” The most salient objection, 
however, was the perceived redundancy of the content. 
All 
the participants reported a sense of privacy and 
confidentiality while using the computer. Some were concerned 
about this at the beginning of the study and this was noted to 
be one of the reasons for some anxiety when first using the 
computer. Other reasons for anxiety at the start of the study 
were being unfamiliar with computers and unsure of Spanish 
language proficiency. Participants spoke of becoming familiar 
with the format of the program and having the peers to help 
them get used to it. The availability of the peers was viewed as 
an overwhelmingly positive aspect of the program. 
Although the majority of those interviewed preferred the 
program in Spanish, some would have preferred to have an 
English version available and some thought having both 
languages would work best for them. (This is important to note 
for any replication in an urban environment where the population 
is likely to include acculturated and bilingual individuals.) 
Nearly all participants stated that they would use the program 
again to pass the time while waiting in the clinic, and when new 
information could be provided. Some would use it at every visit, 
whereas most opted for a few times a year. A few participants 
were clear in not wanting to use the computer program again; 
one person disliked the voice of the narrator and the other was 
uncomfortable with the computer. One participant stated that 
the program might be good for new clients at the clinic or newly 
diagnosed people. 
Overall, the CARE+ Spanish program was viewed positively. 
Most participants used it to improve their health, learn their 
medications (eg “Showed me how much I know, tested me on 
what I knew, allowed me to be honest with myself”), and change 
some behavior (eg “I loved it! I learned so much and because 
of this I slowed down my sex life and am more careful”). 
Although some participants saw the program as an important 
part of their care by asking questions of their providers, others 
did not, seeing it as not relevant to their lives (eg “the long 
explanations of topics that were not relevant to me”). The 
spectrum of responses received in the exit interview reflects the 
diversity of the study population, Latinos living in New York 
City. 
Health Care Provider Focus Groups 
The first focus group was conducted on February 21, 2012 with 
seven participants. Participants included three psychologists, 
three psychiatric nurse practitioners, and one psychiatrist. Years 
in health care ranged from 4 to 23 years and years in HIV care 
ranged from 1.5 to 20 years. There were three bilingual 
providers present. Providers represented all three study sites; 
time at their respective sites ranged from 1.5 to 15 years. 
The second focus group was conducted on February 28, 2012 
with nine participants, but only eight participants provided their 
demographic information. Participants included five medical 
doctors and three nurse practitioners. Years in health care ranged 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
from 14 to 29 years and years in HIV care ranged from 11 to 
14 years. There were three bilingual providers present. Providers 
represented all three study sites and time at their respective sites 
ranged from 5 months to 16 years. 
Providers expressed frustration in continuing to confront the 
same adherence obstacles over time (eg, lack of consistent safer 
sex practices). However, this was a general finding and not 
specific to Latino patients. One provider reported that not using 
condoms makes the patient feel “normal” (eg, “I don’t feel sick 
with HIV when I don’t use a condom”). Other adherence 
obstacles that are in agreement with findings from the RCT exit 
interviews include substance abuse, lack of documentation, 
stigma, and trauma. According to one provider, trauma is a 
“huge, huge factor” because it affects people, their belief in 
their right to protect themselves, and their expectations that 
intimate encounters are at least safe for both parties. Overall, 
providers were in agreement that “like a hydra head,” when one 
issue gets addressed, another comes up. 
Regarding the usefulness of the CARE+ Spanish tool, providers 
agreed that multiple approaches are important (eg “more 
education is always good”) and that patients may feel more 
empowered to have a resource (eg “an education tool” and “a 
health enhancement tool”) they can access without help. 
However, they felt that there are no substitutes for the 
provider-patient relationship, personalism in Latino culture, and 
loyalty to a provider: “...technology might not have the same 
impact.” Although intervention participants had the option to 
share their health promotion plan printout and discuss their 
study participation with their provider, the providers reported 
that none of the participants did. Therefore, a significant 
limitation on provider feedback about the CARE+ Spanish 
program was their lack of familiarity with the tool. 

Principal Results 
The CARE+ computer-based counseling tool adapted for a 
Spanish-speaking population (CARE+ Spanish) was acceptable 
and feasible to implement in an urban clinic setting. Participants 
liked the ease of use and the sense of privacy and confidentiality 
that the computer-based counseling tool provided. The health 
care providers agreed that multiple approaches are needed and 
that the counseling tool can be an additional resource for HIV 
care and support. The CARE+ Spanish program demonstrated 
trends in positive impact in reducing viral loads, increasing 
ART adherence and decreasing risky sexual behaviors in three 
comprehensive care clinics in New York City. In the CARE+ 
Spanish trial, differences between arms were not statistically 
significant. In contrast, the CARE+ computer-based counseling 
tool, when evaluated in a university-affiliated public HIV clinic 
and a community-based AIDS service organization in Seattle, 
was found to be efficacious in reducing HIV-1 viral load and 
sexual transmission risk behaviors [6]. These two randomized 
clinical trials highlight the importance of targeting the right 
populations when adapting technology tools to support patient 
treatment engagement. Although other computer-based 
behavioral interventions delivered in a clinic setting have been 
found to improve self-reported antiretroviral adherence [26] 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 12 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


and reduce risky sexual behaviors [27,28], to the best of our 
knowledge, CARE+ Spanish is the first non-English language 
computer-based counseling program to provide medication 
adherence support and promote positive prevention in a 
HIV-positive minority population. Another version of the 
counseling tool, CARE+ Kenya, linguistically and culturally 
adapted for use in clinic settings in Kenya (ClinicalTrials.gov: 
NCT01015989), may provide additional insights regarding the 
efficacy of computer-based counseling interventions across 
different populations. 
Limitations and Strengths 
We draw from the qualitative data to provide potential 
explanation of the statistical lack of effect noted from this 
intervention in this population and setting. Exit interviews from 
intervention participants and focus groups with providers 
highlight the efficacy of computer-based counseling tools in 
overcoming adherence challenges experienced by culturally 
and linguistically diverse communities, especially stigma. A 
study that explored an intervention to engage PLHA to initiate 
ART, found that by sampling participants primarily from a clinic 
setting, they were encountering individuals who had already 
overcome many of the barriers to initiating and adhering to 
ARTs [29]. It is possible, although this was not explored, that 
our participants were also further along in the HIV treatment 
cascade [30], and this may have been a factor in reducing the 
effect of the CARE+ Spanish intervention. The computer-based 
audio-narrated risk assessment that both groups received at 
baseline may have been enough to support the maintenance of 
adherence in both groups, and the positive trend noted in the 
treatment group explained by the impact of the full intervention. 
Additionally, health provider acceptability is important for any 
ICT tool that aims to be incorporated into real-world practice. 
Therefore, although the CARE+ Spanish intervention was 
developed as a stand-alone computer-based counseling tool, 
participants did receive a printout of their session that they could 
use to initiate conversation with their provider about adherence 
support and risk reduction. Instead, providers were unfamiliar 
with the CARE+ Spanish program and reported that participants 
did not share the health plan printouts with them. Although not 
a specific outcome measure, the lack of familiarity with the 
specifics of the program and the session printout, from the 
providers, may highlight that the participants were not engaging 
their providers on this aspect of their self-care, and this may 
have been a factor in reducing the effect of the intervention. 
Potential improvement of this counseling intervention may be 
developing a mobile cloud-based platform to support users in 
self-motivated behavioral change for better health. Additionally, 
targeting the intervention to individuals with adherence and/or 
sexual transmission risk problems may be another way of 
improving the program’s effectiveness. 
An innovative strength of our study is the use of peers to support 
ICT use in a clinic setting for an important and often-neglected 
population that is disproportionately affected by HIV disease 
burden. Peer involvement in programs designed to impact 
attitudes and behaviors have been shown to be effective [31,32]. 
Conclusion 
A computer-based counseling tool grounded in the TAM 
theoretical model and delivered in Spanish was acceptable and 
feasible to implement in a high-volume HIV clinic setting. It 
can provide evidence-based, linguistically appropriate ART 
adherence support without requiring additional staff time, 
bilingual status, or translation services. We found that language 
preferences and cultural acceptability of a computer-based 
in our urban 
counseling 
Spanish-speaking population. Theoretical frameworks of 
technology’s usefulness in behavioral modification needs further 
exploration in other languages and cultures to determine where 
on the HIV care and treatment continuum these interventions 
may have the greatest impact. 

Acknowledgments 
We thank the following deeply for their contributions and support: Jim Larkin, David Larkin, Carter Wickstrom, David Thomas, 
and Andrew Choi of Resources Online (www.ronline.com/care); Danielle Beiling and Zachariah Hennessey at St Luke’s-Roosevelt 
Hospital; staff members at the Center for Comprehensive Care; our research assistants; and the study participants. 
The project described was supported by Award Number RC1MH088307 from the National Institute of Mental Health. The content 
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Mental 
Health or the National Institutes of Health. We thank our project officer Cynthia Grossman. Initial adaptation of CARE+ 
computer-based counseling tool for a Spanish-speaking population was made possible by a grant to Ann Kurth (principal 
investigator) and José Parés-Avila (co-investigator) from the University of Washington’s Institute of Translational Health Sciences 
(ITHS). ITHS is funded by Grant Number 1UL1RR025014-01 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a 
component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research. 
Authors' Contributions 
AEK conceived of the study and study design. AEK, NC, JAP, MCF, JAL, and CMC drafted the manuscript. MCF, MGS, RGN, 
and CMC were responsible for data analysis. JAP conducted the formative research that guided the adaptation of the CARE+ 
tool for a Spanish-speaking population. JAL managed the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 13 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Multimedia Appendix 1 
Consort-Ehealth Checklist. 

Multimedia Appendix 2 
CARE+ Spanish Participant Interview. 

Multimedia Appendix 3 
CARE+ Spanish Topic Guide: Clinic Staff Focus Group. 




Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact sheet: HIV among Hispanics/Latinos in the United States and dependent 
areas. 2013 Nov. URL: http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk_latino.pdf [accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP5vqXwU] 
Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in 
HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents. 2016 Jan 28. URL: https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/ 
adultandadolescentgl.pdf [accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP6RTnoE] 


3. World Health Organization. Adherence to Long Term Therapies: Evidence for Action. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2003. URL: http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/adherence_full_report.pdf [accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite 
Cache ID 6gP6a4rK7] 
Simoni JM, Pearson CR, Pantalone DW, Marks G, Crepaz N. Efficacy of interventions in improving highly active 
antiretroviral therapy adherence and HIV-1 RNA viral load. A meta-analytic review of randomized controlled trials. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2006 Dec 1;43 Suppl 1:S23-S35 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1097/01.qai.0000248342.05438.52] 
[Medline: 17133201] 
Rueda S, Park-Wyllie LY, Bayoumi AM, Tynan AM, Antoniou TA, Rourke SB, et al. Patient support and education for 
promoting adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy for HIV/AIDS. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006(3):CD001442. 
[doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001442.pub2] [Medline: 16855968] 
Kurth AE, Spielberg F, Cleland CM, Lambdin B, Bangsberg DR, Frick PA, et al. Computerized counseling reduces HIV-1 
viral load and sexual transmission risk: findings from a randomized controlled trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2014 
Apr 15;65(5):611-620 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000100] [Medline: 24384803] 
Skeels MM, Kurth A, Clausen M, Severynen A, Garcia-Smith H. CARE+ user study: usability and attitudes towards a 
tablet pc computer counseling tool for HIV+ men and women. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2006:729-733 [FREE Full text] 
[Medline: 17238437] 
Hayes-Bautista DE, Chapa J. Latino terminology: conceptual bases for standardized terminology. Am J Public Health 1987 
Jan;77(1):61-68. [Medline: 3789240] 
Centers for Disease Control. 2013. HIV among Hispanics/Latinos URL: http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/group/racialethnic/ 
hispaniclatinos [accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP6igE5k] 






Depressive Symptoms in persons living with HIV/AIDS. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2008;15(2):217-226 [FREE Full text] 
[doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2481] [Medline: 18096915] 
Polgar S, Marshall J. The search for culturally acceptable fertility regulating methods. In: Marshall J, Polgar S, editors. 
Culture, Natality and Family Planning (Monograph 21). Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, University of North 
Carolina; 1976:204-218. 



13. Vincent D, McEwen MM, Pasvogel A. The validity and reliability of a Spanish version of the summary of diabetes self-care 
activities questionnaire. Nurs Res 2008;57(2):101-106. [doi: 10.1097/01.NNR.0000313484.18670.ab] [Medline: 18347481] 
Jaja C, Pares-Avila J, Wolpin S, Berry D. Usability evaluation of the interactive Personal Patient Profile-Prostate decision 
support system with African American men. J Natl Med Assoc 2010 Apr;102(4):290-297 [FREE Full text] [Medline: 
20437736] 
Fonteyn ME, Kuipers B, Grobe SJ. A description of think aloud method and protocol analysis. Qual Health Res 1993 Nov 
01;3(4):430-441. [doi: 10.1177/104973239300300403] 
Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D. CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomized 
trials. Ann Intern Med 2010 Jun 1;152(11):726-732. [doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-152-11-201006010-00232] [Medline: 
20335313] 



XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 14 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



Web-based and mobile health interventions. J Med Internet Res 2011 Dec;13(4):e126 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.2196/jmir.1923] [Medline: 22209829] 
Fisher JD, Fisher WA, Amico KR, Harman JJ. An information-motivation-behavioral skills model of adherence to 
antiretroviral therapy. Health Psychol 2006 Jul;25(4):462-473. [doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.25.4.462] [Medline: 16846321] 







15;70(6):1101-1110 [FREE Full text] [Medline: 15456119] 
Faulkner L. Beyond the five-user assumption: benefits of increased sample sizes in usability testing. Behav Res Methods 
Instrum Comput 2003 Aug;35(3):379-383. [Medline: 14587545] 



24. R Development Core Team. R-A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing URL: https://www.r-project.org/ [accessed 2016-03-30] [WebCite Cache ID 6gP7YVTUL] 
Selya AS, Rose JS, Dierker LC, Hedeker D, Mermelstein RJ. A practical guide to calculating Cohen's f(2), a measure of 
local effect size, from PROC MIXED. Front Psychol 2012;3:111 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00111] 
[Medline: 22529829] 
Fisher JD, Amico KR, Fisher WA, Cornman DH, Shuper PA, Trayling C, LifeWindows Team. Computer-based intervention 
in HIV clinical care setting improves antiretroviral adherence: the LifeWindows Project. AIDS Behav 2011 
Nov;15(8):1635-1646. [doi: 10.1007/s10461-011-9926-x] [Medline: 21452051] 




settings for persons living with HIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2010 Mar;53(3):348-356. [doi: 
10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181c429b3] [Medline: 19996978] 
29. Gwadz M, Cleland CM, Applegate E, Belkin M, Gandhi M, Salomon N, Heart to Heart Collaborative Research Team. 
Behavioral intervention improves treatment outcomes among HIV-infected individuals who have delayed, declined, or 
discontinued antiretroviral therapy: a randomized controlled trial of a novel intervention. AIDS Behav 2015 
Oct;19(10):1801-1817. [doi: 10.1007/s10461-015-1054-6] [Medline: 25835462] 
30. Gardner EM, McLees MP, Steiner JF, Del RC, Burman WJ. The spectrum of engagement in HIV care and its relevance to 
test-and-treat strategies for prevention of HIV infection. Clin Infect Dis 2011 Mar 15;52(6):793-800 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1093/cid/ciq243] [Medline: 21367734] 

predominantly Latina population: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004 Sep;158(9):897-902. [doi: 
10.1001/archpedi.158.9.897] [Medline: 15351756] 
32. Kelly JA, St Lawrence JS, Diaz YE, Stevenson LY, Hauth AC, Brasfield TL, et al. HIV risk behavior reduction following 
intervention with key opinion leaders of population: an experimental analysis. Am J Public Health 1991 Feb;81(2):168-171. 
[Medline: 1990853] 

AIDS: acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
ART: antiretroviral therapy 
CARE+: Computer Assessment & Rx Education for HIV-positives 
HIV: human immunodeficiency virus 
ICT: information and communication technology 
PLHA: people living with HIV/AIDS 
RCT: randomized controlled trial 
TAM: Technology Acceptance Model 
VAS: visual analog scale 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 15 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 04.04.16; peer-reviewed by N Abdala, K Claborn; comments to author 08.06.16; revised version 
received 22.06.16; accepted 23.06.16; published 13.07.16 
Please cite as: 
Kurth AE, Chhun N, Cleland CM, Crespo-Fierro M, Parés-Avila JA, Lizcano JA, Norman RG, Shedlin MG, Johnston BE, Sharp VL 
Linguistic and Cultural Adaptation of a Computer-Based Counseling Program (CARE+ Spanish) to Support HIV Treatment Adherence 
and Risk Reduction for People Living With HIV/AIDS: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
J Med Internet Res 2016;18(7):e195 
URL: http://www.jmir.org/2016/7/e195/ 
doi: 10.2196/jmir.5830 
PMID: 27417531 
©Ann E Kurth, Nok Chhun, Charles M Cleland, Michele Crespo-Fierro, José A Parés-Avila, John A Lizcano, Robert G Norman, 
Michele G Shedlin, Barbara E Johnston, Victoria L Sharp. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research 
(http://www.jmir.org), 13.07.2016. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research, is properly cited. The complete 
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://www.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license information 
must be included. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2016 | vol. 18 | iss. 7 | e195 | p. 16 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
