


A Smartphone App to Assist Smoking Cessation Among Aboriginal 
Australians: Findings From a Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial 
David Peiris1, PhD, MBBS, MPH; Lachlan Wright1; Madeline News1, MSci; Kris Rogers1, PhD; Julie Redfern2, PhD; 
Clara Chow2, PhD; David Thomas3, PhD 
1The George Institute for Global Health, UNSW Sydney, Newtown, Australia 
2Westmead Applied Research Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 
3Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, Australia 
Corresponding Author: 
David Peiris, PhD, MBBS, MPH 
The George Institute for Global Health, UNSW Sydney 
1 King St 
Newtown, 
Australia 
Phone: 61 280524513 
Fax: 61 280524500 
Email: dpeiris@georgeinstitute.org 

Background: Mobile health (mHealth) apps have the potential to increase smoking cessation, but little research has been 
conducted with Aboriginal communities in Australia. 
Objective: We conducted a pilot study to assess the feasibility and acceptability and explore the effectiveness of a novel mHealth 
app to assist Aboriginal people to quit smoking. 
Methods: A pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) and process evaluation comprising usage analytics data and in-depth 
interviews was conducted. Current Aboriginal smokers (>16 years old), who were willing to make a quit attempt in the next 
month, were recruited from Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services and a government telephone coaching service. 
The intervention was a multifaceted Android or iOS app comprising a personalized profile and quit plan, text and in-app motivational 
messages, and a challenge feature allowing users to compete with others. The comparator was usual cessation support services. 
Outcome data collection and analysis were conducted blinded to treatment allocation. The primary outcome was self-reported 
continuous smoking abstinence verified by carbon monoxide breath testing at 6 months. Secondary outcomes included point 
prevalence of abstinence and use of smoking cessation therapies and services. 
Results: A total of 49 participants were recruited. Competing service delivery priorities, the lack of resources for research, and 
lack of support for randomization to a control group were the major recruitment barriers. At baseline, 23/49 (47%) of participants 
had tried to quit in recent weeks. At 6-month follow-up, only 1 participant (intervention arm) was abstinent. The process evaluation 
highlighted low to moderate app usage (3-10 new users per month and 4-8 returning users per month), an average of 2.9 sessions 
per user per month and 6.3 min per session. Key themes from interviews with intervention participants (n=15) included the 
following: (1) the powerful influence of prevailing social norms around acceptability of smoking; (2) high usage of mobile devices 
for phone, text, and social media but very low use of other smartphone apps; (3) the role of family and social group support in 
supporting quit attempts; and (4) low awareness and utilization of smoking cessation support services. Despite the broad acceptability 
of the app, participants also recommended technical improvements to improve functionality, greater customization of text messages, 
integration with existing social media platforms, and gamification features. 
Conclusions: Smoking cessation apps need to be integrated with commonly used functions of mobile phones and draw on social 
networks to support their use. Although they have the potential to increase utilization of cessation support services and treatments, 
more research is needed to identify optimal implementation models. Robust evaluation is critical to determine their impact; 
however, an RCT design may not be feasible in this setting. 
Trial Registration: 
https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=371792 
http://www.webcitation.org/76TiV7HA6). 

and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN12616001550493; 
at 




XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 1 
(page number not for citation purposes) 






Smoking Rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander People 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people comprise 
approximately 3% of the total Australian population [1]. 
Although there have been recent encouraging declines in 
smoking overall in Australia, in 2014-15, 39% of Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander people over the age of 15 years 
smoked cigarettes daily (36% of females and 42% of males), 
which is 2.8 times the nonindigenous prevalence [1,2]. Although 
a smaller proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
smokers compared with the general Australian population have 
ever tried to quit (69% vs 81.4%, respectively) or have ever 
sustained a quit attempt for more than or equal to 1 month (47% 
vs 60%), Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander smokers are just 
as likely to have attempted quitting in the previous year [3]. 
There is less social disapproval of smoking among Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander people when compared with the 
general population (62% vs 79%), and daily Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander smokers are less likely to use nicotine 
replacement therapy (NRT) and other smoking cessation 
therapies than the general population (37% vs 59%) [3]. 
Mobile Health Interventions for Smoking Cessation 
Mobile health (mHealth) interventions are emerging as potential 
strategies to increase smoking cessation. A recent systematic 
review of 12 studies and 11,885 participants found that smokers 
who received mHealth support were around 1.7 times more 
likely to abstain from smoking than smokers who did not receive 
the programs [4]. Another systematic review examined text 
messaging interventions for smoking cessation (22 interventions, 
10 countries, and 15,593 smokers) [5]. Smokers who received 
a text messaging intervention were 37% more likely to abstain 
from smoking relative to controls across several smoking 
abstinence measures (point prevalence, continuous abstinence, 
prolonged abstinence, and repeated point prevalence). 
There has been only 1 randomized controlled trial (RCT) of an 
mHealth intervention for smoking cessation in Australia. 
QuitCoach is a personalized tailored internet-delivered advice 
program, and onQ (now named QuiTxt) is an interactive 
automated text messaging program [6]. In a randomized trial 
comprising 3530 smokers or recent quitters, only 42.5% of those 
offered 1 of the interventions engaged with those interventions. 
There were no significant differences between intervention and 
control groups combined in abstinence rates; however, among 
those who actually had used an intervention, there was a 
significant overall increase in abstinence (OR 1.95, 95% CI 
1.04 -3.67). In a follow-up study conducted by this group of a 
smartphone app versus simple text messaging, authors found 
that the app-based intervention was similar to text messaging 
in terms of utilization; however, the text messaging system was 
associated with higher abstinence rates [7]. 

There have been 2 randomized trials of intensive smoking 
cessation support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people in program in remote communities (163 participants) 
and among pregnant women (263 participants) [8,9]. Although 
both trials did not demonstrate significant improvement in quit 
rates, a meta-analysis of data from both trials did show a 2.4-fold 
increase in quit rates. A systematic review of clinical trials 
indigenous 
to reduce smoking rates 
internationally 
populations, conducted in 2013, analyzed 5 studies—3 testing 
Quitline protocols (structured steps for what happens when a 
person calls the Quitline including triage, counseling, and 
follow-up processes) combined with cessation products 
compared with Quitline alone and 2 using culturally adapted 
cessation counseling using mobile phones [10]. Outcomes were 
mixed; however, a New Zealand trial of a text message 
intervention involving 1705 participants including 355 Maori 
(the indigenous people of New Zealand) found a greater than 
2-fold increase in smoking abstinence at 6 weeks (28% vs 13%), 
which appeared to be sustained at 6 months [11]. Abstinence 
rates were equally successful among Maori as non-Maori in the 
intervention arm [12]. This program is now being administered 
via New Zealand Quitline. 
Contemporary data on mobile phone access for Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander people were unclear; however, in 2008, 
67% of nonremote and 61% of remote households had access 
to a prepaid mobile phone and 41% and 19%, respectively, had 
mobile access via a contract [13]. These numbers are almost 
certainly much higher now. Despite high rates of mobile phone 
usage, we are not aware of any trials of smoking cessation apps 
specifically built for indigenous people. Therefore, the aim of 
this study was to assess the feasibility, acceptability, and 
preliminary effectiveness of a novel mHealth app to assist 
Aboriginal people to quit smoking. 

Design 
The pilot study was an RCT (Figure 1). Outcome data collection 
and analysis were conducted blinded to treatment allocation. 
The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials-EHEALTH 
statement is available in Multimedia Appendix 1 and the study 
protocol in Multimedia Appendix 2. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 2 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



Participant Eligibility Criteria 
Participants were eligible if they could provide informed consent 
and met all of the following criteria: (1) current smokers aged 
16 years or older, (2) self-identification as an Aboriginal and/or 
Torres Strait Islander person, (3) willing to make an attempt to 
quit smoking in the next month, and (4) had access to an iPhone 
or Android smartphone. Only 1 person per household was 
invited to participate in the study. 
Recruitment 
Recruitment was intended to take place via up to 4 Aboriginal 
Community Controlled Health Services (ACCHSs), a New 
South Wales (NSW) government telephone coaching service, 
and Quitline. Participants were recruited via community events, 
ad hoc referrals from health professionals, and direct phone 
calls by research staff based on recommendations made by the 
ACCHS. 
Allocation 
Randomization was conducted via a central computer-based 
randomization service. Allocation was 1:1 intervention versus 
control using a minimization algorithm to balance for sex, age 
(<30 years vs ≥30 years), and heaviness of smoking index score 
(low [score≤2] vs moderate or high addiction [score>2]) for 
nicotine dependence [14]. Outcome analysis and data collection 
were conducted blinded to treatment allocation. 
Intervention 
A detailed description of the intervention development, the 
codesign process, and core features is available in Multimedia 
Appendix 3. In brief, the intervention was delivered via a 
multifaceted Android or iOS app comprising a personalized 
profile and quit plan, text and in-app motivational messages, 
and a challenge feature allowing users to “compete” with others. 
Screenshots are shown in Figures 2-5. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 3 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


All participants were free to use any other smoking cessation 
service or support and were offered Quitline and local ACCHS 
contact numbers. Participants allocated to the intervention group 
were given the opportunity to download and start using the app 
immediately. There was no cost associated with using the app. 
A support worker facilitated the registration profile, password 

set-up and the creation of a tailored quit plan. Participants were 
then given a tutorial of the app features including how to set up 
a challenge, motivational support, and tracking progress on their 
plan. App set up was also done without the use of a support 
worker as desired. 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 4 
(page number not for citation purposes) 




Control 
Participants in the control arm and their supporting health 
services were encouraged to make use of all smoking cessation 
support services available to them. They were barred from 
accessing the app if their mobile number matched our database 
of control arm participants. People not involved in the trial could 
also download the app if they were invited by an intervention 
arm participant to use the “challenge” function. 
Data Collection Methods 
All study instruments were administered by a questionnaire and 
an 
interview. Baseline data collection, consent, and 
randomization were conducted by telephone or via an in-person 
visit with a trained project officer. Participants allocated to the 
intervention were telephoned at 1 week to determine if they 
needed any support with using the app. There was also a 
“contact us” number in the app itself to call for help. At 4 weeks, 
an “evaluation” project officer conducted an outcome assessment 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 5 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


by telephone or in-person for all participants in the trial. At 6 
months’ post randomization, this officer conducted the final 
outcome assessment and biochemical verification of smoking 
status (if needed) as part of a face-to-face visit (Figure 1). In 
addition to the objective outcome assessment visits, an analytic 
tool built in the app assessed usage patterns and changes in 
usage patterns over time. 
Quantitative Outcomes 
The primary outcome was self-reported continuous smoking 
abstinence, objectively verified at 6 months. Self-reported 
continuous abstinence is defined as the participant reporting 
they had quit at both 4 weeks and 6 months of follow-up. 
Self-reported smoking cessation was confirmed with an Airmet 
Scientific Micro Plus Smokerlyzer (carbon monoxide meter 
breath test where a reading of less than or equal to 6 represents 
no recent tobacco smoking) [15]. Secondary outcomes included 
point prevalence of abstinence and use of smoking cessation 
therapies and services. 
Statistical Considerations 
On the basis of the Text2Quit and Text2Stop trials, we estimated 
the control arm abstinence rate at 6 months to be 5% [11,16]. 
Assuming that the abstinence rate is double that of the control 
arm, we calculated that 1000 participants would be needed to 
detect a 5% absolute difference (ie, 10.0% vs 5.0%; relative 
risk 2.00). This assumes a 15% loss to follow-up, 2-sided 
alpha=.05 and 80% probability of detecting a significant 
difference with P values less than .05 judged as significant. This 
study was planned as a pilot RCT in which we aimed to recruit 
200 participants to assess feasibility, resource considerations, 
acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness data to inform a 
future adequately powered trial. 
Using the secondary outcome measure of 7-day abstinence rates 
at 4 weeks and assuming the control arm abstinence rate is 12% 
and the intervention arm abstinence rate is 2.4 times greater (as 
observed in the Text2Stop trial), we assumed there would be 
80% probability of detecting a significant difference with 200 
participants from the pilot study under the same assumptions 
as above. 
Data were analyzed on the basis of intention-to-treat. 
Characteristics were compared between the groups at 4 weeks 
and 6-month follow-up using exact Chi-square tests for 
categorical variables with 2-sided P values, where the 
assumptions of the statistical test could be met. Results were 
reported in terms of relative risks with exact 95% CI. Analyses 
were undertaken using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). 
Given this was a pilot study, no subgroup analyses were 
prespecified. No imputation techniques were undertaken for 
missing data. 
Qualitative Evaluation 
Semistructured, in-depth interviews with intervention arm 
participants were conducted to better understand barriers and 
enablers to smoking cessation in general and to use of the app. 
Participants were sampled to include interviewees with a range 
of app engagement levels and a balance of gender and ages. 
Insights from the Talking About the Smokes (TATS) national 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
survey of attitudes to smoking, quit patterns, and management 
received were drawn on to guide the interview schedule 
(Multimedia Appendix 4) [17]. Interviews were conducted both 
over the phone and in-person and were digitally recorded and 
professionally transcribed. The first 5 interviews were analyzed 
by 3 team members, and a preliminary coding framework was 
derived by consensus. The remaining interviews were then 
analyzed according to this framework by 2 team members. The 
thematic framework was iteratively refined as new data and 
themes became apparent. Interviews continued until no new 
major themes emerged. 
Governance and Ethics 
An executive committee comprising the NSW Ministry of 
Health (Centre for Population Health and the Centre for 
Aboriginal Health), Aboriginal Health and Medical Research 
Council, and The George Institute for Global Health oversaw 
the project delivery. The Cancer Institute provided ad hoc advice 
and reviewed progress throughout the project. An expert user 
group was convened early in the project and regularly consulted 
during the intervention development phase (Multimedia 
Appendix 2). Ethical approval was granted by the Aboriginal 
Health and Medical Research Council Human Research Ethics 
Committee. Formal approvals from each of the participating 
sites were also granted. Due to an administrative oversight, the 
trial was inadvertently registered retrospectively after the first 
participant was enrolled in the trial. 

Recruitment 
We were only able to collaborate with 1 ACCHS, 1 regional 
community event, and the NSW government coaching service 
to assist in recruitment. Furthermore, 3 ACCHSs decided against 
participation. The major barriers to participation included the 
following: (1) competing service delivery priorities, (2) lack of 
resources for research, and (3) preference that the intervention 
be made available to all interested clients of the service rather 
than random allocation to intervention and control arms. Due 
to a change in the contracted service provider for Quitline during 
the trial, we were also unable to negotiate an agreement with 
the new provider within the project timelines. 
Due to these recruitment challenges, only 49 of the target 200 
participants were recruited between March 2016 and January 
2017, with the majority recruited from 1 ACCHS (Figure 6). 
There were no changes made to the trial outcomes after the trial 
commenced. 
Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics of the trial participants 
by randomization arm. Broadly, both groups were similar. The 
majority of participants in both arms had made at least one quit 
attempt in the previous 12 months and almost half had tried to 
quit in recent weeks (23/49, 47%). The majority of participants 
(39/49, 80%) smoked their first cigarette of the day within 30 
min of waking. Most participants (44/49, 90%) commenced 
smoking before the age of 20 years. Most people lived in 
households where at least one other person smoked (33/49, 
67%) A minority had made use of support services, medication, 
or NRT. Most participants had seen a doctor in the previous 12 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 6 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


months. In terms of use of mobile technology, most participants 
used their mobile phone for more than 30 min a day for voice 
calls (29/49, 60%), text messages (31/49, 64%), smartphone 
apps (35/49, 72%), internet (37/49, 75%), and social media 
(41/49, 83%). 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 7 
(page number not for citation purposes) 




































Number of people who had a previous quit attempt in the last 12 
months 

























Use of any type of nicotine replacement therapy or other stop-smoking 
medications in the last year 




















































































XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 8 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Trial Outcomes 
Table 2 shows the primary outcomes of the trial for the 46 
people who completed the study. Only 2 participants 
(intervention arm) reported abstinence at either the 4-week or 
6-month interview, and nobody had continuous abstinence at 
both time points. There were generally higher numbers of 
intervention arm participants reporting the use of supportive 
cessation services, but these were not statistically significant. 
There were no harms or unintended consequences observed in 
this study. 












App Usage Analytics 
The usage data for the app from March 2016 to April 2017 are 
shown in Figure 7. These data include both intervention arm 
participants and nontrial participants who were invited to use 
the app as part of the challenge function (81 new users in total 
for the trial period). From June to December 2016, there was a 
relatively consistent rate of usage in terms of new users (3-10 
users per month) and returning users (4-8 users per month). 
Session frequency average was 2.9 times per user per month, 
average session time was 6.3 min, and the average number of 
unique screens viewed per session was 7.6. These statistics 
indicate a low to moderate level of usage through the trial 
period. 


















aThe total number of participants who achieved 1 of the main or secondary outcomes was small, so we did not perform statistical testing or calculate a 
relative risk ratio as we could not meet the assumptions required. 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 9 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Interview Findings 
A total of 15 interviews with intervention arm participants were 
conducted, ranging from 20 to 45 min duration. Furthermore, 
6 major themes arose from the analyses of these interviews. 
These are illustrated in Figure 8 using a context, mechanism, 
and outcome configuration to demonstrate the potential influence 
of these themes on smoking cessation and to assist with 
explaining the outcomes observed in the trial. More descriptive 
detail on the context- and mechanism-related themes is provided 
below. 


All trial participants had commenced smoking before the age 
of 18 years. Interviewees described living in households where 
smoking was the norm among adults and how these norms 
strongly influenced children: 
You’d see the plumes of smoke in the kitchen...There 
were ashtrays all over the place...we used to play with 
the butts and pretend to smoke them ourselves 
[female, 61 years] 
Another participant described the strong influence of girls’ peer 
groups in driving the commencement of smoking describing 
how she: 
Would go home and my friend would give me one out 
of her mum’s packet and it went on from there. 
[female, 44 years] 
Another participant described being paid in cigarettes for 
babysitting for his neighbor. The consequence of such 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
entrenched normalizing behaviors was that smoking was viewed 
as a natural aspect of progression to adulthood with 1 participant 
commenting: 
I got my first pay check at 14 and I bought a packet 
of cigarettes. [female, 39 years] 

Most participants cited phone usage of some kind. Facebook 
was one of the most popular features with 1 participant 
describing it: 
Like the fridge, you’re always opening it. [female, 44 
years] 
Only 2 participants had used a health-related app (unrelated to 
the study app). For these participants, there was an initial 
curiosity to explore the features and its potential to assist with 
one’s health, but this tended to be short-lived: 
I downloaded it, but then, yeah, it was a lot of rubbish 
so I took it off. [female, 48 years] 
Most older interviewees did not appear to have any major issues 
with knowledge on how to access phone features. However, 
most people rarely made use of smartphone apps apart from 
those used for playing games. Moreover, 1 participant 
commented: 
...I play them (game apps) on the way to work...maybe 
three hours a day. [male, 24 years] 
Furthermore, 1 interviewee suggested that game apps could 
provide a stronger motivation for engaging in health apps. 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 10 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



A study design involving a control arm that did not receive the 
app was not viewed favorably, given this was a cohort of current 
smokers who had expressed the intention to quit smoking within 
the next month: 
I seen it [the trial] promoted on Facebook...and a 
couple of posters in the waiting area, and I was 
actually encouraging a lot of patients to come down 
for it, but I didn’t know it... [depended on]... whether 
you got randomized. I was glad I was in the trial 
[intervention arm], because I would have been 
frustrated if I wasn’t. [female, 44 years] 
This sentiment was also expressed by several ACCHS managers. 
Although the decision to participate was influenced by a range 
of factors, some managers were uncomfortable with both the 
resource burden of participating in a trial and the lack of ability 
to provide the intervention as a part of routine service delivery. 
Many expressed interest in participating in a posttrial phase 
once the RCT was completed. 
Some commented on how an app could extend this group 
support further: 
...then you could send this person a message, “Mate, 
I’m having a downer.”...And if they’re on the other 
end they can give you some positive feedback. [female, 
48 years] 
Although all participants had heard of Quitline and some had 
been referred to the program, no one reported actually using the 
telephone service. Some participants expressed problems with 
the referral process and this led to a loss of confidence in the 
service: 
I don’t think they rang me...I don’t know if they’re 
just tokenistic. [female, 44 years] 
The same participant suggested that the fact that the referral 
was coming from a third party may have signaled a lack of 
motivation: 
Maybe if you don’t do it yourself (self-refer), they 
don’t take it as seriously. 




Although social norms were described as strong drivers in 
initiating and maintaining smoking, similarly many participants 
cited family as being the major motivator for quitting: 
So what I want...is when I cuddle my girls they’re not 
saying, “Oh Nanny, you smell like cigarettes”...that 
breaks my heart. And it makes me more determined...I 
want them to remember me as their nanny who loved 
them very much... [female, 61 years] 
Although many participants had used smoking cessation aids, 
key events such as the death of a relative appeared to be critical 
moments in supporting quit attempts: 
Losing my mum two years ago has really, really made 
me want to quit. [female, 44 years] 
The benefits of being smoke-free were also frequently framed 
in the context of improving family well-being: 
I could use that (money from cigarettes) for something 
better, for another cruise where I can take the girls...if 
I save $25 every time I buy a smoke, I might have 
enough to go on a world cruise. It could happen. 
[female, 44 years] 

Around one-half of the participants had previously attempted 
a range of smoking cessation methods to help them quit, in 
particular, NRT and mFedication. In addition to these support 
strategies, several participants mentioned the value of a group 
atmosphere to support smoking cessation: 
...a support group, like AA...sharing ideas, so you 
encourage each other a bit more. [female, 44 years] 

You’d have each other to lean on and to express what 
you’re feeling. [female, 39 years] 
Although most participants found the app intuitive and easy to 
use, some participants would have benefited from more 
extensive training. For example, 1 participant was not aware of 
the ability to alter the quit date in the app settings. Given the 
app was designed to provide tailored content according to the 
user’s quit status, this caused problems: 
I stuffed up my start date...to start giving up smoking. 
And then, it flashed something up, and I’m thinking, 
“I haven’t quit yet, what are you sending me these 
for?” ...and that messed everything up. And probably 
just another excuse not to give up. [female, 44 years] 
Several participants indicated interest in the challenge function 
both for oneself and to challenge others; however, there were 
a range of technical issues that limited its usage such as halting 
a current challenge and initiating a new one and inviting new 
users to engage in a challenge. Other technical barriers related 
to difficulties downloading the app over a cellular network and 
an automatic log out requiring the user to sign in again after 3 
days of inactivity. For a minority of people, these issues 
substantially limited use of the app. 

A positive feature of the app was the support provided by trial 
staff in using the intervention. Several participants appreciated 
the phone call follow-ups: 
I’d say keep the ringing up. As much as us smokers 
dodge people that’s because it is a hard subject and 
we do need that push and encouragement. [female, 
44 years] 
Although this level of “intrusiveness” from the trial staff was 
generally viewed favorably, some interviewees warned of the 
risk of “overkill.” Moreover, 1 participant highlighted the need 
to strike a balance: 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 11 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


I was part of that NSW Health service...Get Healthy. 
Oh and you’d dodge them like a bullet! They were 
painful...So once I see your number, I go, “Oh, THEM 
again!” I think you’ve got to find the right balance. 
[female, 44 years] 
This was particularly an issue with the motivational text 
messages. For some participants, the high message frequency 
(Multimedia Appendix 2) was viewed positively, and when the 
frequency reduced, they started to disengage: 
I was getting texts all the time, reading all of them, 
trying to take in all the information...They were 
good...motivating, especially when you’re having a 
hard day and you get texts all the time, and it’s like, 
“Yeah, I can do it.” ...In the beginning I was getting 
about five or six [text messages], and then it just 
petered off... [female, 46 years] 
Others found the text message content to be initially useful, but 
that they would start to lose their appeal over time: 
I started ignoring them. They went into a dark place. 
[female, 46 years] 
Some suggested the messages needed to be more engaging over 
time: 
It was exciting at first, but...I want fun stuff... [female, 
48 years] 
Others found the messages came too frequently and this 
detracted from the personalized nature of these messages: 
One time I got five in the space of three and a half 
minutes, and that’s when it felt to me it was just 
automated. [female, 44 years] 

Many commented on the value of incorporating games into the 
app: 
There were no games that you could play...like my 
jigsaw puzzle on my iPad, there was nothing 
...[where] you could go “Oh yeah, I might have to do 
a little quiz. [female, 48 years] 
Several participants were regular Facebook users and most of 
these users felt the app could have been more social, interactive, 
and inclusive of user-generated content: 
...Bring more people to it...maybe put funny little 
videos or...more stories where you can link in with 
people...Have it open. [female, 48 years] 
Addition of an enhanced social element and linkage to support 
services such as Quitline was seen as essential to harnessing 
greater interest in the app: 
...if they (Quitline) can see that you are having a hard 
time, then maybe you can get a support call from 
them...Because...there wasn’t enough people for me 
to join to become friends with. So you’re sort of 
isolated on there. [female, 48 years] 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 

Principal Findings 
This study outlines the development, implementation, and pilot 
evaluation of an mHealth strategy to support Aboriginal people 
with smoking cessation. The evaluation shed valuable 
information on the challenges of implementing an RCT in this 
setting and clearly raises serious questions about the feasibility 
of conducting a larger-scale trial. Despite these challenges, it 
also shed light on the future potential for mobile apps in this 
area. We discuss the findings and implications across 3 broad 
areas: (1) the population, (2) the setting and social context, and 
(3) this particular app and lessons for other apps in this setting. 
The population which participated may 
represent a 
“hard-to-reach” group in terms of cessation support services 
and consequently may differ from the types of populations that 
have participated in previous mHealth quit smoking trials. A 
large number of female participants were enrolled in the trial, 
and analyses from systematic review data suggest that mHealth 
smoking cessation interventions may be less effective for women 
than men [5]. Consistent with other studies of quitting among 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, we found that few 
participants successfully sustained abstinence, used NRT, 
smoking cessation medications, or cessation services [3,18,19]. 
These factors suggest that a “one app fits all” approach is 
unlikely to be successful and a better understanding of the needs 
and opportunities for groups that have difficulty sustaining quit 
attempts is needed. A recent international critical review of the 
literature relating to Indigenous people’s use of health 
technologies found that such technologies required meaningful 
user involvement, community-based processes for development, 
and creative adaptation to local needs [20]. 
The importance of the setting and social context in which people 
smoke was a prominent finding from the interviews. Several 
interviewees commented that social norms around smoking are 
key drivers of smoking rates in the community. It has been 
suggested that changes in these norms have occurred more 
slowly in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, 
and this may be a key factor in the differential decline in 
smoking rates compared with the general population. Our 
interviews highlighted many examples of social influences 
where participants were exposed to smoking behavior early in 
life and the role this may have played in initiation and 
maintenance of smoking [21]. A social network analysis study 
of Aboriginal people in the Australian Capital Territory found 
separate clustering of smokers from nonsmokers in the social 
network and that the proportion of adults in a person’s household 
who smoked was associated with being a smoker [22]. 
Despite historically high levels of social acceptability for 
smoking in Aboriginal communities, this is clearly changing. 
Some have suggested that social contagion of behaviors such 
as quitting rely on changing norms [23]. The TATS study found 
that attitudes and beliefs positively associated with wanting to 
quit included regretting ever starting to smoke, perceiving that 
local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community leaders 
disapprove of smoking, believing nonsmokers set a good 
example for children, worrying about future smoking-related 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 12 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


health effects, and believing quitting to be beneficial [3]. We 
also found in the interviews that although families can influence 
initiating smoking, they can also be a highly motivating 
influence to quit smoking. Several participants interviewed 
commented on how key family members viewed smoking as 
undesirable, and this was a strong driver for making quit 
attempts. Others said they would like group support and a group 
atmosphere to support them in their smoking cessation journeys. 
our inability to recruit participants via this means precluded 
being able to address this. Questions remain regarding the 
optimal level of support that is needed with such services. A 
key finding from the interviews was the need to balance 
intrusiveness versus supportiveness, particularly for text 
messages. The evidence on the optimal dose of message 
frequency is unclear, and further research to test different 
intensities are needed to help answer this question. 
The above 2 findings related to population and social context 
have implications for future app development considerations. 
Although most participants cited phone usage of some kind 
(mainly texting, phone calls, and Facebook), smartphone apps 
were not widely used, and only 2 participants had used a 
health-related app previously. The usage analytics showed 
modest but sustained usage over the life of the study. Many 
participants, particularly female, recommended that the Can’t 
Even Quit app needed to be socially “opened up” like Facebook 
so that more stories could be shared. Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander people may use Facebook at higher rates than 
the general Australian population, and a recent qualitative study 
highlighted potential opportunities for leveraging Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander people’s use of social media departing 
from traditional one-way information models of health 
promotion to assets-based, self-empowerment models [24]. If 
smoking cessation apps could access a person’s social network, 
they may be able to facilitate support from network members 
and spread an intervention through these networks [25]. 
Currently, most health apps that offer Facebook integration are 
related to exercise tracking and calorie counting. A 2014 review 
found only 9 Facebook-integrated smoking cessation apps and 
these were of variable quality [25]. Pediatric researchers have 
started to explore Facebook communities for children with 
chronic diseases and proposed 3 considerations for how this 
platform could be better leveraged for health issues [26]. These 
include the following: (1) “back end” content management 
systems mediated by trusted health professionals that can be 
integrated with Facebook, (2) tools that can extract data from 
Facebook feeds and providing structured threads and forums to 
promote topic-specific information exchange between users, 
shifting dialogue from “one to many” to “many to many”; and 
(3) using the platform for consultation and codesign processes 
when developing health integrated apps. 



Clearly, social media apps are only 1 strategy for strengthening 
social networks related to health issues. A review of the 
Australian government’s Tackling Indigenous Smoking and 
Health Lifestyle program highlighted the need for multilevel 
approaches 
social media and 
community-based campaigns, health service strategies that are 
locally tailored, maximize community participation, and 
strengthen workforce capacity are needed. In this study, the 
broad appreciation for regular support from research staff 
suggests that the model of “prescribing” the app as part of a 
coordinated smoking support service package may be attractive. 
Given the self-reported rates of seeing health professionals were 
high (88%) in this study and consistent with previous literature, 
strengthening health service–mediated interventions should be 
pursued further [18]. Although we had intended to better 
understand the role of the app as part of the Quitline service, 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
Limitations 
Although we were not expecting to show statistically significant 
changes in the primary outcome of this pilot, we did intend to 
generate sufficient preliminary data to inform a large-scale, 
well-powered trial. Unfortunately, the study fell short of the 
target numbers for recruitment. On the basis of previous trials, 
we calculated that over 1000 participants would be needed for 
an adequately powered study. The overall abstinence rates at 4 
weeks and 6 months in this study were lower than the 
hypothesized 5% quit rate estimated from the literature. This 
indicates that quit rates may be lower than assumed, and 
therefore, an even greater sample size may be needed for a fully 
powered RCT. Our difficulties in achieving recruitment targets 
were multifactorial, and barriers occurred at both institutional 
and individual participant levels. More effort will also be needed 
to attract higher numbers of men into future research of this 
nature, as many of the findings presented here may reflect 
gender-specific views. Although we had success implementing 
the trial at 1 ACCHS, this was not true for several other sites 
that we approached. For ACCHSs, competing interests, the lack 
of dedicated resources to support a research study, and a 
perceived challenge in “selling” a trial where only half of the 
participants would be given the intervention were the major 
barriers [28]. Indeed, many ACCHS managers indicated a strong 
interest in accessing a program if it were made available in a 
nontrial setting. Alternative evaluation and alternative designs 
that maintain methodological rigor, enhance institutional and 
participant acceptability, and place a limited resource burden 
on health services are needed. Potential options include testing 
multiple interventions using a factorial RCT design as was done 
in the Victorian RCT [6], embedding periodic outcome 
assessments into the app itself and constructing matched control 
groups from routinely collected datasets. 
Conclusions 
This pilot of a smoking cessation app for Aboriginal people was 
difficult to implement, and few conclusions can be made 
regarding its effectiveness. Despite this, many insights were 
gained from the evaluation that bear consideration for future 
research in this space. In relation to health apps, the findings 
underscore the importance of a socio-technical approach to their 
development, comprehensively understanding and embracing 
the complex interaction between people, their social contexts, 
and rapidly changing technologies. Although maximal benefit 
would come from working with people that experience the 
greatest difficulty with sustaining a quit attempt, it is important 
to recognize that this is a heterogeneous group that may have 
particular needs that are not being addressed through existing 
interventions. Finally, to enhance adoption of such apps, we 
suggest that a 2-pronged approach is needed that focusses on 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 13 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


both service delivery models that promote app “prescription” 
as part of an overall comprehensive smoking cessation support 
service and health promotion strategies that support community 
empowerment. 
Acknowledgments 
This research is a project of the George Institute for Global Health and was commissioned by NSW Health. The information and 
opinions contained in it do not necessarily reflect the views or policy of NSW Health. The authors would like to thank all the 
communities and organizations participating in the Can’t Even Quit project. In particular, the authors extend gratitude to those 
individuals that participated in the expert user groups, the pilot trial, and those participants that generously gave time for interviews. 
The authors also acknowledge the support provided by staff from the Centre for Population Health, Centre for Aboriginal Health, 
Tharawal Aboriginal Corporation, Bullinah Aboriginal Health Service, Get Healthy NSW, Cancer Institute NSW, and Cancer 
Council of Victoria. 
Authors' Contributions 
DP and LW conceptualized the project. DT provided advice on study design throughout the project. LW and MN were responsible 
for participant recruitment, data collection, and analysis. DP and KR performed the statistical analyses. KN contributed to 
qualitative data analysis and preparation of the report. All authors critically reviewed and approved the final manuscript. 
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared. 
Multimedia Appendix 1 
CONSORT‐EHEALTH checklist (V 1.6.1). 

Multimedia Appendix 2 
Study protocol. 

Multimedia Appendix 3 
Development of the intervention. 

Multimedia Appendix 4 
Participant interview guide. 





Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2016. 4714.0 - National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Survey, 2014-15 URL: 
https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/4714.0 [accessed 2019-03-01] [WebCite Cache ID 76XqiZabv] 
Theo V, Bridget B, Lucy S, Alan D L. The Burden of Disease and Injury in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples. 
Brisbane: School of Population Health, The University of Queensland; 2007:2003. 
Nicholson AK, Borland R, Davey ME, Stevens M, Thomas DP. Past quit attempts in a national sample of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander smokers. Med J Aust 2015 Jun 01;202(10):S20-S25. [doi: 10.5694/mja15.00202] [Medline: 26017251] 
4. Whittaker R, McRobbie H, Bullen C, Borland R, Rodgers A, Gu Y. Mobile phone-based interventions for smoking cessation. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;11:CD006611. [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006611.pub3] [Medline: 23152238] 
Scott-Sheldon LA, Lantini R, Jennings EG, Thind H, Rosen RK, Salmoirago-Blotcher E, et al. Text messaging-based 
interventions for smoking cessation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2016;4(2):e49 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.5436] [Medline: 27207211] 
Borland R, Balmford J, Benda P. Population-level effects of automated smoking cessation help programs: a randomized 
controlled trial. Addiction 2013 Mar;108(3):618-628. [doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2012.04091.x] [Medline: 22994457] 
Buller DB, Borland R, Bettinghaus EP, Shane JH, Zimmerman DE. Randomized trial of a smartphone mobile application 
compared to text messaging to support smoking cessation. Telemed J E Health 2014 Mar;20(3):206-214 [FREE Full text] 
[doi: 10.1089/tmj.2013.0169] [Medline: 24350804] 




XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 14 
(page number not for citation purposes) 





a randomised controlled trial of an intensive smoking cessation intervention in a remote aboriginal Australian health care 
setting. BMC Public Health 2014 Jan 13;14:32 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-32] [Medline: 24418597] 
Eades SJ, Sanson-Fisher RW, Panaretto K. An intensive smoking intervention for pregnant Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander women: a randomised controlled trial. Med J Aust 2013 Jan 21;198(1):23-24. [Medline: 23330759] 
Johnston V, Westphal DW, Glover M, Thomas DP, Segan C, Walker N. Reducing smoking among indigenous populations: 
new evidence from a review of trials. Nicotine Tob Res 2013 Aug;15(8):1329-1338. [doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntt022] [Medline: 
23519776] 
11. Rodgers A, Corbett T, Bramley D, Riddell T, Wills M, Lin R, et al. Do u smoke after txt? Results of a randomised trial of 
smoking cessation using mobile phone text messaging. Tob Control 2005 Aug;14(4):255-261 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1136/tc.2005.011577] [Medline: 16046689] 


13. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Canberra: ABS; 2010. National Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Social Survey 2008 URL: 
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4714.0Main+Features12008 [accessed 2019-03-01] [WebCite Cache 
ID 76XshiApO] 
14. Borland R, Yong H, O'Connor RJ, Hyland A, Thompson ME. The reliability and predictive validity of the Heaviness of 
Smoking Index and its two components: findings from the International Tobacco Control Four Country study. Nicotine 
Tob Res 2010 Oct;12 Suppl:S45-S50 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntq038] [Medline: 20889480] 


self-reported tobacco smoking in remote Australian Indigenous communities. Popul Health Metr 2010 Feb 20;8(1):2 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1478-7954-8-2] [Medline: 20170528] 
Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, Whittaker R, Edwards P, Zhou W, et al. Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile 
phone text messaging (txt2stop): a single-blind, randomised trial. Lancet 2011 Jul 2;378(9785):49-55 [FREE Full text] 
[doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60701-0] [Medline: 21722952] 

community-based participatory research project. Med J Aust 2015 Jun 01;202(10):S13-S19. [Medline: 26017250] 
18. Thomas DP, Briggs VL, Couzos S, Panaretto KS, van der Sterren AE, Stevens M, et al. Use of nicotine replacement therapy 
and stop-smoking medicines in a national sample of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander smokers and ex-smokers. Med 
J Aust 2015 Jun 01;202(10):S78-S84. [doi: 10.5694/mja15.00205] [Medline: 26017263] 




non-pharmacological support in a national sample of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander smokers and ex-smokers. Med 
J Aust 2015 Jun 01;202(10):S73-S77. [doi: 10.5694/mja15.00293] [Medline: 26017262] 
Jones L, Jacklin K, O'Connell ME. Development and use of health-related technologies in indigenous communities: critical 
review. J Med Internet Res 2017 Dec 20;19(7):e256 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.7520] [Medline: 28729237] 
van der Sterren A, Greenhalgh E, Knoche D, Winstanley MH. The Cancer Council. Melbourne: Cancer Council Victoria; 
2016. 8.1 Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders: social disadvantage, health and smoking—an overview URL: 
http://www.tobaccoinaustralia.org.au/chapter-8-aptsi/8-1-overview [accessed 2019-01-24] [WebCite Cache ID 75eaymwhH] 
van der Sterren A, Greenhalgh E, Knoche D, Winstanley MH. The Cancer Council. Melbourne: Cancer Council Victoria; 
2016. 8.9 Attitudes to and beliefs about smoking among Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders URL: http://www. 
tobaccoinaustralia.org.au/chapter-8-aptsi/8-9-attitudes-to-and-beliefs-about-smoking [accessed 2019-01-24] [WebCite 
Cache ID 75eb66gcb] 


24. Hefler M, Kerrigan V, Henryks J, Freeman B, Thomas DP. Social media and health information sharing among Australian 
Indigenous people. Health Promot Int 2018 Apr 17:- Epub ahead of print(forthcoming). [doi: 10.1093/heapro/day018] 
[Medline: 29672684] 
Jacobs MA, Cobb CO, Abroms L, Graham AL. Facebook apps for smoking cessation: a review of content and adherence 
to evidence-based guidelines. J Med Internet Res 2014;16(9):e205 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.3491] [Medline: 
25205129] 

26. Mogul DB, Nagy PG, Bridges JFP. Building stronger online communities through the creation of Facebook-integrated 
health applications. JAMA Pediatr 2017 Oct 01;171(10):933-934. [doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.2300] [Medline: 
28846765] 

Smoking and Healthy Lifestyle Programme Review: Executive Summary URL: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/ 
publishing.nsf/Content/904B8752C99678A1CA257EA00026976F/$File/ 
TIS-and-Healthy-lifestyle-Programme_Executive%20Summary.pdf [accessed 2019-02-28] [WebCite Cache ID 73rMyUTGn] 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 15 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



clinical trial in Aboriginal health services. Med J Aust 2015 Jul 06;203(1):24-27. [doi: 10.5694/mja14.00581] [Medline: 
26126563] 

ACCHS: Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Service 
mHealth: mobile health 
NRT: nicotine replacement therapy 
NSW: New South Wales 
RCT: randomized controlled trial 
TATS: Talking About the Smokes 
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 06.12.18; peer-reviewed by N Walker, M Dyson, E Isaura; comments to author 16.01.19; revised 
version received 30.01.19; accepted 30.01.19; published 02.04.19 
Please cite as: 
Peiris D, Wright L, News M, Rogers K, Redfern J, Chow C, Thomas D 
A Smartphone App to Assist Smoking Cessation Among Aboriginal Australians: Findings From a Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019;7(4):e12745 
URL: https://mhealth.jmir.org/2019/4/e12745/ 
doi: 10.2196/12745 
PMID: 30938691 
©David Peiris, Lachlan Wright, Madeline News, Kris Rogers, Julie Redfern, Clara Chow, David Thomas. Originally published 
in JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 02.04.2019. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR mhealth and uhealth, is properly 
cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://mhealth.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright 
and license information must be included. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e12745 | p. 16 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
