Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, No. 87, Vol. 1 
doi:10.1007/s11524-009-9397-9 
* 2009 The New York Academy of Medicine 
The Challenge of Understanding Mortality Changes 
among Street Youth 
Élise Roy, Nancy Haley, Jean-François Boudreau, 
Pascale Leclerc, and Jean-François Boivin 
ABSTRACT According to a cohort study conducted in Montréal, Québec from 1995 to 
2000, the mortality rate among street youth was 921/100,000 person-years. Several 
new community initiatives aiming to increase access to housing and to social and health 
services for the homeless were implemented in the city between 2000 and 2003. This 
study aims to update the mortality rate estimate for the period 2001–2006 and to 
examine factors that could explain a difference between rates, if any. A second cohort 
study was conducted between 2001 and 2006. The Cohort 2 mortality rate was 
computed and compared with the Cohort 1 rate. Several analyses were then carried out: 
(1) mortality rates in the general population were compared with street youth rates 
using standardized mortality ratios (SMR); (2) Cohorts 1 and 2 distributions of risk 
factors for mortality were examined, and their effects were assessed using multivariate 
proportional hazards regression analyses carried out on a combined Cohorts 1 and 2 
dataset. Mortality rate among street youth decreased by 79% while it declined by only 
19% in the general population; the SMR for Cohort 1 was higher than for Cohort 2 
(11.6 versus 3.0). Multivariate proportional hazards regression analyses yielded 
estimates that were close to the model's estimates based on Cohort 1 data only, and 
participation in Cohort 1 was an independent predictor of mortality, with an adjusted 
hazard ratio of 9.0. The mortality decline cannot be completely explained by a similar 
decrease among the general population or by a difference in distribution of risk factors 
for mortality between the two cohorts. Field workers suggested that the decrease in 
heroin consumption they had observed in the streets might have contributed to the 
mortality decline. We then performed additional analyses which showed that even though 
the proportion of street youth currently using heroin decreased significantly between 
1995 and 2005, the association between heroin use and mortality was not significant 
(adjusted hazard ratio of 0.9; 95% CI, 0.4 to 2.3). It seems that various factors could 
have contributed to the decline in mortality rates among street youth, one plausible factor 
being the implementation of new services for the homeless. This study underscores the 
importance of monitoring risky behaviors among vulnerable populations to ensure that 
morbidity and mortality data among these populations is correctly interpreted. Setting up 
a system to monitor the drug market could improve the quality of information collected. 


Street youth reality has different faces depending on the social environments where it 
takes place. In Canada and the USA, street-involved youth are generally aged 
Roy and Boudreau are with the Université de Sherbrooke, Longueuil, QC, Canada; Roy, Haley, and 
Leclerc are with the Direction de Santé Publique, Montréal, QC, Canada; Haley is with the Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; Boivin is with the McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada. 






25 years old or below, and approximately one third of them are girls. Despite some 
heterogeneity, mostly based on local subcultural differences, these youth share many 
characteristics that 
they are highly 
entrenched in the streets and live in unstable residential conditions with frequent 
episodes of homelessness; many of them engage in high-risk behaviors such as 
prostitution and substance abuse, which seriously compromise their health.1 The 
ultimate consequence of these precarious living conditions (death of street youth) is 
poorly documented. Several studies addressed mortality among homeless individu- 
als, but only a few presented data for youth less than 25 years.2–5 Although the 
mortality ratio varied greatly from one study site to another, ranging between 2.7 
and 28.5, all these studies clearly showed that homeless youth experienced mortality 
rates much higher than their counterparts in the general population. 
Preliminary ﬁndings on mortality risk factors among street youth in Montréal, 
Canada, were ﬁrst reported in 1998,6 and ﬁnal results were published in 2004.7 
Brieﬂy, a prospective cohort study on risk factors for HIV and hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) infections was conducted from 1995 to 2000 among street youth aged 14 to 
the 1,013 
25 years at recruitment. Secondary analyses showed that 26 of 
participants died during follow-up for a mortality rate of 921 per 100,000 person- 
years (95% conﬁdence interval (CI), 602–1350). This represented a standardized 
mortality ratio of 11. Causes of death were suicide (13), overdose (8), accident (2), 
fulminant hepatitis A (1), heart disease (1), and 1 unknown. A multivariate pro- 
portional hazards regression analysis showed that independent risk factors for 
mortality were as follows: HIV infection (adjusted hazard ratio (AHR=8.1)), daily 
alcohol use in the last month (AHR=3.7), homelessness and drug injection in the last 
6 months (AHR=3.9 and 3.7, respectively), and male sex (AHR=2.6). 
The analyses presented in this paper were based on data collected between 2001 
and 2006 in a second prospective cohort study, the aim of which was to determine 
psychosocial determinants of initiation into injection drug use among street youth in 
addition to updating HIV and HCV infection incidence estimates. The objectives of 
the analyses presented here are to update the mortality rate estimate and to examine 
factors that could explain a difference between rates, if any. 

Criteria for entry into the study cohorts as well as recruitment strategies (fully 
detailed in previous papers8,9) were the same for both cohorts, except for age (14 to 
25 years in Cohort 1 and 14 to 23 years in Cohort 2). Brieﬂy, youth were eligible if 
they were street-active, English or French speaking, able to provide informed 
consent, and able to complete an interviewer-administered questionnaire. In the 
second cohort, a slightly younger sample was targeted because of the psychosocial 
component related to initiation into injection, the youngest among street youth 
being at greatest risk of initiation.8 Study interviewers enrolled participants through 
regular visits to all major street youth agencies in Montréal. Semiannual follow-up 
interviews included completion of a questionnaire on sociodemographics, drug and 
alcohol use, and sexual behaviors. Mortality data were obtained from the Coroner’s 
Ofﬁce and the Institut de la statistique du Québec. Ethical approval was provided by 
the Institutional Review Board of the Faculty of Medicine, McGill University. 
As in the ﬁrst cohort analyses, mortality rate in the second cohort was estimated 
using the person-time method, and the 95% CI was calculated using the Poisson 
distribution.10 Follow-up started at recruitment and ended either at death or 


6 months after completion of the last questionnaire, which was mid-2006 for the 
second cohort. Mortality rates in Cohorts 1 and 2 were compared using a test 
developed by Oleinick and Mantel.11 
To examine factors that could explain a possible difference between Cohorts 1 
and 2 mortality rates, the following analyses were carried out. First, we examined 
mortality rates in Québec’s general population for the same time periods. We then 
compared rates in the general population to Cohorts 1 and 2 mortality rates by 
computing standardized mortality ratios (SMRs). The indirect method of stand- 
ardization by sex and age group was applied. The two SMRs were compared using 
conﬁdence intervals calculated via Byar’s approximation.10, 12 Secondly, we tried to 
determine if a different distribution of risk factors for mortality (identiﬁed in 
Cohort1) in the cohorts could explain changes in mortality rates. Proportions of 
youth presenting risk factors at baseline were calculated for each cohort. Then, a 
multivariate proportional hazards regression analysis with time-varying covariates 
was carried out on a dataset combining data from both cohorts. We examined the 
independent effect of participation in Cohort 1 on mortality, controlling for the 
predictors of mortality. Analyses were carried out with SPSS 13.0.13 

A total of 1,687 subjects participated in the two cohorts: 829 in Cohort 1 only, 674 
in Cohort 2 only, and 184 in both cohorts. Sex distribution and mean age at 
recruitment into Cohort 2 (68.9% boys; 20.4 years) were similar to those reported 
for Cohort 1 (67.4% boys; 19.9 years). 
Five of the 858 participants in Cohort 2 died during follow-up, for a mortality 
rate of 191/100,000 person-years (95% CI, 62–447). Causes of death were overdose 
(2), suicide (1), unintentional 
injury (1), and 1 unknown. This mortality rate 
represents a decrease of 79% (from 921/100,000 person-years to 191/100,000 
person-years), and the difference between the rates was statistically different 
(pG0.001). The corresponding decline in the general population was only 19% 
and the SMRs in Cohorts 1 and 2 were 11.6 (95% CI, 7.6–17.0) and 3.0 (95% CI, 
1.0–6.9), respectively. This statistically signiﬁcant difference between SMRs shows 
that the decline in mortality was greater among street youth than in the general 
population. 
Baseline proportions of street youth with risk factors for mortality were similar 
in the two cohorts (Table 1). As shown in Table 2, multivariate proportional hazards 
regression analyses of the combined dataset (model A) yielded estimates that were 
close to the previous model’s estimates based on Cohort 1 data only (ﬁrst column). 
The effect of the “Cohort” variable was statistically signiﬁcant in the model where 
independent predictors of mortality were controlled for, and its addition in the 
model did not modify other estimates by more than 10% (model B). This shows that 
Cohort 1 participants were more likely to die during follow-up compared to Cohort 
2 participants and that cohort difference in distribution of mortality predictors 
identiﬁed previously did not explain the decrease in mortality. 

This study shows a striking decline in mortality rate among Montréal street youth 
between the periods 1995–2001 and 2001–2006. This decrease cannot be explained 
by a similar drop among the general population; the decline was signiﬁcantly greater 


TABLE 1 Presence of risk factors for mortality at study entry in both street youth cohorts 
in Montréal 



HIV infection 
Daily alcohol use in last month 
Homelessness in last 6 months 
Drug injection in last 6 months 
Male sex 
aTwo missing values 
bSix missing values 
cOne missing value 
1.4%a 
10.2% 
78.9% 
30.5% 
67.4% 
0.9%b 
12.5%c 
83.0%c 
31.1% 
68.9% 
for street youth than for the general population during the same time period. Also, 
differences in distribution of mortality risk factors between the two samples did not 
appear to be involved. According to the ﬁnal multivariate model, Cohort 1 
participants were nine times more likely to die during follow-up than Cohort 2 
participants when controlling for other independent predictors. 
In April 2008, while presenting these results to community groups and 
institutions working with street youth in Montréal, we suggested that the signiﬁcant 
drop in mortality among street youth could be at least partially explained by the 
implementation of new services for homeless people during the period 2000 to 2003. 
In fact, soon after publication of our preliminary results in 1998, the Montréal 
Public Health Department set up a working group in response to this mortality 
epidemic. The working group was asked to make recommendations to the regional 
and provincial health authorities to take actions to decrease mortality among street 
youth.14 Within several months of receiving the working group’s report, around the 
end of 2000, Québec’s Minister of Health and Social Services allocated new funds to 
community organizations working with street youth to improve services, both 
medical and social. At the same time, a federal-provincial agreement on home- 
lessness provided new funding for special projects to increase access to housing and 
to social and health services for the homeless in Montréal. With these funds, several 
community initiatives were implemented between 2000 and 2003. These included 
TABLE 2 Multivariate proportional hazards regression analyses of mortality among street 
youth 




6.0 (2.0–17.5) 
3.1 (1.4–6.9) 
2.8 (1.2–6.6) 
2.5 (1.2–5.1) 
2.9 (1.1–7.5) 
5.4 (1.8–15.9) 
3.1 (1.4–6.9) 
2.9 (1.3–6.9) 
2.4 (1.1–4.9) 
2.8 (1.1–7.3) 
9.0 (2.3–35.5) 

5.6 (1.9–16.8) 
3.2 (1.3–7.7) 
3.0 (1.1–7.6) 
2.7 (1.2–6.2) 
2.6 (0.9–7.7) 

HIV infection 
Daily alcohol use in last month 
Homelessness in last 6 months 
Drug injection in last 6 months 
Male sex 
Cohort (1 vs. 2) 
an=1,012 (26 deaths) 
bn=1,682 (31 deaths) 


increased hours for outreach community interventions, training of outreach and 
community workers regarding mental health issues and suicide prevention, opening 
of a new hassle-free primary care clinic for street youth, and improved access to 
social housing with community support. Consequently, our hypothesis that newly 
implemented services helped reduce mortality seemed plausible, especially since 
these services speciﬁcally targeted suicide prevention. However, while the organ- 
izations participating in the meeting did not reject this hypothesis, some workers 
proposed that the decrease in mortality could also be partly due to a change in the 
youth’s drug consumption habits. Workers said they had observed a decline in 
heroin consumption in the streets; this could mean a decrease in the number of 
heroin users and injection drug users and, thus, a reduced risk of deadly overdoses 
due to heroin consumption or injection. 
To further examine this question, we looked at the temporal variation in the 
proportion of heroin users during the period covered by the two cohort studies. We 
had previously shown that the annual prevalence of current injection among street 
youth was stable between 1995 and 2005.15 The new analysis demonstrated that the 
odds of being a current heroin user (last month), controlling for sex and age, had 
declined signiﬁcantly since 1995, with an odds ratio of 0.94/year (95% CI, 0.92– 
0.97; pG0.0001). Given this result, we carried out additional proportional hazards 
regression analyses, assessing the effect of current heroin use on mortality. The 
univariate analysis showed a marginal association between heroin use and mortality 
(hazard ratio of 2.0; 95% CI, 0.9–4.3; p=0.07). Once included in the multivariate 
model (shown in model B, last column of Table 2), the association between heroin 
use and mortality was not signiﬁcant (adjusted hazard ratio of 0.9; 95% CI, 0.4– 
2.3; p=0.90). There was no confounding effect of heroin use on other parameter 
estimates (changes in estimates were less than 4%). Thus, heroin use did not seem to 
be an independent predictor of mortality among street youth. It is, therefore, 
unlikely that the reduction in heroin use among the youth explains the decrease in 
mortality. 
We come to the conclusion that various factors could have contributed to the 
decline in mortality rates among street youth. A certain decrease having been observed 
among the general population, it is possible that the steep drop among street youth 
can be explained in part by this population trend. Another plausible factor is the 
implementation of new services for the homeless. However, we cannot state this 
conclusively, given that our study is a post hoc analysis. An evaluative study design, 
for instance a quasi-experimental design, would undoubtedly have been better to 
assess the effects and impact of services implemented to counter the issue of mortality. 
Some limitations of our study could have been detrimental to our capacity to 
identify all factors that could have contributed to the drop in mortality. One is the 
limited power of the study due to the relatively small number of observed deaths. It 
is possible that this prevented us from detecting other signiﬁcant predictors, 
including a signiﬁcant effect of the decline of heroin consumption among youth. 
Finally, another area of concern may be the generalizability of the results. However, 
cohort participants should be representative of the larger Montréal street youth 
population, given that recruitment was conducted in all major street youth 
organizations and that refusals were infrequent.8 Moreover, according to a survey 
carried out in the late 1990s, most of the homeless population in Montréal (over 
90%) attend community organizations offering services to homeless people.16 
This study highlights the challenge of understanding mortality trends in 
marginalized populations, such as street-involved people and drug users. Immediate 


causes of death reported in ofﬁcial databases are, of course, very useful, but they are 
only part of the explanation. Factors that are precursors to these causes, such as 
substance use or suicidal behaviors and psychological distress, are rarely well 
documented among these individuals, who are generally overlooked in population 
surveys. Behavioral epidemiological surveillance of vulnerable populations is an 
effective way to monitor risky behaviors that can shed light on morbidity and 
mortality data among these populations. In our study, one possible explanation for 
the decrease in mortality was the decline in heroin use among youth. Our 
longitudinal research data enabled us to study the effect of these changes and, thus, 
to conclude that a reduction in heroin use was not a major cause of mortality 
decline. However, data collected from both users and informers in the ﬁeld have 
their limitations. Additional information, particularly concerning the drug market, 
is also necessary to better 
including price, purity, and availability of a drug, 
understand users’ behaviors. Indeed, studies have shown that the drug market 
inﬂuences the types of drugs consumed and methods used among drug-using 
populations.17–19 In this regard, we would like to underline the importance of 
collecting systematic data through highly performing integrated surveillance systems 
to understand morbidity and mortality trends among marginalized populations and, 
thus, to better inform health policies addressing their needs. It is crucial that these 
systems rely on a variety of sources. In this regard, examples from Europe and 
Australia that include multiple data collection strategies such as behavioral surveys, 
consultations with key informants, and analyses of drug seizures are inspiring.17,20 
Finally, despite a striking decrease in mortality rates among street youth 
between 1995–2001 and 2001–2006, it is noteworthy that mortality in this group is 
still higher than in the general population. It is, thus, essential to maintain public 
funding to strengthen the preventive work that has been started in Montréal and to 
continue developing innovative services that will improve the lives of street youth as 
well as decrease morbidity and mortality among them. On a broader level, faced 
with the high rates of mortality among homeless people documented elsewhere in 
the world, the Montréal example suggests that it is essential to develop services 
adapted to their needs to reduce the disparity between afﬂuent and poor individuals 
with regard to health and mortality. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Project funding: This study was ﬁnancially supported through unconditional grants 
received from the following sources: Medical Research Council of Canada, Health 
Canada, Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux du Québec, Human Resources 
Development Canada: Supporting Communities Partnership Initiative, Direction de 
santé publique de Montréal-centre, and Fonds de recherche en santé du Québec. 
We wish to thank the youth who participated in this study as well as all 
collaborating street youth community organizations. This study was made possible 
through the dedicated contribution of all members of the research team: the 
coordinator, interviewers, secretaries, and data entry clerk. 























11. Oleinick A, Mantel N. Family studies in systemic lupus erythematosus—II: mortality 
among siblings and offspring of index cases with a statistical appendix concerning life 
table analysis. J Chronic Dis. 1970;22:617-625. 


13. SPSS. SPSS for Windows, Rel 130. Chicago: SPSS; 2004. 
14. Direction de la santé publique. Le Défi de l’accès pour les jeunes de la rue. Avis du 
directeur de la santé publique sur la mortalité chez les jeunes de la rue à Montréal. 
Montréal: RRSSSMC; 1998. ISBN 2-89494-172-2. 
15. Roy É, Boudreau J-F, Leclerc P, Haley N, Boivin J-F, Godin G. Trends in injection drug 
use behaviours over 10 years among street youth. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2007;89:170- 
175. 
16. Fournier L, Chevalier S, Ostoj M, Caulet M, Courtemanche R, Plante N. Dénombrement 
de la clientèle itinérante dans les centres d’hébergement, les soupes populaires et les 
centres de jour des villes de Montréal et Québec 1996–97, 2-Montréal: premiers 
Résultats. Montréal: Santé-Québec; 1998. 


18. de la Fuente L, Saavedra P, Barrio G, Royuela L, Vicente J. Temporal and geographic 
variations in the characteristics of heroin seized in Spain and their relation with the route 
of administration. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1996;40:185-194. 
19. Roy É, Morissette C, Haley N, Gutiérrez N, Rousseau L, Denis V. Pourquoi commencer? 
L’initiation à l'injection de drogues selon les jeunes de la rue. Drogues, Santé et Société. 
2006;5:45-76. 


