

































Developing Web-based physical activity (PA) interventions based on motivational interviewing 
(MI) could increase the availability and reach of MI techniques for PA promotion. Integrating an 
avatar in such an intervention could lead to more positive appreciation and higher eficacy of the 
intervention, compared to an intervention that is purely text-based. 





The present study aims to determine whether a Web-based PA intervention based on MI with an 
avatar results in more positive appreciation and higher effectiveness of the intervention, when 
compared to an intervention that is purely text-based. 

A three-arm randomized controlled trial was conducted, containing the following research condi- 
tions: (1) a Web-based PA intervention based on MI with an avatar, (2) a content-identical inter- 
vention without an avatar, and (3) a control condition that received no intervention. 
Measurements included PA behavior and process variables, measured at baseline, directly follow- 
ing the intervention and 1 month post intervention. 


Both interventions signiicantly increased self-reported PA at 1 month, compared to the control 
condition (beta 
=.44, P=.006). No distinctions were 
found regarding intervention effect on PA between both interventions. Similarly, the results of the 
process evaluation did not indicate any signiicant differences between both interventions. Due to 
the limited relational skills of the avatar in this study, it probably did not succeed in forming a 
stronger relationship with the user, over and above text alone. 



The indings suggest that avatars that do not strengthen the social relationship with the user do 
not enhance the intervention impact. Future research should determine whether Web-based PA 
interventions based on MI could beneit from inclusion of a virtual coach capable of more complex 
relational skills than used in the current study, such as responding in gesture to the user’s state 
and input. 

Dutch Trial Register trial number: NTR3147; 
http://www.trialregister.nl/trialreg/admin/rctview.asp?TC=3147 (Archived by WebCite at 
http://www.webcitation.org/6NCbwdUJX). 


Motivational interviewing (MI) is deined as “a collaborative conversation style for strengthening a 
person’s own motivation and commitment to change” [1]. Evidence illustrates that MI can be suc- 
cessful in getting individuals to increase their physical activity (PA) [2]. Delivering MI in a tradi- 




tional way, however, is expensive and therefore dificult to scale up. Therefore, developing Web- 
based PA interventions based on MI could increase the availability and reach of the MI techniques 
for PA promotion. 
Although developing a Web-based PA intervention based on MI appears feasible [3], questions re- 
main to be answered regarding the optimal coniguration of such an intervention. MI is usually de- 
livered as a face-to-face intervention by a counselor. In the context of a Web-based delivery mode, 
the presence of the human counselor could be substituted by using a virtual agent or an avatar 
[4]. Multiple studies have conirmed that the presence of a virtual agent can further improve effec- 
tiveness of Web-based interventions [4,5]. 
Considering the above, integrating an avatar into a Web-based PA intervention based on MI could 
lead to more positive appreciation and higher eficacy of the MI components. Future intervention 
development would be less expensive, however, when such an avatar is omitted. Thus, it is impor- 
tant to determine whether the addition of an avatar leads to more favorable results in the context 
of a Web-based PA intervention based on MI. 
The present study aims to answer the following questions: (1) Does adding an avatar to a Web- 
based PA intervention based on MI result in additional effects on PA behavior? and (2) Does the 
presence of such an avatar lead to better appreciation for the intervention? 


A three-arm randomized controlled trial was conducted, containing the following research condi- 
tions: (1) a Web-based PA intervention based on MI with an avatar (AVATAR), (2) a content-identi- 
cal intervention without an avatar (TEXT), and (3) a control condition that received no interven- 
tion (CONTROL). Measurements were taken using Web-based questionnaires at baseline, directly 
after the intervention (follow-up 1) and 1 month post intervention (follow-up 2). 

The participants were Dutch adults (18-70 years old). Exclusion criteria included impairments that 
severely impede PA participation (participants were asked whether they were unable to be physi- 
cally active), not speaking and/or writing Dutch, and not having Internet access. The participants 
were recruited in April and May 2012 through an Internet panel of Dutch residents who occasion- 
ally volunteer in Web-based research. 

At baseline and follow-up 2, the number of weekly days with at least 30 minutes of moderate PA 
was measured with a self-reported single item of the Dutch Short Questionnaire to Assess Health 
Enhancing Physical Activity (SQUASH): “How many days per week are you, in total, moderately 




physically active, by undertaking, for example, heavy walking, cycling, chores, gardening, sports, or 
other physical activities for at least 30 minutes?” [6]. At follow-up 1, appreciation for the interven- 
tion was evaluated by measuring several appreciation dimensions such as personal relevance, 
trustworthiness, and overall appreciation. 

Two Web-based PA interventions based on MI were developed, one of which included an avatar 
(AVATAR) and one of which was fully text-based (TEXT). Both interventions were derived from a 
previous study on a Web-based PA intervention based on MI [3]. In these interventions, partici- 
pants answered several open-ended and multiple choice questions. In between those questions, at 
various instances, the participants received feedback messages containing a relection or sum- 
mary, based on one or more of their prior answers. The following is an example of such a 
message: 
So you have a very busy life, and therefore you have less conidence that you could manage to 
increase your physical activity, which is completely understandable. However, you also said 
that you’re a real go-getter. When you have decided to do something, you go all the way! 
Because of that, you still have conidence that you could increase your physical activity. Do you 
already have some ideas about how you would increase your physical activity? What activity 
would you want to do? And how could you schedule this in such a way that it would not take 
too much time? With your willpower and a good plan, you would surely be able to become 
more physically active. 
During both interventions, several topics are discussed such as the participant’s current PA behav- 
ior, the perceived importance of PA and potential beneicial effects of becoming more physically 
active, and the participant’s conidence that he or she could succeed in becoming more physically 
active. Finally, participants are given the option to formulate their own PA plans and to anticipate 
dificulties. 
Throughout both interventions, several MI counseling techniques have been implemented and 
have been translated into automatized text versions. Obviously, application of these techniques by 
means of an automated Web-based platform differs from application in a real-life counseling set- 
ting. For example, a face-to-face setting allows responding to very subtle expressions of motiva- 
tion, which is less feasible in an automated platform. Due to the speciic and interactive approach, 
however, the application of these techniques in the interventions displays a high degree of similar- 
ity to the real-life situation, in which a counselor asks questions and provides feedback. The main 
difference is that the questions and feedback are not provided by a human counselor, but through 
text or an avatar on a computer screen. 
With regard to textual content, the TEXT and AVATAR interventions are almost completely identi- 
cal. Throughout both interventions, the feedback messages are identical. During a few moments in 
the intervention, however, the AVATAR intervention contains somewhat more social dialogue than 
the TEXT intervention. 




The TEXT intervention has a relatively simple layout, consisting of a static blue background and a 
white dialogue window where questions and feedback messages appear. Figure 1 shows a screen- 
shot of the TEXT intervention. 
The AVATAR intervention consists of an avatar positioned behind a desk in a small ofice. 
Questions and messages are communicated through text balloons, without the use of voice. The 
avatar displays speech movements (matching the text in the balloons), social dialogue (at the be- 
ginning of the intervention and during transitions between the different parts of the intervention) 
as well as non-verbal expressions such as empathic gestures and eye and head movements. The 
physical appearance of the avatar was based on the results of a series of focus group interviews 
among the target population that discussed how a motivating and reliable avatar should look. 
Based on the results of these interviews, it was decided to include both a male and a female avatar 
in the intervention so the participants can choose a coach in accordance with their preferences. At 
the start of the intervention, participants can choose either a male or a female avatar. Figure 2 
shows a screenshot of the AVATAR intervention. Before implementation, the intervention was ex- 
tensively pretested by members of the target group. 

Physical activity data were analyzed using a linear regression analysis with the following indepen- 
dent variables: baseline PA behavior, gender, age, body mass index (BMI), educational level, and 
the intervention condition variable coded into two dummies (AVATAR and TEXT). Potential varia- 
tions in process evaluation variables were analyzed through analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with 
gender, age, BMI, educational level, and baseline PA behavior as covariates. Analyses were per- 
formed using SPSS for Windows (version 18). 

At baseline, 958 individuals (60.4% female, 578/958; mean age 42.9 [SD 14.5]; 58% high educa- 
tion, 555/958) completed the questionnaire. These individuals were on average moderately physi- 
cally active for at least 30 minutes per day an average of 4.2 (SD 1.9) days per week. At baseline, 
the TEXT condition contained signiicantly fewer participants with high education compared to the 
AVATAR and CONTROL condition. No additional baseline differences were found between the 
three study conditions. 
Follow-up 2 (1 month) measurements were completed by 500 participants (AVATAR 162; TEXT 
146; CONTROL 192) or 52% of the baseline population (57.8% female, 289/500; mean age 45.3 
[SD 14.2]; 58% high education, 290/500). Dropout analyses showed that participants younger 
than age 46 were more likely to drop out at 1 month (OR 1.95, 95% CI 1.51-2.53). In addition, par- 
ticipants randomized into one of the intervention conditions were more likely to drop out at 1 
month (OR 1.64, 95% CI 1.25-2.16). 
At 1 month, participants were on average moderately physically active for an average of 4.4 (SD 
1.8) days per week for at least 30 minutes per day (AVATAR mean 4.6 [SD 1.6]; TEXT mean 4.7 [SD 
1.8]; CONTROL mean 4.0 [SD 1.9]). Both interventions were effective in increasing total PA at 1 





month when compared to the control condition (beta 
beta 
=.44, P=.006). Participants from the two intervention conditions who had com- 
pleted the follow-up 2 questionnaire (n=308) increased the number of days per week on which 
they were physically active for at least 30 minutes from 4.44 to 4.63 (AVATAR from 4.43 to 4.57; 
TEXT from 4.46 to 4.69). No differences were found regarding intervention effect on PA level be- 
tween AVATAR and TEXT condition. 


Overall, process evaluation results were quite positive (ie, entertainment 5.16/7; trustworthiness 
5.15/7; overall appreciation score 7.14/10). No signiicant differences were found between the in- 
tervention conditions regarding these variables. 


Both interventions signiicantly increased self-reported PA at 1 month, compared to the control 
condition. These outcomes indicate that Web-based PA interventions based on MI hold promise, as 
they are potentially capable of inducing behavior change. No distinctions were found regarding ef- 
fect on PA level between the AVATAR and TEXT intervention. Similarly, the results of the process 
evaluation did not indicate any signiicant differences between both interventions. 
The avatar in this study did not increase intervention impact. This is probably related to the inabil- 
ity of the avatar to respond in gestures to the user’s state and input [5]. Due to the limited rela- 
tional skills of the avatar in this study, it probably did not succeed in forming a stronger relation- 
ship with the user, over and above text alone. As a consequence, the avatar used in the current 
study was not able to enhance the intervention. For future intervention research, inclusion of an 
avatar capable of more sophisticated relational skills, such as responding to the user’s input with 
gestures, is warranted. 
Alternatively, it would be relevant to test a modality in which the avatar is replaced by multiple 
short videos of a real human who speaks to the participant and leads the way through the inter- 
vention. Previous research shows that this type of interactive video counseling holds promise for 
public health interventions [7]. These videos could even be supplemented by videos in which a PA 
expert talks about the possible beneits of being physically active on a regular basis, or in which 
former participants talk about their experiences during the intervention. All this could help give 
the Web-based intervention a more human character. 

This study has some limitations. First, a considerable degree of self-selection occurred in this 
study, due to the fact that participants from the intervention conditions were more likely to drop 
out compared to participants from the control conditions. This may be related to a second consid- 
eration; participating in this study was relatively demanding since the baseline measurement, in- 
tervention, and post-measurement were all on the same day. This may have led to some irritation 




among the participants and probably explains a part of the relatively large attrition that occurred 
in the intervention conditions of this study. Third, PA behavior was measured with a single self-re- 
port item. Although several studies have provided support for the validity of the item used in this 
study [8,9], the measure remains a weakness of the current study and an objective measure of PA 
(eg, by pedometer or accelerometer) is recommended for future studies. Finally, caution is needed 
when generalizing the results of this study to the general population because of the overrepresen- 
tation of a high educational level in the sample due to the Web-based sampling frame [10]. 

In conclusion, the indings suggest that avatars that do not strengthen the social relationship with 
the user do not enhance intervention impact. Future research should determine whether Web- 
based PA interventions based on MI could beneit from inclusion of a virtual coach capable of 
more complex relational skills than used in the current study, such as responding with gestures to 
the user’s state and input [5]. Furthermore, future research should assess the use of video coach- 
ing as a potentially beneicial part of a Web-based PA intervention based on MI. 

The study was funded by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development 
(ZonMw, 200120007). 



























































