

Engaging women with an embodied conversational agent to 
deliver mindfulness and lifestyle recommendations: A feasibility 
randomized control trial 
Paula M. Gardinera,*, Kelly D. McCuea, Lily M. Negasha, Teresa Chenga, Laura F. Whitea, 
Leanne Yinusa-Nyahkoona, Brian W. Jacka, and Timothy W. Bickmoreb 
aDepartment of Family Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine/Boston Medical Center, 
Boston, USA 


Objective—This randomized controlled trial evaluates the feasibility of using an Embodied 
Conversational Agent (ECA) to teach lifestyle modifications to urban women. 
Methods—Women were randomized to either 1) an ECA (content included: mindfulness, stress 
management, physical activity, and healthy eating) or 2) patient education sheets mirroring same 
content plus a meditation CD/MP3 once a day for one month. General outcome measures 
included: number of stress management techniques used, physical activity levels, and eating 
patterns. 
Results—Sixty-one women ages 18 to 50 were enrolled. On average, 51% identified as white, 
26% as black, 23% as other races; and 20% as Hispanic. The major stress management techniques 
reported at baseline were: exercise (69%), listening to music (70%), and social support (66%). 
After one month, women randomized to the ECA significantly decreased alcohol consumption to 
reduce stress (p = 0.03) and increased daily fruit consumption by an average of 2 servings 
compared to the control (p = 0.04). 
Conclusion—It is feasible to use an ECA to promote health behaviors on stress management and 
healthy eating among diverse urban women. 
Practice implications—Compared to patient information sheets, ECAs provide promise as a 
way to teach healthy lifestyle behaviors to diverse urban women. 
*Corresponding author at: Department of Family Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine/Boston Medical Center, 1 Boston 
Medical Center Place, Dowling 5 South, Boston, MA 02118, USA. Paula.Gardiner@bmc.org (P.M. Gardiner). 
Conflict of interest 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Authors’ contributions 
Contributions were as follow: PMG, BWJ, LYN and TWB contributed to conception of the study; KDM managed data collection; 
PMG, LMN, LFW, and TC conducted data analyses; TC and PMG drafted the manuscript; PMG, TC, KDM, LFW, TWB, and LYN 
revised the manuscript critically. All authors have read and approved the final version for submission. 
Statements 
The authors confirm all patient/personal identifiers have been removed or disguised so the patient/person(s) described are not 
identifiable and cannot be identified through the details of the story. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Patient Educ Couns. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01. 



Embodied conversational agent; Mindfulness; Mindfulness based stress reduction; Stress 
management; Healthy eating; Nutrition; Physical activity 

Clinicians often address multiple health behaviors simultaneously and supplement office 
visits with additional health education through written materials, such as patient information 
sheets or brochures [1, 2]. Although these sheets are considered standard of care, the content 
and readability may not necessarily benefit patients with cultural or economic differences or 
lower literacy [3]. Furthermore, many clinicians endorse lifestyle changes or assist in 
managing chronic stress related problems (e.g. obesity, alcohol, and tobacco abuse) which 
require patients to change several behaviors at a time [4]. 
Today, technology-based interventions are becoming increasingly popular for delivering 
health-related behavioral changes [5–7]. To date, most automated health behavior change 
interventions are designed to only address a single behavior [8, 9]. Little is known about the 
practicality of using a technology-based intervention to deliver a multi-behavioral change 
intervention in racially diverse women [10, 11]. 
Providing specifically tailored information on multiple health behaviors may prove useful 
for patients to improve their overall well-being. One technology, called the embodied 
conversational agent (ECA), shows particular promise for conveying behavioral change 
strategies to patients [9, 12]. This paper reports on a feasibility study that compares an ECA 
delivering content on mindfulness, stress management, healthy eating, and physical activity 
to patient education sheets with the same content. 
The ECA is an animated conversational character that simulates face-to-face interaction with 
a patient (Fig. 1) [12–16]. The system is comprised of a networked server with a 
conversational database responding to patient’s interactions and a patient education system. 
The ECA is an animated African American female character programmed to deliver 
culturally aware patient strategies and health information (e.g. recommending specific 
popular recipes or foods, mentioning prayer or spiritual traditions) to increase skills in self- 
management. The language used is dynamically composed, based on each patient’s data 
(e.g. name, gender, history of past interactions and responses). The agent also answers 
questions and tests patient understanding of key health facts. Prior pilots have demonstrated 
acceptability of ECAs in both inpatient [17–19] and outpatient settings [20, 21]. Other 
studies have also yielded positive outcomes for ECAs to deliver health education on topics 
such as: exercise, eating fruits and vegetables, and preconception care [12, 16, 21–24]. 
Based on our previous studies, we have shown it is feasible for young African American 
women ages 18 to 34 years to benefit from an ECA delivering health information on dietary 
supplements and stress management as part of a larger preconception patient education ECA 
system [16, 24]. We do not know, however, whether the ECA can be used to deliver lifestyle 
strategies (mindfulness, stress management, healthy eating, and physical activity) in an 



urban outpatient setting with racially diverse women ages 18 to 50 years. This two-arm 
randomized control trial (RCT) newly introduces the ECA to female patients in person and 
compares the acceptability and satisfaction of the ECA to patient information sheets plus a 
meditation CD/MP3 among peri-menopausal women recruited from Boston. The outcomes 
being studied are feasibility and satisfaction with the ECA versus patient information sheets 
(control group). 


2.1.1. The Gabby System—The ECA system for this study was adapted from the Gabby 
Preconception Health Care system’s dialogue scripts and media (Version 2); the detailed 
curriculum is in Table 1 [16]. The scripts included motivational interviewing dialogue, 
dialogue to simulate shared decision making interactions, and additional longitudinal 
interaction using techniques such as goal setting, problem solving, tips, and homework 
(Appendix A). 
The healthy eating promotion dialogue was based on previous ECA studies engaging women 
in preconception care [16, 24], the Five Fruit and Vegetables recommendation [25], the 
Harvard School of Public Health’s healthy eating plate [26], and the principles of the 
Diabetes Prevention Program [27]. Information on stress management was adapted from 
principles of Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) [16], a promising mind-body 
intervention [28–31]. The major techniques included were: being present in the moment, 
responding and not reacting to stress, awareness of breath meditations (two versions: short 
10 min; long 25 min), body scan, mindful eating, and mindful yoga. A recent systematic 
review identified 21 RCTs of MBSR: eleven of these studies showed improvement in mental 
health measures compared to waitlist or standard care controls, and improved pain scores 
and mental health status for patients with chronic pain [32]; other studies have also shown 
similar results [33–36]. Additional stress management exercises included progressive muscle 
relaxation and guided imagery. Finally, physical activity recommendations were based on 
governmental guidelines for physical activity [20, 21, 37, 38]. 
The ECA system is accessed over the web in a standard browser through a username and 
secure password login. Each interaction with the system consisted of a personal greeting 
from Gabby, an ECA, followed by educational content and behavior change counseling 
related to stress management, healthy eating, and physical activity, any or all of which could 
be selected by the participant (Fig. 1). The system also contains an auto logout feature after 
a period of user inactivity. 
If participants were randomized to the intervention, the research assistant (RA) enrolled 
them into the ECA system, specifying baseline information (e.g. name, age), and then taught 
them how to use the system for 60 min. Participants were asked to log on once a day for 30 
days and to interact with Gabby for as long as they wished. 
2.1.2. Patient information sheets and meditation CD/MP3—If participants were 
randomized to the control, the RA reviewed patient information sheets in person for 60 min, 



which mirrored the content from the Gabby system. These sheets were written at a fifth 
grade level to accommodate a spectrum of health literacy. We also prepared a CD/MP3 with 
the same meditations and exercises offered by the ECA. Control group meditations were 
recorded by a live meditation teacher in contrast to Gabby’s electronic voice. Women were 
encouraged to listen to the recordings once a day for 30 days and to read the sheets as many 
times as they wished. 

Participants were recruited from primary care outpatient clinics at Boston Medical Center 
(BMC). Recruitment flyers were placed in clinical exam rooms, and recruitment materials 
were available to clinicians to hand out as appropriate. We also posted in the weekly BMC 
online newsletter. Patients self-referred themselves to the study by calling the study phone 
number listed on flyers within clinics. We included participants who self-identified as 
women, were 18–50 years of age, had access to a telephone and computer with internet, 
were English-speaking, and were not pregnant, to enroll in the study. We excluded 
participants who refused to consent, were not able to complete the study due to health 
reasons, including mental health or substance abuse problems, or did not speak English. 
All participants completed enrollment with a trained RA, which took 30 min to complete. 
The RA explained the study, including the purpose, risks, and benefits, and asked each 
potential participant a question about each of those points to confirm that she was capable of 
providing informed consent. Participants gave verbal informed consent, since the enrollment 
process was completed. Data were collected by the RA for all participants at baseline and at 
one month follow-up. Participants were enrolled into the study on a rolling basis and as 
such, participant study durations were tracked individually based upon the date of baseline 
completion. After obtaining baseline information, participants were randomized to either the 
intervention or control using a computer-generated permuted block method. The RA was not 
blinded to group allocation. 
All participants received a reminder phone call/e-mail at 14 days after enrollment to assess 
for safety and address any questions. After one month from baseline, the RA conducted 
post-study interviews in person or by phone. Participants received a gift card for their 
participation in the study and reimbursement for transportation and were also entered into a 
raffle. 

2.3.1. Primary outcomes—A primary goal of this study was to gather feasibility data on 
ECA utilization among multiracial women ages 18 to 50 years within an outpatient setting in 
order to design a larger fully powered RCT. The primary outcomes were as follows: number 
of recruited participants in a 12-month period; proportion of participants who were racial 
minorities (non-white); number of participants who completed the study from baseline to 
follow-up; number of participants for whom outcome data can be collected; and participants’ 
satisfaction with the intervention or control. 



2.3.2. Demographic and secondary outcomes—The following information was 
collected by the RA through an interview both at baseline and post-study: demographics 
(including age, race, ethnicity, education, work status, income, self-reported height and 
weight, BMI; clinical factors such as health conditions, medication use, smoking status, 
alcohol use, and pain levels); physical and mental health statuses by the Short Form Health 
Survey (SF-12) [39] and depression levels by the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) 
[40]. We asked questions assessing eating patterns, physical activity routines, and stress 
management levels at baseline and post-intervention. 
Adapting questions from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES), participants reported the total number of fruit and vegetable servings they 
consumed daily; the frequency of consuming regular soda/sugary drinks, caffeinated drinks, 
snack foods, calcium and dairy, whole grains, red meat, and fish per week; the frequency of 
eating breakfast per week; and intake of vitamins or minerals, folic acid, and herbal 
supplements [41]. We showed an image of a food label and asked participants if they read 
Nutrition Fact labels on grocery items regularly. We assessed their nutrition knowledge 
(Appendix B), and inquired about food access and assistance programs using the Household 
Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS) [42]. 
Based on the Stanford Patient Education Research Center’s Exercise Behaviors 
Questionnaire, we compiled the total amount of time, in minutes, participants reported 
engaging in physical activity during a typical week [43]. Specific activity routines included 
stretching, strengthening and aerobic activities (e.g. walking, running or jogging, aquatics, 
and other). We also collected information on participants’ self-efficacy to participate in 
physical activity with the Self-Efficacy for Exercise Scale (SEE) [44]. 
For stress management, we asked participants to report self-perceived stress levels using the 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-4) [45]. For types of stress management, we asked: “in the past 
week, how many times did you do stress management or relaxation techniques?” Then we 
asked them to describe techniques they utilized to manage their stress on a weekly basis (see 
Section 3.2.2). 
For all three overarching topics, we asked participants to rate their confidence in their ability 
to eat healthy, to exercise at least an hour per week, or to manage stress. Higher scores 
indicated greater confidence to perform such activities. 
At the end of the study, participants were also asked to provide feedback on their assigned 
intervention. Questions included incorporation and relevance of suggestions on diet and 
nutrition; effects of the intervention on stress; exercise; benefits and difficulties of 
interacting with the intervention; and any other feedback they wished to share. 
Specifically for ECA users, we collected system utilization data including number of logins, 
duration of use (in min), and user satisfaction after one month. Following a semi-structured 
interview guide, we also asked open ended questions regarding participants’ impressions of 
an ECA delivering health information. 




2.4.1. Preliminary analysis—Effectiveness of randomization was assessed by comparing 
sociodemographic factors between the intervention and control using Chi-square tests for 
dichotomous and categorical variables and two-sample t-tests for continuous variables. 
2.4.2. Primary and secondary analyses—Descriptive statistics were used to analyze 
primary outcome measures. This feasibility study lacked the statistical power to measure the 
difference in adherence to plan between intervention and control patients. An exploratory 
analysis using a Chi-square test was conducted to compare the adherence to plan (e.g. 
increase in stress management techniques used, increase in healthy eating, and increase in 
activity) between intervention and control patients. Two sample t-tests were used to compare 
satisfaction scores between the two groups. Normally distributed data were analyzed using 
two sample t-tests and data not normally distributed were analyzed using Wilcoxon Rank 
Sum tests. All analyses were conducted using SAS 9.3. 
Interview responses were documented on a data collection sheet and reviewed to identify 
similarities among responses. Responses reported by two or more participants were 
identified for further analysis and categorized into three overarching themes: perceived 
helpfulness, benefits, and challenges using the assigned intervention. The study was 
approved by the BMC Institutional Review Board. 


We recruited 61 participants in a 12-month period; all 61 recruited women were screened 
eligible and enrolled into the study for one month. We collected outcome data from baseline 
to follow-up on 57 participants (Fig. 2). 

3.2.1. Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics—The demographic and 
clinical characteristics of the 61 women enrolled in this study are presented in Table 2. On 
average, participants were 35 years old; 51% identified as white, 26% as black, 2% as Asian/ 
Pacific Islander, and 21% as other races; and 20% identified as Hispanic. Eighty-four 
percent of participants primarily spoke English at home, while 11% primarily spoke 
Spanish. Seventy-nine percent of women had completed at least some college, and 89% of 
them worked full-time or part-time. In regards to yearly household income, 44% reported 
making less than $49,000, and another 46% reported making more than $50,000. Ten 
percent of participants refused to disclose their income status. 
On average, women in the study had a BMI of 28 kg/m3 and scored a 7 on the PHQ-9 
assessment; 30% reported having chronic health problems, and 67% regularly took 
prescribed medication. An average BMI score of 28 kg/m3 is classified as being overweight, 
while a PHQ-9 score greater than 5 denotes mild depression [40]. Three percent of 
participants reported smoking, and 70% reported drinking alcohol at least once a month or 



more. There were no significant differences in demographics or clinical characteristics 
between groups. 
3.2.2. Stress management techniques—In Table 3, the most popular stress 
management techniques at baseline among participants included: engaging in physical 
activity (69%), listening to music (70%),and spending time with friends (66%). At one 
month, there was no significant difference in the number of adaptive coping techniques 
between groups. The proportion of women who reported eating as a coping technique did 
decrease, although not significantly (55% to 29% for intervention, 50% to 38% for control). 
At baseline, 67% of participants reported drinking alcohol at least once a month or more to 
manage their stress. At 30 days, there was a significant decrease in the number of women 
who used alcohol for stress management in the intervention compared to the control group 
(35% to 14% for intervention, 30% to 31% for control; p = 0.03). The number of stress 
management techniques increased in both groups, though there was no significant difference 
(μ = 1 to 4 for intervention, μ=2 to 3 for control). There was no significant difference in the 
perceived stress scale in the intervention compared to the control group. 
At baseline, women in both groups were identified as being mildly depressed, with an 
average PHQ-9 score of 7. At follow-up, PHQ-9 and SF-12 scores did not differ 
significantly between the two groups (p = 0.36 and p = 0.28, respectively). However, it is 
worth noting that PHQ-9 scores decreased by two units in the ECA group compared to a one 
unit decrease in the control group. 
3.2.3. Food and nutrition—Specific eating patterns are documented in Table 4. Analysis 
revealed that ECA users significantly increased the average amount of fruit servings they ate 
compared to women using patient information sheets (μ = 2 to 4 for intervention, μ = 2 to 2 
for control; p = 0.04). The amount of vegetable servings increased for both groups, but not 
significantly. There were trends in the reduction of weekly caffeine and snack consumptions 
after 30 days for women in the ECA group compared to the control group, although 
statistically insignificant. Consumption of whole grains, red meat, and fish did not differ 
significantly between the two groups from baseline to follow-up. There was no significant 
difference in food knowledge, food insecurity, and breakfast consumption between groups (p 
= 0.15, p = 0.99, and p = 0.11, respectively). 
3.2.4. Patient satisfaction of assigned intervention—At follow-up, participants 
were asked to evaluate their satisfaction of their assigned intervention based on topics of 
healthy eating, physical activity, and stress management (Table 5). Women favored using 
Gabby to improve stress management and increase physical activity more than women using 
patient information sheets. Sixty-nine percent utilized suggestions from Gabby to improve 
healthy eating, 52% to increase physical activity, and 70% to manage stress: all of which 
were greater–but not statistically significant–relative frequencies than participants using 
patient information sheets (66%, 49% and 66%, respectively). There was no significant 
difference in self-confidence to manage stress, to engage in physical activity, and to eat 
healthy between groups. Although statistically insignificant, duration of exercise increased 
in both groups for stretching/ strengthening (p = 0.18) and aerobic exercise (p = 0.27). 



3.2.5. ECA system utilization—For one month, ECA users spent a median total of 52 
min (interquartile range [IQR] = 101.4, N = 31) interacting with Gabby and logged in 5 
times (IQR = 7, N = 31). The average time spent per individual session was 12.1 min (σ = 
6.1, min = 3.9, max = 25.8). 

Findings suggest that most participants perceived the health information they received to be 
helpful, and intervention participants identified specific benefits and challenges to using an 
ECA. Users from both groups generally highlighted that their assigned intervention was very 
informative, easy to use, and served as a good reminder to keep their health status in check 
through mindfulness, physical activity and healthy eating. Interestingly, a majority of ECA 
users commented that Gabby was most relevant in regards to stress management. For 
example, intervention participants reported: “It definitely gave me more tools for stress 
management”"She helped me relax”, and “She reminded me to take care of myself even 
when I’m in the midst of a crazy work life”. Additionally, the majority of those who 
interacted with Gabby described her as empowering and relatable. One participant stated, 
“She relates to my stress … you can tailor it to your specific interests and needs”. In 
contrast, control group participants generally found it difficult to use the patient information 
sheets due to reported lack of accountability and follow-up. For example, some control 
group participants commented: “No accountability, no checking to see if you made 
improvements” and “Sheets were easy to ignore”. 
For the intervention group only, participants highlighted specific benefits and challenges to 
using the ECA system. The majority of users perceived Gabby to be a fast, reliable, and 
credible source of information. Participants’ comments to support this finding included: 
“The right answer is always there no matter what … I don’t have to wait for a doctor” and “I 
did not think she shared incorrect or unsupportive info”. Challenges using the Gabby system 
included the sound and quality of her voice, time commitment to use the system, and 
program accessibility. Several participants described Gabby’s voice as “robotic”; one 
participant in particular commented that they “could not stand how slowly she talked”. 
Intervention participants also found it difficult “having the time and sitting in front of the 
computer to do it”, and highlighted her laptop and desktop accessibility limitations, stating 
“she was only on a computer, not a phone”. 


In this study, we demonstrated that it is feasible to use ECA technology to deliver multiple 
healthy lifestyle recommendations on physical activity, healthy eating, mindfulness, and 
stress management techniques among diverse urban women. Among our study sample, 
interaction with an ECA was shown to be effective in decreasing alcohol consumption for 
stress and increasing daily fruit consumption. There was also a trend increase in the number 
of stress management techniques used. 



Adherence to a healthy lifestyle includes stress management; however, fewer than 10% of 
adults in the United States follow this pattern, including women [46]. Gabby users reported 
utilizing more stress management techniques from baseline, and 70% of them responded that 
they used Gabby’s suggestions to improve their stress. In the qualitative data, both groups 
reported being more knowledgeable about managing their stress post-intervention. Similarly, 
one pilot study implemented a virtual coach to provide mindfulness training, and found that 
participants who had coach-based training performed the techniques more effectively and 
regularly than participants who had to teach themselves the same techniques using paper and 
audio materials [22]. There was no statistically significant difference in perceived stress 
among women in the Gabby group compared to the control group. However, our study was 
not adequately powered to detect such a difference; therefore, an adequately powered 
clinical trial is necessary to determine efficacy in stress reduction. 
Our results also show a significant decrease in alcohol use for stress management (63%) for 
women who interacted with Gabby compared to the control group. Research has found the 
use of technologies among non-dependent alcoholic drinkers to be promising [47, 48]. In 
several studies to reduce alcohol use among college students, participants who received 
tailored text messages were more likely to report a reduction in alcohol consumption and an 
increased awareness to manage drinking behaviors [49–51]. Furthermore, mindfulness 
training has been shown to help decrease stress levels and as a result, may partially decrease 
engagement in alcohol use [52–55]. In light of our findings and previous studies, we believe 
that aspects of Gabby, including personalization and face-to-face engagement [16], may 
promote healthy decision making on stress management among its users. More research is 
needed to prioritize which aspects of the system are important in supporting patients beyond 
the dissemination of information on stress management. 
Generally, healthy eating habits improved in both the intervention and control groups. 
Specifically, increased fruit consumption was statistically significant for Gabby users. Only 
13% of the adults in the United States consume the recommended daily amount of fruits (4 
to 5 servings) [56, 57]. Very few technologies have been developed to support healthy eating 
habits among disparate populations: one study found that a web-based nutrition program led 
to increased–but not statistically significant–fruit consumption compared to a traditional in- 
person nutrition education among low-income adults [58]; another study revealed that 
female ethnic minority college students ate more servings of fruit when they received 
motivational text messages [59]. With Gabby, we find that women were actually consuming 
an increased amount of fruit servings relative to those who were given patient information 
sheets–results consistent with these two studies mentioned above. 
Based on our qualitative feedback, we believe that users would have utilized the ECA 
system more had it been available on multiple technology platforms, such as mobile devices. 
With smartphone ownership increasing steadily [60], having the Gabby system installed on a 
frequently used device would provide more opportunities for patients to engage in learning 
and practicing meaningful health behaviors. Use of technology, such as having access to the 
Internet or owning cell phones with data, is common among underserved racially diverse 
populations [5]. The National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate 
Services in Health and Health Care encourage healthcare organizations and providers to use 



multimedia when communicating health information to culturally diverse patients [61]. 
However, more information is needed on how technology can be used to create healthy 
behavior changes for such racially and culturally diverse patient populations. 
Limitations to this feasibility study include a small sample size, short duration of the 
intervention, specific inclusion criteria, and self-reported information. By including only 
women who had access to the internet, we may have biased the sample towards women who 
have favorable use of technology. The Gabby system was also developed in English, 
excluding participants who are not fluent in English. Lastly, participants could have 
inaccurately reported their health behaviors due to a lack of knowledge or feeling 
uncomfortable sharing information with a web-based system. 

Feasibility data on the Gabby system are encouraging, and show that ECA technology can 
help improve education on lifestyle information on physical activity, healthy eating, 
mindfulness and stress management methods for diverse, urban women. 

In medical settings, clinicians give patients after-visit summary plans that usually include 
patient information sheets. ECAs are an encouraging way to provide patient information in a 
customized interactive format. ECAs may help patients adhere to behavioral changes 
through improved decision making and experiential learning as opposed to passive reading. 


This work was supported by the National Center for Complementary & Integrative Health (Grant Number 
K07AT005463, 2016). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the 
official views of the National Center for Complementary & Alternative Medicine or the National Institutes of 
Health. 


On the right hand side of the screen you will see some buttons, just let me know that you can 
see them by pressing on any one of the responses. 














Gabby: Great. So, <USER’s NAME>, I’m here every day to go over topics for your health! I 
want our interactions to be like a conversation. I am here to support you as you learn new 
ways to care for your health. 




Each time we meet I will offer you a menu of topics to choose from. By asking you 
questions and listening to your responses, I will be able to coach you better. Answer my 
questions by clicking the buttons I show on the right side of your screen. The only way for 
our chats to move forward will be by you pressing a button. 






Gabby: It is fun for me to share pictures and tips with you about stress, nutrition, and 
exercise. 






Gabby: I am excited to take this journey to better health with you. Together we are team. I 
hope that you can check in with me daily. But that’s up to you! The more time we spend 
together the more I can support you in the changes you are making in reducing your stress 
and improving your health. 













Beans contain only a few useful nutrients, therefore their health benefit is not 
great. T F 
A healthy meal should consist of half meat, a quarter vegetables, and a quarter 
side dishes. T F 






How much folic acid should women of childbearing age take every day to help 
prevent birth defects? 











































































culturally-tailored health education materials at Puentes de Salud. J. Community Health Nurs. 2011; 
28:181–189. [PubMed: 22053763] 

Health Literacy of America's Adults: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy. 
NCES 2006-483. 

management strategy, part 1: clinical implications for depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and 
anxiety. Mil. Med. 2016; 181:961–968. [PubMed: 27612338] 


6. Matthews J, Win KT, Oinas-Kukkonen H, Freeman M. Persuasive technology in mobile applications 
promoting physical activity: a systematic review. J. Med. Syst. 2016; 40:72. [PubMed: 26748792] 
7. Harris J, Felix L, Miners A, Murray E, Michie S, Ferguson E, Free C, Lock K, Landon J, Edwards P. 
Adaptive e-learning to improve dietary behavior: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness 
analysis. Health Technol. Assess. 2011; 15:1–8. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta15370. 
8. Monroe CM, Bassett DR Jr, Fitzhugh EC, Raynor HA, Thompson DL. Effect of adding online social 
support tools to an adult walking program: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Health Promot. Pract. 
2016 
9. King AC, Bickmore TW, Campero MI, Pruitt LA, Yin JL. Employing virtual advisors in preventive 
care for underserved communities: results from the COMPASS study. J. Health Commun. 2013; 
18:1449–1464. [PubMed: 23941610] 
10. Rosal MC, Heyden R, Mejilla R, Capelson R, Chalmers KA, Rizzo DePaoli M, Veerappa C, 
Wiecha JM. A virtual world versus face-to-face intervention format to promote diabetes self- 
management among african american women: a pilot randomized clinical trial. JMIR Res. Protoc. 
2014; 24:e54. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/resprot.3412. 
11. Valle CG, Deal AM, Tate DF. Preventing weight gain in African American breast cancer survivors 
using smart scales and activity trackers: a randomized controlled pilot study. J. Cancer Surviv. 
2016:1–16. (Epub ahead of print). 


13. Bickmore T, Gruber A, Picard R. Establishing the computer-patient working alliance in automated 
health behavior change interventions. Patient Educ. Couns. 2005; 59:21–30. [PubMed: 16198215] 





Damus K, Jack B. Reaching women through health information technology: the Gabby 
preconception care system. Am. J. Health Promot. 2013; 27:eS11–20. [PubMed: 23286652] 



17. Bickmore TW, Pfeifer LM, Byron D, Forsythe S, Henault LE, Jack BW, Silliman R, Paasche- 
Orlow MK. Usability of conversational agents by patients with inadequate health literacy: 
evidence from two clinical trials. J. Health Commun. 2010; 15:197–210. [PubMed: 20845204] 

anesthesia concepts to patients. Annual Meeting of the American Society of Anesthesiologists. 
2010; 3 

Factors in Computing Systems 2009. ACM; 2017. Taking the time to care: empowering low health 
literacy hospital patients with virtual nurse agents; p. 1265-1274. 

virtual exercise coach to promote walking in community-dwelling persons with Parkinson Disease. 
Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2013; 92:472–485. quiz 482-5. [PubMed: 23552335] 
21. Bickmore TW, Silliman RA, Nelson K, Cheng DM, Winter M, Henault L, Paasche-Orlow MK. A 
randomized controlled trial of an automated exercise coach for older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 
2013; 61:1676–1683. [PubMed: 24001030] 
22. Hudlicka E. Virtual training and coaching of health behavior: example from mindfulness 
meditation training. Patient Educ. Couns. 2013; 92:160–166. [PubMed: 23809167] 
23. Morie JF, Antonisse J, Bouchard S, Chance E. Virtual worlds as a healing modality for returning 
soldiers and veterans. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 2009; 144:273–276. [PubMed: 19592780] 
24. Jack B, Bickmore T, Hempstead M, Yinusa-Nyahkoon L, Sadikova E, Mitchell S, Gardiner P, 
Adigun F, Penti B, Schulman D, Damus K. Reducing preconception risks among African 
American women with conversational agent technology. J. Am. Board Fam. Med. 2015; 28:441– 
451. [PubMed: 26152434] 

content of preconception care: nutrition and dietary supplements. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2008; 
199:S345–56. [PubMed: 19081429] 
26. World Health Organization. [Accessed Sept 10 2016] Promoting Fruit and Vegetable Consumption 
Around the World. Global Strategy on Diet. Physical Activity and Health. 2016. Retrieved from 
http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/fruit/en/ 
27. Department of Nutrition. [Accessed Sept 10 2016] Harvard School of Public Health. Healthy 
Eating Plate & Healthy Eating Pyramid. The Nutrition Source. 2016. Retrieved from https:// 
www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/healthy-eating-plate/ 
28. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Diabetes Prevention Program. 
Diabetes. Diabetes Prevention Program; 2008. Retrieved from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/about- 
niddk/research-areas/diabetes/diabetes-prevention-program-dpp/Pages/default.aspx [Accessed Sept 
10 2016] 



systematic review. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2012; 12:162. [PubMed: 23009599] 
31. Niazi AK, Niazi SK. Mindfulness-based stress reduction: a non-pharmacological approach for 


mindfulness-based cognitive therapy – a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Acta 
Psychiatr. Scand. 2011; 124:102–119. [PubMed: 21534932] 
33. Cavanagh K, Strauss C, Cicconi F, Griffiths N, Wyper A, Jones F. A randomized controlled trial of 
a brief online mindfulness-based intervention. Behav. Res. Ther. 2013; 51:573–578. [PubMed: 
23872699] 


35. Krusche A, Cyhlarova E, Williams JMG. Mindfulness online: an evaluation of the feasibility of a 
web-based mindfulness course for stress, anxiety and depression. BMJ Open. 2013; 3:e003498. 




Feasibility of an online mindfulness program for stress management—a randomized, controlled 
trial. Ann. Behav. Med. 2013; 46:137–148. [PubMed: 23632913] 


38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Accessed Sept 10 2016] How Much Physical Activity 
Do Adults Need?. Physical Activity. 2015. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/ 
basics/adults/index.htm 




41. National Center for Health Statistics (US). National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, US 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Health Statistics. 2008. 
42. Coates, J., Swindale, A., Bilinsky, P. Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project. Academy 
for Educational Development; Washington, DC: 2007. Household Food Insecurity Access Scale 
(HFIAS) for Measurement of Food Access: Indicator Guide. 

Research Instruments Developed, Adapted or Used by the Stanford Patient Education Research 
Center. 2017. Retrieved from http://patienteducation.stanford.edu/research/exercise.pdf 






47. Sankaranarayanan J, Sallach RE. Rural patients' access to mobile phones and willingness to receive 
mobile phone-based pharmacy and other health technology services: a pilot study. Telemed. J. E 
Health. 2014; 20:182–185. [PubMed: 24205837] 

systematic review of the literature. Addict. Behav. 2016; 62:25–34. [PubMed: 27310031] 
49. Mason M, Ola B, Zaharakis N, Zhang J. Text messaging interventions for adolescent and young 


evaluation of a mobile intervention for heavy drinking and smoking among college students. 
Psychol. Addict. Behav. 2014; 28:639–650. [PubMed: 25000269] 

tailored text messaging to reduce negative consequences of drinking alcohol. J. Stud. Alcohol 
Drugs. 2007; 68:534–537. [PubMed: 17568957] 
52. Bodenlos JS, Noonan M, Wells SY. Mindfulness and alcohol problems in college students: the 
mediating effects of stress. J. Am. Coll. Health. 2013; 61:371–378. [PubMed: 23930751] 

substance use disorders: a systematic review. Subst. Abus. 2009; 30:266–294. [PubMed: 
19904664] 


55. Marcus MT, Fine PM, Moeller FG, Khan MM, Pitts K, Swank PR, Liehr P. Changes in stress levels 
following mindfulness based stress reduction in a therapeutic community. Addict. Disord. Their 
Treat. 2003; 2:63–68. 

Healthy Living. 2015. Retrieved from http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/HealthyLiving/ 
HealthyEating/HealthyDietGoals/Suggested-Servings-from-Each-Food- 
Group_UCM_318186_Article.jsp#.WKR36tIrKUl 




Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. 2013. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/ 
annual_data/2013/pdf/overview_2013.pdf 
58. Neuenschwander LM, Abbott A, Mobley AR. Comparison of a web-based vs in-person nutrition 
education program for low-income adults. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet. 2013; 113:120–126. [PubMed: 
23092741] 
59. Rodgers RF, Pernal W, Matsumoto A, Shiyko M, Intille S, Franko DL. Capitalizing on mobile 
technology to support healthy eating in ethnic minority college students. J. Am. Coll. Health. 
2016; 64:125–132. [PubMed: 26630479] 



Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care: A Blueprint for Advancing and Sustaining CLAS 
Policy and Patience. US Department of Health and Human Services; Washington (DC): 2013. 



Fig. 1. 
Gabby Embodied Conversational Agent (ECA) Interface. 



Fig. 2. 
Study consort diagram. 























Difficult communications/social 
support 










Healthy Eating Plate (protein, 
grains, fruits, vegetables, oil, 
water) 












Finding Time to be 
Active 
The FITT Equation 
(frequency, intensity, 
time, type) 
Baseline Daily 
Monitoring 
Setting Goals about 
Physical Activity 








Breathing meditation (short and long 
versions) 

























Total Baseline 
(N = 61) 
n (%) 
Gabby Baseline 
(N = 31) 
n (%) 
Control Baseline 
(N = 30) 
n (%) 










hnicity 
t 
E 





































































































































cohol Use 
l 
A 

Total Baseline 
(N = 61) 
n (%) 
Gabby Baseline 
(N = 31) 
n (%) 
Control Baseline 
(N = 30) 
n (%) 











Continuous variables were analyzed using two-sample t-tests and categorical/dichotomous variables were analyzed using Chi-square tests of 
independence. 














i 
F 




Satisfaction and Confidence in using Gabby versus Patient Information Sheets on Healthy Eating, Physical 
Activity and Stress Management. 


Gabby 
(N = 27) 
n (%) 
Patient Information Sheets 
(N = 29) 
n (%) 



























































