

ARTICLE 
Randomized trial of two artiﬁcial intelligence coaching 
interventions to increase physical activity in cancer survivors 
Ahmed Hassoon 1,2,3 ✉ 
Jennifer Schrack1, Seth S. Martin 1,2,3, Hsin-Chieh Yeh2, Hadas Zeilberger1 and Lawrence J. Appel1,2,3 

INTRODUCTION 
Despite obesity’s well-documented association with poor 
health outcomes—including increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease (CVD), diabetes, and cancer incidence and recurrence— 
the prevalence of overweight and obesity has risen sharply over 
the past several decades1. Nearly 42.4% (2017–2018 NHANES) 
of US adults have obesity1, with an estimated annual economic 
burden of US$190 billion in total costs, corresponding to 21% 
per year of total direct healthcare spending in the US2. In recent 
years, CVDs became one of the leading causes of death among 
cancer survivors3. Obesity among cancer survivors signiﬁcantly 
reduces survivorship4. 
Increasing physical activities among 
cancer survivors signiﬁcantly reduced all-cause mortality5. 
Behavioral approaches to reduce calorie intake and increase 
physical activity are essential features of weight loss interven- 
tions, which typically involve individualized, person-to-person 
coaching6,7. However, such programs are time- and cost- 
intensive8. 
The introduction of intelligent voice assistance using smart 
devices—phones, wearables, 
in-home speakers, the ability to 
deploy learning models and other technologies comprising the 
Internet of Things—is a potential way to deliver behavioral base 
interventions closer to the classic model of person-to-person 
coaching but at lower cost and in a scalable form. The potential 
interventions is especially important given the 
scalability of AI 
extremely high prevalence of physical 
inactivity and limited 
reimbursement for lifestyle counseling. For these reasons, the 
classical model of “person-to-person,” behavioral 
interventions 
are insufﬁcient as a public health response given the scope of the 
problem. The ability of artiﬁcially intelligent agent to generate 
language process for 
adaptive responses based on behavior, 
human-machine interaction, and on-demand data analytics in the 
cloud present an opportunity to create an artiﬁcially intelligent 
agent that can provide instant, individualized, on demand health 
coaching adapted by user’s behavior. Such coaching has the 
potential to calibrate guidance based on real-time data from a 
user’s ﬁtness tracker and health records. 
Our team designed and developed two artiﬁcial intelligent (AI)- 
based, physical activity interventions and tested them in a three- 
arm, randomized, controlled pilot study. The AI-based health 
coaching agent (MyCoach) was delivered through an in-home 
smart speaker—a relatively recent technology found in nearly half 
of homes in the United States in 20189. A second AI intervention 
was autonomous progressive smart coaching delivered through 
text messaging (SmartText). The third arm received educational 
materials on physical activity (control). The aim of our study was to 
determine whether novel AI coaching interventions increase 
physical activities among overweight or obese, physically inactive 
cancer survivors compared to a control arm that receives health 
information. 
1Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 733 N. Broadway, Baltimore, 
MD 21205, USA. 3Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology, & Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins University, 2024 E. Monument Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 4University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 5Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles 
Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-2608, USA. 



Physical activity (PA) has numerous health beneﬁts. Personalized coaching may increase adherence to PA recommendations, but it 
is challenging to deliver personalized coaching in a scalable manner. The objective of our study was to determine whether novel 
artiﬁcially intelligent (AI) coaching interventions increase PA among overweight or obese, physically inactive cancer survivors 
compared to a control arm that receives health information. We conducted a single-center, three-arm randomized trial with equal 
allocation to (1) voice-assisted AI coaching delivered by smart speaker (MyCoach), (2) autonomous AI coaching delivered by text 
message (SmartText), and (3) control. Data collection was automated via sensors and voice technology, effectively masking 
outcome ascertainment. The primary outcome was change in mean steps per day from baseline to the end of follow-up at 4 weeks. 
Of the 42 randomized participants, 91% were female, and 36% were Black; mean age was 62.1 years, and mean BMI was 32.9 kg/m2. 
The majority were breast cancer survivors (85.7%). At the end of 4 weeks follow-up, steps increased in the MyCoach arm by an 
average of 3618.2 steps/day; the net gain in this arm was signiﬁcantly greater [net difference = 3568.9 steps/day (95% CI: 
1483–5655), P value <0.001] compared to control arm, and [net difference = 2160.6 steps/day (95% CI: 11–4310), P value 0.049] 
compared to SmartText. In conclusion, AI-based voice-assisted coaching shows promise as a practical method of delivering scalable, 
individualized coaching to increase physical activity in sedentary cancer survivors. Additional research is needed to replicate these 
ﬁndings in a broader population of cancer survivors and to investigate the effects of these interventions in the general population. 



 

 

 

 

similar after limiting the follow-up period to the fourth week of 
intervention (Table 3, bottom panel). 
Intervention process data 
The intervention was delivered as intended in all three study arms. 
All participants in the control arm received printed and emailed 
Institute (NCI) educational materials about 
National Cancer 
physical activities for cancer survivors. All SmartText participants 
received three text messages per day during the intervention 
period, except one participant who did not get messages on 
1 day. MyCoach participants had an average of two interactions 
per day. Most of the voice interaction sessions concerned physical 
activity reminders and progress (66%), asking for health tips (23%), 
checking local resources (7%), and checking for sunscreen need 
before going out for a walk (4.3%). 
Safety 
There were no adverse events during the intervention period. 
DISCUSSION 
In the Physical Activity by Technology Help (PATH) trial, we 
tested two novel AI-based interventions to increase physical 
activities among overweight or obese cancer survivors. Our 
main ﬁnding was 
that AI-based, voice-assisted coaching 
(MyCoach) signiﬁcantly 
delivered through a smart speaker 
increased physical activity in comparison to the control arm 
and the AI-based autonomous texting (SmartText). In addition, 
while the SmartText intervention increased physical activity, 
the change in physical activity did not differ from the change in 
physical activity in the control arm. 

While physical activity increased in each arm, the patterns over 
time appeared to differ. During the initial 2 weeks of 
the 
intervention period, participants in the control arm had a gradual 
rise in steps, 
followed by a gradual reduction over the last 
2 weeks. Participants in the MyCoach and SmartText arms both 
experienced a spike in activity in the ﬁrst week. However, those 
enrolled in the SmartText arm had a gradual reduction in activity 
during the following 3 weeks. 
In contrast, the MyCoach arm 
participants sustained a high level of physical activity throughout 
the intervention period. Potential 
the apparent 
differences in physical activity between SmartText and MyCoach 
interventions are manifold. One reason is the approach to 
communication between the AI agent and participant. The 
intervention in MyCoach is dependent on the participant’s desire 
to seek coaching that occurred in a bidirectional conversation, 
while the intervention in the SmartText arm provided coaching via 
text messages in a unidirectional fashion from the AI agent to the 
participant. Similarly, a prior study that aimed to increase physical 
activity among patients with diabetes showed sustained gain in 
physical activities for an extended period, 12 weeks, and used 
mobile app with bidirectional communication but powered by 
human coaching10. A second reason is the ﬂexible vs ﬁxed contact 
frequency in the MyCoach and SmartText arms, respectively. 
Nevertheless, both interventions used had similar content and 
goals. These results suggest that technology interventions that 
allow users to decide when and how to use the technology may 
have a better chance at achieving and sustaining increased 
physical activity and perhaps other lifestyle changes. 
Our target population in this study was cancer survivors who 
were sedentary and overweight or obese. 
Increased physical 
activity coupled with weight reduction might beneﬁt this group 
by reducing the risk of cancer recurrence and reducing morbidity 
and mortality from CVDs. In recent years, our research group has 
focused on weight loss in overweight and cancer survivors and 
has published the results of two trials11–13 and is conducting a 
inactivity component of 
third (NCT04534309). Still, the physical 


RESULTS 
Participants 
Fourteen participants enrolled in each arm; participant ﬂow from 
screening to enrollment is summarized in the consort ﬁgure 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Table 1 provides participants’ character- 
istics by study arm and overall. Mean (SD) age was 62.1 (9.8) years 
and mean (SD) body mass index (BMI) was 32.9 kg/m2 (5.0). The 
majority of participants (85.7%) had stage 1 or 2 breast cancer. 
Baseline characteristics were similar in the study arms. 
Physical activity 
At baseline, the average number of steps was similar in the three 
study arms (Table 2). Within each arm, the average number of 
steps increased between baseline and follow-up by a mean of 
886.1 steps/day (95% conﬁdence interval (CI): −895 to 2667) in the 
control arm, 1619.0 steps/day (95% CI: −328 to 3566) in SmartText 
arm, and 3618.2 steps/day (95% CI: 2490–4764) in the MyCoach 
arm (Table 2, top panel). When the fourth week of intervention 
was used alone as follow-up (Table 2, bottom panel), there were 
similar patterns, e.g., mean (95% CI) change in the MyCoach arm 
was 3585.0 steps/day (95% CI: 2304–4866). Figure 1 displays the 
average number of steps per day, by study arm, for each day post- 
randomization. 
In the MyCoach arm, there was an early and 
sustained increase in the average number steps, while in the 
SmartText arm, an early increase in steps per day was not 
sustained. During the whole intervention period, the number (%) 
of person/days achieved ≥10,000 steps per day was 28, 41, and 
61% in the control, SmartText, and MyCoach arms, respectively. 
During the fourth week of follow-up only, corresponding results 
were 31, 34, and 58%. 
The MyCoach arm achieved a greater increase in the average 
number of 
steps/days with an average net difference of 
3568.9 steps/day (95% CI: 1483–5655, P value < 0.001) compared 
to control arm. MyCoach arm also achieved an average net 
difference of 2160.6 steps/day (95% CI: 11–4310, P value 0.049) 
compared to SmartText arm (Table 3, top panel). Results were 
Table 1. Characteristics of the study participants by 
randomization arm. 




Number of participants 42 
Female, n (%) 










Body mass index 
(kg/m2), mean (SD) 
Overweight, n (%) 
Obese, n (%) 
Race (Black), n (%) 
Cancer type, n (%) 






0 
1 














36 (85.7%) 13 (93) 
1 (2.3%) — 
2 (4.7%) 
1 (7) 


1 (2) 
18 (43) 



— 

1 (7) 
7 (50) 
5 (36) 
— 




1 (7) 
— 








12 (86) 
— 





























Control 
SmartText 

4847.0 (2925.7) 
5522.4 (3528.3) 

5593.7 (4731.8) 
6924.8 (4181.3) 

886.1 (−894.9, 2667.1) 
1619.0 (−328.1, 3566.2) 
3618.2 (2490.1, 4764.2) 
746.6 (−1544.1, 3037.4) 
1402.4 (−1025.6, 3830.4) 
3585.0 (2303.6, 4866.4) 
concluded that most of the studies were of short duration without 
sufﬁcient 
time to assess long-term outcomes14. Still, given 
abundance evidence on the beneﬁt of increased physical activity 
on general health, and the concurrent public health burden of 
CVD, 
sedentary lifestyle, and overweight/obesity in cancer 
survivors as well as the general public, the need for practical, 
scalable interventions to increase physical activities is a public 
health priority. 
In this context, AI technology has the potential to deliver 
effective interventions at scale to promote physical activity and 
perhaps other lifestyle interventions. 
Importantly, as AI-based 
interventions become widely available with large numbers of 
users, the learning and training of AI agents will likely improve. 
The use and effectiveness of AI agents (supervised or unsuper- 
vised) can be further enhanced through publicly accessible, open- 
access repositories with the learning algorithms. Some of the 
challenges to scale unsupervised AI intervention is computational 
resources. However, a recent study demonstrated an efﬁcient use 
of computational resources to optimize model hyper-parameter 
tuning for fast physical activity recommendation in mobile health. 
Our study did not have to account for this challenge since the use 
of a dedicated server for the model computation is separate from 
the server that runs the voice interface15. 
Our study has limitations. It was a pilot study with only 4 weeks 
of follow-up. However, in an analysis that included only the last 
week of follow-up, the MyCoach arm still showed a signiﬁcant 
improvement in physical activity that highlights the potential for 
the trial enrolled a small number of 
sustainability. Second, 
participants. Replication of the trial with a large number of 
participants followed for a longer period of time is warranted. 
Third, the eligibility criteria of the trial included use of technology, 
which is not universally available now. However, digital voice 
assist technology is widely accepted and used by millions of users 
in the US9. Fourth, there are complex issues related to data 
security and privacy. At the time we developed these technolo- 
gies, our institutional review board (IRB) required that we host and 
operate the AI agents from a secure server at Johns Hopkins 
University. However, technology companies now offer HIPAA 
compliant voice technology for such use, which makes AI 
technology interventions easily scalable. 
Our study also has several strengths. Even though the trial was a 
pilot study, it was adequately powered and designed to detect 
changes in physical activity. Second, follow-up and data com- 
pleteness were high; all participants had follow-up data, and the 
vast majority had completed primary outcome data. Third, trial 
conduct was extremely efﬁcient with automated interventions, 
data collection, data transfer, and data storage. After the initial in- 
person visit, there were no other required in-person visits to the 
research clinic; all outcome data were collected remotely, mostly 
by physical activity sensor. 
In addition, recruitment was also 
efﬁcient, using the electronic health record to target invitations, 
including mailings16. 





























Fig. 1 Average steps per day by groups. Blue line—control. Green 
line—SmartText. Red line—MyCoach. 
Table 3. Between-group differences: change from baseline to follow- 
up. 

Change–change, mean 
(95% CI) 
Change–change, 
P value 
Between-group differences: change from baseline to follow-up (all 
4 weeks of intervention) 
SmartText–control 
MyCoach–control 
MyCoach–SmartText 2160.6 (11.4, 4309.7) 
1408.2 (−1312.4, 4128.9) 0.30 
0.001 
3568.9 (1482.7, 5655.0) 

Between-group differences: change from baseline to follow-up (last 
week of intervention) 
SmartText–control 
1331.0 (−1731.9, 4393.9) 0.39 
MyCoach–control 
3675.1 (1304.7, 6045.5) 
0.003 
MyCoach–SmartText 2344.1 (152.8, 4535.3) 

the classic “person-to-person” 
the interventions implements 
model, which is problematic given the need for scalability and 
concerns about effectiveness. Despite the high prevalence of 
overweight, obesity, and sedentary lifestyle, our results may not 
be generalizable to all sedentary people who are overweight or 
obese, as well as normal weight cancer survivors. The study 
interventions were speciﬁcally designed and tested for cancer 
survivors. However, similar approach can be adapted for other 
population in future studies. In addition, our study was a short- 
term pilot trial. Also, the trial was not designed to assess the 
impact of the interventions on weight change or general health. 
Our team is planning to assess these outcomes in a long- 
term study. 
A systematic review of studies aimed to increase physical 
activities among adults with cancer using technology support 





In conclusion, AI voice-assisted coaching shows considerable 
promise as a practical method of delivering scalable, individua- 
lized coaching to increase physical activity in sedentary cancer 
survivors. Further 
research would be required to investigate 
whether this intervention produces similar results in the general 
population. 
stratum and blocks using Microsoft smart 
form, which effectively 
concealed the sequence within each block. At the randomization visit, 
each participant reviewed and signed the IRB-approved written consent 
form, then the Study Coordinator conducted the randomization assign- 
ment using www.random.org. 
METHODS 
Design 
The PATH study was a three-arm, randomized parallel trial with an 
allocation ratio of 1:1:1. A detailed description of the trial’s interventions 
has been published16. An IRB at Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine approved the trial protocol. All participants provided written 
informed consent. 

Eligibility 
The principal eligibility criteria were: (1) Maryland adults with a history of 
breast, prostate, colon, 
(2) 
overweight or obese as deﬁned by BMI of ≥25 kg/m2; (3) completion of 
cancer treatment (surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation) at least 3 months 
before enrollment, with the exception of anti-hormonal therapy; (4) access 
to a smart phone (Android or OS); (5) ability to perform mild-to-moderate 
physical activity, such as walking; (6) physician clearance; (7) willing to be 
randomized to each study arm; and (8) willing to wear an activity tracker 
throughout the 5-week study period. The principal exclusion criteria were: 
(1) engagement in routine physical activity of ≥150 min per week during 
the 4 weeks before screening (using The Godin–Shephard Leisure-Time 
Physical Activity Questionnaire)17; (2) stage 4 cancer; (3) plans to re-locate 
during the study; (4) structured physical activity as part of a program, 
study, or consumer technology guide (e.g., Fitbit); (5) self-reported history 
of a psychiatric condition that may prevent 
from 
performing study activities; and (6) pregnant or planning to become 
pregnant during the study period. 

After screening and randomization, there was a 1-week baseline period 
followed by a 4-week intervention period. During the baseline period, we 
conducted safety monitoring and established baseline physical activity for 
each participant. Participants were instructed to not engage in any new 
activities outside of their current physical activities’ during the baseline 
period. The level of physical activities during baseline was not subjected to 
any exclusion criteria. After the baseline period, the interventions began. 
Measurements 
At an initial visit, we obtained written informed consent, assessed 
eligibility, and randomized the participant. Afterwards, we activated a 
registration account through which we collected all subsequent data 
remotely via sensors. Participants assigned to the non-control arms were 
then introduced to the intelligent agents developed for 
their arm 
—“MyCoach” for the voice assist arm, and “SmartText” for the text 
Information about the participants, baseline date, and 
messaging arm. 
anticipated date to start the intervention were recorded. During the same 
visit, a wearable sensor (Fitbit Charge 2 HR) was provided to participants in 
all three arms with instructions on installation, charging, and use. Each 
wearable sensor had a serial number linking it to a research Application 
Programming Interface (API) that enabled data monitoring and transfer 
minute by minute. 
Data were collected from the server, automatically recorded, and stored 
in a secure database; hence, 
it was unnecessary for the participant to 
return in-person the wearable device to download data. The wearable 
sensor transmitted 5 weeks’ worth of physical activity data of each 
participant—1-week baseline physical activity data, and 4 weeks of 
intervention physical activity data. The wearable sensor also served as an 
extension for the coaching agents to learn about the participant’s physical 
activity behavior. 
Randomization 
We utilized Stratiﬁed Permuted Block Randomization to account for factors 
that may inﬂuence the study outcome such as age, sex, and body mass 
index. There were three allocations A, B, or C. We used 6 blocks of size 3. 
Blocks were concealed in smart form (Microsoft 365 Enterprise/Excel 2109) 
to eliminate guessing. We developed an automated tool to general 
Interventions 
The trial tested two interventions compared to a control condition: (1) on- 
demand, AI coaching using interactive digital voice assist via Amazon Echo 
smart speaker, termed “MyCoach,” and (2) autonomous, data-driven smart 
text messaging via mobile phone, termed “SmartText. The third arm, 
“control”, received printed written information, speciﬁcally, a NCI publica- 
tion about the beneﬁts of physical activity for cancer survivors that 
recommended 10,000 steps per day of physical activity. In addition, the 
same publication was sent electronically via email after the end of baseline 
period to the control arm. 


Voice-assisted AI “MyCoach” intervention. Participants in this intervention 
received personalized physical activity coaching via digital voice technol- 
ogy between the agent (MyCoach, delivered through the Amazon Echo/ 
Alexa smart speaker) and the participant18. On the last day of the baseline 
period, a study team member visited the participant, installed an Amazon 
Echo device in the home, and gave instructions on how to use the voice 
technology. The participant had to interact with MyCoach®, via the smart 
speaker, 
the intervention intensity and 
frequency was dependent on the participant’s intention and motivation 
to seek coaching. MyCoach used reinforced recommendation system to 
learn about the participant behavior and general responses to maximize 
rewards, some based on achieving the physical activity goal at least 
10,000 steps per day. To enable reward feedback, the wearable sensor 
provided real-time data to MyCoach. The connection between the 
wearable sensor (Fitbit Charge HR2) and MyCoach was established using 
voice technology during installation of the smart speaker. MyCoach and its 
related databases were hosted on a secure local server at Johns Hopkins 
University. MyCoach design and how the intervention worked is displayed 
in Supplementary Fig. 1. Further details are published16. 
Autonomous smart testing “SmartText” intervention. Participants in this 
arm received personalized physical activity coaching via text messages. 
After baseline, the participants received three messages each day. The text 
messages were initiated by an autonomous agent19, termed SmartText, a 
goal-based agent designed to progressively increase physical activity. The 
agent selects and then modiﬁes the message content after considering an 
individual participant’s schedule, anthropometric measures, wearable 
sensor 
time. All 
feedback, personal preferences, and progress over 
computations were performed on a secure server, which received 
minute-by-minute data from the wearable sensors and combined it with 
the other participant data to formulate messages. The agent (SmartText) 
i.e., the agent sent messages to the 
acted as a unidirectional coach, 
participant, but the participant could not communicate with the agent. 
SmartText design and how the intervention worked is displayed in 
Supplementary Fig. 2. Further details are published16. 
MyCoach and SmartText intervention uses a recommendation system 
(AI-agent) to provide coaching, but the interventions differed substan- 
tively16. SmartText used supervised goal-based model, while MyCoach uses 
an unsupervised goal base model with a reward condition(s). The time- 
speciﬁc parameter in MyCoach is inﬂuenced by priors, the user’s intent, 
and the physical activities captured by the wearable sensor. The model is 
connected to the Alexa voice interface using a proprietary Amazon 
platform (Alexa console). Response selection (messaging) is done by the 
agent using resource data bank. The SmartText arm message formulations 
were unidirectional, while the messaging formulation for MyCoach is 
bidirectional since it is dictated by the participant’s intent. The wearable 
sensor served as an extension for the agent/model to get feedback. 
Blinding 
Due to the nature of the study interventions, study participants were not 
blinded. However, outcome ascertainment was blinded, given that the 
sensor collected and transferred data automatically. 





Study outcome 
The aim of 
this study is to assess the effectiveness of different 
technological approaches in increasing physical activity among overweight 
and/or obese cancer survivors captured by wearable sensors. The primary 
outcome is the percentage of change in daily steps from the 1-week 
baseline to the end of the 4-week intervention period. Participant wear- 
time is validated using the heart rate sensor readings in the wearable 
device. For more details, please check the published protocol16. 
Data analysis and sample size 
The primary endpoint was change in the average number of daily steps 
from baseline to the end of follow-up. An intention-to-treat analysis was 
used to determine the effects of each intervention compared to control and 
to compare the two active interventions (MyCoach and SmartText). Mean 
steps per day for baseline was calculated from 7 days of baseline data. Mean 
steps per day during follow-up was calculated from 4 weeks of intervention 
data. We computed average change in steps before and after intervention 
within each arm using a regression model in which B0 represents the step 
count per day, and B1 represents the regression coefﬁcient of the two-sided 
t test by the stage of the study (baseline/follow-up) among the participants 
in each arm. A cluster by unique participant ID term was included in the 
regression model to treat each individual participant independently. The 
change in changes across arms was then computed by ﬁtting a multiple 
linear regression model in which B0 represents the step count per day for 
each participant, B1 represents the trial period, and B2 represents the 
interaction term by period/arm. Change from baseline to follow-up in the 
control arm was the reference in the regression models. We adjusted for 
baseline and clustered by participant ID. Finally, the same outcomes were 
assessed using data from the ﬁnal week of follow-up only. All baseline and 
follow-up summary measures are reported as mean and SD, and summary 
outcomes as mean with 95% CIs and P values. 
Of the 1470 total expected person-days in the trial, 34 person-days 
(2.3%) were missing across the 3 study arms. Some were due to occasional 
synchronization issues of the wearable devices; for religious purposes, one 
participant speciﬁed days on which the wearable device would not be 
activated. Missing person-days were imputed with the average steps from 
the valid person-days. As for process measures, we reported measures of 
adherence by study arm: (1) number of participants in control arm that 
opened the written publication provided by email; (2) number of daily 
messages sent and received by each participant in SmartText arm; and (3) 
average number of daily interaction sessions in the MyCoach arm. 
The sample size of 39 participants in total (13 per arm) was sufﬁcient to 
detect a 2000 average steps/day, between-arm difference, assuming a 
standard deviation of 1800 steps/day, with power of 0.80 and a 2-sided 
alpha of 0.0520,21. To account for participant dropout, 42 participants were 
recruited. We used SQL to query our server, Python 3.7 to prepare the 
master data frame, and Stata/SE 15.1 for the statistical analysis. 
Reporting summary 
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research 
Reporting Summary linked to this article. 
DATA AVAILABILITY 
The deidentiﬁed data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request. 
CODE AVAILABILITY 
Access to data collection codes can be obtained from the product websites: Fitbit 
API: https://dev.ﬁtbit.com/build/reference/web-api/. Amazon Alexa APIs: https:// 
developer.amazon.com/en-US/alexa/alexa-skills-kit/get-deeper/dev-tools-skill- 
management-api. 

REFERENCES 
1. Hales, C. M., Carroll, M. D., Fryar, C. D. & Ogden, C. L. Prevalence of obesity and 
severe obesity among adults: United States, 2017–2018. NCHS Data Brief. 1–8 (2020). 
2. Cawley, J. & Meyerhoefer, C. The medical care costs of obesity: an instrumental 
variables approach. J. Health Econ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.10.003 
(2012). 
3. Bardia, A. et al. Comparison of breast cancer recurrence risk and cardiovascular 
disease incidence risk among postmenopausal women with breast cancer. Breast 
Cancer Res. Treat. 131, 907–914 (2012). 
4. Sinicrope, F. A., Foster, N. R., Sargent, D. J., O’connell, M. J. & Rankin, C. Obesity is 
an independent prognostic variable in colon cancer survivors. Diagnosis https:// 
doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2636 (2010). 


6. Ramage, S., Farmer, A., Apps Eccles, K. & McCargar, L. Healthy strategies for 
successful weight loss and weight maintenance: a systematic review. Appl. Phy- 
siol. Nutr. Metab. https://doi.org/10.1139/apnm-2013-0026 (2014). 
7. Playdon, M. et al. Weight loss intervention for breast cancer survivors: a systematic 
review. Curr. Breast Cancer Rep. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12609-013-0113-0 (2013). 
8. Butryn, M. L., Webb, V. & Wadden, T. A. Behavioral treatment of obesity structures 
and principles of behavioral treatment. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.psc.2011.08.006 (2011). 
9. NPR & Edison Research. The Smart Audio Report. National Publication Media. 
https://www.nationalpublicmedia.com/smart-audio-report/latest-report/ (2019). 
10. Bonn, S. E. et al. App-technology to increase physical activity among patients 
with diabetes type 2 - The DiaCert-study, a randomized controlled trial. BMC 
Public Health 18, 119 (2018). 
11. Yeh, H.-C. et al. Effects of behavioral weight loss and metformin on IGFs in cancer 
survivors: a randomized trial. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 106, e4179–e4191 (2021). 
12. Sheng, J. Y. et al. The impact of weight loss on physical function and symptoms in 
overweight or obese breast cancer survivors: results from POWER-remote. J. 
Cancer Surviv. 2021, 1–10 (2021). 
13. Santa-Maria, C. A. et al. The effects of a remote-based weight loss program on 
adipocytokines, metabolic markers, and telomere length in breast cancer survi- 
vors: the POWER-Remote trial. Clin. Cancer Res. 26, 3024–3034 (2020). 
14. Kiss, N. et al. Technology-supported self-guided nutrition and physical activity 
interventions for adults with cancer: systematic review. JMIR MHealth UHealth 7, 
e12281 (2019). 


16. Hassoon, A. et al. Increasing physical activity amongst overweight and obese 
cancer survivors using an alexa-based intelligent agent for patient coaching: 
protocol for the Physical Activity by Technology Help (PATH) trial. JMIR Res. 
Protoc. 7, e27 (2018). 







20. Bassett, D. R., Toth, L. P., LaMunion, S. R. & Crouter, S. E. Step counting: a review of 
measurement considerations and health-related applications. Sports Med. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s40279-016-0663-1 (2017). 
21. Hoeger, W. W. K., Bond, L., Ransdell, L., Shimon, J. M. & Merugu, S. One-mile step 
count at walking and running speeds. ACSM Health Fit. J. https://doi.org/10.1249/ 
01.FIT.0000298459.30006.8d (2008). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The study team would like to acknowledge the Maryland Cigarette Restitution Fund 
for supporting this study. We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA 
Corporation with the donation of a GPU unit for our server. The team also 
acknowledge the study intern Sibyl Medabalimi for assisting in study logistics. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
A.H. developed the aim, study design, AI agent design, supervised the trial 
implementation, data analysis, and led the manuscript writing. Y.B. assisted in trial 
implementation, recruitment activities, and manuscript preparation. D.N. supervised the 
AI agent hosting, running the remote server, statistical study plan, and data preparation. 
D.C. provided resources for the study and guided the study implementation. D.L. 
provided access to the resources at the cancer center and assisted in the recruitment 
activities. V.S. provided clinical assessment of the study candidates, and clinical safety 
evaluation. J.C. guided the data presentation, J.S. provided technical support, and 
statistical guide for wearable senser use to track physical activities. S.M. guided the 
SmartText design, input on the trial design, and clinical input. H.Y. provided resources 
level 
and guidance for 






supervision of the study design, implementation, analysis, clinical input, and manuscript 
preparation. All authors contributed to the manuscript preparation and revisions. 
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/ 
reprints 
COMPETING INTERESTS 
V.S. received research funding to institution from Abbvie, Biocept, Pﬁzer, Novartis, 
and Puma Biotechnology and served as member, Data Safety Monitoring Board, 
Immunomedics, Inc. Outside of this work, S.S.M. has received research support to 
institution from the American Heart Association (20SFRN35380046 and COVID19- 
811000), PCORI (ME-2019C1-15328), National 
Institutes of Health (P01 HL108800), 
Aetna Foundation, the David and June Trone Family Foundation, the Pollin Digital 
Innovation Fund, PJ Schafer Cardiovascular Research Fund, CASCADE FH, and Google. 
S.S.M. reports personal fees for serving on scientiﬁc advisory boards for Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, DalCor Pharmaceuticals, Esperion, Regeneron, Sanoﬁ, and 89bio. The 
rest of the authors declare no potential conﬂicts of interest. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00539-9. 
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party 
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the 
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4.0/. 





