

Randomized Trial of a Family-based, Automated, Conversational 
Obesity Treatment Program for Underserved Populations 
J. A. Wright1,2,*, B.D. Phillips3, B.L. Watson4, P.K. Newby4,5, G. J. Norman6, and W.G. 
Adams4 
1University of Massachusetts Boston, Department of Exercise & Health Sciences College of 
Nursing and Health Sciences 
2Boston University School of Medicine/Boston Medical Center, Department of General Internal 
Medicine 


5Division of Graduate Medical Nutrition Sciences; Boston University School of Public Health, 
Department of Epidemiology; Boston University Metropolitan College, Program in Gastronomy, 
Culinary Arts, and Wine Studies 


Objective—To evaluate the acceptability and feasibility of a scalable obesity treatment program 
integrated with pediatric primary care and delivered using interactive voice technology (IVR) to 
families from underserved populations. 
Design and Methods—Fifty parent-child dyads (child 9–12 yrs, BMI >95th percentile) were 
recruited from a pediatric primary care clinic and randomized to either an IVR or a wait-list 
control (WLC) group. The majority were lower-income, African-American (72%) families. Dyads 
received IVR calls for 12 weeks. Call content was informed by two evidenced-based interventions. 
Anthropometric and behavioral variables were assessed at baseline and 3 mo follow-up. 
Results—Forty-three dyads completed the study. IVR parents ate 1 cup more fruit than WLC (p 
< .05). No other groups differences were found. Children classified as high users of the IVR 
decreased weight, BMI and BMI z-score compared to low users (p<.05). Mean number of calls for 
parents and children were 9.1 (5.2 SD) and 9.0 (5.7 SD), respectively. Of those who made calls, 
>75% agreed that the calls were useful, made for people like them, credible, and helped them eat 
healthy foods. 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms 
*Corresponding Author: Julie A. Wright, PhD, UMass Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd, Boston, MA 02125, julie.wright@umb.edu, 
617-287-3808. 
Disclosure 
None of the authors has a conflict of interest to declare. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 01. 


Conclusion—An obesity treatment program delivered via IVR may be an acceptable and 
feasible resource for families from underserved populations. 

The prevalence of childhood obesity has been increasing for the last four decades and the 
problem affects children from all socioeconomic levels, genders and ethnic groups (1). 
Minority children are particularly affected; the combination of a higher prevalence of severe 
obesity, higher severity of overweight(2), and possibly stronger tracking of BMI (3) also 
indicate that these characteristics may have considerable negative impact on the health, 
productivity and quality of life of minority populations. The racial/ethnic disparities in 
incidence of severe obesity underscore the importance of developing interventions to treat 
this problem. The most effective obesity treatment programs for children have been family- 
based(4). Data suggest that parents should be considered key players in weight management 
interventions (5–10). Effective, evidence-based weight management interventions have been 
delivered in clinical settings (face-to-face) and include the parent and child, but most 
pediatric weight management programs have high attrition rates and reach a small number of 
children. Reasons for this may include the program not meeting expectations, child 
engagement, costs, and scheduling conflicts with school and work (11). 
There is a pressing need for effective and affordable treatments delivered outside clinical 
settings for overweight children. Automated home-based programs that are linked to 
primary care and delivered to children and their caregiver at home may be effective, 
affordable, and scalable. The use of automated interactive voice response (IVR) systems to 
deliver health interventions (12, 13) has been found to be feasible, well-accepted, and 
effective in managing a variety of chronic conditions (12–16). To date, two studies have 
evaluated the use of IVR for treating overweight children (15, 17). 
The aim of this pilot study was to evaluate an integrated information system, Healthy Eating 
and Activity Today (HEAT), for promoting self-care in 9–12 year old obese children. The 
primary aims were to test initial efficacy, acceptability and feasibility of the intervention. 
The primary hypothesis was that children in families who used the HEAT system would 
have a reduced rate of BMI increase at the end of the intervention compared to wait-list 
control (WLC) children. A secondary aim was to evaluate whether use of the HEAT system 
was associated with: 1) lower consumption of kilocalories (kcal/wk), 2) lower consumption 
of fat (total fat and saturated fat grams), 3) greater consumption of fruits and vegetables 
(servings/day), 4) and fewer number of hours per week of television time. 


The Healthy Eating and Activity Today (HEAT) study was a randomized trial using a wait- 
list control group conducted at Boston University Medical Center (Boston, Massachusetts). 
The study was approved by the Boston University Medical Campus Institutional Review 
Board. 




Participants were 9–12 year old obese children and their parents recruited from an urban 
pediatric outpatient clinic between October 2008 and October 2009. Patients were eligible to 
participate if they were 1) between 9–12 years old, 2) had a BMI 0–5 BMI points above the 
95th percentile for age and gender, 3) attended a pediatric visit within the last year, and 4) 
were due for an annual well-child exam in the next four months. Exclusion criteria included 
cognitive impairment, terminal illness, eating disorder, special diet restrictions, participation 
in another weight treatment program, or spoke limited English. A HIPAA approved staff 
member identified a list of potentially eligible pediatric patients through the electronic 
health record system (Centricity, GE) at Boston Medical Center pediatric clinic. The clinic’s 
pediatricians reviewed the lists and eliminated any family they deemed inappropriate for the 
study. Informed written consent from parents and assent from children was obtained. 

Fifty parent-child dyads were randomized in blocks of six to either the intervention 
condition (HEAT) or wait-list control condition (WLC). The blocks were generated by an 
investigator who did not have contact with the participants. Assignments to condition were 
placed in sealed envelopes and opened after all baseline measures were completed. 

Both parents and children received a 12-week telephone counseling intervention delivered 
by an automated IVR system. The intervention also included an EHR behavioral counseling 
tool used by the primary care clinician during well-child follow-up visits. Similar but 
separate interventions were developed for parents and children. 
The IVR was designed to monitor, educate and counsel parents and children on healthy 
weight management and television time through weekly IVR telephone conversations. 
During these conversations, the system spoke to participants using computerized voice by 
means of text-to-speech technology (TTS). Participants communicated by speaking into the 
telephone receiver or by pressing keys on the telephone keypad. The conversation is tailored 
to the individual user of the IVR such that the IVR asked questions and provides tailored 
feedback based on the user’s response. Questions are asked to monitor the user’s behavior 
and provided education and theory-based behavior change strategies for the targeted 
behaviors as well as generate a conversation that is more human-like. The HEAT system 
stores responses that are used to tailor the questions asked during the same conversation or 
inform subsequent calls. The conversations incorporated principles of Social Cognitive 
Theory (18, 19) and were guided by two evidenced-based programs, the Traffic Light Diet 
(TLD) (20) and the Student Media Awareness to Reduce Television (SMART) program 
(21). Separate but parallel interventions were developed for the children and the parents. 
Child Intervention—Figure 1 outlines the content of the behavior and intervention calls 
for the children. The core concepts from the TLD (20) and SMART (21) media program 
guided the development of the HEAT child conversations which aimed to increase 
consumption of green foods (low calorie, nutrient dense) and decrease red foods (high fat 
and/or high calorie) to four per day and to reduce TV time to less than two hours per day. 



HEAT objectives included: 1) learn the Traffic Light diet; 2) learn about rules; 3) learn how 
to self-monitor weight, food, and screen-time; and 4) set up contracts and rewards. 
Parent Intervention—Figure 2 outlines the content of the behavior and intervention calls 
guided by Golan’s approach to parent-based interventions, (19) and was structured on four 
goals: 1) creating a home that supports health, 2) being a good role model (using positive 
talk and eating healthy foods in front of the child, watching less than two hours of TV), 3) 
building a respectful relationship with the child, and 4) using praise and encouragement to 
motivate the child to do healthy things. Creating a healthy home was defined as keeping 
junk food out, bringing healthy green and yellow foods in, making rules about healthy eating 
and TV-watching, and asking other people in the home to be supportive of healthy changes. 
The content of the parent conversations ran in parallel with the child’s conversation to 
promote support and teamwork in the effort to eat healthier and watch less TV. An 
additional aim was for parents to follow the TLD along with their child to support their 
efforts. 
Both parent and child conversations taught and emphasized goal setting, contracting, parent- 
child meetings, problem-solving, regular self-weighing, self-monitoring diet and TV time, 
and included standard weight management topics such as snacking, substituting low-fat for 
high fat foods, and finding alternatives to sedentary behaviors. The calls were designed to be 
interactive and conversational and typically included quizzes or questions that helped direct 
the conversation and content received. Vignettes and testimonials were used to exemplify 
education topics or testify about the helpfulness of a behavior change strategy. Pre-recorded 
human voice files (“clips”) from age and gender appropriate voice actors were used for these 
components only. 
Both HEAT parents and children used the HEAT-IVR via weekly “inbound” telephone calls 
for 12 weeks. Participants who were not making calls received a reminder call from a 
research assistant. The IVR system consisted of two calls per week. The first call focused on 
education and behavior change content (“behavior call”), and followed the basic structure of 
1) greetings; 2) review of the goal set the previous week and feedback on self-reported 
progress, 3) education, 4) goal setting, and 5) closing summary of call (See Figures 1 and 2). 
The second call each week was a brief monitoring call (“tracking call”) that asked users to 
self-report weight, green and red foods consumed, and hours of TV watched. Participant 
were given the option to complete both the behavior and tracking call back-to-back if they 
chose, i.e., at the end of the behavior call, the IVR asked the callers if they would like to 
complete the tracking call now or at another time. Each participant was also given either a 
child or parent guidebook designed to support the calls. The book outlined call topics, 
bulleted main points, provided a place to write down weekly goals, track weight and foods 
consumed, and included a list of red, yellow, and green foods from the TLD, a list of 
community resources for physical activity and recreation, and alternatives to television 
viewing. The parent’s guidebook included shopping tips, instructions on reading nutrition 
labels, and examples of healthy meal plans. 
PC-HEAT—The primary care (PC) component of HEAT was an EHR template designed to 
provide data to the child’s pediatrician to support the patient’s behavior change efforts and 




document the clinical encounter. Data captured in the child IVR system were sent to the 
child’s EHR to assist the clinician with providing counseling and clinical decision support at 
the point of care. The EHR template was designed by the research team with input from the 
pediatric clinic’s providers (22). The template included body weight currently and at the 
start of the intervention, self-reported levels of diet and television behaviors, comparison to 
the recommended levels, readiness to work towards recommended levels, and goals set and 
met. Additionally, bulleted suggestions on how to comment, praise, encourage and problem 
solve about these behaviors were based on the patient’s progress and highlighted in the 
template for the pediatrician. This template was automatically inserted into the annual well- 
child visit which occurred approximately within 1 month of the end of the intervention 
period. Attending physicians, nurses and clinical staff at the pediatric clinic were given a 
demonstration on how to use EHR template. 
Dyads in the WLC condition received the same assessments as the HEAT group, were 
reminded to attend their well-child visit, and were offered the HEAT intervention post study. 
The primary aim of this study was to test the initial efficacy, acceptability and feasibility of 
the intervention. Outcomes were for both child and parent and included BMI, intakes of 
calories, fat, and fruits and vegetables, and television viewing time. Outcome measures were 
assessed at baseline and 3 months later (follow-up) by trained research assistants between 
October 2008 and March 2010. All measures were interviewer administered except for the 
satisfaction questions, which were self-administered. Incentives were given for completing 
assessments ($40 parents; $10 child). Height and weight were measured without shoes using 
a portable stadiometer (Seca model 214) and scale (Seca model 882). Change in BMI 
(kg/m2), BMI percentiles and z-scores were calculated. BMI percentile was determined from 
CDC growth charts of national norms using age to the nearest month and sex-specific 
median, standard deviation, and power of the Box-Cox transformation.(23)Diet was assessed 
using Block Dietary Data Systems Kids Food Screener version 2, which assessed the 
number of days in the last week 39 items were consumed and portion consumed (24, 25). 
Parent diet was assessed using the Block 2007 Fat, Sugar, Fruit and Vegetable screener (25). 
Validated measures were used to assess television and recreational activities. Children were 
asked to recall the amount of time they spent yesterday before lunch and after lunch on 11 
different recreational activities (26). TV time was also measured with one question from the 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (27), and a 12-item proxy measure (26). The proxy measure 
asked parents to report the time their child spent in leisure time activities (e.g., TV, 
computer) the previous day. The proxy measure has good test-retest reliability (r=.94) (26). 
Parent TV time was assessed with one item from the CARDIA study (28). 
Acceptability and feasibility of HEAT was assessed at follow-up. Parents and children 
completed a paper survey about their experience with various aspects of HEAT, e.g., use, 
credibility, satisfaction. Participants rated their agreement to statements on a scale (1 
=strongly disagree to 5 being strongly agree). Feasibility was assessed using data extracted 
from the IVR system and interviews with providers at the end of the study period. 




Given that the primary aim of this study was to examine the acceptability, feasibility and 
preliminary efficacy of the intervention, the analyses presented compare only those who had 
data at baseline and follow-up (i.e., per-protocol analyses). However, intention-to-treat 
analyses with baseline values carried forward for those missing at follow-up were also 
conducted. Independent, paired t-tests and analysis of covariance (using baseline value as 
the covariate) were used to examine change from baseline to follow-up for the primary 
outcomes. A post hoc comparison was performed to examine whether use of HEAT 
improved weight and weight management behaviors. The HEAT group was split into two 
groups based on a clinical decision of what might be considered meaningful use. High users 
were those who completed 4 or more calls which represented 57% of the HEAT group. All 
analyses were preformed separately for parents and children. Analyses were performed 
using PASW Statistics 18, (SPSS, Chicago, IL, http://www.spss.com). All statistical tests 
were two-tailed with p < .05 considered statistically significant. 
There were 241 potentially eligible pediatric patients at the time of the study (Figure 3). Of 
the sample pool, 140 were mailed a letter inviting the patient and a parent to participate. Of 
those, 14% were not eligible, 22% refused to participate and 28% could not be reached by 
phone. Of the 81 eligible dyads, 62% agreed to participate. Fifty dyads were randomized 
into HEAT (n=24) or WLC (n=26). The randomized sample was primarily African- 
American (72%), lower income (73.5% reported an income of less than $40,000/year), and 
high-school educated (52.5%). Additionally, 98% of the adults were overweight or obese. 
Seven dyads did not complete the follow-up assessments (See Figure 3); however, there 
were no significant differences on demographic variables between those who dropped out 
and those who completed the study. Two mothers in the WLC were excluded from the 
weight analyses. One mother was in a wheelchair and the other reported that she was 
pregnant. The pregnant mother was also excluded from the diet analyses. For both children 
and parents, the per-protocol analyses resulted in the same statistical findings as the 
intention-to-treat analyses. 
Baseline characteristics for the randomized groups are presented in Table 1. There were 
group differences in weight and height but not BMI scores at baseline. Table 2 displays both 
the within and between group differences from baseline to follow-up for those who 
completed both assessments. There were no statistically significant between group 
differences at p <.05. 
Analyses of high versus low users of the IVR found that higher users had significant 
improvements on measures of weight, BMI, BMI percentile and z-score compared to low 
users (See Table 3). No statistically significant differences between high and low users were 
found for demographic variables. 






At baseline, WLC parents had a significantly higher weight and BMI. For the baseline to 
follow-up comparisons, the HEAT parents consumed 1.1 more cups of fruit per day than 
WLC (F (1,40) =4.22, p = 0.046); however, the HEAT parents consumed fewer servings of 
vegetables than the WLC (F (1,40) = 6.88, p = .012). Analyses of high versus low users of 
IVR found that the high users consumed significantly fewer calories compared to the low 
users (see Table 3). 
Acceptability of the HEAT-IVR—The majority of the parents gave highly favorable 
responses on questions regarding the intervention’s content. Of those who made at least one 
call, 75% or more agreed that HEAT was useful, easy to use, made for people like them, 
credible, and helped them eat healthy foods, and watch less TV). The majority of children 
agreed that HEAT was easy to talk to, made for people like them, credible, and helped them 
eat healthy foods, but only 35% agreed that HEAT helped them watch less TV. All of the 
parents and 83% of the children agreed that they would recommend HEAT to a friend. 
Questions about how and where HEAT was delivered were favorable: 100% of the parents 
and 82% of the children agreeing that they liked using HEAT because they could use it at 
home. The parents and children agreed that they liked HEAT because they could use it over 
the phone (88% and 59%, respectively). Half of parents and 47% of the children agreed with 
the statement, “I would rather do HEAT on a website.” 
Feasibility of the HEAT-IVR—HEAT-IVR was designed as an “inbound” system which 
relies on participants calling in each week for 12 weeks. The IVR was called at least once by 
17 of the 21 children (81%) and 16 of the 21 parents (76%). Of the parents who called 
HEAT more than once, the mean number of total calls was 9.1 (5.2). The parents made an 
average of 5.2 (2.8) education and behavior calls and 3.9 (2.6) tracking calls. Of the children 
who called HEAT more than once, the mean number of total calls was 9.0 (SD 5.7). The 
children made an average of 6.2 (3.6) education and behavior calls and 2.8 (2.8) tracking 
calls. 
Feasibility of PC-HEAT—All study outcomes were assessed before any primary care 
visits, however, families were told that their data would be available for viewing by their 
PCP at a follow-up visit after the study. The primary goal of this component of the study 
was to test the feasibility of PC-HEAT. Families were initially recruited four months prior to 
the child’s expected yearly well-child visit in order to allow time for enough IVR data to be 
collected and delivered to the EHR so that the acceptability and feasibility could be 
assessed. Data for families were transferred to the EHR in a semi-automated process. Data 
transfer was only performed if children had made at least two calls so that meaningful data 
would be available to the clinician at the time of the visit. Transfer required 1) recognition of 
a pending visit; and 2) a single manual copy and paste of compiled data from HEAT into a 
specialized EHR form that would save the data for automatic extraction once the patient 
arrived for the scheduled visit. Due to technical challenges with the EHR, data for the first 
five families meeting these criteria could not be transferred to the EHR. For the remaining 
10 families, 5 (50%) of patients successful kept their first follow-up appointment after 
completion of the study (1 arrived before completion and 4 either cancelled or did not keep 



their initial follow-up visit). Thus, 5 (33%) of the 15 families who made at least two calls 
actually completed a well-child visit on schedule. For the five families completing visits on 
schedule, one family did not have any IVR data in the system due to technical difficulties, 
four families had IVR data in the EHR note. Of the four families with IVR data in the note, 
only one had documentation of PCP counseling during the visit. 
Acceptability of PC-HEAT—To better understand the potential acceptability of the PC- 
HEAT forms, qualitative interviews were completed with pediatricians to obtain 
acceptability of the form’s potential. Comments were similar to those obtained during the 
design phase (22). Pediatricians commented that it was clear, concise and important to 
pursue but recommended functionality that included a reminder system. 

The HEAT study demonstrated that it is possible to translate programs with known 
effectiveness into a fully automated treatment program using IVR technology. While the 
intensity and effectiveness of the HEAT intervention did not have outcomes at the 
magnitude of the parent programs (20, 21), they were found to be acceptable to children and 
their parents from an underserved population. 
This study was limited with regard to statistical power (i.e., small sample size) and non- 
equivalent study arms following randomization. However, a number of important findings 
were found. While the intervention was associated with statistically significant 
improvements in television time for children and fruit intake for parents, a larger sample size 
may have detected more between group differences. Comparison of high versus low users of 
the intervention suggests that children who completed more calls gained less weight. It also 
suggests that parents who made more calls showed more improvements in dietary fat and 
calorie intake. 
While the primary outcome was to reduce child BMI, parents were a major component of 
the intervention given that the most effective obesity treatment programs have been family- 
(parent-child) (6, 29) and parent-based (7). The parent-focused components of HEAT were 
based on the concepts and content of evidenced-based obesity treatment programs (7), 
however there were only modest treatment effects on the parent’s dietary behaviors and no 
effects on parent weight status or television viewing behaviors. The lack of changes in 
parent BMI is similar to findings in Project Story (16), which used a more intensive weight 
management intervention delivered in a group setting. Future modifications could include 
emphasizing the content of the tracking call which included self-weighing, a known, 
effective weight loss strategy (30), by integrating them with the behavior call. The 
intervention did not explicitly direct parents to lose weight nor did it include a caloric intake 
recommendation but encouraged participation in the same weight management behaviors as 
their child (e.g., self-monitoring weight, diet, TV, increasing green foods, reducing red 
foods). Parents were provided with a list of three possible goals to choose from each week. 
These goals were either about supporting the child’s efforts or about engaging in the 
behavior itself. More direct messages and goals regarding parent weight loss may be needed 
to see significant weight loss in parents. 



A recent review suggests that high intensity interventions (35–97.5 hrs) typically result in 
more weight loss, yet low intensity interventions (less than 10 hrs) can also result in a 
clinically meaningful benefit (31). Traditional IVR systems are known to have limitations in 
the depth and breadth of a counseling conversation which means it is important to select the 
most important variables to effect change. This study was successful at translating key 
components of evidence-based programs into a system that many families were able to use 
effectively. Children who used the system more frequently had greater improvements in 
weight status and self-management behaviors consistent with previous computer-based, diet 
and exercise interventions for child and adult primary care populations (15, 32, 33). Even 
interventions with modest effects may have a meaningful impact if they can reach large 
numbers of families. The findings of the present study as well as a recent study by Pinard et 
al. (21) suggest that IVR interventions are not only acceptable but are well positioned to 
reach underserved populations. IVR interventions could overcome some of the barriers 
families encounter with clinic-based programs such as time and schedule (11), which could 
also have the added benefit of reducing costs to the health care system (i.e., fewer resources 
required and greater reach) (14). 
Those who used the IVR more than once reported favorable ratings suggesting it is 
acceptable to parents and children as an obesity treatment. Yet, the more cogent finding of 
acceptability is that parents and children made calls to a “totally” automated IVR. Although 
testing automated systems for disease prevention and treatment is not novel, no IVR 
intervention has ever been truly, fully automated or devoid of human-like elements. Unlike 
previous IVR systems, which have used pre-recorded human voice files, the HEAT system 
used text-to-speech with synthetic speech technology. This approach allows for easier, faster 
and less costly modifications to the conversational content, e.g., text edits do not require a 
professional voice actor to re-record the file. While it can be argued that human-to-human 
interaction is preferable in theory, findings from other studies suggest that synthetic speech 
is an acceptable alternative (34). While the majority of families liked HEAT because it was 
on the telephone (59% of the children and 88% of the parents), reflecting that a phone-based 
platform is an acceptable alternative to the Web, about half of the HEAT families reported 
that they would rather use a program like this on a website. These findings suggest that 
technology preferences may influence the effectiveness of a given obesity treatment. 
A novel feature of the HEAT system was the automated presentation of IVR data in the 
EHR used by pediatricians at the point of care. While it was feasible to extract data from the 
IVR and populate the EHR with the patient’s data, the use of PC-HEAT was not adequately 
tested. First, many participants were not able to complete a scheduled routine health care 
maintenance visit on schedule and for those who did, post-study interviews revealed that 
most clinicians did not remember using PC-HEAT during the visit. Nonetheless, they gave 
favorable ratings to the concept and encouraged future work in this area. Physician recall, 
insufficient prompting, and the relatively small number of individual subjects that needed to 
be identified within a large primary care practice were likely responsible for this outcome. 
The findings from this study are important in light of the HITECH Act (Health Information 
Technology for Economic & Clinical Health Act) and the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, which places new emphasis on the widespread and meaningful use of electronic 



health records (EHRs). Previous studies have found that data delivered at the point of care is 
valuable but physicians need prompts to make changes (35). 
While few studies have evaluated a computer-based obesity treatment program linked with 
primary care, HEAT results compare favorably to other technology-based (15) and non- 
technology based interventions delivered in primary care, notably the Live, Eat and Play 
(LEAP) (36) and Obeldicks (37) studies. A recent review of low intensity interventions 
suggest a standardized mean differences for weight compared to controls was −0.39 kg 
(95%CI −0.66 to −0.11) (31). HEAT resulted in a −0.9 kg (95%CI −2.45 to 0.63) between 
group differences at 3 mo. While a longer term follow-up is needed to adequately test the 
effectiveness, the Obeldicks (37) study found that weight loss at 3 mo was predictive of 
outcomes at 3 yr follow-up. HEAT also had comparable retention rates (87.5% and 84.6% 
treatment v. control) to other family or parent based studies delivered in primary care which 
range from 60–93% (15, 16, 31, 32). 

This study is the first to evaluate a fully automated behavioral weight management program 
for children and parents that links the family in the home directly with their primary care 
clinicians through a fully automated system that is driven by spoken language over a 
ubiquitous technology – the telephone. The findings of the present study suggest that for 
many users this approach has the potential to improve health behaviors and outcomes related 
to obesity. Further research in larger samples with longer follow-up is needed to examine its 
effectiveness as an intervention in the treatment of childhood obesity. 



1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM. Prevalence of high body mass index in 
US children and adolescents, 2007–2008. JAMA. 2010 Jan 20; 303(3):242–9. [PubMed: 20071470] 
2. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index 
among US children and adolescents, 1999–2010. JAMA. 2012 Feb 1; 307(5):483–90. [PubMed: 
22253364] 

secular trends for childhood BMI, weight, and height. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006 Feb; 14(2): 
301–8. [PubMed: 16571857] 



treatments for childhood obesity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1990 Oct; 58(5): 
661–4. [PubMed: 2254515] 

treatment for childhood obesity. Health Psychology. 1994; 13(5):373–83. [PubMed: 7805631] 
7. Golan M, Crow S. Targeting parents exclusively in the treatment of childhood obesity: long-term 




8. Wrotniak BH, Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN. Parent weight change as a predictor of child 
weight change in family-based behavioral obesity treatment. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine. 2004 Apr; 158(4):342–7. [PubMed: 15066873] 
9. Wrotniak BH, Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN. The relationship between parent and child 
self-reported adherence and weight loss. Obesity Research. 2005 Jun; 13(6):1089–96. [PubMed: 
15976152] 
10. Boutelle KN, Cafri G, Crow SJ. Parent-only treatment for childhood obesity: a randomized 
controlled trial. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Mar; 19(3):574–80. [PubMed: 20966907] 




13. Stritzke W, Dandy J, Durkin K, Houghton S. Use of interactive voice response (IVR) technology 
in health research with children. Behavior Research Methods. 2005; 37(1):119–26. [PubMed: 
16097351] 
14. Krishna S, Balas EA, Boren SA, Maglaveras N. Patient acceptance of educational voice messages: 
a review of controlled clinical studies. Methods of Information in Medicine. 2002; 41(5):360–9. 
[PubMed: 12501806] 

counseling for parents of overweight children: a randomized controlled trial. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine. 2009 Jan; 36(1):35–42. [PubMed: 19095163] 

parent-only vs family-based interventions for overweight children in underserved rural settings: 
outcomes from project STORY. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2008 Dec; 
162(12):1119–25. [PubMed: 19047538] 
17. Pinard CA, Hart MH, Hodgkins Y, Serrano EL, McFerren MM, Estabrooks PA. Smart Choices for 
Healthy Families: A Pilot Study for the Treatment of Childhood Obesity in Low-Income Families. 
Health Educ Behav. 2012 Jan 6. 








22. Moore BJ, Wright JA, Watson B, Friedman RH, Adams WG. Usability testing of an electronic 
health record form to support physician-based counseling and self-management of overweight 
children. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. 2008:1061. [PubMed: 18999039] 


24. Cullen KW, Watson K, Zakeri I. Relative reliability and validity of the Block Kids Questionnaire 
among youth aged 10 to 17 years. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 2008 May; 
108(5):862–6. [PubMed: 18442512] 

Lifestyle Intervention Via Email), and its effect on health-related quality of life, presenteeism, and 
other behavioral outcomes: randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 
2008; 10(4):e43. [PubMed: 19019818] 



Survelliance Survey, (YRBSS) 2002. 2003. [updated 11/23/02]]. Available from: www.cdc.gov/ 
nccdphp/dash/yrbs/2003/rationale.htm 



28. Pereira MAFS, Gregg EW, Joswiak ML, Ryan WJ, Suminski RR, Utter AC, et al. A collection of 
Physical Activity Questionnaires for health-related research. Medicine & Science in Sports & 
Exercise. 1997; 29(6 Supplement):S1–205. [PubMed: 9243481] 

now: twenty-five years of pediatric obesity treatment. Health Psychology. 2007 Jul; 26(4):381–91. 
[PubMed: 17605557] 
30. Vanwormer JJ, French SA, Pereira MA, Welsh EM. The impact of regular self-weighing on weight 
management: a systematic literature review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2008; 5:54. [PubMed: 
18983667] 

management interventions in children: a targeted systematic review for the USPSTF. Pediatrics. 
2010 Feb; 125(2):e396–418. [PubMed: 20083531] 
32. Patrick K, Calfas KJ, Norman GJ, Zabinski MF, Sallis JF, Rupp J, et al. Randomized controlled 
trial of a primary care and home-based intervention for physical activity and nutrition behaviors: 
PACE+ for adolescents. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2006 Feb; 160(2):128–36. 
[PubMed: 16461867] 
33. Bennett GG, Herring SJ, Puleo E, Stein EK, Emmons KM, Gillman MW. Web-based weight loss 
in primary care: a randomized controlled trial. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 Feb; 18(2):308–13. 
[PubMed: 19696764] 





LEAP (Live, Eat and Play) trial: a randomized controlled trial of a primary care intervention for 
childhood overweight/mild obesity. International Journal of Obesity (London). 2007 Apr; 31(4): 
630–6. 
37. Reinehr T, Temmesfeld M, Kersting M, de Sousa G, Toschke AM. Four-year follow-up of children 
and adolescents participating in an obesity intervention program. International Journal of Obesity 
(London). 2007 Jul; 31(7):1074–7. 



Figure 1. 
The content of the IVR education and behavior calls for the child. 



Figure 2. 
The content of the IVR education and behavior calls for the parent. 



Figure 3. 
Consort Diagram 









Total 
N=50 
HEAT 
N=24 
WLC 
N=26 
















































































































 
 
 















