


The Use of a Smartphone App and an Activity Tracker to Promote 
Physical Activity in the Management of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: Randomized Controlled Feasibility Study 
Claire L Bentley1, BSc, MPH; Lauren Powell2, BSc, MSc; Stephen Potter1, BSc, MSc, PhD; Jack Parker3, BSc, PhD; 
Gail A Mountain1, DipCOT, MPhil, PhD; Yvonne Kiera Bartlett4, BSc, MSc, PhD; Jochen Farwer5, PhD; Cath 
O'Connor6, BSc, MSc; Jennifer Burns1, BSc, PG Dip; Rachel L Cresswell1, BSc, MSc; Heather D Dunn1, BSc, MSc; 
Mark S Hawley1, BSc, PhD 
1School of Health and Related Research, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom 
2School of Education, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom 
3School of Human Sciences, The University of Derby, Derby, United Kingdom 
4Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom 
5Library, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom 
6Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Integrated Community Care Team, Sheffield, United Kingdom 
Corresponding Author: 
Mark S Hawley, BSc, PhD 
School of Health and Related Research 
The University of Sheffield 
Regent Court 
30 Regent Street 
Sheffield, S1 4DA 
United Kingdom 
Phone: 44 114 222 1726 
Email: mark.hawley@sheffield.ac.uk 

Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is highly prevalent and significantly affects the daily functioning 
of patients. Self-management strategies, including increasing physical activity, can help people with COPD have better health 
and a better quality of life. Digital mobile health (mHealth) techniques have the potential to aid the delivery of self-management 
interventions for COPD. We developed an mHealth intervention (Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and 
Telehealth technologies-COPD [SMART-COPD]), delivered via a smartphone app and an activity tracker, to help people with 
COPD maintain (or increase) physical activity after undertaking pulmonary rehabilitation (PR). 
Objective: This study aimed to determine the feasibility and acceptability of using the SMART-COPD intervention for the 
self-management of physical activity and to explore the feasibility of conducting a future randomized controlled trial (RCT) to 
investigate its effectiveness. 
Methods: We conducted a randomized feasibility study. A total of 30 participants with COPD were randomly allocated to 
receive the SMART-COPD intervention (n=19) or control (n=11). Participants used SMART-COPD throughout PR and for 8 
weeks afterward (ie, maintenance) to set physical activity goals and monitor their progress. Questionnaire-based and physical 
activity–based outcome measures were taken at baseline, the end of PR, and the end of maintenance. Participants, and health care 
professionals involved in PR delivery, were interviewed about their experiences with the technology. 
Results: Overall, 47% (14/30) of participants withdrew from the study. Difficulty in using the technology was a common reason 
for withdrawal. Participants who completed the study had better baseline health and more prior experience with digital technology, 
compared with participants who withdrew. Participants who completed the study were generally positive about the technology 
and found it easy to use. Some participants felt their health had benefitted from using the technology and that it assisted them in 
achieving physical activity goals. Activity tracking and self-reporting were both found to be problematic as outcome measures 
of physical activity for this study. There was dissatisfaction among some control group members regarding their allocation. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 1 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Conclusions: mHealth shows promise in helping people with COPD self-manage their physical activity levels. mHealth 
interventions for COPD self-management may be more acceptable to people with prior experience of using digital technology 
and may be more beneficial if used at an earlier stage of COPD. Simplicity and usability were more important for engagement 
with the SMART-COPD intervention than personalization; therefore, the intervention should be simplified for future use. Future 
evaluation will require consideration of individual factors and their effect on mHealth efficacy and use; within-subject comparison 
of step count values; and an opportunity for control group participants to use the intervention if an RCT were to be carried out. 
Sample size calculations for a future evaluation would need to consider the high dropout rates. 


mobile health; mHealth; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; feasibility; physical activity; activity tracker; Fitbit; 
self-management; health behavior change; pulmonary rehabilitation 

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the 
most prevalent chronic conditions (CCs), and one of the leading 
causes of death and disability, in the United Kingdom [1] and 
worldwide [2]. COPD is characterized by progressive and 
nonreversible narrowing or inflammation of the airways or 
alveoli in the lungs [3,4]. People with COPD experience 
symptoms such as breathlessness, frequent chest infections, 
reduced ability to exercise, and impaired day-to-day functioning 
[5-7]. COPD and its treatment cost the UK’s National Health 
Service (NHS) approximately 800 million pounds annually 
[3,5]. 
Self-Management 
Even with appropriate medical care, people with COPD 
experience symptoms and functional challenges on a daily basis, 
and therefore, they must engage in long-term self-management 
to maintain their physical, social, and psychological health [8,9]. 
Teaching people with CCs to self-manage their health has 
become an important strategy for alleviating symptom burden 
and improving quality of life and is advocated within the NHS 
as a method of empowering people to take control of their health 
[10]. Participation in self-management activities requires 
changes to personal health behaviors by the individual with 
COPD. For example, COPD is associated with low physical 
activity levels [11]—higher levels of physical activity in the 
management of COPD are associated with a lower risk of 
hospital admission, a lower risk of COPD-related and all-cause 
mortality, and a higher health-related quality of life compared 
with those with lower activity levels [12,13]. 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is an intervention that aims to 
foster self-management among people with COPD in the United 
Kingdom. It is a group-based program that takes place over a 
minimum of 6 weeks and aims to teach people with COPD (and 
other lung conditions) to self-manage their condition [5,14]. 
UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 2018 
guidelines [14] stipulate that the service should be available 
nationally for all people with COPD who have recently been 
hospitalized with the condition or who are functionally restricted 
by the condition. The program includes physical exercise of the 
upper and lower extremities, education about different aspects 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
of the condition and how to manage them (eg, breathlessness), 
and strategies for improving daily functioning [4,5,14]. PR has 
demonstrated a number of benefits for people with COPD, 
including improved exercise capacity, alleviation of symptoms, 
reduced number and severity of exacerbations, reduced 
depression, and improved quality of life and sense of control 
[15]. In addition, PR has been demonstrated as cost-effective 
in the UK context [5]. However, long-term maintenance of 
increased physical activity and self-management behaviors after 
PR completion is a significant challenge [16,17]. 
Health Behavior Change 
It is advantageous to design health behavior change interventions 
that are underpinned by behavior change theories or models, 
eg, the Behavior Change Wheel (BCW) [18]. Within the BCW 
model, intervention functions and policy categories are arranged 
around a central hub that outlines three different sources for 
health-related behaviors: opportunity, capability, and motivation. 
By providing education, training, persuasion, and environmental 
restructuring and enablement, PR can increase the social and 
physical opportunity for patients with COPD to engage in 
self-management, increase the physical and psychological 
capability of patients to engage in self-management, and help 
patients feel motivated to carry out self-management behaviors. 
The potential for digital technology to help people with COPD 
to self-manage their condition is increasingly being investigated 
[19,20] and advocated in the NHS [10,21]. Bartlett et al [22] 
demonstrated that people with COPD find support with a 
primary task, and dialog support (eg, through feedback), to be 
persuasive technological strategies to help increase their levels 
of physical activity. Therefore, a technological intervention for 
self-management that incorporates these elements could increase 
an individual’s capability, opportunity, and motivation to carry 
out that behavior (eg, motivation through encouraging feedback). 
Mobile Health 
Although the exact definition is disputed, mobile health 
(mHealth) broadly refers to medical or health care interventions 
delivered through mobile technology (eg, smartphones) [23]. 
Digital technologies such as mHealth offer several advantages 
over more traditional forms of care, including low up-front cost 
[24]; familiarity and convenience for patients [21]; better access 
to information [24]; improved communication between patients 
and health care professionals (HCPs) [21,24,25]; provision of 
real-time feedback to patients [24]; and allowing patients to 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 2 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


monitor their own data [24,25]—all of which potentially increase 
health service efficiency and reduce costs [21,25]. Although 
mHealth tools represent a promising means to encourage greater 
self-management of COPD, findings from a systematic review 
in this field were inconclusive owing to a high risk of bias in 
the included studies, thus indicating the need for more research 
[19]. Digital health interventions should be evidence based, 
person based, and robustly evaluated, with considerations given 
to future implementation of the intervention at an early stage 
of its development [20]. 
Intervention Development 
We developed an mHealth-based self-management intervention 
for COPD. According to the Technology Acceptance Model, 
the perceived usefulness of a technological intervention directly 
affects an individual’s intention to use the technology in question 
[26]. Therefore, we carried out a large amount of exploratory 
work with the intended users and stakeholders of the technology. 
Qualitative semistructured interviews were conducted with 
people with COPD (n=15), their family members (n=5), and 
HCPs who work in PR services (n=7). During the interviews, 
of COPD 
we 
self-management, their priorities for self-management, and their 
views on using digital technology to aid self-management. We 
also showed participants examples of ways in which digital 
technology could enhance capability, opportunity, and 
motivation [18] for self-management of COPD, eg, through 
goal setting and automatic monitoring of goals, demonstrating 
different types of devices and their functions, etc. The purpose 
of these interviews was to explore participants’ reactions to the 
to help with 
possibility of using digital 
self-management of the condition and to feed into the design 
of such an intervention. 




During these exploratory interviews, both people with COPD 
and HCPs identified physical activity as being a high priority 
for COPD self-management. Feedback from the interviews 
informed the development of a prototype intervention that used 
an activity tracker and a smartphone app to help people with 
COPD set physical activity goals and monitor their progress. 
A total of 5 in-house researchers (unconnected with the project) 
and 5 participants with COPD from the exploratory interviews 
were later shown the prototype intervention and were asked to 
carry out think-aloud tasks using the technology, in accordance 
with a user-centered design [27]. The 5 participants with COPD 
involved in this stage of usability testing were selected to include 
a range of ages, gender, and COPD severities. The usability 
testing helped with assessing the intervention’s relevance and 
usability, identified problems in its operation, and helped further 
refine the intervention. After this stage, 2 people with COPD 
used the intervention over a period of many weeks. They relayed 
their experiences of using the intervention and offered 
suggestions for improvement. 
activity, the importance of HCP support in the path to 
self-management was also emphasized. Therefore, 
the 
intervention was incorporated within the PR program, with the 
aim of encouraging individuals to maintain increased levels of 
physical activity after completing PR. In accordance with the 
BCW approach, the app provides motivation to self-manage 
physical activity through personalized feedback along with PR 
and provides the capability and opportunity to continue 
self-managing physical activity after PR. The development of 
the mHealth intervention is summarized in a short YouTube 
video [28]. 
Feasibility and Acceptability 
Feasibility studies are carried out before large-scale studies 
(such as randomized controlled trials, RCTs) with the aim of 
establishing whether an intervention can be used and, if so, how 
it should be used [29]. The feasibility stage includes testing the 
intervention for its acceptability, estimating likely recruitment 
rates and retention of participants, and testing out design 
elements of a larger study [30]. A mixture of quantitative and 
qualitative methods is likely needed to establish feasibility [30]. 
An important element of the feasibility of carrying out a larger 
study is the acceptability of the intervention itself. In this study, 
we assessed the acceptability of the intervention using a 
combination of both qualitative (eg, interview data) and 
quantitative (eg, usage data collected by the intervention) data. 
Assessment of acceptability included attitude toward the 
intervention; burden of the technology; perceived effectiveness 
of the intervention; how well the intervention fits with the 
participants’ perceived value system; intervention coherence; 
and self-efficacy in being able to use the intervention [31]. 
Although objective data, such as dropout rates, provided a 
quantitative indication for ease of use of the intervention, the 
research team did not set predetermined thresholds for levels 
that would deem the intervention feasible or not feasible. The 
study evaluated the feasibility of delivering a complex 
intervention in a complex health care setting; therefore, 
qualitative interview feedback and reasons for withdrawal were 
necessary to understand the nuances behind the intervention’s 
feasibility. 
Research Questions 
This paper reports the results of a randomized feasibility study. 
The research questions (RQs) were as follows: 
• RQ1: Is it feasible and acceptable to use the SMART-COPD 
intervention within PR to encourage people with COPD to 
maintain (or increase) their physical activity levels after 
PR? 



The results of these interviews, of usability testing, and of a 
scoping literature review of existing best practice guidelines 
informed the development of a Self-Management supported by 
Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies-COPD 
(SMART-COPD) app for COPD self-management and informed 
strategies for its use. In addition to the emphasis on physical 
• How do people with COPD and HCPs react to the 
technology? What are their views on the technology, and 
on whether it is feasible to use the technology for physical 
activity in COPD? (related to RQ1) 
Is the technology acceptable to people with COPD and 
HCPs? For example, do they use the technology as 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 3 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


intended? Do they find the technology easy to use? Which 
parts of the technology do they use? Are there any problems 
with the technology? (RQ1) 
• What are the recruitment and dropout rates for the study? 
What do these patterns tell us about the acceptability of the 
technology and the feasibility of conducting a future RCT? 
(RQ1 and RQ2) 




• How should the technology be deployed: both within health 
care services and within an RCT? Are any changes needed 
to increase the feasibility of using technology in this way? 
(RQ1 and RQ2) 
The overall aim of the study was to determine the feasibility 
and acceptability of both the intervention and the possibility of 
carrying out a future RCT. 

The Self-Management Supported by Assistive, 
Rehabilitative, and Telehealth Technologies-Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Intervention 
The SMART-COPD intervention is an Android smartphone 
mobile app used in conjunction with a Fitbit wearable activity 
tracking device. The app encourages physical activity through 
goal setting, self-monitoring, and feedback, based on behavior 
change and persuasive technology principles [18,22]. The app 
includes three elements of physical activity: general cumulative 
activity over each day (ie, step count); a timed daily walk; and 
timed daily exercises based on standard PR exercises (eg, leg 
lifts). The integrated content of the app is summarized in Table 
1. 









Number of steps (measured by 
activity tracker) 
Daily step-count visible on activi- 
ty tracker, and feedback graphs 
on phone 


Length of walk in minutes (mea- 
sured by phone's accelerometer) 
App shows flower gaining petals 
as they get closer to their goal, 
and feedback graphs on phone 



Length of time exercising (measured via 
manual timer on phone) 
Videos demonstrating different exercises, 
timed doing exercises, and feedback graphs 
on phone 
Videos developed in-house with PR phys- 
iotherapists and featuring a range of 
COPDb severities 
aIndividualized goals set in partnership with PR staff. Participants self-monitor progress via described outlets. 
bCOPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Participants decided on a personal starting goal for each of the 
three activities based on advice from their PR team and their 
own preferences. It was important that participants felt 
ownership of their goals and that both the participant and HCP 
felt they were achievable. The intention was that they should 
consistently achieve their activity goals on a daily basis and, if 
possible, gradually increase each physical activity goal over 
time. The app was used initially in conjunction with the PR 
program, with continued use once the PR program had finished. 
Study participants were provided a Motorola smartphone with 
the SMART-COPD app installed and a Fitbit activity tracker 
for the duration of the study. Each smartphone was fitted with 
a SIM card to enable remote data transfer. The app could be 
used in conjunction with 1 of 3 Fitbit models: Charge HR 
(wrist-worn); Charge 2 (wrist-worn); or One (hip-worn). Fitbit 
activity trackers use low-energy Bluetooth to automatically 
transmit (or sync) data periodically whenever the device is in 
the proximity of a smartphone with an appropriately configured 
Fitbit app. These data are then transferred to Fitbit’s internet 
servers, where they can be accessed in the SMART-COPD app. 
The devices have a rechargeable battery with an approximately 
5-day battery life. Fitbit One had previously demonstrated high 
accuracy compared with other low-cost activity trackers even 
for slower walking speeds (a factor highly relevant for COPD) 
[32]. The decision to use Fitbit as a step count device was further 
supported by in-house comparisons of step count accuracy of 
various activity monitoring devices (including Fitbit One and 
Charge HR), at different walking speeds, carried out by 
researchers and people with COPD. 
The Setting 
In total, PR teams at 3 NHS sites in Northern England, United 
Kingdom, participated in the feasibility study. Northern England 
has one of the highest rates of lung disease in the United 
Kingdom, possibly due to greater socioeconomic deprivation 
and higher rates of smoking compared with the south of England 
[3,4,33]. Preliminary work was conducted to map current PR 
care pathways (eg, workshops with PR staff; observation of PR 
sessions, numbers, and demographics of referred patients; etc), 
and we worked together with the PR teams to determine how 
the intervention might best be used within the PR program. 
Each PR service was delivered over a 6- to 7-week timeframe, 
with similar exercises and educational content. Therefore, the 
same study procedure was used across all sites. 
Study Design 
The study was a randomized feasibility study [34] using both 
quantitative and qualitative methods. The Medical Research 
Council Framework for the evaluation of complex interventions 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 4 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


emphasizes the feasibility stage as a means of testing procedures 
and estimating parameters for a future large-scale evaluation 
[30]. 
Participants 
The aim was to recruit 30 individuals who were formally 
diagnosed with COPD and who were attending PR in 1 of the 
3 study sites. This sample size was chosen based on advice from 
an in-house statistician and on a study by Julious [35]. Potential 
participants met the inclusion criteria if they were attending PR. 
There were no exclusion criteria based on age, comorbidities, 
or having previously attended PR for managing COPD. 
Participants did not need any previous experience of using 
digital technology. 
Procedure 
Details of the study procedure are summarized in Figure 1. PR 
attendees were assessed for PR eligibility before starting the 
program. Participants attended PR twice weekly for 6 to 7 
weeks. Each week PR physiotherapists informed the researchers 
if there were any new starters with COPD expected at PR 
sessions in the coming week. In their second PR session (during 
week 1), participants were asked if they would be happy for a 
researcher to speak with them about the feasibility study and 
what it would involve. Potential participants were given a 
participant information sheet and asked to contact the research 
team within the next week if they wished to take part. 
Figure 1. Summary of participants’ progress through the study. COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease; ISWT: Incremental Shuttle Walk 
Test; PR: pulmonary rehabilitation. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 5 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Data Collection and Randomization 
If a participant agreed to take part, then a baseline appointment 
was organized with one of the research team members for week 
2 of PR. At the baseline visit, written informed consent was 
obtained and the participant completed a set of questionnaires 
(see Quantitative Outcome Measures). The participant was then 
randomized to 1 of 2 conditions: 
• Group 1 (intervention) used the app and activity tracker to 
monitor, maintain, and (if possible) increase their physical 
activity during their time in PR (the PR phase) and for a 
further 8 weeks afterwards (the maintenance phase). 
• Group 2 (control) wore a blinded activity tracker for the 
PR phase and maintenance phase. A strong black tape was 
used to cover the activity tracker’s screen so the participant 
would not be able to see their step count. This group was 
also provided with a smartphone so that data from the 
activity tracker could automatically be sent to, and stored 
on, the phone. 
Uneven randomization was used, whereby two-thirds of 
participants were assigned to group 1 and one-third to group 2. 
This was due to the need to assess the acceptability and usability 
of the intervention. A blinded researcher used sealed opaque 
envelopes to generate randomization. This method of allocation 
was chosen because 
rigorous 
software-generated randomization method used in RCTs, in a 
manner that was satisfactory for the purposes of the feasibility 
study. 


After allocation, the researcher demonstrated the technology to 
the participant and set up baseline activity goals within the app. 
Participants were provided with an instruction manual and the 
research team’s contact details. 
Participants then used the app and activity tracker, or wore a 
blinded activity tracker, during the PR phase in accordance with 
their allocation. An appointment was made for a member of the 
research team to visit the participant at the end of PR and take 
follow-up 1 (F1) measurements. At this point, the set of 
questionnaires applied at baseline was repeated. 
Another appointment was made for 8 weeks after finishing PR 
(follow-up 2 or F2), ie, the end of maintenance. If possible, 
participants were seen at the PR facility so that a final 
incremental shuttle walk test (ISWT) could be conducted (see 
Quantitative Outcome Measures), a final set of questionnaires 
could be completed, and a semistructured qualitative interview 
could be conducted about their experiences on the study. The 
interview explored their experiences of using the technology, 
perceived benefits and barriers to using the technology, 
acceptability of randomization, perceived impact of the 
technology on physical activity, and tolerability of outcome 
measures (see Multimedia Appendix 1). During the final ISWT, 
participants wore a Fitbit Charge 2 (wrist-worn), a Fitbit One 
(hip-worn), and Axivity motion sensors on their hip and wrist 
to compare step count accuracy across different devices for 
individual participants. The devices were found to be 
comparable in accuracy, although detailed results of this 
comparison are not reported here. Finally, the research team 
retrieved the technology from the participant. 
Clinical support (via the relevant PR team during PR sessions) 
and technical support (via the research team) was available to 
all participants throughout their time in the study. The protocol 
and all materials used for the study were reviewed by people 
with COPD for relevance and comprehensibility. 
Health Care Professionals 
At the end of the recruitment period, PR team members (eg, 
respiratory physiotherapists) were contacted via email with a 
participant information sheet attached and were asked to contact 
the research team if they wished to take part in a qualitative 
semistructured interview or focus group discussion. The purpose 
was to explore HCPs’ opinions of using the technology 
alongside PR, including perceived benefits and barriers to using 
the technology, acceptability of the technology, and perceived 
impact on participants’ physical activity (see Multimedia 
Appendix 2). 
Quantitative Outcome Measures 
The feasibility of using a number of quantitative outcome 
measures (for a future RCT) was assessed during the study, eg, 
for relevance and ease of completion. The System Usability 
Scale (SUS) [36] was also included as an objective measure of 
ease of use of the intervention. The quantitative outcome 
measures used are summarized in Table 2. 
Exercise capacity was assessed using the ISWT, a well-validated 
measure [37] used as part of standard clinical practice by all 
three PR sites. Patients completed a baseline ISWT at their 
assessment visit and another ISWT in their final week of PR 
(ie, at F1) as part of standard practice. The research team 
requested these scores for all participants in the study and added 
an additional ISWT for participants at the end of the 
maintenance phase (F2). This was conducted at the PR facility 
by a respiratory physiotherapist. The research team collected 
all other outcome measures. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 6 
(page number not for citation purposes) 









Age, gender, ethnicity, postcode, medical conditions, previous PRa, and previous 
experience with technology 





COPD severity: 1 (“not troubled by breathlessness except on strenuous exercise”) 
to 5 (“too breathless to leave the house, or breathless when undressing”) [38] 


























































aPR: pulmonary rehabilitation. 
bX: Measure taken at indicated timepoint. 
cN/A: not applicable. 
dCHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors. 
eISWT: incremental shuttle walk test. 
fSGRQ: St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. 
gPHQ: Patient Health Questionnaire. 
hEx-SRES: Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale. 
iCAT: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test. 
jEQ-5D-3L: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level 
kSUS: System Usability Scale. 
Quantitative Analysis 
Descriptive statistics were calculated for demographic data, 
ISWT scores, and questionnaire-based outcome measures in 
SPSS. Data collected via the SMART-COPD app on amount 
and types of physical activity were summarized and explored 
in Microsoft Excel to provide insights into how the intervention 
was used. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
Qualitative Analysis 
Qualitative interviews with patients with COPD and HCPs were 
transcribed verbatim, and a thematic analysis [45] was used to 
identify key themes within the data (using NVivo software). 
The first author explored the transcript data, taking notes on 
pre-existing and emerging themes. These notes were used to 
build a coding framework, which was used to code the transcript 
data within NVivo. All data within individual themes were then 
explored and summarized (including where there were 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 7 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


differences between participants), to produce summaries of each 
theme and also to identify relationships between themes. 

Ethics 
The study received NHS research ethics approval (15-YH-0458), 
as well as Health Research Authority and research governance 
approval from each NHS site. The feasibility study was 
registered on a clinical trials database (NCT02691104). 
Recruitment and Dropout Rates 
A total of 30 people with COPD participated in the feasibility 
study: 19 participants were assigned to the intervention group 
and 11 were assigned to the control. 16 participants completed 
all three data collection points and 14 participants withdrew 
from the study. The groups were well matched on most 
demographics. Participants’ demographics are summarized in 
Table 3. 


























a1=least severe and 5=most severe. 
bPR: pulmonary rehabilitation. 



















































Study Withdrawal 
In the intervention group, 47% (9/19) of participants withdrew, 
and in the control group 46% (5/11) of participants withdrew; 
thus, attrition rates were similar for both groups. In total, 12 
participants withdrew before F1: 3 participants withdrew either 
at baseline or within 2 weeks of baseline; and 9 participants 
withdrew within 3 to 6 weeks into the study. A further 2 
participants withdrew between F1 and F2. More women 
withdrew compared with men (9/17, 53% vs 5/13, 38%, 
respectively). Withdrawers also had a lower median age 
compared with completers (median 65.5, IQR 59.8-70.5 years 
vs median 68.0, IQR 61.0-71.3 years, respectively). The most 
common (voluntarily given) reasons for withdrawing included 
ill health (n=5); withdrew from PR (n=4); burden of research, 
of technology, or of completing daily exercises (n=4); technical 
issues or frustrations with 
technology (n=4); and 
disappointment at having been assigned to the control group 


XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 8 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


(n=3). Some withdrawers cited more than one of these reasons. 
Several withdrawers (n=3) still liked the concept of the app, 
and 2 participants who had stopped attending PR would have 
liked to continue using the app. 
Descriptive statistics on baseline outcome measures revealed a 
pattern of differences between participants who completed the 
study and those who withdrew. Withdrawers showed signs of 
having worse baseline disease severity and health compared 
with those who completed the study. These comparisons are 
summarized in Table 4. 
Participants who withdrew had worse baseline scores on exercise 
capacity, quality of life, and depression compared with those 
who completed. However, sample sizes were small, so this 
finding should be interpreted with caution. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 9 
(page number not for citation purposes) 













































XSL•FO 
RenderX 






























































JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 10 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


bSGRQ: St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire; lower score=better quality of life. 
cCHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors; higher score=more physical activity. 
dEx-SRES: Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale; higher score=more exercise-related self-efficacy. 
ePHQ-9: Patient Health Questionnaire for Depression; higher score=more depressed. 
fCAT: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test; higher score=more COPD symptoms. 
gEQ-5D-3L: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level score; higher score=worse health. 
hEQ-5D-3L scale: EuroQol 5 Dimensions 3 Level scale; scored 0-100, where 100=best health they can imagine. 
Use of the Technology 
For intervention participants, physical activity and usage data 
collected by the SMART-COPD app were transmitted by email 
using the smartphone’s mobile data connection. These data 
provided indications of how the app was used and how often. 
Table 5 summarizes the percentage of days on which each 
physical activity component of the app was used by each 
participant. 


App use, no. 
days (%) 
Steps recordeda, no. 
days (%) 
Exercise recorded, no. 
days (%) 
Daily walk recorded, no. 
days (%) 
Total days participant had inter- 
vention, n 
































































































aSteps were recorded by an activity tracker even if the Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies-Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease app itself was not used. 
bParticipants who later withdrew from the study. 
A total of 3 intervention participants withdrew immediately or 
within 1 to 2 weeks of receiving the technology. No app use 
data were recorded for these participants. One intervention 
participant (17) withdrew 5 weeks into the study but had no app 
use data recorded. Technical issues were noted for this 
participant (eg, the activity tracker not holding its charge); 
however, it is unclear if this was the reason for the lack of data 
from this participant. 
On average, the SMART-COPD app was used on 73% of days 
on which it was deployed to a participant, although individual 
participants’ usage patterns varied widely. The steps component 
of the intervention was the most frequently used physical activity 
strategy overall. However, use of the steps component decreased 
for some participants when they moved into maintenance. 
Participants generally maintained consistent (high or low) usage 
levels for daily walks and exercises across the PR and 
maintenance phases. 
Outcome Measure: Step Counts 
Participants did not show a consistent pattern overall with 
respect to whether their step counts increased, decreased, or 
stayed the same over time. Most intervention participants who 
completed the study had a near-complete dataset for the full 
study timeframe. Only 2 control participants had near-complete 
datasets. Some gaps in the data were explained by technical 
issues or by participant illness, but many gaps were unexplained. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 11 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Outcome Measure: Incremental Shuttle Walk Test 
The ISWT was found to be relevant and appropriate as an 
outcome measure for exercise capacity, as this was routinely 
collected in the three PR sites and participants were used to 
completing it. However, the logistics of carrying out a third 
ISWT at F2 (when participants had already been discharged 
from the PR service) at times proved challenging owing to the 
need to coordinate availability between participants, the research 
team, and the PR team. 
Outcome Measure: Questionnaires 
All participants were generally satisfied with the questionnaires 
and length of time needed to complete them. Some participants 
requested help from the researcher to complete them, eg, asking 
the researcher to read questions aloud and complete answers on 
their behalf. Some questions felt repetitive to participants if a 
similar question was included on more than one questionnaire. 
However, the only questionnaire that caused significant 
problems in completion was the Community Healthy Activities 
Model Program for Seniors (CHAMPS) self-reported physical 
activity questionnaire. Participants did not identify with the 
Americanized nature of included activities or the wording of 
some of the questions (eg, shooting pool), which were felt to 
be less relevant to a British population. Researchers also noted 
problems in participants’ understanding of the timeframe to 
which the questions applied and confusion over calculating how 
often, or for how long, each activity was completed. 
System Usability Scale 
Individual participants’ SUS scores at F1 and F2 are summarized 
in Table 6 (for intervention participants who completed the 
study). Scores are out of 100, with a higher score indicating 
greater usability. 
SUS scores were generally high compared with the industry 
standard average score of 68 [42], indicating the intervention 
had a higher than average usability level across technological 
systems from multiple industries. Participants’ SUS scores 
generally (but not always) increased with time spent using the 
technology. 















People With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: 
Reactions to the Intervention 
The interviews captured the views of 16 participants who 
completed the study (n=10 intervention group; n=6 control 
group). Qualitative data relating to the intervention were 
categorized into six main themes: technology; technical issues; 
previous experience (with digital technology); integration with 
PR; control group issues; and involvement in the project. 
Technology 
The intervention was generally well liked and well accepted 
among participants who completed the study. Most of these 
participants found the technology easy to use and were able to 
incorporate it into their daily routine, eg, putting on the activity 
tracker in the morning: 
Yes, absolutely no problem, once I’d got, had a 
shower and you know put it on and just carried on 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 




















what I was doing… even forgetting sometimes I’d got 
it on. [Patient 28] 
Around half of (completed) the participants felt they had 
benefitted (physically or psychologically) through enhanced 
confidence, monitoring of physical activity, and incentivization 
to exercise: 
If I hadn’t found this technology erm I would probably 
be just sat at home watching TV… it would never 
occur to me to do exercise at home and to move. 
[Patient 3] 
Many participants found the technology motivational. Feedback 
on activity and goal attainment motivated them to do more: 
You look at it in the day and... see how many steps 
you’ve done and it encourages you I think. [Patient 
6] 
Two participants did not use the intervention in this way—they 
were already active and used the intervention to monitor activity 
that they were already doing rather than trying to increase it: 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 12 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


It’s just the way I live. I’ve not done anything different 
to what I normally do… made me realise how much 
I was doing, or how little I was doing but I wouldn’t 
say it increased what I put into it. [Patient 15] 

smartphone and 
One participant 
SMART-COPD app and found them difficult to use (supported 
by her F2 SUS score), although she was happy to continue 
wearing the activity tracker: 

Rubbish cause I couldn’t do it, couldn’t do it, no way 
could I do it… I’ve never been able to use one of them 
phones for a start. [Patient 21] 
Participants rarely updated goals. Reasons included conforming 
researchers) 
to what 
recommended (and the physiotherapists did not explicitly tell 
them to increase these goals) and keeping the goal achievable: 


I didn’t want to do it too much because I knew I’d be 
disappointed if I didn’t reach the goal I’d set. [Patient 
3] 
Opinions of the daily walk and exercise sections of the app were 
mixed. Even where the exercise section was used, the videos 
were not well liked—they were viewed as repetitive or 
participants were put off by people in the videos they perceived 
as less able than themselves: 
I haven’t used the exercise bit because I looked at the 
exercise thing and it’s all people sat in chairs and 
looks like they’re all in old people’s homes, I’m a 
little bit more active than that. [Patient 15] 
Reasons for low use of the daily walk section included difficulty 
getting the smartphone to register the walk and not wanting to 
walk outside alone: 
I don’t go for daily walks so I thought I’ll give it a 
try in the house and I had to walk at such a speed [for 
the walk to register via the accelerometers in the 
smartphone] I was frightened of banging into doors 
and all sorts so in the end I decided not to do the daily 
walks. [Patient 3] 
There were misunderstandings around the daily walk section 
of the app, with a few participants referring to the step count 
and daily walk sections interchangeably. At least two 
participants did not understand that the phone needed to register 
continuous movement and hence needed to be placed in the 
hand or the pocket to record the duration of the walk: 
I can have walked for twenty minutes at the rehab 
centre on the err treadmill and it doesn’t show it, it 
never works… I have on the machine you know I stand 
it up on the machine. [Patient 6] 
Many participants, from both groups, discovered the Fitbit app 
on the smartphone, even though it was not intended that either 
group should use it directly. Installation of the app was necessary 
for data synchronization but could be discovered by participants 
with an experience of, or curiosity about, using smartphones. 
Several used this, rather than the SMART-COPD app, to monitor 
their step counts. At least two control participants used the Fitbit 
app to monitor their steps and increase their activity despite it 
being against the planned intervention: 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
Just at odd times I did [check steps on Fitbit app], 
yes, yes just odd times, I didn’t cheat at all. [Patient 
28, control] 
Overall, the activity tracker was the most liked component of 
the intervention, and a few participants expressed a preference 
for using the activity tracker alone and leaving out the 
SMART-COPD app: 
With Fitbit bit, chuck phone away and just leave 
Fitbit. As long as you’ve got the app that you can 
have on your own phone. [Patient 24] 
Participants who already owned smartphones often expressed 
a preference for having the SMART-COPD app installed on 
their own phone rather than carrying and charging extra 
equipment. In total, 3 participants were conscious of not wanting 
to damage or lose the study’s equipment, which would be less 
of a worry if they were using their own technology: 
The only thing that did affect me was the fear of losing 
it all… it’s using somebody else’s equipment and 
being responsible for it. [Patient 6] 
Most participants did not carry the smartphone with them when 
they left the house. Participants were also less likely to use the 
technology if they were unwell, busy, or on holiday: 
I just want to get up and go. If I’m taking my dog out 
for a walk I’ve got enough trouble getting leads, 
making sure there’s bags on it and harness on dog 
and treats to make sure they come back without 
having to take [the phone]. [Patient 24] 
Technical Issues 
The Fitbit device frequently stopped synchronizing with the 
Fitbit app. This happened for at least six participants. These 
occurrences were sometimes due to the device not being charged 
and, in one case, a participant accidentally deleting the Fitbit 
app from the smartphone. However, in most cases, these 
communication errors were unexplained: 
They weren’t getting no data through and I said well 
I don’t know whether Fitbit what’s not charging or 
phone what’s not charging. [Patient 25] 
There were a number of reports of itchiness, rash, or discomfort 
from wearing the activity tracker, particularly in warm weather: 
I bruise very easily, my skin is wafer thin and it was 
very uncomfortable and it marked both arms so it had 
to go. [Patient 3] 
A few participants who experienced early problems were offered 
the hip-worn Fitbit One as an alternative and seemed to get on 
well with this option. A few other participants expressed a 
preference for a hip-worn activity tracker at the interview stage, 
eg, for discretion. 
There were at least three cases of the activity tracker catching 
on clothes and falling off: 
I lost it in the churchyard once; luckily it was still 
there when I went back... it had caught on my sleeve 
and just pulled off. [Patient 15] 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 13 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


Previous Experience 
Many participants had previous experience with using digital 
technology, such as smartphones and computers, and a few had 
a prior interest in technology: 
[Talking about the game Pokémon Go] So I quite 
enjoy that and I’ve starting using my eggs as distances 
on how much I’ve walked. [Patient 24] 
However, some participants had little or no previous experience, 
and these participants were more likely to encounter difficulties 
with using the intervention: 
I don’t know how they work and I’m not interested to 
be honest. The learning how to work it, in my opinion 
I’m at wrong time, wrong side of life now to start 
worrying about technology. [Patient 25] 
No one had previously used a Fitbit. Some participants knew 
about Fitbit devices through advertisements or family members, 
but had perceived them as being irrelevant for themselves or as 
being only for athletes: 
I wouldn’t have known about that Fitbit cos I weren’t 
interested in things like that… I never took no notice. 
I always thought people did it when they went in gym, 
you know like they bought a Fitbit just to cycle and 
things like that. [Patient 29] 
Some participants felt the intervention was less suited to people 
with COPD who were older, less technologically savvy, with 
more severe disease, or living alone, despite the app being 
perceived as easy to use: 
I could understand how some people that are a bit 
older than me would struggle with it if they hadn’t 
got any support in the house. I mean I’ve got a 
husband and he’s pretty good with technical things 
but I didn’t have to really ask him, I figured it myself. 
[Patient 6] 
Integration With Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
There were few reported issues with the intervention being used 
alongside PR, and many participants liked their concurrent use. 
Most participants did not speak to the PR team about the 
technology. However, where they did speak to physiotherapists, 
they often found the HCP did not know much about the 
technology or the study (though they still showed an interest 
and tried to help with any issues): 
They didn’t know how it worked. They didn’t, you 
know because I did ask at the beginning I was a bit 
flummoxed with it all erm and I did ask the physio 
that was there then and she, she had a look but she 
couldn’t tell me, but I figured it out myself in the end. 
[Patient 6] 
Well, I honestly felt a bit disappointed... because erm 
I did want to experience trialling erm the Fitband 
[sic] as it should be used... but I realise the 
importance of that um, you need both aspects of it, 
so, I was still happy to do it. [Patient 07, control] 
One control group participant who had no prior experience with 
digital technology stated he would have withdrawn if he had 
been allocated to the intervention group: 
I’d have probably put it back in box and have rung 
em back up and said I don’t want to do it, it’s too 
much for me this, I’m not into it. [Patient 25] 
When technical issues occurred, control group participants were 
less likely to realize that there was a technical issue compared 
with intervention group participants, as they could not see the 
Fitbit display or the Fitbit app (unless they had discovered it). 
When participants did realize that there was a technical issue, 
it was usually because they were using the Fitbit app or noticed 
the activity tracker no longer had a flashing light underneath: 
Well part of it was when it wasn’t working, which I 
didn’t know, when I was unaware of that. [Patient 28] 
One control group participant had been given a Fitbit Charge 
2, whose charging cradle differs from the Charge HR. For this 
participant, the black tape covering the screen interfered with 
the charging cradle, which caused weeks of problems getting 
data from this participant (until the root cause was discovered). 
Involvement in the Project 
Participants did not generally contact the research team if they 
technology or were 
were having problems using 
experiencing technical issues. These problems were usually 
detected when members of the research team called participants 
to arrange data collection visits. Some participants had lost the 
research team’s contact details; others seemed reluctant to bother 
researchers with issues they feared were due to their own 
incompetence or inexperience with technology: 

No I’ve never contacted you. I was thinking about it 
in the beginning because I wasn’t getting, as I say I 
was a bit flummoxed by it all, but I figured it out so 
I didn’t, I’ve not phoned up or anything, I’ve not had 
any contact other than the visits. [Patient 6] 
One participant who was initially resistant to using technology 
decided to try it after hearing the researcher’s explanation of 
the study: 
Well when you when they first asked me, would I, you 
know at pulmonary rehab, would I take one and I was 
thinking no I can’t be doing with that, you know. 
Can’t be doing with that… because I didn’t 
understand it… until it was explained and then I 
thought, yes I’m going to have that, yes. [Patient 14] 
Control Group 
Most control group participants would have liked to see and 
use the intervention but were usually happy to take part. A few 
intervention participants felt they would have been disappointed 
to receive the control condition but stated they would have 
continued with the study: 
Participants enjoyed taking part in the study and were mostly 
happy with their contact with the research team. Some 
participants had purchased, or planned to purchase, their own 
Fitbit to continue using after the study had finished: 
It would never have entered my head to go and buy 
something to improve my condition, never, erm but 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 14 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


now I’ve got another Fitbit waiting for me when I go 
home. [Patient 03] 
Health Care Professionals: Reactions to the Technology 
A total of 5 HCPs took part in either a focus group discussion 
or an interview exploring their experiences of participating in 
the study. Five themes relevant to HCPs’ experiences with the 
technology 
recruitment; 
communication; workload; and suggested improvements. 




One physiotherapist (with personal experience of using activity 
trackers) described the SMART-COPD app as clunky and 
visually unattractive. The staff felt some participants were 
motivated by the technology to achieve physical activity goals 
between PR sessions, although they also noted that some 
participants are naturally more motivated regardless of whether 
they have technology. 

The staff reported that some participants got on with the 
technology better than others, and that it was usually (but not 
technologically experienced 
always) younger and more 
participants who adapted quickly and gained the most benefit. 
However, 2 staff members pointed out that older people are 
becoming more technologically experienced as the years 
progress, so this may not be an issue for future generations. 
The study did not have any inclusion criteria around previous 
experience with technology. However, there were hints that a 
small number of potential participants may not have been put 
forward to the research team if staff members felt they would 
not benefit from the intervention, eg, if they had never used 
digital technology or did not seem motivated to benefit from 
PR. The staff also heard a few control group participants 
expressing disappointment with their allocation, eg, wondering 
about the purpose of their involvement. 

During the feasibility study preparation, the research team 
conducted workshops with PR staff and involved them in 
planning the logistics of the intervention and the study. 
Unfortunately, it was (understandably) difficult to speak with 
the entire PR team; therefore, not all staff were briefed in-person 
on the study and technology, and key information did not always 
filter through to the entire team. In addition, physiotherapists 
within PR teams are frequently rotated to different locations. 
In the time it took to complete development work and get ethical 
amendments approved, some PR team members had changed, 
and even those who were involved in earlier stages of the study 
did not always recall how the technology or the study worked. 



in which 
This was reflected 
physiotherapists often reported that they did not know much 
about the technology or the wider study. Owing to their own 
experiences with technology, PR team members were more able 
to help with generic smartphone issues but were not usually 
experienced with using activity trackers or the SMART-COPD 
app. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 

The study did not have a large impact on workload, as PR 
physiotherapists are accustomed to speaking with individual 
patients during PR sessions and checking their progress. One 
difficulty, however, was that the research team was not always 
told in good time when a new starter would be attending a PR 
session, especially when this was decided at short notice or 
when this coincided with staff absence on either side. 
Physiotherapists sometimes reported difficulties deciding 
appropriate physical activity goals for participants, as they did 
not think in terms of the number of daily steps a person with 
COPD should aim to achieve. There were also difficulties 
organizing appointments for conducting F2 ISWT tests (which 
were not a part of normal service delivery). Overall, it was felt 
that the SMART-COPD intervention had become a tool used 
alongside PR rather than incorporated within PR, although it 
was thought in some cases to have enhanced people’s PR 
experience and the benefits they gained from it. 



Suggestions for improving the study included a dedicated central 
improve communication and sharing of 
email 
responsibility for appointments and tasks. One HCP suggested 
asking participants to wear a blinded activity tracker for a week 
before starting the study to gain a better baseline physical 
activity level. This would help with setting appropriate physical 
activity goals for the individual and would help with working 
out whether the intervention was effective for that individual. 

Principal Findings 
This randomized feasibility study examined the feasibility and 
acceptability of using a wearable activity tracker and the 
SMART-COPD app both within and following PR to encourage 
people with COPD to increase, or at least maintain, their 
physical activity levels (RQ1). The study also explored the 
feasibility of conducting a future RCT to investigate the 
effectiveness of the intervention (RQ2). The intervention shows 
potential in helping a subset of people with COPD to achieve 
physical activity goals. However, both the intervention and 
methods used would need to be modified if a future RCT were 
to be conducted. 
Acceptability of the Intervention 
A total of 30 people with COPD were recruited to the study. 
The 16 participants who completed the study were generally 
positive about the intervention (or liked the concept if they were 
in the control group). Some believed they had gained tangible 
benefits from using the intervention, both in terms of motivation 
to achieve physical activity goals and subsequent benefits to 
their physical or psychological health. Most participants who 
completed the study found the technology easy to use and most 
experienced no problems incorporating it into their daily lives. 
However, almost half of the participants (n=14) withdrew from 
the study. Some participants seemed to find the prospect of 
using digital technology for physical activity monitoring to be 
daunting or overwhelming. This was supported by the reasons 
given for withdrawing, and qualitative feedback from both 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 15 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


patients and staff, which indicated that people who were older 
or less experienced with digital technology or did not have 
support at home might be wary of using this type of intervention. 
Overall, people who withdrew from the study had worse baseline 
scores on exercise capacity, quality of life, and depression 
compared with those who completed the study, which indicates 
that people with better COPD-related health may gain more 
benefits from mHealth-based interventions. This claim must 
however be interpreted with caution due to the small sample 
size. 
Although mHealth is a promising intervention for the 
self-management of COPD, the evidence base around mHealth 
is currently mixed and underdeveloped [46-48]. In this study, 
there was arguably a dichotomy between people who completed 
the study and gained perceived physical and psychological 
benefits from the intervention and those who did not easily 
adopt the technology or found it to be a burden. This has been 
found for related interventions such as telehealth [46,49,50] and 
supports McCabe et al’s [19] hypothesis that patients with 
COPD with greater interest in technology may gain greater 
benefits from mHealth interventions. In addition, a recent 
literature review of wearable technologies for physical activity 
in COPD identified only a small number of RCTs with highly 
heterogeneous technologies and study designs, meaning no 
conclusions could be drawn about their effectiveness [51]. More 
evidence is needed on the use of wearables in COPD, along 
with an improved ability for accurate step count detection, and 
more robust guidelines are needed for clinical staff to implement 
wearable technologies for COPD [51]. 
The SMART-COPD app itself mostly worked well. However, 
one of the most challenging technical issues was the failure of 
activity data to be transmitted from the activity tracker to its 
corresponding smartphone app. This was frustrating for all 
concerned as it meant some participants’ physical activity data 
were not recorded, and indeed technical issues were cited by 
several participants as a reason for withdrawing. The wrist-strap 
also caused discomfort and could catch on clothes and fall off. 
These issues would need to be resolved if the intervention were 
to be used on a wider scale. 
Although the intervention seemed acceptable as a tool for use 
alongside standard PR, a full integration of the intervention 
within service delivery was problematic. Communication errors 
occurred between the research team and PR team despite the 
best efforts of everyone involved. In addition, the logistical 
difficulties of briefing entire PR teams, coupled with the 
tendency of PR physiotherapists to be moved between teams, 
resulted in some PR team members feeling uninformed about 
the technology and the wider study. However, PR staff were 
still supportive of the intervention, especially when participants 
within their service told them about their positive experiences. 
There are potential patient-level advantages to incorporating 
the SMART-COPD intervention within PR, eg, access to clinical 
support when first using the app. However, it is worth noting 
that a large proportion of patients with COPD referred to PR 
do not attend or do not complete the course [52,53]. Reasons 
for nonattendance and noncompletion include perceived lack 
of benefit, disruption to usual routine, poor access to transport, 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
greater disease severity, lower quality of life, and greater 
symptoms of depression [53,54]. Even if the intervention were 
deployed within PR in the future, a large number of people with 
COPD would not have the opportunity to use this method of 
self-managing their physical activity. Therefore, future research 
should explore other ways of delivering mHealth interventions 
to people with COPD who do not access PR. 
Feasibility of the Study Design 
Almost half of recruited participants dropped out of the study. 
This finding has implications both for the acceptability of the 
intervention and for the sample size of a future RCT, which 
would need to account for high dropout rates. It could be argued 
that the inclusion criteria should be modified to target people 
with COPD who are deemed more likely to engage with this 
type of intervention. However, 1 or 2 individuals readily adopted 
the technology against their own or the physiotherapists’ 
expectations. HCPs in this study made the point that future 
generations coming through PR are likely to have more 
experience with digital technology and might therefore be more 
likely to engage with mHealth. These points suggest that the 
inclusion criteria should not exclude potential participants based 
on age, (actual or perceived) COPD-related health, or (actual 
or perceived) aptitude toward, or previous experience with, 
technology. 
Most outcome measures tested were found to be suitable for 
use in a future RCT. The ISWT is routinely conducted in PR 
and would be suitable as an outcome measure for exercise 
capacity in a future trial. However, in this study, we were unable 
to identify a suitable outcome measure for physical activity. 
Fitbit One and Fitbit Charge were both accurate in counting 
participants’ steps during the F2 ISWT (when compared with 
Axivity sensor readings). However, control participants were 
more likely to have gaps in their step count data, and so these 
data are unlikely to have constituted an adequate comparison 
if this was an RCT. In addition, although control group 
participants could not see their step count on the Fitbit screen 
or on the smartphone’s home screen, some control group 
participants discovered the Fitbit app on the smartphone (a 
necessity for recording step count data) and were able to see 
their step counts. This meant that some control group 
participants were monitoring their step counts despite the 
blinded activity tracker. Thus, it would currently be challenging 
to use step count as a between-group comparative outcome 
measure in any future study. Participants also experienced 
difficulties completing the CHAMPS questionnaire for physical 
activity in older adults, thus ruling out this option as an outcome 
measure for physical activity. One physiotherapist suggested 
using a blinded activity tracker to take a baseline step count for 
participants between their assessment visit and beginning PR, 
which could provide a more reliable indication of physical 
activity changes within individual participants rather than 
between experimental groups in an RCT. 
Some (though not all) participants were disappointed to be 
assigned to the control group, and in some cases, it was difficult 
for participants to appreciate the purpose of the control 
condition. For a future study, this may be resolved by giving 
all control group participants the opportunity to try using a 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 16 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


wearable activity tracker at some stage in the study, eg, after 
data collection. 
Implications for Future Development of the 
Intervention 
Smartphones and wearables are two technologies predicted to 
transform health care provision in the coming decades [21]. 
Participants who helped codevelop 
the SMART-COPD 
intervention stressed the importance of being able to personalize 
the intervention. This led to the inclusion of three different 
strategies to encourage maintenance of physical activity. 
However, when using the intervention in the real world, this 
approach proved too complicated. The daily walk and exercise 
components of the app were not widely used, and in some cases 
proved confusing for participants and PR team members alike. 
The more complex a technological intervention is, the less 
usable it is likely to be [26], and problems with usability may 
negatively impact participants’ motivation to continue with the 
intervention or the behavior [18]. Although efforts were made 
to design the intervention based on the needs and capabilities 
of people with COPD, more could have been done to achieve 
a truly co-designed intervention [55]. In addition, the 
self-selected participants who helped codevelop 
the 
SMART-COPD intervention were mostly experienced with 
digital technology and may not have been fully representative 
of the general COPD population. 
Our results also suggest that people’s engagement with 
technology might wane over time (as had happened with some 
of our participants), although this study does not provide any 
indication as to whether participants began disengaging from 
the technology only or from the entire health behavior. This 
pattern was not present for all participants and the use of 
different components of the intervention differed between 
participants, which implies there were individual differences in 
how participants interacted with, and responded to, the 
intervention. 
This study shows that participants also need the capability [18] 
to learn how to use the technology. People with less experience 
of digital technologies may have had less capability to use the 
intervention, and thus were more likely to leave the study. 
Participants appeared to have differing experiences of the 
SMART-COPD intervention depending on their previous 
experience with digital technology and their baseline health. 
This finding is indicative of the need to consider the 
circumstances, motivations, and capabilities of individual 
participants. The SMART-COPD intervention was complex, 
and the COPD population is complex and has complex needs. 
One intervention does not fit all, and future investigations of 
similar mHealth-based interventions need to consider individual 
factors as well as group factors when determining who could 
gain the most benefit [19]. 
Our results suggest that a future version of the app would need 
to be simplified. One option would be to adopt an existing 
commercially available activity tracker (eg, Fitbit) and its 
associated app to monitor step count and the completion of 
individually relevant step count goals. This approach has the 
benefit of not needing to be updated or maintained directly by 
the (resource-limited) research team, instead relying on a 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 

technology that is widely available and has a commercial team 
developing and maintaining 
the 
SMART-COPD app was specifically designed to consider the 
needs of users with COPD and included simplification of the 
presentation of step count information collected via the activity 
tracker, commercially available apps are not designed for this 
population. Hence, we would need to determine whether patients 
with COPD without prior experience with digital technology 
could benefit from this approach (and, indeed, to ensure that 
the motivational aspects of commercial apps are not harmful or 
counter-productive for this population). 
Strengths and Limitations 
One strength of the feasibility study was that the SMART-COPD 
intervention was tested with people with COPD in a real-life 
setting, with real-life complexities and challenges, and over a 
period of several months. The study involved both people with 
COPD and relevant HCPs and tested out design elements of an 
RCT. In addition, to our knowledge, no one has previously used 
a wearable activity tracker to monitor step count for both an 
experimental and a control group. 
Potential limitations of the study include technical issues 
affecting participants’ experiences of using the intervention, 
and the effect of those issues on data completeness. The study 
also experienced a high dropout rate. While this in itself 
provided valuable information on the usability and acceptability 
of the intervention, it also affected data completeness. We were 
unable to formally interview these participants to fully 
understand their experiences with the technology and their 
reasons for leaving the study. 
The resource-limited nature of the feasibility study meant we 
were only able to include three PR sites: these sites may not 
have been representative of PR services (and COPD populations) 
across the United Kingdom. To practically conduct the study, 
we also had to use more than one researcher for recruitment and 
data collection. Researchers were trained on the use of the 
technology and on how to introduce both the study and the 
technology to participants. However, there may still have been 
differences in how each researcher introduced and explained 
the technology and the study, which may have influenced some 
participants’ interactions with the technology. 
However, all of the above strengths and limitation issues reflect 
the wider complexities of assessing mHealth interventions in 
real-world settings. 
Conclusions 
Overall, the SMART-COPD intervention was well liked and 
perceived as easy to use and easy to incorporate into 
participants’ daily lives by those who completed the study. 
However, there was a high dropout rate which implies high 
rates of people who were eligible for the intervention but who 
did not easily adopt the technology, or else disliked the study 
design (eg, because of allocation). The data suggest that people 
with COPD who had worse baseline health were more likely to 
withdraw from the study, which may indicate that this patient 
group is harder to reach with mHealth interventions. The results 
suggest the intervention would need to be simplified for future 
use, eg, by focusing on step count only, with the possible sole 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 17 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


use of a wearable activity tracker and an associated app. This 
finding contradicts a key finding from our earlier codevelopment 
work, which emphasized 
importance of having a 
the 
multi-option personalizable intervention. In a future RCT, the 
control group would be offered an opportunity to use the 
intervention and either the ISWT or a within-subject measure 
of step count should be considered as a primary outcome 
measure. Any future evaluation of the intervention would need 
to consider individual factors that affect the usability, 
acceptability, and efficacy of the intervention. 
Acknowledgments 
This paper presents the independent research by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership 
in Applied Health Research and Care Yorkshire and Humber. The views expressed are those of the authors, and not necessarily 
those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of partner organizations and particularly those of the participants from 
this study. 
Authors' Contributions 
MH was the Principal Investigator on the project. MH, CB, YB, GM, and JP were involved in the study design and development 
of the protocol. CB and LP were involved in the day to day management of the project. SP and JF were technical researchers on 
the project involved in development, maintenance, and delivery of the intervention. YB, GM, and JP were advisors on the project. 
LP, CO, JB, RC, HD, and CB were involved in participant recruitment and data collection. CB, SP, JP, and MH were involved 
in data analysis and interpretation. CB wrote and finalized the manuscript. LP, SP, JP, GM, YB, and MH all made substantial 
contributions to the final manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript. 
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared. 
Multimedia Appendix 1 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patient Interview Guide. 
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1] 
Multimedia Appendix 2 
Healthcare professional interview guide. 
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2] 
Multimedia Appendix 3 
Screen Flow for SMART COPD App. 
[PPTX File , 1652 KB-Multimedia Appendix 3] 
Multimedia Appendix 4 
CONSORT-eHealth Checklist (V 1.6.1). 
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 1564 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4] 






Department of Health. Government of UK. 2012. Long Term Conditions Compendium of Information. Third Edition URL: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/216528/dh_134486.pdf 
[accessed 2015-06-02] 
Quaderi SA, Hurst JR. The unmet global burden of COPD. Glob Health Epidemiol Genom 2018;3:e4 [FREE Full text] 
[doi: 10.1017/gheg.2018.1] [Medline: 29868229] 
British Lung Foundation. Shopify. 2016. The Battle for Breath - The Impact of Lung Disease in the UK URL: https://tinyurl. 
com/yalnngfk [accessed 2018-09-05] 
National Institute for Health Research. 2017. Implantable & Wearable Medical Devices for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease URL: https://tinyurl.com/yc2wdq92 [accessed 2018-09-05] 
National Health Service. UK Government. 2012. COPD Commissioning Toolkit URL: https://tinyurl.com/r9k9u8f [accessed 
2018-09-05] 



XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 18 
(page number not for citation purposes) 





Rzadkiewicz M, Bråtas O, Espnes GA. What else should we know about experiencing COPD? A narrative review in search 
of patients' psychological burden alleviation. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2016;11:2295-2304 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S109700] [Medline: 27695316] 
Halding A, Aarsheim EI, Dolmen NM, Jensen AJ, Stavøstrand S, Grov EK. COPD transitions in health and self-management: 
service users' experiences from everyday life. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2018;13:2075-2088 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S158058] [Medline: 30013335] 
Zwerink M, Brusse-Keizer M, van der Valk PD, Zielhuis GA, Monninkhof EM, van der Palen J, et al. Self management 
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 Mar 19(3):CD002990 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD002990.pub3] [Medline: 24665053] 



review. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2014;9:1377-1388 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/COPD.S74298] [Medline: 
25548519] 
12. Garcia-Aymerich J, Lange P, Benet M, Schnohr P, Antó JM. Regular physical activity reduces hospital admission and 
mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a population based cohort study. Thorax 2006 Sep;61(9):772-778 
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/thx.2006.060145] [Medline: 16738033] 
13. Moy ML, Teylan M, Weston NA, Gagnon DR, Garshick E. Daily step count predicts acute exacerbations in a US cohort 
with COPD. PLoS One 2013;8(4):e60400 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060400] [Medline: 23593211] 



Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006 Oct 18(4):CD003793. [doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003793.pub2] [Medline: 17054186] 
16. Dyer CAE, Harris ND, Jenkin E, Langley-Johnson C, Lewis R, Taylor GJ, et al. Activity levels after pulmonary rehabilitation 
- what really happens? Physiotherapy 2013 Sep;99(3):228-232. [doi: 10.1016/j.physio.2012.01.004] [Medline: 23219642] 
17. Egan C, Deering BM, Blake C, Fullen BM, McCormack NM, Spruit MA, et al. Short term and long term effects of pulmonary 
rehabilitation on physical activity in COPD. Respir Med 2012 Dec;106(12):1671-1679 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1016/j.rmed.2012.08.016] [Medline: 23063203] 
18. Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method for characterising and designing behaviour 
change interventions. Implement Sci 2011 Apr 23;6:42 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-6-42] [Medline: 21513547] 
19. McCabe C, McCann M, Brady AM. Computer and mobile technology interventions for self-management in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017 May 23;5:CD011425 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011425.pub2] [Medline: 28535331] 
20. Morrison D, Mair FS, Yardley L, Kirby S, Thomas M. Living with asthma and chronic obstructive airways disease: using 
technology to support self-management - An overview. Chron Respir Dis 2017 Nov;14(4):407-419 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1177/1479972316660977] [Medline: 27512084] 



obstructive pulmonary disease by encouraging regular walking: a mixed-methods study exploring opinions and preferences. 
J Med Internet Res 2017 Apr 20;19(4):e124 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.6616] [Medline: 28428155] 
Park Y. Emerging new era of mobile health technologies. Healthc Inform Res 2016 Oct;22(4):253-254 [FREE Full text] 
[doi: 10.4258/hir.2016.22.4.253] [Medline: 27895955] 


chronic diseases: an integrative review. Telemed J E Health 2014 Jun;20(6):570-583. [doi: 10.1089/tmj.2013.0243] [Medline: 
24787747] 









studies in preparation for randomised controlled trials: development of a conceptual framework. PLoS One 
2016;11(3):e0150205 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150205] [Medline: 26978655] 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 19 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



30. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M, Medical Research Council Guidance. Developing and 
evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. Br Med J 2008 Sep 29;337:a1655 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.a1655] [Medline: 18824488] 
Sekhon M, Cartwright M, Francis JJ. Acceptability of healthcare interventions: an overview of reviews and development 
of a theoretical framework. BMC Health Serv Res 2017 Jan 26;17(1):88 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2031-8] 
[Medline: 28126032] 
Storm FA, Heller BW, Mazzà C. Step detection and activity recognition accuracy of seven physical activity monitors. PLoS 
One 2015;10(3):e0118723 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118723] [Medline: 25789630] 


study. Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol 2016 Nov;19:28-36 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.sste.2016.05.004] [Medline: 
27839578] 
34. Blatch-Jones AJ, Pek W, Kirkpatrick E, Ashton-Key M. Role of feasibility and pilot studies in randomised controlled trials: 
a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2018 Sep 25;8(9):e022233 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022233] 
[Medline: 30257847] 
Julious SA. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pilot study. Pharm Stat 2005;4(4):287-291. [doi: 10.1002/pst.185] 
35. 
36. Brooke J. SUS: a retrospective. J Usability Stud 2013 Feb;8(2):29-40 [FREE Full text] 
37. 
Parreira VF, Janaudis-Ferreira T, Evans RA, Mathur S, Goldstein RS, Brooks D. Measurement properties of the incremental 
shuttle walk test. A systematic review. Chest 2014 Jun;145(6):1357-1369. [doi: 10.1378/chest.13-2071] [Medline: 24384555] 
Stenton C. The MRC breathlessness scale. Occup Med (Lond) 2008 May;58(3):226-227. [doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqm162] 
[Medline: 18441368] 
Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, Haskell WL, Gillis D, Ritter PL. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire for older 
adults: outcomes for interventions. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001 Jul;33(7):1126-1141. [doi: 
10.1097/00005768-200107000-00010] [Medline: 11445760] 
Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM. The St George's Respiratory Questionnaire. Respir Med 1991 Sep;85(Suppl B):25-31; 
discussion 33. [doi: 10.1016/s0954-6111(06)80166-6] [Medline: 1759018] 






Scale for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Heart Lung 2007;36(3):205-216. [doi: 
10.1016/j.hrtlng.2006.08.007] [Medline: 17509427] 
Jones PW, Harding G, Berry P, Wiklund I, Chen W, Leidy NK. Development and first validation of the COPD Assessment 
Test. Eur Respir J 2009 Sep;34(3):648-654 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1183/09031936.00102509] [Medline: 19720809] 








10.1146/annurev-med-051210-114650] [Medline: 22053737] 
Fiordelli M, Diviani N, Schulz PJ. Mapping mHealth research: a decade of evolution. J Med Internet Res 2013 May 
21;15(5):e95 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.2430] [Medline: 23697600] 
Sobnath DD, Philip N, Kayyali R, Nabhani-Gebara S, Pierscionek B, Vaes AW, et al. Features of a mobile support app for 
patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: literature review and current applications. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 
2017 Feb 20;5(2):e17 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.4951] [Medline: 28219878] 

of telehealth on quality of life and psychological outcomes over 12 months (Whole Systems Demonstrator telehealth 
questionnaire study): nested study of patient reported outcomes in a pragmatic, cluster randomised controlled trial. Br Med 
J 2013 Feb 26;346:f653 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.f653] [Medline: 23444424] 
50. Emme C, Rydahl-Hansen S, Ostergaard B, Schou L, Jakobsen AS, Phanareth K. How virtual admission affects coping - 
telemedicine for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Nurs 2014 May;23(9-10):1445-1458. [doi: 
10.1111/jocn.12444] [Medline: 24372676] 
Pericleous P, van Staa TP. The use of wearable technology to monitor physical activity in patients with COPD: a literature 
review. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2019;14:1317-1322 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/COPD.S193037] [Medline: 
31354259] 

52. Harrison SL, Robertson N, Graham CD, Williams J, Steiner MC, Morgan MDL, et al. Can we identify patients with different 
illness schema following an acute exacerbation of COPD: a cluster analysis. Respir Med 2014 Feb;108(2):319-328 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.016] [Medline: 24238773] 

predict patient attendance and adherence. Respir Med 2013 Mar;107(3):401-407 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1016/j.rmed.2012.11.016] [Medline: 23261311] 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 20 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


54. Keating A, Lee A, Holland AE. What prevents people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from attending pulmonary 
rehabilitation? A systematic review. Chron Respir Dis 2011;8(2):89-99. [doi: 10.1177/1479972310393756] [Medline: 
21596892] 
Sanders EB, Stappers PJ. Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. CoDesign 2008;4(1):5-18. [doi: 
10.1080/15710880701875068] 


BCW: Behavior Change Wheel 
CC: chronic condition 
CHAMPS: Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors 
COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
HCP: health care professional 
ISWT: Incremental Shuttle Walk Test 
mHealth: mobile health 
NHS: National Health Service 
NIHR: National Institute for Health Research 
PR: pulmonary rehabilitation 
RCT: randomized controlled trial 
SMART: Self-Management supported by Assistive, Rehabilitative, and Telehealth technologies 
SUS: System Usability Scale 
Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 10.09.19; peer-reviewed by H Chih, K Gordon; comments to author 16.10.19; revised version 
received 07.01.20; accepted 24.01.20; published 03.06.20 
Please cite as: 
Bentley CL, Powell L, Potter S, Parker J, Mountain GA, Bartlett YK, Farwer J, O'Connor C, Burns J, Cresswell RL, Dunn HD, Hawley 
MS 
The Use of a Smartphone App and an Activity Tracker to Promote Physical Activity in the Management of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: Randomized Controlled Feasibility Study 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(6):e16203 
URL: https://mhealth.jmir.org/2020/6/e16203 
doi: 10.2196/16203 
PMID: 32490838 
©Claire L Bentley, Lauren Powell, Stephen Potter, Jack Parker, Gail A Mountain, Yvonne Kiera Bartlett, Jochen Farwer, Cath 
O'Connor, Jennifer Burns, Rachel L Cresswell, Heather D Dunn, Mark S Hawley. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and 
uHealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 03.06.2020. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction 
in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth, is properly cited. The complete 
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://mhealth.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license 
information must be included. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 6 | e16203 | p. 21 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
