Original research 
Using a smartphone application maintains physical 
activity following pulmonary rehabilitation in patients 
with COPD: a randomised controlled trial 
Marc Spielmanns ,1,2 Rainer Gloeckl,3,4 Inga Jarosch,3,4 Daniela Leitl,3,4 
Tessa Schneeberger,3,4 Tobias Boeselt,5 Stephan Huber,6 Pawandeep Kaur- Bollinger,6 
Bernhard Ulm,7 Claudia Mueller,6 Jonas Bjoerklund,6 Sabine Spielmanns,1 
Wolfram Windisch ,2,8 Anna- Maria Pekacka- Egli,1 Andreas Rembert Koczulla3,4 
 ► Additional supplemental 
material is published online 
only. To view, please visit the 
journal online (http:// dx. doi. 
org/ 10. 1136/ thoraxjnl- 2021- 
218338). 
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article. 
Correspondence to 
Dr Marc Spielmanns, Pulmonary 
Medicine, Zürcher RehaZentren 
Hospital Wald, Wald, 
Switzerland; 
spielmanns@me. com 
 
Received 11 October 2021 
Accepted 4 March 2022 
Published Online First 
21 April 2022 
AbsTrACT 
background Evidence suggests that patients with 
COPD struggle to maintain improved physical activity 
(PA) after completing pulmonary rehabilitation 
(PR). Smartphone applications (apps) providing a 
comprehensive training programme have conferred 
healthy benefits. This study was conducted to determine 
whether regular usage of an app maintains PA following 
PR. 
Methods Patients with stage II–IV COPD were enrolled 
in a 6- month trial following PR. After the screening 
period, participants were randomised into the Kaia 
COPD app group (intervention group (IG)) or the control 
group (CG). The primary outcome was PA (daily steps), 
measured using an activity tracker. Secondary outcomes 
included the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), the Chronic 
Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ) and the 1 min 
Sit- to- Stand Test (STST). 
results Sixty participants completed the study. 
The median steps from baseline to 6 months were 
significantly different between the groups, in favour of 
the IG (−105.3, IQR −1970.1 to 2105.8, vs CG −1173.0, 
IQR −3813.1 to –93.8; p=0.007). CAT was significantly 
decreased in the IG (15.1±8.6 vs 19.7±6.4, p=0.02), 
whereas the CRQ subdomains for dyspnoea (4.5±1.7 
vs 3.7±1.3, p=0.033) and fatigue (4.5±1.4 vs 3.5±1.3, 
p=0.028) improved significantly in the IG. The STST at 
6 months was not significant. Sleep duration and sleep 
efficiency showed no significant differences between the 
two groups at any time. 
Conclusions A comprehensive program by using the 
Kaia app following PR maintained PA and improved 
symptoms in patients with COPD at 6 months. The app 
might be an important accessory tool for enhanced 
COPD care. 
Trial registration number DRKS00017275. 
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2023. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published 
by BMJ. 
InTroduCTIon 
Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is defined as a multi- 
disciplinary and comprehensive intervention based 
on a thorough patient assessment followed by patient- 
tailored therapies that include, but are not limited to, 
exercise training, education and behavioural changes 
designed to improve the physical and psycholog- 
ical condition of people with chronic respiratory 
disease and to promote long- term adherence to 

health- enhancing behaviours.1 PR is considered an 
important modality for non- pharmacological manage- 
ment of COPD. Numerous trials have shown that 
participation in a PR programme improves health- 
related quality of life (HRQoL) and exercise capacity 
in patients with COPD.2 However, it is often chal- 
lenging for patients with COPD who have completed 
a PR programme to maintain physical activity (PA) and 
to integrate regular exercise training into their daily 
lives. Consequently, many patients with COPD fail to 
adhere to exercise training after completing PR and 
receive insufficient instructions to continue their exer- 
cise training at home.3 
A systematic review and meta- analysis of single- 
group and randomised trials evaluating the effect of 
exercise training (not necessarily PR) on PA concluded 
that this intervention conferred a small but significant 
increase in this outcome.4 Studies have highlighted 
the crucial importance of maintaining PA in COPD 
showing significantly higher survival rates correlated 
with increased PA.5 6 Several studies confirmed that 
a sustainable increase in PA following PR in patients 
with COPD with declining levels of PA is inconsistent 
following structured PR programmes.7 8 
Digital therapeutics to promote behavioural 
change in chronic conditions have recently emerged 
with a growing body of evidence supporting their 

To cite: Spielmanns M, 
Gloeckl R, Jarosch I, et al. 
Thorax 2023;78:442–450. 

What is already known on this topic 
 ⇒ To date, no study has been able to demonstrate 
the benefits of eHealth in the postrehabilitation 
phase, especially in terms of maintaining 
physical activity (PA) in patients with COPD. 
What this study adds 
 ⇒ Regular use of the contents of the smartphone 
application (app) Kaia COPD app not only 
maintained PA in patients with COPD after 
rehabilitation but also improved symptoms. 
How this study might affect research, 
practice or policy 
 ⇒ Widespread use of eHealth has the potential to 
close the long- known gap in postrehabilitation. 

use across many indications.9 Of note, digital rehabilitation tools 
have been suggested as a means of increasing access to reha- 
bilitation and structured exercise in different indications.10 11 
Recent studies have investigated the effect of short- course digital 
interventions for PR in COPD, comparing them against face- to- 
face outpatient PR, which demonstrated comparable results in 
terms of HRQoL and exercise capacity as measured by the 6 min 
walk test.12 Further pilot studies have suggested the potential of 
digital applications (app) to also improve HRQoL and to reduce 
hospital readmissions in patients with severe symptoms when 
compared with standard care.13 Another pilot study suggested a 
moderate improvement in HRQoL in newly diagnosed COPD, 
regardless of disease severity.14 The effect of mobile health 
(mHealth) app use on PA was also investigated in an early feasi- 
bility mixed- methods study, but the effect of app usage on PA 
was not detected.15 
The Kaia COPD app is available as a digital solution for 
PR and consists of an exercise training programme, breathing 
exercises and an educational programme.16 To the best of the 
authors’ knowledge, no current evidence supports the use of 
digital health interventions following structured PR programme 
PA. We hypothesised that the use of this smartphone app would 
maintain PA in patients with COPD following PR. 
MeTHods 
Participants and study centres 
This trial was conducted as an international, bicentre, parallel- 
group randomised controlled trial (RCT). Study participants 
were in COPD Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) stages II–IV who were randomised in a 1:1 ratio in 
parallel assignment to either the intervention group (IG), which 
was provided with the Kaia COPD app, or the control group 
(CG), which received standard care (accomplished by using a 
software randomiser, https://www.randomizer.org). Two centres 
specialised in inpatient PR for COPD (Schoen Klinik Berchtes- 
gadener Land, Germany, and Zurich RehaCenter Clinic Wald, 
Switzerland) recruited participants. The trial was reported in 
line with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials recom- 
mendations for the reporting of RCTs.17 
The study was registered with the German Clinical Trials 
Register. A summary of the study protocol has been published.18 
objectives and outcomes 
The primary objective was to assess the effectiveness of the newly 
developed COPD app as a maintenance programme after PR. The 
primary outcome was defined as a change in PA, measured in steps 
per day after 6 months. A commonly used activity tracker (POLAR 
A370 watch; Polar Electro Europe AG, Steinhausen, Switzerland) 
was used to measure the results of the primary endpoint. In a 
previous study, this activity tracker was also shown to be valid for 
daily life assessment of PA in patients with COPD.19 
The secondary objectives were to evaluate the effects of the 
COPD app programme on functional exercise capacity (1 min Sit- 
to- Stand Test (STST)20), HRQoL and patient- reported health status 
(Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ)21 and COPD 
Assessment Test (CAT)22), number of exacerbations (defined as an 
increase in symptoms and an increase in dosage of or a new prescrip- 
tion of systemic corticosteroids and/or antibiotics), and depression 
and anxiety symptoms (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale23). 
Furthermore, we aimed to investigate patients’ compliance, adher- 
ence and safety; to identify factors that facilitate the implementa- 
tion of the programme in the patient’s home setting; and to evaluate 
factors of the programme that are especially supportive of patient 
care. For additional information regarding materials and methods, 
see online supplemental material. 
Intervention 
The study intervention consisted of physical exercise training 
sessions conducted daily by the patient via the Kaia COPD app. 
The app is available as a digital solution for PR in German- 
speaking countries. This COPD app consisted of an exercise 
training programme, breathing exercises and an educational 
programme, and was developed by healthcare professionals and 
PR experts. In a feasibility study for the Kaia app, promising 
results were obtained from a 20- day intervention on the CAT 
and HRQoL in patients with severely symptomatic COPD.16 
Regular contacts via telephone calls were made by a trained 
healthcare professional to assess and discuss compliance with 
the study intervention. Additionally, patients were contacted by 
phone if they did not meet the predefined minimal adherence 
criteria (exercising with the app at least 4 out of 7 days a week). 
Individualised strength training programme 
The exercise training programme provided by the COPD app 
consisted of various daily whole- body exercises of 15–20 min. Most 
exercises included compound movements to train large muscle 
groups and improve upper and lower body strength and mobility. 
Each exercise day began with a whole- body warm- up and finished 
with two to three stretching exercises. During the programme, the 
intensity of the exercises was progressively increased dynamically 
based on patient feedback recorded through the application at the 
end of each exercise session. All exercises were explained in exer- 
cise videos, which included detailed instructions to ensure proper 
performance, training amount and intensity. Completed training 
sessions were recorded by the application, and aggregated data about 
training intensity and frequency were provided to the site staff to 
assess compliance with the study intervention. Within the exercise 
training programme, frequency of workouts, as well as exercise 
duration and intensity, were initially determined using a self- test 
assessing baseline exercise capacity. All exercises were performed 
without the need for specialised exercise equipment. Furthermore, 
the app promoted overall PA (eg, walking). The number of steps per 
day was collected by the activity tracker and reported to the app, 
and goals for activity were set weekly, depending on the updated 
individual fitness level. Users were reminded of their activity goals 
via push notifications provided by the app. The CG also wore the 
activity tracker every day and used a smartphone for the assessments 
but had no access to the COPD app. The IG and CG received a 
leaflet to encourage an active lifestyle (German version of ‘living well 
with COPD’) as well as individual exercise recommendations, as part 
of their discharge instructions to reflect the established standard of 
care. At the 6- month assessment, participants who were allocated to 
the CG were offered to use the Kaia COPD app free of charge. 
sample size calculation and statistics 
Sample size calculation was based on expected changes in the 
primary endpoint and the average step difference between the 
groups from week 1 to the 6- month follow- up. The minimal 
clinically important difference in steps per day after PR is esti- 
mated between 350 and 1100 steps as measured with an activity 
tracker during an intervention.24 Assuming an SD of the outcome 
variable of 2500 steps/day, an expected effect size of 2000 steps/ 
day could be assumed for programmes combining PA counsel- 
ling with PR to increase activity. According to a current meta- 
analysis,25 to achieve 80% power and a significance level of 5% 
(one- sided), a sample size of 52 participants (26 participants in 



Figure 1 Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials diagram. ITT, 
intention to treat. 
each group) was required. Assuming a drop- out rate of 50%, 
enrolment of up to 104 participants was expected. From our 
study group, two RCTs on outpatient training interventions 
were published in advance, each demonstrating high drop- out 
rates of 45% and 57%.26 27 The sample calculation and the 
primary outcome analysis were based on a two- tailed unpaired 
t- test comparing changes from baseline between the two groups 
at the final visit at the end of the follow- up period. 
Discrete variables are presented as absolute and relative numbers. 
For continuous variables, the Shapiro- Wilk test was performed to 
determine the normality of distribution. Depending on the results 
of the Shapiro- Wilk test, mean and SD or median with IQR were 
reported. For discrete variables, group comparisons were performed 
using χ2 tests. Continuous variables were compared with either 
t- tests or Mann- Whitney U tests, according to the normal distribu- 
tion assumption. Data are presented as boxplots or mean plots with 
error bars. A p value of 5% was determined as significant for all 
analyses. For the main analyses, we compared the CG with the IG 
using an intention- to- treat approach. The effect size for the Mann- 
Whitney U tests was calculated using rank–biserial correlation; for 
t- tests, Cohen’s d was calculated. This study was designed as a supe- 
riority study, and analyses were performed using the R V.4.1.1. 
resulTs 
recruitment and baseline characteristics 
Overall, 421 subjects were screened for eligibility. The trial was 
conducted from July 2019 to June 2021. Enrolment was termi- 
nated after the planned number of participants completed the 
study (n=52). Figure 1 shows the protocol for screening, rando- 
misation and follow- up. Table 1 shows the baseline demographics 
of the 67 randomised patients. The 67 participants with COPD 
had a mean age of 64±8 years and, according to the pulmonary 
function testing, severe airflow obstruction with a mean FEV1% 
predicted of 44%±16%. Comorbidities are illustrated in table 2, 
showing no group differences according to distribution. 
Primary outcome 
The main analysis showed a significant difference in the change 
in median steps from baseline to 6 months between the groups 
(IG −105.9, IQR −1970.1 to 2105.8, vs CG −1173.0, IQR 
−3813.1 to –93.8 steps per day; p=0.007) (figure 2). The effect 
size was 0.402 (IQR 0.131–0.617). 

The median number of daily steps at 6 months measured as 
an average value over 7 days was significantly higher in the IG 
(median steps and IQRs in the IG 5016.3 (2920.3–10 206.5) 
vs 3105.1 (606.4–4372.0), p=0.014) than in the CG (figure 3). 
The effect size was 0.370 (IQR 0.095–0.593). 
At baseline and 3 months, the differences were not significant 
between the groups (baseline, IG 6361.4 (IQR 3401.2–8304.3) vs 
CG 5052.21 (IQR 3531.9–8999.1) steps per day, p=0.760; effect 
size, 0.024 (IQR −0.264 to 0.309); 3 months, IG 4661.1 (IQR 
2538.4–7829.0) vs CG 3728.0 (IQR 1889.3–5773.4) steps per day, 
p=0.199; effect size, 0.168 (IQR −0.125 to 0.433) (figure 3). 
secondary outcomes 
COPD Assessment Test 
CAT scores decreased from baseline to 6 months in the IG (−1.4 
point mean difference) but increased in the CG by 3.7 points 
(p=0.02) (figure 4 and table 3). 






























Number of exacerbations treated as 
outpatient in the past 12 months, mean 
(SD) 
Number of exacerbations treated as 
inpatient in the past 12 months, mean (SD) 






































GOLD stage IV, n (%) 
18 (26.9) 
BMI, body mass index; CAT, COPD Assessment Test; CG, control group; FEV1, forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s ; FVC, forced vital capacity; GOLD, Global Initiative for 
Obstructive Lung Disease; IG, intervention group; 















































Sit-to-Stand Test 
At baseline, no significant difference in the number of STST 
repetitions was observed. After 3 months, participants in the IG 
performed a significantly higher number of repetitions, and after 
6 months, no significant difference was noted in the number of 
STST repetitions (figure 6 and table 3). 
Sleep parameters 
Regarding sleep duration and sleep efficiency, no differences 
were found for both the CG and IG at any time (table 3). 
App usage and adherence 
The app usage for the IG is reported in line with adherence to 
definitions previously reported and listed in table 4.14 A prespec- 
ified optimal usage rate of four different types of content, 
on four different days per week, was achieved by 36% of the 
participants. Using the prespecified adherence definition (use of 
the application at least four times a week for at least 70% of 
the weeks during the study), 13 participants (43%) in the IG 
complied fully with the app usage suggestions (‘frequent app 
user’). As a sensitivity analysis, we reanalysed this subgroup of 
patients and found an even greater difference when compared 
with controls regarding the primary outcome (change in steps 
from baseline in the IG 1092.1 (−1036.3 to 2317.9) and in the 
CG −1173.0 (−3813.1 to −93.8), p=0.006). The results of the 
subgroup frequent app user are provided in online supplemental 
table S7). A visual representation of the participants’ app usage 
is shown in figure 7. 
Of the 30 participants, 29 (96.6%) completed the study, indi- 
cating that they were satisfied with the study app after using 
it. Ten (34.5%) participants rated it as ‘okay’, and 18 (62.1 %) 
rated it as ‘very satisfactory’. All participants would recommend 
the app to other patients with COPD. There were no differences 
in safety endpoints. More detailed information regarding safety 
endpoints is provided in the online supplemental material. 
dIsCussIon 
The study investigated the effects of a digital- based post- PR 
programme provided via a smartphone app to maintain the posi- 
tive results of PR as long as possible and to encourage patients to 
Figure 2 Changes in steps per day from baseline to 6 months. P value 
was obtained from the Mann- Whitney U test. CG, control group; IG, 
intervention group. **P<0.01. 
Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire 
Significant differences were found between the IG and CG 
for the CRQ domains of dyspnoea and fatigue. The domains 
of emotional function and mastery, as well as the CRQ total 
score, did not show significant differences between groups 
(table 3). 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
While Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale–Depression 
Subscale (HADS- D) did not change significantly over the study 
period for the IG, the scores significantly increased for the CG 
(IG 4.20 (±2.95) vs CG 6.55 (±5.08), p=0.033) (figure 5). 
Group differences for the Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale–Anxiety Subscale (HADS- A) and the total scores were not 
significant at 6 months (table 3). 
Figure 3 Steps per day at baseline and 3 and 6 months for the IG and the CG. P value obtained from the Mann- Whitney U test. CG, control group; 
IG, intervention group. *P<0.05. 



Figure 4 Results of the CAT for the IG and the CG. P value was obtained from the t- test. CAT, COPD Assessment Test; CG, control group; IG, 
intervention group. *P<0.05. 
adopt a more active lifestyle. The results demonstrate that the main- 
tenance of PA and a significant increase in HRQoL, up to 6 months 
after completing PR, were possible by using a mobile app for self- 
management of COPD. To our knowledge, this study is the first 
RCT to demonstrate the maintenance of PA after inpatient PR using 
a digital structured programme. In addition, differences in favour of 
the IG could be found in all observed endpoints of the study (except 
HADS- A) after 6 months, exceeding the minimal clinically important 
differences (online supplemental material). These positive app results 
are particularly impressive because the CG received the usual postre- 
habilitation recommendations rather than no intervention. In addi- 
tion to the application providing potential benefit of maintenance 
after participating in PR, it may provide benefit of increasing the 
uptake of digital delivery of PR overall. 
PR has been demonstrated to significantly and reliably improve 
HRQoL and exercise capacity. However, the long- term effects on 
PA are moderate. Given its resource- intensive and costly nature, 
consolidation and maintenance of PR- induced benefits, especially 
in maintaining PA, remain a challenge across modes of delivery 
and healthcare systems. Structured exercise programmes aimed to 
improve the maintenance of benefits after PR showed mixed results 
when assessing exercise tolerance, HRQoL and PA.28 
Additionally, the findings of the current study are of relevance 
because PA is an important outcome. Previous studies on this topic 
have shown ambivalent results, and most studies have focused on 
physical performance as the primary endpoint.7 8 Since a higher exer- 
cise capacity does not necessarily lead to higher PA,7 29 it is of partic- 
ular interest to evaluate the effects of a postrehabilitation programme 
on PA. Physical inactivity is a potential modifiable risk factor and 
should be clinically assessed as a vital sign of a patients’ general phys- 
ical condition prior to any exercise- based intervention.30 
In this study, training on the use of the study equipment occurred 
during rehabilitation (four sessions, each of 20 min duration). When 
reduced to pure training with the app, the effort would be signifi- 
cantly lower, and a cost- effective and feasible application would be 
conceivable in the outpatient area. However, the extent to which 
a reduction in training times has an influence on adherence to the 
training app cannot be estimated. 
Barriers to referral, uptake and completion of PR are well docu- 
mented and linked with organisational, practitioner and patient- 
related factors.31 However, the extent to which the use of a training 
app can close a gap here must certainly be evaluated in further 

studies. Findings from studies of maintenance programmes following 
PR are heterogeneous, especially regarding supervision frequency. 
A recently published Cochrane review including 21 studies with 
1799 patients with COPD suggested that supervised maintenance 
programmes for patients with COPD after PR may improve HRQoL 
and could possibly improve exercise capacity at 6–12 months. 
The strength of the evidence was assessed as limited. The authors 
concluded that the optimal frequency of supervision and mode for 
supervised maintenance programmes are still unclear.32 However, 
these studies also predominantly examined only the effects on the 
participants’ physical performance and not the consequences in 
terms of PA. Interestingly, no significant changes between CG and 
IG were seen in the 3- month assessment. We suppose this to be 
the usual duration that PR effects are measurable. By the extended 
observation period of 6 months, significant differences between the 
groups could be seen. Our results confirm the experience of the ATS 
guidelines, stating that the benefits of PR in the absence of any main- 
tenance strategy appeared to diminish over 6–12 months.3 Another 
study tried to demonstrate the effects of an mHealth intervention to 
improve or maintain PA in patients with COPD after PR. However, 
no differences were observed in PA, functional exercise capacity, 
HRQoL outcomes or body mass index in patients with COPD using 
a consumer smartphone- based mHealth intervention.33 The discrep- 
ancies between outcomes of the previous study and the current study 
might be caused by the different settings, as patients in the previous 
study were enrolled until half a year after outpatient PR, and the 
different inclusion and exclusion criteria. In addition, differences 
between study interventions might have played a role. 
Other disease- relevant outcomes such as the CAT, HRQoL 
measured by the dyspnoea and fatigue domains of the CRQ, and 
data on the mood of the patients assessed with the HADS- D showed 
a significant improvement in the IG compared with CG. Regarding 
the STST, a clinically and statistically significant difference was 
observed at 3 months, while no significant difference was noted at 
6 months, which may be caused by the fact that the study was not 
sufficiently powered to detect such a change in the STST. These find- 
ings are in line with the effects observed in a retrospective pilot study 
of the same application, showing at least a significant improvement 
in the CAT score and the identical CRQ domains from baseline to 
the end of the observational period.16 Our results support the find- 
ings of North et al, who had previously reported non- inferiority of 
a mHealth intervention to outpatient face- to- face PR on changes 





Figure 5 Results of the HADS- D for the IG and the CG. P value was obtained from the t- test. CG, control group; HADS- D, Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale–Depression Subscale; IG, intervention group. *P<0.05. 
in functional exercise capacity and HrQoL in patients with COPD 
meeting referral criteria to PR.13 In a recent study among patients 
with severe COPD, telerehabilitation (delivered though providers 
instead of an app) also yielded equal results to face- to- face PR.34 Of 
note, all participants in our study were included following a compre- 
hensive rehabilitation, assuming that the patients were in their best 
possible condition with little potential for further improvements. 
Another pilot study investigated the same intervention as Crooks 
et al in inpatients with COPD following an exacerbation and found 
clinically relevant effects on HRQoL and the incidence of exacerba- 
tions.14 This study also reported an effect of a digital health interven- 
tion on PA, HRQoL and functional exercise capacity. The findings 
suggest that inpatient populations either are especially prone to 
profit from these interventions or reflect the well- documented effect 
of PR following exacerbations, as the majority of the participants of 
this study also had a history of a recent exacerbation.35 
Notably, no significant difference was found between the groups 
with respect to the number of recorded exacerbations or adverse 
events (AEs). The intervention had a positive safety profile with a 
comparable incidence and distribution of AEs across the groups. 
These results are in line with the findings of the aforementioned 
Cochrane review showing that supervised maintenance programmes 
for patients with COPD after PR are not associated with increased 
AEs.33 
However, it is still unknown which patients, in terms of disease 
progression or demographic properties, benefit the most from digital 
health apps for PR. Another recent pilot study investigated the use of 
an mHealth app in a collective of newly diagnosed, mild and moder- 
ately affected patients with COPD, but observed no clinically or 
statistically relevant effect on HRQoL, even if the study was powered 
comparably to the current study.14 However, in both studies, the 
patient’s baseline symptoms and demographics were comparable. 
Crooks et al showed that changes in CAT during the study period 
were more favourable with higher app usage. In the current study, 
results of the frequent app user subgroup indicated that increased 
usage creates greater advantages. Furthermore, this subgroup even 
increased their PA rather than just maintained it. Hence, it seems that 
increasing adherence motivation might be a key to achieving favour- 
able results in mHealth app usage by patients with COPD. The 
finding that uptake of and adherence to digital health intervention 
is indeed a challenge in patients with COPD was also confirmed.36 
It is quite conceivable that the use of the app can be beneficial even 
without prior rehabilitation. This is the subject of the current study 
and will be reported in the future. 
App usage in the current study was sustained over the observa- 
tional period in most participants in the IG. In this context, previous 
trials of digital health interventions for PR have repeatedly shown 
that adherence to the intervention is crucial for favourable outcomes, 
Figure 6 Results of the 1 min Sit- to- Stand Test for the IG and the CG. P value was obtained from the t- test. CG, control group; IG, intervention 
group. **P<0.01. 



but adherence is difficult. Previous studies have reported that 28% 
of patients do not use an app after 1 month (40% at 3 months).12 13 
Long- term adherence of >3 months for digital interventions has 
only been assessed by a few trials but seems to be a remarkable chal- 
lenge in those studies with below 20% of participants completing 
the 6- month programme.37 The long- term usage rates in the current 
study suggest acceptable patient engagement throughout the obser- 
vational period. 
The observational period of our study suggests that using a digital 
health tool maintains PA after PR during an observational period 
of 6 months. This exceeds the observational periods of previous 
studies that have investigated the effect of digital tools on self- 
management in patients with COPD, which ranges mostly from 6 
to 12 weeks.2 Implementing a long observational period is important 
since continued use and sustained demonstration of positive clinical 
outcomes of digital health tools have been described as a problem 
that needs to be addressed.36 
This study has some limitations. First, the sample size was small. 
However, the statistical considerations according to the primary 
endpoint assumed a total sample size of 52 patients. In this study, the 
results of 60 patients were finally analysed, allowing for appropriate 
interpretation of the primary endpoint. However, in consequence, 
additional studies with larger sample sizes will help elucidate the 
effects of the intervention in broader settings. Second, more than 
three other sites were asked to participate; however, due to several 
reasons (eg, no sufficient inpatient PR case load in COPD and no 
adequate research infrastructure), only two sites were eligible. Third, 
the results of this study may not be generalisable to a broader popu- 
lation of patients with COPD. According to the aim and the defined 
inclusion criteria of the study, a preselection of patients in the COPD 
rehabilitation population was necessary, showing sufficient verifica- 
tion in mobile technology. Hence, even though the authors tried to 
mitigate this by offering smartphones and a corresponding education 
as part of the intervention, the study was mainly limited to smart- 
phone users. 
Fourth, the nature of the intervention made blinding of the 
study participants and study staff impossible. Although this 
problem is commonplace in rehabilitation trials, the lack of 
blinding is a limitation. To reduce the risk of bias, other proce- 
dures such as proper allocation concealment were implemented 
to ensure rigour and reproducibility. Selection bias may have 
been introduced in the study through the screening criteria 
which might select for participants compliant with the study 
intervention; this may have an effect on adherence and patient 
engagement. Fifth, while the study showed significant benefits of 
the intervention over an observational period of 6 months, the 
effects during a longer observational period like 12 months have 
not been assessed. 
ConClusIons 
Digital interventions are an interesting option to support the 
management of chronic conditions such as COPD. For these digital 
interventions to be meaningful, integration into the existing health- 
care landscape is paramount, and it may provide benefit of increasing 
the uptake of digital delivery of PR overall. This study reveals how 
a digital intervention can be used to supplement existing care by 
closing gaps in the existing healthcare landscape. However, to make 
a general recommendation on the benefit of an app as a maintenance 
programme after PR in patients with COPD, further studies are 
required. 
Author affiliations 
1Pulmonary Medicine, Zuercher RehaZentren Klinik Wald, Wald, Switzerland 





Activating the app and at least one activity 
 
Training on the app on at least 30 days 
 
Training on the app on at least 60 days 
 
Training on the app on at least 90 days 
 
Training on the app on at least 120 days 
 

An activity in the app in at least 50% of trial weeks (%) 
 
An activity in the app in at least 75% of trial weeks (%) 
 







Number of active days in the final week of the study (SD) 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2Faculty of Health, Department for Pulmonary Medicine, University Witten Herdecke, 
Witten, Germany 
3Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Philipps- Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany 
4Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik Berchtesgadener 
Land, Schoenau am Koenigssee, Germany 
5Pulmonary Medicine, Philipps University Marburg Faculty of Medicine, Marburg, 
Germany 
6Kaia Health GmbH, Munich, Bavaria, Germany 
7Unabhaengige Statistische Beratungen Bernhard Ulm, Munich, Bavaria, Germany 
8Department of Pneumology, Cologne Merheim Hospital, Kliniken der Stadt Koeln, 
Koeln, Germany 
Acknowledgements We thank Editage ( www. editage. com) for English language 
editing. 
Contributors MS was the principal investigator for Switzerland and supervised 
the study, PR programme and data collection; ARK was the principal investigator for 
Germany. MS, TB, SH, PK- B, A- MP, SS, RG, IJ, TS, DL and ARK contributed to the study 
concept and design, as well as in the data collection. MS and SH wrote the first draft 
of the manuscript, which was critically reviewed by RG, PK- B, SS, ARK, WW, IJ, and 
TS. BU contributed for the statistical analysis. All authors participated in various steps 
in the study, edited the manuscript and gave their approval for submission. MS is the 
guarantor of the article. 



ethics approval This study involves human participants and was approved by the 
Swiss Ethics Committee (BASEC 2019–00766) and the German Ethics Committee of 
the University of Marburg (number 96/19). The participants gave informed consent 
to participate in the study before taking part. The investigation conformed to the 
principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. 

data availability statement Deidentified and aggregated participant data are 
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request, subject to approval 
by an independent ethics committee. 
open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. 
orCId ids 
Marc Spielmanns http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4541-6977 
Wolfram Windisch http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7574-2672 
reFerenCes 
 1 Spruit MA, Singh SJ. Maintenance programs after pulmonary rehabilitation: how may 




respiratory Society statement: key concepts and advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013;188:e13–64. 

activity in people with COPD? A systematic review and meta- analysis. Chron Respir 
Dis 2012;9:17–26. 










10 Toelle TR, Utpadel- Fischler DA, Haas K- K, et al. App- based multidisciplinary back 
 
pain treatment versus combined physiotherapy plus online education: a randomized 
controlled trial. npj Digital Medicine 2019;2. 
12Bourne S, DeVos R, North M, et al. Online versus face- to- face pulmonary rehabilitation 
 
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: randomised controlled trial. 
BMJ Open 2017;7:e014580. 
13North M, Bourne S, Green B, et al. A randomised controlled feasibility trial of e- health 
 
application supported care vs usual care after exacerbation of COPD: the rescue trial. 
NPJ Digit Med 2020;3:14580. 
14 Crooks MG, Elkes J, Storrar W, et al. Evidence generation for the clinical impact of 
 
myCOPD in patients with mild, moderate and newly diagnosed COPD: a randomised 
controlled trial. ERJ Open Res 2020;6:00460–2020. 
15Bentley CL, Powell L, Potter S, et al. The use of a smartphone APP and an activity 
 
Tracker to promote physical activity in the management of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: randomized controlled feasibility study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 
2020;8:e16203. 
16 Rassouli F, Boutellier D, Duss J, et al. Digitalizing multidisciplinary pulmonary 
 
rehabilitation in COPD with a smartphone application: an international observational 
pilot study. Int J COPD 2018;13:3831–6. 
17 Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, et al. Consort 2010 statement: updated guidelines for 
 

18Spielmanns M, Boeselt T, Huber S, et al. Impact of a smartphone application (KaiA 
 
COPD APP) in combination with activity monitoring as a maintenance prOgram 
following pulmonary rehabilitation in COPD: the protocol for the AMOPUR study, 
an international, multicenter, parallel group, randomized, controlled study. Trials 
2020;21:1–13. 
19 Boeselt T, Spielmanns M, Nell C, et al. Validity and usability of physical activity 
 
monitoring in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). PLoS One 
2016;11:e0157229. 
20Crook S, Frei A, Ter Riet G, et al. Prediction of long- term clinical outcomes using simple 
 
functional exercise performance tests in patients with COPD: a 5- year prospective 
cohort study. Respir Res 2017;18:1–4. 
21 Guyatt GH, Berman LB, Townsend M, et al. A measure of quality of life for clinical 
 

22 Jones PW, Harding G, Berry P, et al. Development and first validation of the COPD 
 

23 Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Heal Qual Life Outcomes 
 

24 Teylan M, Kantorowski A, Homsy D, et al. Physical activity in COPD: 
 
minimal clinically important difference for medical events. Chron Respir Dis 
2019;16:147997311881642. 
25 Lahham A, McDonald CF, Holland AE. Exercise training alone or with the addition 
 
of activity counseling improves physical activity levels in COPD: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 
2016;11:3121–36. 
26 Spielmanns M, Meier A, Winkler A, et al. [Pulmonary Rehabilitation after Acute 
 
Exacerbation of COPD Reduces the Rate of Reexacerbations]. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 
2017;142:e10–19. German. 
27 Spielmanns M, Fuchs- Bergsma C, Winkler A, et al. Effects of oxygen supply during 
 
training on subjects with COPD who are Normoxemic at rest and during exercise: a 
blinded randomized controlled trial. Respir Care 2015;60:540–8. 
28 Spencer LM, McKeough ZJ. Maintaining the benefits following pulmonary 
 

29Koolen E, van Hees H, van Lummel R, et al. “Can do” versus “do do”: A Novel 
 
Concept to Better Understand Physical Functioning in Patients with Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. J Clin Med 2019;8:340. 
30 Santos CD, das Neves RC, Ribeiro RM, et al. Novel input for designing Patient- 
 
Tailored pulmonary rehabilitation: Telemonitoring physical activity as a vital Sign— 
SMARTREAB study. J Clin Med 2020;9:2450. 
31 Lahham A, Holland AE. The need for expanding pulmonary rehabilitation services. Life 
 

32 Malaguti C, Dal Corso S, Janjua S, et al. Supervised maintenance programmes 
 
following pulmonary rehabilitation compared to usual care for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2021;8:CD013569. 
33 Vorrink SNW, Kort HSM, Troosters T, et al. Efficacy of an mHealth intervention to 
 
stimulate physical activity in COPD patients after pulmonary rehabilitation. Eur Respir 
J 2016;48:1019–29. 
34 Hansen H, Bieler T, Beyer N, et al. Supervised pulmonary tele- rehabilitation versus 
 
pulmonary rehabilitation in severe COPD: a randomised multicentre trial. Thorax 
2020;75:413–21. 
35 Puhan MA, Gimeno- Santos E, Cates CJ, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation following 
 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2016;12:CD005305. 
36Houchen- Wolloff L, Orme M, Barradell A, et al. Web- Based self- management program 
 
(space for COPD) for individuals hospitalized with an acute exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: nonrandomized feasibility trial of acceptability. JMIR 
Mhealth Uhealth 2021;9:e21728. 
11 Nero H, Dahlberg J, Dahlberg LE. A 6- week web- based osteoarthritis treatment 
 
37 Blakey JD, Bender BG, Dima AL, et al. Digital technologies and 
 
program: observational quasi- experimental study. J Med Internet Res 
2017;19:e422. 
adherence in respiratory diseases: the road ahead. Eur Respir J 2018;52. 
doi:10.1183/13993003.01147-2018. [Epub ahead of print: 22 11 2018]. 



