

Long-term effects of web-based pedometer-mediated 
intervention on COPD exacerbations☆ 
Emily S. Wana,b,c, Ana Kantorowskia,c, Madeline Polaka, Reema Kadrid, Caroline R. 
Richardsond, David R. Gagnone,f, Eric Garshicka,b,c, Marilyn L. Moya,c,* 
aPulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Section, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA 




fMassachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center, Veterans Affairs 
Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA 

Background—Technology-based physical activity (PA) interventions have been shown to 
improve daily step counts and health-related quality of life, but their effect on long-term clinical 
outcomes like acute exacerbations (AEs) is unknown in persons with COPD. 
Methods—U.S. Veterans with stable COPD were randomized (1:1) to either pedometer alone 
(control) or pedometer plus a website with feedback, goal-setting, disease education, and a 
community forum (intervention) for 3 months. AEs were assessed every 3 months over a follow- 
up period of approximately 15 months. Pedometer-assessed daily step counts, health-related 
quality-of-life (HRQL), and self-efficacy were assessed at baseline, end-of-intervention at 3 
months, and during follow-up approximately 6 and 12 months after enrollment. Zero-inflated 
Poisson models assessed the effect of the intervention on risk for AEs, compared to controls. 
☆Use of an internet-mediated pedometer-based physical activity intervention is associated with a reduction in acute exacerbations of 
COPD. 
*Corresponding author. VA Boston Healthcare System, Pulmonary and Critical Care Section, 1400 VFW Parkway, Mail Code 111PI, 
West Roxbury, MA, 02132, USA. marilyn.moy@va.gov (M.L. Moy). 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Emily S. Wan: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Ana 
Kantorowski: Investigation, Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Madeline Polak: Investigation, Data curation, Writing - 
review & editing. Reema Kadri: Methodology, Software, Writing - review & editing. Caroline R. Richardson: Conceptualization, 
Methodology, Writing - review & editing. David R. Gagnon: Resources, Methodology, Writing - review & editing. Eric Garshick: 
Resources, Project administration, Writing - review & editing. Marilyn L. Moy: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, 
Writing - review & editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Dr. Moy reports receiving an honorarium for consulting from AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. The remaining authors have 
no relevant conflicts to disclose. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105878. 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
Public Access Author manuscript 
Respir Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 February 01. 


Generalized linear mixed-effects models for repeated measures examined between-group and 
within-group changes in daily step count, HRQL, and self-efficacy. 
Results—There were no significant differences in age, FEV1% predicted, baseline daily step 
count, AEs the year prior to enrollment, or duration of follow-up between the intervention (n = 57) 
and control (n = 52) groups. The intervention group had a significantly reduced risk of AEs (rate 
ratio = 0.51, [95%CI 0.31–0.85]), compared to the control group. There were no significant 
between-group differences in change in average daily step count, HRQL, or self-efficacy at 6 and 
12 months after enrollment. 
Conclusions—A 3-month internet-mediated, pedometer-based PA intervention was associated 
with reduced risk for AEs of COPD over 12–15 months of follow-up. 





Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide [1,2]. Low levels of physical activity (PA) in COPD patients are present 
early in the course of the disease [3] and are associated with an increased risk of acute 
exacerbations (AEs) [4], higher rates of healthcare utilization [5–7], higher levels of 
systemic inflammation [8], and increased mortality [6,9,10], independent of lung function. 
Increasing PA, a modifiable risk factor, is recommended by the Global Initiative for 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines as a non-pharmacological treatment of COPD 
[11]. 
Technology-based interventions that employ pedometers and accelerometers, the internet, 
and smartphone applications have emerged to promote PA in COPD [12–16]. Studies have 
demonstrated the efficacy of these programs to increase PA and 6-min walk test (6MWT) 
distance and improve health related quality of life (HRQL) [14–20] over the short term (3–4 
months). However, the impact of technology-mediated PA interventions on clinical 
outcomes such as risk for acute exacerbations (AEs) and the long-term (>12 months) 
durability of improvements in PA are less well established. In one study that used a 
resource-intense home-based telephone coaching intervention, increased PA was reported 
over 18 months of follow-up relative to usual care, and lower rates of lung-related healthcare 
utilization were observed in a subset of subjects with severe airflow obstruction [21]. To 
date, only limited number of studies have examined the long-term effects of technology- 
based PA interventions on risk for AEs in COPD [21,22]. 
We previously reported on the efficacy of a technology-based PA intervention in two studies, 
(Taking Healthy Steps (THS) [20] and Every Step Counts (ESC), to improve daily step 
counts and HRQL [23]). The intervention group used a platform that combined a pedometer 
and website that provided goal setting, feedback, motivational and educational messages, 
and social support to improve PA, while the control group used a pedometer alone 



[20,23,24]. In both studies, the intervention increased average daily step count at 3–4 months 
[20,23]. In THS, the gains in PA were not sustained at 12 months [25], but there was 
minimal contact with study personnel in the automated study and limited assessment of 
clinical outcomes. In ESC, in contrast, subjects participated in a minimum of two in-person 
clinic visits and were followed closely for an additional 12 months after the 3-month 
intervention period. In this secondary analysis of ESC, we examine the effect of use of a 
pedometer plus website versus pedometer alone on (1) risk for AEs and (2) long-term 
changes in daily step count, HRQL, and exercise self-efficacy. 

We used data from the ESC study, a single-site randomized controlled trial (RCT) which 
showed that an intervention combining a pedometer plus a website that provided goal 
setting, feedback, motivational and educational content, and social support (intervention) is 
efficacious compared to a pedometer alone (control) [23]. A previous publication, which 
adhered to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) checklist for 
reporting randomized trials, described the research methods in detail and reported the results 
for the primary outcome of daily step count at 3 months [23]. The protocol was approved by 
the VA Boston Healthcare System Committee on Human Research. All participants provided 
written informed consent. The randomized clinical trial was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov 
(NCT01772082). 
Briefly, eligible participants were enrolled from the pulmonary clinics at VA Boston 
Healthcare System between 2012 and 2016, and were 1) > 40 years old, 2) had >10 pack 
years of smoking, 3) had COPD defined as an ratio of FEV1/FVC <0.70 or emphysema on a 
clinical chest CT, and 4) had access to the internet. Exclusion criteria included inability to 
ambulate without assistance and unstable cardiovascular disease. 
Subjects completed spirometry, a 6MWT, the St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) [26] and Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale (Ex-SRES) [27] questionnaire at 
enrollment (Visit 1). Lower scores were indicative of better HRQL and worse exercise self- 
efficacy, respectively. The Omron HJ-720 ITC pedometer (Omron Healthcare, Inc., 
Bannockburn, IL, USA) collected baseline daily step count for 7 days prior to 
randomization. Subjects in the pedometer plus website group were instructed to wear the 
pedometer daily during all waking hours and to upload step counts weekly. They received 
access to a website which provided individualized goal-setting, iterative step-count feedback 
for self-monitoring, educational and motivational content to enhance self-efficacy, and an 
online community forum for social support. Subjects received weekly updated step-count 
goals. 
Subjects randomized to the pedometer alone group were given a pedometer (with 
instructions to wear the pedometer daily while awake) and written materials about exercise 
but were not assigned step-count goals and did not have access to the website content. Both 
groups uploaded step-count data to the same study server via the website and completed an 
in-person study visit at 3 months (Visit 2). 




After Visit 2, all participants returned their pedometers and those in the intervention group 
no longer had access to the content of the website. Subjects in both groups were contacted 
via telephone by study staff approximately every 3 months (FU1-FU4) for approximately 15 
months from the time of enrollment (Fig. 1). 
At Follow-up 1 (FU1) and Follow-up 3 (FU3), subjects were mailed an Omron pedometer 
and questionnaires which included the SGRQ and Ex-SRES. Subjects were instructed to 
wear the pedometer for 2 weeks, complete the questionnaires, and return the materials to the 
study staff in a prepaid envelope. The criteria for a valid “wear day” were >8 h and >100 
steps per day; wear times and step counts below those thresholds were considered indicative 
of failure to wear the pedometer on that particular day. Daily step counts were averaged over 
a minimum of 5 valid wear days during the 14-day monitoring period at FU1 and FU3. 
Season at enrollment and at each visit for step count monitoring (for V2, FU1, and FU3) was 
ascertained based upon whether the majority of days during the monitoring period fell into 
the calendar month groupings as follows: winter (December, January, February), spring 
(March, April, May), summer (June, July, August), and fall (September, October, 
November). 
Number of AE’s were assessed 1) at V1 for the year prior to enrollment and 2) prospectively 
after enrollment via semi-structured questionnaire in-person at Visit 2 and, 3) by telephone 
interviews and medical record review every 3 months at FU1-FU4 (Fig. 1). An AE was 
defined as new or increased respiratory symptoms with >2 the following criteria: increased 
cough, sputum, wheezing, dyspnea, or chest tightness for >3 days requiring antibiotics or 
new/increased systemic steroid use [8]. AEs were considered distinct events if courses of 
oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or COPD-related hospitalizations were separated by > 14 
days [8]. When the participant could not be reached by telephone (minimum 3 attempts), AE 
assessment was conducted using medical record review alone. All AE events were then 
adjudicated by > 2 study personnel (including a pulmonary physician), with a 3rd 
adjudicator in the event of discrepancies. Events adjudicated as meeting the criteria for an 
AE outlined above were included in the analysis. Research staff conducting Visit 2 (in- 
person visit) and the adjudicators were blinded to randomization group assignment. 
Research staff conducting follow-up calls and medical record reviews were not formally 
blinded, but did not have immediate access to randomization group assignment during the 
periods when AE data were acquired. 

Univariate comparisons between groups were made using a Chi- square or Fisher’s exact test 
for categorical data and a Wilcoxon rank- sum test for continuous data. To assess the effect 
of the intervention on risk for AEs, zero-inflated Poisson models were constructed with the 
sum of the number of AEs (that occurred during the period from V1 up through at most 15 
months at FU4) as the dependent variable and randomization group as the independent 
variable. The model adjusted for FEV1% predicted, smoking status, number of AEs in the 
year prior to enrollment, and season of enrollment. Duration of follow-up was included as 



the offset, and the zero-model included FEV1% predicted as an independent variable. A p- 
value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
To evaluate the effect of the intervention on change in daily step count at 6 and 12 months, 
generalized linear mixed effects models (PROC MIXED, SAS v9.4, Cary, NC) for repeated 
measures employing a first order auto-regressive covariance matrix were constructed. Data 
from the three follow-up time points (V2, FU1, and FU3) were included in the model, with 
change in daily step count from baseline (V1) as the dependent variable and randomization 
group as the independent variable with covariate adjustment for FEV1% predicted, season of 
step count assessment and the number of days between assessments (which were not exactly 
3 months apart due to subject availability and responses to follow-up efforts). Similar 
models were constructed to evaluate the effect of the intervention on SGRQ and Ex-SRES 
scores at 6 and 12 months, where change in score from baseline was the dependent variable 
and randomization group the independent variable, with covariate adjustment for FEV1% 
predicted and the number of days between assessments. 


One-hundred and fourteen subjects were enrolled and randomized, of which 109 participants 
who contributed at least 1 week of step-count data following randomization were included in 
the analyses [23]. There were no between-group differences in age, FEV1% predicted, 
average daily step count or 6MWT distance at baseline (Table 1), or in the proportion of 
participants lost to follow-up at FU1 and FU3 (Table 2). In the pedometer alone group, 
subjects who were lost to follow-up at FU1 and FU3 had higher average daily step counts at 
baseline (p-values 0.03 and 0.06, respectively) relative to subjects who completed follow-up 
for step counts. In the pedometer-plus-website group, there were no significant differences 
between those who were lost to follow-up versus those who completed follow-up. Four 
subjects (2 pedometer-alone, 2 pedometer-plus-website) missed one or more follow-up calls 
and had AE assessment performed by medical record review alone; there were no significant 
differences in age, sex, current smoking status, pack-years FEV1% predicted, or average 
daily step count at enrollment between subjects who completed all AE telephone 
assessments and the four subjects who did not. A total of 89 AEs were analyzed, 57 of 
which were ascertained by both self-report and medical record review, and 32 of which were 
ascertained by medical record review alone. An additional 72 self-reported AE events were 
not included in the analyses because of lack of medical record validation, symptoms that 
were not attributable to COPD AE, or the self-reported event was temporally indistinct from 
a previous AE event. There were no differences in the distribution of the 72 AE events not 
included in the analyses by randomization group. 

There were no significant differences in follow-up time over 15 months (Table 2) or in rate 
of AEs in the year prior to enrollment by randomization group (Table 1). The number of 
AE’s in the year prior to enrollment was moderately correlated with the number of 
prospective AEs (Spearman’s rho = 0.34, p-value 0.0003) in the entire cohort (combined 



control and intervention). A plot of the number of AEs experienced by each subject in both 
randomization groups over approximately 15 months since enrollment demonstrated a large 
number of individuals with no AEs (Supplementary e-Fig. 1). 
In the adjusted zero-inflated Poisson model, the pedometer plus website group had a 
significantly reduced risk of AEs (rate ratio = 0.51, [95%CI 0.31–0.85]) relative to the 
pedometer alone group (Table 3). Compared to controls, those in the intervention group had 
a 49% risk reduction for AEs over the follow-up period. History of AE in the year prior to 
study entry and season of enrollment were also a significant predictor of future AEs. 

There were no significant differences in days of follow-up by randomization group at FU1 
and FU3 (Table 2). Fig. 2 shows the change in average daily step count from baseline (least 
square means from adjusted regression) by randomization group. In the adjusted linear 
mixed models for repeated measures, no significant between-group differences in change in 
average daily step count were noted at 6 (FU1) or 12 months (FU3). However, although 
between-group differences did not reach statistical significance, several within-group 
observations were notable. In the pedometer along group, a significant decline in average 
daily step count below baseline was observed at 6 months (FU1). In the pedometer plus 
website group, a statistically significant decrease in daily step count below baseline was 
delayed until 12 months (FU3). 

There were no significant differences in baseline SGRQ Total Score (SGRQ-TS) and Ex- 
SRES scores by randomization group (Table 1). In adjusted mixed models for repeated 
measures examining change in SGRQ-TS scores over long-term follow-up from baseline, 
there were no significant between-group differences by randomization group. In the 
pedometer-alone group, there was a significant within group increase in average SGRQ-TS 
(indicative of worse quality of life from baseline) at FU1. There was no significant within- 
group change in SGRQ-TS score in the pedometer plus website group during the entire 
follow up period, indicating no significant decline in HRQL from baseline (Fig. 3). 
In the adjusted analyses, there were no significant between-group differences in change in 
Ex-SRES by randomization group. The pedometer-only group exhibited significant within 
group decreases (indicative of decreasing self-efficacy) in Ex-SRES score from baseline at 
V2, FU1, and FU3 (Fig. 4). A significant decline in Ex-SRES score from baseline in the 
pedometer plus website group was not observed until FU3. 

In our secondary analysis of the Every Step Counts study [23], a 3-month technology-driven 
PA intervention that combines a pedometer with a website was associated with a 
significantly reduced risk of AEs in persons with COPD over 15 months, compared to a 
control group that used a pedometer alone. Although there were no significant between- 
group differences in daily PA, HRQL, or exercise self-efficacy during long-term follow-up, 
within-group changes suggest that the pedometer plus website delayed declines in these 



outcomes over time. To our knowledge, this is the first study using a RCT design to show 
that a technology-based PA intervention has a potential causal effect on reducing risk for 
AEs. To date, based largely on cross-sectional data, it has been assumed that increased PA 
results in improved clinical outcomes, like reduced risk for AEs [4,5,9,10]. We did not study 
mechanisms of benefit, but speculate that the benefits in PA and HRQL documented at 3–4 
months [20,23] may have led to unmeasured effects-such as improved patient self- 
management skills through use of the web-based education or changes in markers of 
systemic inflammation through increased PA at 3 months-that may explain the observed 
long-term effects on decreasing risk of AEs. 
Long-term patterns of change in daily step count suggest that the pedometer and website 
intervention can slow the natural history of progressive decline in PA among COPD patients 
[28,29] which may be a possible mechanism by which the protective effects of our 
intervention on AEs are mediated. Although progressive decline in PA was observed in both 
groups following the conclusion of the 3-month intervention period (after V2), the initial 
improvements in PA achieved in the pedometer plus website group effectively set a new, 
higher baseline PA level and delayed significant declines to below enrollment PA levels until 
12 months. In contrast in the pedometer alone group, within-group analyses demonstrated a 
significant trend towards decline from baseline as early as 6 months. 
Although many PA interventions for COPD patients have been reported to improve PA over 
the short-term (3–4 months) [14,19,20,23], a limited number of studies have reported 
differing results on the durability of these improvements and their effects on other clinical 
endpoints. In two different pedometer-based interventions, short-term improvements in PA 
and HRQL achieved during the 3-month intervention period were not sustained at 12–15 
months [16,25,30]. In contrast, a 20-week telephone-based coaching program improved PA 
which was sustained at 18 months [21]. A separate 12-month multi-modality walking 
intervention did not result in significant differences in the rate of severe AEs (on study) 
compared to usual care groups [22]. In contrast, in a 20-week telephone-based coaching 
study, increased PA as well as a reduction in lung-related healthcare utilization was reported 
in a subset of subjects with severely reduced FEV1 [21]; notably, both PA and healthcare 
utilization endpoints in this study were self-reported. Heterogeneity in intervention 
components, outcomes assessment, and baseline patient characteristics likely contributes 
significantly to the varying long-term results reported. 
While the long-term changes in HRQL and exercise self-efficacy also did not exhibit 
significant between-group differences, some notable within-group trends were observed. 
There was a trend towards worsening HRQL from baseline by FU1 and FU3 in the 
pedometer-alone group which was not observed in the pedometer plus website group. 
When we examined whether the change in the SGRQ-TS was associated with the number of 
AEs during follow up, we did not observe a significant association (data not shown). Self- 
efficacy, defined as the belief in one’s ability to achieve an outcome [31], predicts success 
with traditional exercise training [32,33] and has been shown to be a determinant of change 
in PA levels in COPD [34]. Analogous to the long-term PA results, Ex-SRES scores in the 
pedometer alone group exhibited a significant within-group decline from baseline as early as 



V2 whereas the pedometer plus website group did not exhibit a significant decline until later 
at FU3. Thus, the website intervention which contained content to promote self-efficacy may 
have delayed the natural decline in self-efficacy over time observed in the pedometer alone 
group. 
The strengths of our study include a well-characterized cohort, randomized controlled trial 
design with objectively-assessed PA data and well-defined, prospective AE events data 
which were collected using a rigorous and standardized protocol. We acknowledge a high 
percentage of self-reported AE events which were not validated and attribute this to the 
relatively low reliability of patient recall with regards to AE events as well as the stringent 
criteria used to define AE events in our study. Importantly, the distribution of non-validated 
AE events was not significantly different by randomization group and would therefore, be 
less likely to introduce bias. We believe the impact of “non-respondents” (subjects who 
could not be reached by telephone for all follow-up AE assessments) on our reported results 
was minimal due to the relatively modest number of non-respondents and the balance 
between randomization groups. Due to integral role of medical record review in our AE 
event validation/adjudication process and the multiple-payor, multiple provider healthcare 
system in the United States, we acknowledge that our record review process may not have 
captured AE events which occurred outside the Veterans Affairs (VA) healthcare system. 
However, we contend that the impact of this on our results is mitigated by 1) the fact that the 
VA healthcare system represents the largest integrated healthcare system within the United 
States, and 2) the frequent import into and availability of outside hospital records through 
the VA electronic medical record. 
Additional potential limitations of our study include the male predominance, lack of racial/ 
ethnic diversity, and single-center nature of our study, all of which may limit the 
generalizability of our findings. Future studies in larger and more diverse populations with 
COPD are warranted. Lastly, although the study was powered for the primary outcome of 
daily step counts at 3 months, the modest sample sizes within each arm of the study as a 
result of attrition during long-term follow-up may have limited our ability to detect 
significant between- group differences in daily step counts, HRQL and exercise self-efficacy 
at 6 and 12 months. Despite these limitations, we contend that our novel finding of a 
beneficial long-term effect of a 3-month technology-mediated PA intervention to reduce 
future risk for AEs represents a potentially significant clinical benefit of PA promotion in 
COPD patients. 





United States Department of Veterans Affairs, Rehabilitation Research and Development Service [Career 
Development Award 2, F6847W (Moy); CDA2 IK2RX002165 (Wan); Merit O1150-R (Moy)]. 




The funding body had no role in the design, collection, analysis or interpretation of the data, in writing the 
manuscript, or in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. 

























Sanman E, Wulf S, Lopez AD, Murray CJ, Gakidou E, Smoking prevalence and cigarette 
consumption in 187 countries, 1980–2012, J. Am. Med. Assoc. 311 (2) (2014) 183–192. 



Janssens W, Troosters T, Daily physical activity in subjects with newly diagnosed COPD, Thorax 
68 (10) (2013) 962–963. [PubMed: 23604460] 



Xiang AH, Gould MK, Associations between physical activity and 30-day readmission risk in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc 11 (5) (2014) 695–705. [PubMed: 
24713094] 
[6]. Durheim MT, Smith PJ, Babyak MA, Mabe SK, Martinu T, Welty-Wolf KE, Emery CF, Palmer 
SM, Blumenthal JA, Six-minute-walk distance and accelerometry predict outcomes in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease independent of Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease 2011 Group, Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc 12 (3) (2015) 349–356. [PubMed: 25568929] 
[7]. Zanoria SJ, ZuWallack R, Directly measured physical activity as a predictor of hospitalizations in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Chronic Respir. Dis 10 (4) (2013) 207–213. 

associated with plasma C-reactive protein and IL-6 in a US cohort with COPD, Chest 145 (3) 
(2014) 542–550. [PubMed: 24091482] 





[10]. Waschki B, Kirsten A, Holz O, Muller KC, Meyer T, Watz H, Magnussen H, Physical activity is 
the strongest predictor of all-cause mortality in patients with COPD: a prospective cohort study, 
Chest 140 (2) (2011) 331–342. [PubMed: 21273294] 


[12]. Barberan-Garcia A, Vogiatzis I, Solberg HS, Vilaro J, Rodriguez DA, Garasen HM, Troosters T, 
Garcia-Aymerich J, Roca J, Consortium N, Effects and barriers to deployment of telehealth 
wellness programs for chronic patients across 3 European countries, Respir. Med 108 (4) (2014) 
628–637. [PubMed: 24451438] 
[13]. Hornikx M, Demeyer H, Camillo CA, Janssens W, Troosters T, The effects of a physical activity 
counseling program after an exacerbation in patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: a randomized controlled pilot study, BMC Pulm. Med. 15 (2015) 136. [PubMed: 
26530543] 

Hopkinson NS, Pedometers to enhance physical activity in COPD: a randomised controlled trial, 
Eur. Respir. J. 45 (2) (2015) 347–354. [PubMed: 25261324] 

LiFe! Mobile and web-based monitoring and feedback tool embedded in primary care increases 
physical activity: a cluster randomized controlled trial, J. Med. Internet Res. 17 (7) (2015) e184. 
[PubMed: 26209025] 

stimulate physical activity in COPD patients after pulmonary rehabilitation, Eur. Respir. J. 48 (4) 
(2016) 1019–1029. [PubMed: 27587557] 

randomized controlled trial evaluating the effectiveness of a web- based, computer-tailored self- 
management intervention for people with or at risk for COPD, Int. J. Chronic Obstr. Pulm. Dis. 
10 (2015) 1061–1073. 
[18]. Nguyen HQ, Gill DP, Wolpin S, Steele BG, Benditt JO, Pilot study of a cell phone-based exercise 
persistence intervention post-rehabilitation for COPD, Int. J. Chronic Obstr. Pulm. Dis. 4 (2009) 
301–313. 

Buttery SC, Rubio N, Van der Molen T, Hopkinson NS, Vogiatzis I, Puhan MA, Garcia-Aymerich 
J, Polkey MI, Troosters T, Mr Papp Psg, the Pc. Physical activity is increased by a 12-week 
semiautomated telecoaching programme in patients with COPD: a multicentre randomised 
controlled trial, Thorax 72 (5) (2017) 415–423. [PubMed: 28137918] 

Cohen MD, Goodrich DE, Giardino ND, Richardson CR, An internet-mediated pedometer-based 
program improves health-related quality- of-life domains and daily step counts in COPD: a 
randomized controlled trial, Chest 148 (1) (2015) 128–137. [PubMed: 25811395] 

Bae S, Home-based physical activity coaching, physical activity, and health care utilization in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease self-management 
activation research trial secondary outcomes, Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc 15 (4) (2018) 470–478. 
[PubMed: 29283670] 

Celorrio N, Delgado A, Jane C, Marin A, Martin-Cantera C, Monteagudo M, Montella N, Munoz 
L, Ortega P, Rodriguez DA, Rodriguez- Roisin R, Simonet P, Toran-Monserrat P, Torrent-Pallicer 
J, Vall-Casas P, Vilaro J, Garcia-Aymerich J, Long-term efficacy and effectiveness of a 
behavioural and community-based exercise intervention (Urban Training) to increase physical 
activity in patients with COPD: a randomised controlled trial, Eur. Respir. J. 52 (4) (2018). 
[23]. Wan ES, Kantorowski A, Homsy D, Teylan M, Kadri R, Richardson CR, Gagnon DR, Garshick 
E, Moy ML, Promoting physical activity in COPD: insights from a randomized trial of a web- 
based intervention and pedometer use, Respir. Med. 130 (2017) 102–110. [PubMed: 29206627] 
[24]. Martinez CH, Moy ML, Nguyen HQ, Cohen M, Kadri R, Roman P, Holleman RG, Kim HM, 
Goodrich DE, Giardino ND, Richardson CR, Taking Healthy Steps: rationale, design and 



baseline characteristics of a randomized trial of a pedometer-based Internet-mediated walking 
program in veterans with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, BMC Pulm. Med. 14 (2014) 12. 
[PubMed: 24491137] 
[25]. Moy ML, Martinez CH, Kadri R, Roman P, Holleman RG, Kim HM, Nguyen HQ, Cohen MD, 
Goodrich DE, Giardino ND, Richardson CR, Long-term effects of an internet-mediated 
pedometer-based walking program for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: randomized 
controlled trial, J. Med. Internet Res. 18 (8) (2016) e215. [PubMed: 27502583] 
[26]. Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM, Littlejohns P, A self-complete measure of health status for 
chronic airflow limitation. The St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire, Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 
145 (6) (1992) 1321–1327. [PubMed: 1595997] 
[27]. Davis AH, Figueredo AJ, Fahy BF, Rawiworrakul T, Reliability and validity of the Exercise Self- 
Regulatory Efficacy Scale for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Heart 
Lung 36 (3) (2007) 205–216. [PubMed: 17509427] 



Clarenbach CF, Physical activity declines in COPD while exercise capacity remains stable: a 
longitudinal study over 5 years, Respir. Med. 141 (2018) 1–6. [PubMed: 30053953] 
[30]. Altenburg WA, ten Hacken NH, Bossenbroek L, Kerstjens HA, de Greef MH, B Wempe J, Short- 
and long-term effects of a physical activity counselling programme in COPD: a randomized 
controlled trial, Respir. Med. 109 (1) (2015) 112–121. [PubMed: 25499548] 


[32]. Blackstock FC, Webster KE, McDonald CF, Hill CJ, Self-efficacy predicts success in an exercise 
training-only model of pulmonary rehabilitation for people with COPD, J. Cardiopulm. Rehabil. 
Prev. 38 (5) (2018) 333–341. [PubMed: 29757825] 

O’Halloran P, Cox NS, Lahham A, Gillies R, Holland AE, The Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
Adapted Index of Self-Efficacy (PRAISE) tool predicts reduction in sedentary time following 
pulmonary rehabilitation in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
Physiotherapy 105 (1) (2019) 90–97. [PubMed: 30316548] 
[34]. Robinson SA, Shimada SL, Quigley KS, Moy ML, A web-based physical activity intervention 
benefits persons with low self-efficacy in COPD: results from a randomized controlled trial, J. 
Behav. Med. 42 (6) (2019) 1082–1090. [PubMed: 30980223] 



Fig. 1. 
Overview of study and follow-up timeline. 
Study consisted of in-person visits (red hatched arrow) and telephone interviews (blue solid 
arrows) over 15 months. Semi-structured questionnaires at all follow-up time points assessed 
occurrence of self-reported AEs over the preceding 3 months. Daily step count was assessed 
with the Omron pedometer at V1, V2, FU1, and FU3. AEs = acute exacerbations; SGRQ = 
St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire; Ex- SRES = Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy 
Scale. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the Web version of this article.) 



Fig. 2. 
Change in average daily step count from baseline by randomization group. 
Change in average daily step count from baseline (V1) from adjusted regression model (least 
square means values). There were no significant between-group differences in change 
average daily step count from baseline. Blue and red stars denote a significant (p < 0.05) 
w 
group change from baseline in the pedometer-only and pedometer plus website 
n 
i 
h 
t 
i 
groups, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
 



Fig. 3. 
Change in Saint George’s Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score from baseline by 
randomization group. 
Change in St. George’ s Respiratory Questionnaire Total Score (SGRQ-TS) from baseline 
(V1) from adjusted regression model (least square means values). There were no significant 
between-group differences in change in SGRQ-TS from baseline. The blue star denotes a 
significant (p < 0.05) within group change in SGRQ-TS score from baseline in the 
pedometer-only group at FU1. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 



Fig. 4. 
Change in Exercise Self-Regulatory Efficacy Scale (Ex-SRES) from baseline by 
randomization group. 
Change in Exercise Self-Regulatory Exercise Score (Ex-SRES) from baseline (V1) from 
adjusted regression model (least square means values). There were no significant between- 
group differences in change Ex-SRES from baseline. Blue and red stars denote a significant 
(p < 0.05) within group change from baseline in the pedometer-only and pedometer plus 
website groups, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
























































Data are shown as mean (SD) or n (percent). Significance testing was performed using the Wilcoxon rank sum (continuous) or Chi-square or 
Fisher’s exact test (categorical) as appropriate. 






























Data are shown as mean (SD) or n (percent). Significance testing was performed using the Wilcoxon rank sum (continuous) or Fisher’s exact test 
(categorical) as appropriate. 



Multivariable-adjusted, zero-inflated Poisson model examining the association between randomization group 
and COPD AEs. 


























