



Predictors of bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
pulmonary hypertension in newborn children 
ORiginal 
aRticlE 
Department of 
Pediatrics, Hvidovre 
Hospital 
Dan Med J 
2013;60(8):A4688 

abstRact 
IntroductIon: Infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
(BPD) are at high risk of developing cardiovascular sequelae 
in the form of pulmonary hypertension (PH) which signifi­ 
cantly increases morbidity and mortality. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate the incidence of BPD, to identify 
characteristics associated with BPD and to identify char­ 
acteristics associated with PH in infants with BPD. 
MaterIal and M ethods: A retrospective study was per­ 
formed. Data were obtained from a regional neonatal data­ 
base and by reviewing medical records of infants admitted 
during the 2002­2010 period. A total of 400 infants with a 
birth weight (BW) < 1,500 g were identified. Eight were 
excluded and 74 infants met the criteria for BPD. A total of 
17 infants with BPD had PH. 
results: We found that the incidence of BPD at the Neona­ 
tal Department at Hvidovre Hospital between January 2002 
and December 2010 was 18%. Infants with BPD differed sig­ 
nificantly from infants without BPD with regard to the fol­ 
lowing characteristics: Infants with BPD more frequently 
had a lower gestational age and BW, intubation at birth, 
mechanical ventilation within 24 hours of birth, a lower 
Apgarscore at one minute and five minutes. The incidence 
 
of PH was 23% among infants with BPD. Furthermore, we 
found a significantly larger frequency of intubation at birth, 
postnatal infection, longer duration of continuous positive 
airway pressure treatment and use of oxygen therapy 
among infants with PH and BPD than among the remaining 
infants. 
conclusIon: The incidence of BPD was 18%. Low gesta­ 
tional age was found to be the most important factor asso­ 
ciated with development of BPD. Among BPD infants, post­ 
natal infection was significantly associated with PH. Further 
prospective studies including routine echocardiography are 
needed to evaluate risk factors for PH. 
FundIng: not relevant. 
tr Ial regIstratIon: not relevant. 
Preterm deliveries are those that occur before 37 weeks’ 
of gestational age (GA). In the US, the preterm delivery 
rate is 12.18% [1]. Today, smaller and more premature 
infants survive more often than previously owing to 
technological advances, improved ventilatory strategies 
and better nursing techniques coupled with the use of 
prenatal steroids and postnatal surfactant [2]. In these 
infants, bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) has been 
characterized on the basis of pathology found in infants 
dying from the condition [3]. BPD is characterized by less 
fibrosis, less inflammation, fewer and larger alveoli, and 
a reduction in the number and size of intra­acinar­pul­ 
monary arteries [3]. These changes cause a significant 
reduction in the cross­sectional area of the pulmonary 
vascular bed, which gives rise to increased pulmonary 
vascular resistance, which, in turn, leads to development 
of pulmonary hypertension (PH). PH is a severe compli­ 
cation of BPD and it contributes significantly to the in­ 
creased morbidity. Furthermore, premature infants with 
BPD and severe PH are at high risk of death, particularly 
during the first six months after diagnosis of PH [4]. 
Even though severe PH is a life­threatening compli­ 
cation in neonates, only few studies describing charac­ 
teristics related to PH in preterm infants with BPD have 
been published. The aim of the present study was to de­ 
termine any characteristics associated with the develop­ 
ment of PH in infants with BPD and to identify character­ 
istics associated with the development of BPD. 
matERial and mEthOds 
A retrospective study was conducted by reviewing 
medicalrecords and data from a neonatal database 
 
(NeoBasen) which contains data on all infants admitted 
to the neonatal department at Hvidovre Hospital, Co­ 
penhagen University Hospital, Denmark. All infants with 
a birth weight (BW) < 1,500 g who were hospitalized be­ 
tween January 2002 and December 2010 were included. 
Clinical evidence has been provided that significant risk 
factors associated with BPD in neonates is a BW ≤ 1,500 
g. The exclusion criteria were diaphragmatic hernia, con­ 
genital pulmonary malformation, congenital cytomegal­ 
ovirus pneumonia, chromosomal syndromes, malforma­ 
tions or other known explanation for prolonged need of 
oxygen. Furthermore, infants who died before reaching 
a post­conceptional age of 36 weeks were excluded. 
definitions 
According to the definition refined in the consensus 
conferenceof the National Institute of Child Health and 
 
Human Development (NICHD) in June 2000, infants de­ 
pending on supplemental oxygen for a minimum of 28 
days suffer from BPD [5]. Prematurely born infants are 
 
 







classified as having moderate or severe BPD according 
to their respiratory support requirement a GA of 36 
weeks [5]. Our retrospective design bars us from using 
this method since the percentage of supplemental oxy­ 
gen is not rigorously described in the medical records. 
Regardless of these limitations, in order to classify sever­ 
ity, we used the need for supplemental oxygen at a GA 
of 36 weeks as a measure of moderate/severe disease 
and the need for supplemental oxygen for 28 days as a 
measure of mild BPD. For more definitions, see table 1. 
definition of pulmonary hypertension 
The diagnosis of PH was made by echocardiography 
based on the following criteria: dilatation of right­sided 
chambers or right­sided ventricular hypertrophy or flat­ 
tening and left deviation of the septum or triscuspid in­ 
competence (TI) gradient > 30 mmHg or steep pulmo­ 
nary artery flow curve with an acceleration time (AT)/ 
ejection time (ET) ratio < 0.3. The same criteria for PH 
were applied to all cases. Routine echocardiography was 
not provided. Echocardiography was only provided on 
clinical demand such as a heart murmur or increasing 
need for oxygen. 
statistical analysis 
Continuous data were analyzed using the two­tailed 
Studentt­test. Binary outcomes were analyzed using the 
 
χ2­test and Fisher's exact test. Furthermore, multivaria­ 
ble logistic regression analysis was conducted with back­ 
ward selection. The variables included in the multivari­ 

Characteristics of infants with and with­ 
out bronchopulmonary dysplasia. 







APGAR = appearance (skin colour), pulse (heart rate), grimace (reflex irritability), activity (muscle tone); BPD = bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia; CI = confidence interval; CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; IVH = intraventricular haemorrhage; 
NEC = necrotizing enterocolitis; OR = odds ratio; PDA = persistent ductus arteriosus; ROP = retinopathy of prematurity. 
a) Definition of statistical significance: p < 0.05. 

Gestational age was based on 
maternal last menstrual period or 
early prenatal ultrasound 

Retinopathy of prematurity 
was defined according to the 
International Classification [6] 

Haemorrhages were graded in 1­4 
according to the criteria of 
Papile et al [7] 

Postnatal infection was defined as 
positive bacterial or fungal blood 
or cerebrospinal fluid or urine 
culture or positive culture from 
endotracheal secretions 

Patent ductus arteriosus was 
diagnosed in the presence of clinical 
findings and documented by cardiac 
echocardiography 

Intraventricular haemorrhage 
was diagnosed by ultrasound scan 

Necrotizing enterocolitis was diag­ 
nosed based on the criteria of 
Bell et al [8] 




























































































































Nasal continuous 
positive airway pressure 
is a Danish system widely 
used in Scandinavia, 
but not in the rest of the 
world. It is not unpleasant 
for the child, and the 
mouth can be used for 
a pacifier, drops of milk, 
etc. 
ate analyses for BPD in the whole cohort were GA, BW, 
emergency caesarean, surfactant and duration of intu­ 
bation. The variables included in the multivariate analy­ 
ses for PH were patent ductus arteriosus (PDA )(opera­ 
tion), surfactant, duration of continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP), mechanical ventilation < 24 h after 
birth, tracheal intubation at birth, duration of intuba­ 
tion, emergency caesarean, multiple pregnancy, GA, BW, 
sex and postnatal infection. A stepwise regression was 
utilized and in all analyses; p < 0.05 was considered sig­ 
nificant. 

REsUlts 
Results of analyses for bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia in the whole cohort 
A total of 400 preterm infants were born with a BW < 
1,500 g; 82 of the infants met our criteria for BPD and 
eight of these infants were excluded due to missing or 
incomplete medical records. A total of 74 preterm in­ 
fants were included in the final cohort of infants with 
BPD. The incidence of BPD among infants with a BW 
< 1,500 g was 18.5%. 

significantly lower GA and BW than those without BPD 
(non­BPD infants) (table 2). The mean GA at birth was 
26.7 weeks, and the mean BW was 904 g for BPD in­ 
fants. There were significant differences between BPD 
infants and non­BPD infants with respect to vaginal 
birth, surfactant, tracheal intubation at birth, mechani­ 
cal ventilation < 24 hours after birth, duration of CPAP 
treatment, duration of intubation, Apgar score after one 
minute and five minutes, treatment for retinopathy of 
prematurity (ROP), surgical management and treatment 
with indomethacin for PDA, postnatal infection and 
weight at discharge (Table 2). Based on the multivariate 
logistic regression ana lysis, GA was the only factor signif­ 
icantly associated with the development of BPD. 
The proportion of BPD infants among the live born 
infants increased along with the general increase in the 
survival rate of the neonates born at < 1,500 g of BW 
between2002 and 2010. 
 
mean BW was 836 g; 82% of infants with PH had moder­ 
ate/severe BPD (p­value 0.0023). The duration of oxygen 
supplementation was significantly longer in the PH 
group (mean 97 days) than in the non­PH group (mean 
58 days). The duration of CPAP was longer in the PH 
group than in the non­PH group (87 days versus 51 days, 
p < 0.0000). The PH group counted more infants who 
had undergone tracheal intubation at birth than the 
non­PH group (65% versus 30%, p = 0.0107). There was a 
significantly (p = 0.0420) higher incidence of postnatal 
infection in the PH group (59%) than in the non­PH 
group (32%) (table 3). 

sis, postnatal infection was significantly (p = 0.0100) and 
positively correlated with PH in preterm infants with 
BPD. 


discUssiOn 
In the present regional cohort study of premature in­ 
fants born in Denmark during the 2002–2010 period, 
BPD was a serious complication to prematurity and was 
diagnosed in 18.5% of the surviving infants. The charac­ 
teristics associated with BPD are well­known [9] and 
were also confirmed in our study. Prematurity is a pri­ 
mary determinant of an infant’s risk of developing BPD 
due to poor development of the airways in the prema­ 
ture lung. 


GA (p = 0.0016) and BW (p = 0.0256) than those born in 
2002­2005. The mean GA at birth was 26.2 weeks and 
the mean BW was 851 g for infants born in the 2006­ 
2010 period compared with the mean GA of 27.5 weeks 
and the mean BW of 981 g of infants born in 2002­2005. 
Results of analyses for pulmonary hypertension in the 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia cohort 
Seventeen infants with BPD met the criteria for PH. The 
mean GA at birth for infants with PH was 26.4, and the 
4.6% to 72% [10­12]. This broad range may be explained 
by the heterogeneity of the studied populations, or by 
varying management practices or disease definitions. 
The BPD incidence observed in our cohort was expected 
from the literature and was very close to that reported 
by Cunha et al [13] who found the global incidence of 
BPD among very low birth weight (VLBW) newborns to 
be 19.7% .Our result was lower than that reported in the 
study published by the Neocosur Group [14] who found 
the incidence to be 23%, and those of two other large 





Comparison between bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia infants with and without pulmo­ 
nary hypertension. 







APGAR = appearance (skin colour), pulse (heart rate), grimace (reflex irritability), activity (muscle tone); BPD = bronchopulmonary dys­ 
plasia; CI = confidence interval; CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; IVH = intraventricular haemorrhage, NEC = necrotizing 
enterocolitis; OR = odds ratio; PDA = persistent ductus arteriosus; PH = pulmonary hypertension; ROP = retinopathy of prematurity. 
a) Definition of statistical significance: p < 0.05. 
data banks in Canada and the United States which have 
published a BPD incidences of 26% [15] and 23% [16], 
respectively, in VLBW newborns. The difference be­ 
tween the incidence rates of the cited studies and our 
study may be due to the higher rate of healthy infants in 
our cohort. Infants who are very sick get transferred to a 
more specialized hospital in Denmark. 
Although causation is multifactorial in BPD, the pre­ 
natal and postnatal factors for disrupted alveolar growth 
remain fairly well defined. Prematurity (GA < 37 weeks) 
remains the primary determinant of an infant’s risk of 
developing BPD [9]. Our results are in accordance with 
international results. A low GA was found to be the most 
important factor associated with the development of 
BPD in our study. 

characteristics associated with PH in BPD infants. The 
prevalence of PH among the entire sample of preterm 
infants with BPD was 23% in our cohort. Retrospective 
studies report that PH may occur in up to 17­43% of 
preterm infants with BPD [4, 17­19]. In the present 
study, most of the infants diagnosed as having PH had 
underlying moderate/severe BPD. Furthermore, the 
duration of oxygen supplementation was significantly 
longer in the PH group than in the non­PH group. These 
findings are consistent with previous findings by An et al 
[17] and Kim et al [18]. 
In a large retrospective study, An et al [17] obtained 
data by reviewing the medical records of all infants < 32 
weeks GA born between 2004 and 2008. A total of 116 
preterm infants with BPD ware included. The study 
showed that PH occurred initially at a median age of 65 
days (range: 7­232 days). Severe BPD, BW < 800 g, long­ 
term ventilator care and oxygen supplementation, a 
high ventilator setting, infection and a PDA were related 
to PH based on univariate analysis (p < 0.05). The severi­ 
ty of BPD was graded according to the fraction of in­ 
spired oxygen (FiO2) or positive pressure ventilation 
(PPV) as follows: mild BPD, breathing room air; moder­ 
ate BPD, requiring oxygen supplementation (FiO2 of < 
0.30); and severe BPD, requiring an FiO2 of ≥ 0.30 or PPV 
at 36 weeks GA. The infants who received oxygen sup­ 
plementation for a longer period were significantly more 
likely to have PH (odds ratio, 18.5; 95% confidence inter­ 
val (CI), 4.1­84.6; p < 0.001). Kim et al [18] performed a 
retrospective review of data from 295 infants with a GA 
< 32 weeks born during the 2005­2009 period. Of the 
295 infants enrolled in the present study, 145 (49%) 














































































































































were diagnosed with BPD. A total of 25 preterm infants 
(17 males and eight females) with BPD had PH. PH was 
diagnosed in 52.5% (21/40) of infants with severe BPD, 
in 6.9% (4/58) of infants with moderate BPD and in 0% 
(0/47) of infants with mild BPD. BPD and its severity 
were defined using treatment with oxygen for at least 
28 days with division into the following three subgroups 
at 36 weeks’ PCA: 1) mild (breathing room air); 2) mod­ 
erate (need for a < 30% FiO2), and 3) severe (need for > 
30% FiO2 and/or positive pressure support). They found 
that infants with PH had more severe cases of BPD and 
underwent longer oxygen therapy, conventional or high­ 
frequency ventilation, and hospitalization than those 
without PH. Low 5-min Apgar scores (≤ 6; relative risk 
(RR) 6.2; 95% CI 1.4­28.0; p = 0.017) were found to be 
significant risk factors for PH according to multivariate 
analysis. There was a tendency towards a lower 5­min 
Apgar in the PH group, but this finding was not signifi­ 
cant in our cohort. 
This study was limited by its retrospective design, 
which resulted in incomplete data collection. Not every 
BPD­infant underwent echocardiography during the 
study period. As the use of echocardiography was selec­ 
tive, we were only able to determine a minimal estimate 
of PH in BPD infants. This may have led to undiagnosed 
PH in our BPD group without PH. Cardiac catheterization 
is today accepted as the gold standard for diagnosing 
PH. However, since this procedure is very invasive and is 
not easily performed in preterm infants, echocardiogra­ 
phy is recommended as the main tool to screen for PH 
despite its several limitations [20]. Even though it is 
likelythat echocardiography tends to be ordered for the 
 
sickest infants, routine use of echocardiography may 
lead to earlier diagnosis, altered treatment strategy and 
more knowledge of the development of pulmonary hy­ 
pertension. Regular screening for PH has also been sug­ 
gested by other authors [17­19]. 

study. We did not have a prospective design, which 
makes it impossible to determine whether postnatal in­ 
fections increase the risk of developing PH, or whether 
infants with PH have more complications during hospi­ 
talization in terms of infections than non­PH infants do. 
In conclusion, the incidence of BPD at Hvidovre 
hospitalwas 18%. A low GA was found to be the most 
 
important factor associated with the development of 
BPD. The findings of this study confirmed our expecta­ 
tion that the variables of BW and GA were risk factors 
strongly associated with BPD. These data emphasize the 
fact that BPD continues to be a significant public health 
concern that is linked to the improved survival of ex­ 
tremely premature newborns. Among BPD infants, post­ 
natal infection was the only factor associated with PH in 
the final multivariate analysis. To further evaluate risk 
factors for the development of BPD and PH, a prospec­ 
tive study with routine echocardiography is needed. 
Improved screening for and increased recognition of PH 
may allow for earlier treatment and improved clinical 
outcomes. Identification of both prenatal and postnatal 
risk factors for the development of PH may allow for tar­ 
geting of therapy and resources for those at the highest 
risk. 
cORREsPOndEncE : Zarqa Ali, Pædiatrisk Afdeling, 460, Hvidovre Hospital, 
2650 Hvidovre, Denmark. E­mail: zarqa_ali@hotmail.com 
accEP tEd: 6 June 2013 
cOnflicts Of intERE st: Disclosure forms provided by the authors are 
available with the full text of this article at www.danmedj.dk 
acknO wlEdgEmEnts: The authors would like to thank Ole Pryds for his 
help with the statistical analyses. 
litERatURE 
 1. Kochanek KD, Kirmeyer SE, Martin JA et al. Annual summary of vital 

 2. Iams JD, Romero R, Culhane JF et al. Primary, secondary, and tertiary 
interventions to reduce the morbidity and mortality of preterm birth. 
Lancet 2008;371:164­75. 

development in postsurfactant bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Hum Pathol 
1998;29:710­7. 
 4. Khemani E, McElhinney DB, Rhein L et al. Pulmonary artery hypertension 
in formerly premature infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia: clinical 
features and outcomes in the surfactant era. Pediatrics 2007;120:1260­9. 
 5. Jobe AH, Bancalari E. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Am J Respir Crit Care 




subependymal and intraventricular hemorrhage: a study of infants with 
birth weights less than 1,500 gm. J Pediatr 1978;92:529­34. 


 9. Farstad T, Bratlid D, Medbo S et al. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia – 
prevalence, severity and predictive factors in a national cohort of 
extremely premature infants. Acta Paediatr 2011;100:53­8. 

infants born at less than 32 weeks' gestation: incidence and risk factors. 
Pediatrics 2001;108:E26. 


12. Todd DA, Jana A, John E. Chronic oxygen dependency in infants born at 24­ 
32 weeks' gestation: the role of antenatal and neonatal factors. J Paediatr 
Child Health 1997;33: 402­7. 

bronchopulmonary dysplasia in very low birth weight newborns treated 
with mechanical ventilation in the first week of life. J Trop Pediatr 
2005;51:334­40. 


15. Lee SK, McMillan DD, Ohlsson A et al. Variations in practice and outcomes 
in the Canadian NICU network: 1996­1997. Pediatrics 2000;106:1070­9. 
16. Lemons JA, Bauer CR, Oh W et al. Very low birth weight outcomes of the 
National Institute of Child health and human development neonatal 
research network, January 1995 through December 1996. NICHD Neonatal 
Research Network. Pediatrics 2001;107:E1. 



hypertension in preterm infants with moderate or severe 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Neonatology 2011;101:40­6. 
19. Slaughter JL, Pakrashi T, Jones DE et al. Echocardiographic detection of 
pulmonary hypertension in extremely low birth weight infants with 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia requiring prolonged positive pressure 
ventilation. J Perinatol 2011;10:635­40. 

cardiography for the diagnosis and management of pulmonary vascular 
disease in young children with chronic lung disease. Pediatrics 
2008;121:317­25. 

View publication stats 
