

Patent ductus arteriosus and the risk of bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia-associated pulmonary hypertension 
Hythem Nawaytou1, Nancy K. Hills2,3, Ronald I. Clyman1,4,* 
1Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
2Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 



Background: To determine whether prolonged exposure to a moderate/large patent ductus 
arteriosus left-to-right shunt (PDA) increases the risk of late (beyond 36 weeks) pulmonary 
hypertension (BPD-PH) and pulmonary vascular disease (BPD-PVD) during the neonatal 
hospitalization in preterm infants (<28 weeks’ gestation) with bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
(BPD). 
Methods: All infants requiring respiratory support ≥36 weeks had systematic echocardiographic 
evaluations for BPD-PH at planned intervals. Infants were classified as having either flow- 
associated BPD-PH (BPD-flow-PH) or BPD-PVD. 
Results: 256 infants survived ≥36 weeks: 105 had NO BPD (were off respiratory support by 36 
weeks); 151 had BPD. 22/151 had BPD-PH (12/22 had BPD-flow-PH from a PDA that persisted 
beyond 36 weeks; 10/22 had BPD-PVD). Moderate/large PDA shunts that persisted beyond 36 
weeks were significantly associated with an increased incidence of BPD-PH due to BPD-flow-PH. 
We found no association between the duration of PDA exposure and the incidence of BPD-PVD. 
Conclusion: Moderate/large PDA shunts increase the risk of flow-associated BPD-PH when 
present beyond 36 weeks. Although term infants with PDA-congenital heart disease can 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms 
*Corresponding author - Address for correspondence: Ronald Clyman, MD, University of California San Francisco, 550 16th 
Street, UCSF Box 0734, San Francisco, CA 94158-0734, 415-353-1565, clymanr@peds.ucsf.edu. 
Author Contributions: The following authors have made the following contributions: 
1) Hythem Nawaytou, Nancy K. Hills, and Ronald I. Clyman made substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of 
data, or analysis and interpretation of data. 
2) Hythem Nawaytou, Nancy K. Hills, and Ronald I. Clyman have drafted the article or revised it critically for important intellectual 
content. 
3) Hythem Nawaytou, Nancy K. Hills, and Ronald I. Clyman have given final approval of the version to be published: 

Consent Statement: The requirement for individual Research HIPAA Authorization was waived by the Institutional Review Board of 
the University of California San Francisco. 

HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Pediatr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 17. 


develop pulmonary vascular remodeling and PVD after months of PDA exposure, we found 
no echocardiographic evidence in preterm infants that prolonged PDA exposure increases the 
incidence of BPD-PVD during the neonatal hospitalization. 

Preterm infants delivered at <28 weeks’ gestation have a high incidence of 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), defined by the amount of respiratory support they 
need beyond 36 weeks’ post menstrual age (PMA) (1-4). In addition to the alterations in 
respiratory compliance and airway resistance that accompany BPD, a subset of infants 
will develop pulmonary artery hypertension (PH) as a comorbidity that persists beyond 36 
weeks. Infants with BPD-associated pulmonary hypertension (BPD-PH) have a substantially 
increased risk of morbidity and mortality (5, 6). 
The factors responsible for the elevated pulmonary vascular pressures in infants with 
BPD-PH are usually unknown. Since pulmonary blood pressure is related to blood flow 
and vascular resistance through the equation Pressure = Flow x Resistance, most cases of 
BPD-PH can be grouped into two broad categories: 1) increased pulmonary blood flow 
(Flow-associated PH) (e.g., left-to-right flow through shunts like the patent ductus arteriosus 
(PDA) or ventricular septal defect (VSD)), and 2) increased pulmonary vascular resistance 
or obstruction (e.g., pulmonary vascular diseases/disorders (PVD) like altered vasoreactivity, 
vascular injury, remodeling, maldevelopment, or pulmonary venous obstruction). 
Distinguishing between the two broad categories is important since flow-associated PH 
can usually be eliminated when the shunt is closed, whereas PVD and abnormal vascular 
growth appear to be more persistent and may contribute to impaired alveolar development 
and parenchymal lung disease. Although the development of PVD was initially attributed 
to the severity of an infant’s lung disease (7), there is increasing evidence to suggest that 
additional risk factors, including those that predate birth, contribute to the development of 
BPD-associated PVD (8-10). 
Several risk factors for BPD-PH have been consistently identified in observational studies 
and their meta-analyses (11-13). BPD-PH is most frequently seen in infants with the 
most severe grades of BPD and those who are small for gestational age (SGA). Other 
consistently observed postnatal risk factors include the duration of invasive ventilation, 
severe retinopathy of prematurity (sROP), and the presence of a persistent PDA (13). 
We were particularly interested in examining how prolonged exposure to a persistent PDA 
might be associated with the development of BPD-PH in preterm infants. A moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunt can produce both flow-associated PH and PVD. The initial increased L-R 
flow through the PDA shunt causes an acute hydraulic increase in pulmonary blood pressure 
(14, 15). In addition, direct transmission of systemic blood pressures through the shunt to 
the pulmonary circulation adds to the flow associated PH. Over time prolonged exposure 
of the pulmonary circulation to the shunt’s high pressures and flow will cause pulmonary 
vascular remodeling and the development of PVD of varying severity. In term infants with 
PDA-congenital heart disease months of prolonged PDA exposure can cause irreversible 



PVD and right-to-left ductal shunting (with Eisenmenger physiology being the most extreme 
end of the spectrum) (16, 17). 
We hypothesized that extremely preterm infants might be particularly vulnerable to the 
effects of a persistent left-to-right PDA shunt on pulmonary vascular remodeling. We 
designed the following observational study to examine the relationship between different 
durations of exposure to moderate/large, left-to-right PDA shunts and the outcomes BPD- 
PH, flow-associated PH, and BPD-associated PVD (BPD-PVD) beyond 36 weeks’ PMA. 
We hypothesized that increasing durations of exposure to a moderate/large PDA shunt would 
accelerate the rate of PVD development and increase the rate of BPD-PVD beyond 36 
weeks’ PMA in infants born before 28 weeks’ gestation. 


The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of California 
San Francisco. The requirement for individual Research HIPAA Authorization was waived 
by the Institutional Review Board. Infants were included in the study population if they 
delivered before 280/7 weeks’ gestation, were admitted to the intensive care nursery within 
24 hours of birth between January 2012 and September 2022 and survived beyond 36 
weeks’ PMA. A single neonatologist (RIC) recorded all the demographic factors and 
outcome measures prospectively and reviewed the PDA-focused echocardiograms with 
the attending cardiologists. A single echo-cardiologist (HN) reviewed the PH focused 
echocardiograms. Detailed descriptions of our approach to respiratory and hemodynamic 
support have been previously published (18). 

All infants had an echocardiogram performed on postnatal day 7. The echocardiographic 
studies included two-dimensional imaging, M-mode, color flow mapping, and Doppler 
interrogation as previously described (19, 20). A moderate/large PDA with left-to-right shunt 
(PDA L-R shunt) was defined by continuous left-to-right flow across the PDA, a ductus 
diameter ≥1.5mm (or PDA:left pulmonary artery diameter ratio ≥0.5), plus one or more 
of the following criteria: a) left atrium-to-aortic root ratio ≥1.5; b) ductus flow velocity 
≤2.5m/sec or mean pressure gradient across the ductus ≤8 mm Hg,; and/or c) reversed 
diastolic flow in the descending aorta (19, 20). Ductus that did not meet these criteria were 
considered “constricted” (small or closed). 
Infants who had a moderate/large PDA on the echocardiogram performed on day 7 were 
followed with echocardiograms every 7 days for the next 2-3 weeks, then at least every 2-3 
weeks until the PDA was no longer moderate/large. Infants with a “constricted” (small or 
closed) ductus on day 7 were examined daily for a change in clinical symptoms indicative 
of a reopened moderate/large PDA (systolic murmur or hyperdynamic precordium). If either 
of these occurred, an echocardiogram was performed within 24 hours. When a reopened 
moderate/large PDA was detected, echocardiograms were performed every 7-10 days for 
the next 2-3 weeks, and then at least every 2-3 weeks until the PDA was no longer 



moderate/large. Infants with a “constricted” ductus that never developed clinical signs of 
reopening had routine echocardiograms performed at least every 3-4 weeks to confirm 
ductus constriction until ductus closure or hospital discharge. Infants whose PDAs had 
not closed before hospital discharge were followed at 2-to-6 months intervals until ductus 
closure occurred either spontaneously or by device closure. 
The duration of exposure to a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt that persisted beyond the 
first week was calculated and expressed in days. Infants with small or closed ductus at 
postnatal day 7 were assumed to have been unexposed to a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt 
during the first 7 days. Infants with moderate/large PDA L-R shunts at postnatal day 7 were 
assumed to have been exposed to a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt for the entire 7 days. 
The time of ductus constriction was assigned as the halfway point between the last exam 
with a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt and the first exam with a constricted ductus. If infants 
died before an exam showed ductus constriction, the ductus was assumed to be moderate/ 
large at the time of death. When late reopening of the PDA occurred after documented 
ductus constriction, the additional exposure to the reopened moderate/large PDA L-R shunt 
(calculated as the number of days from the echocardiogram demonstrating the reopened 
moderate/large shunt to the time of ductus constriction (i.e., the halfway point between 
the last exam with a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt and the first exam with a constricted 
ductus)) was added to the duration of any prior moderate/large PDA L-R shunt exposure. 
During the study period, two different protocols for PDA treatment were used. During 
epoch 1, January 2012 - June 2017, no PDAs were treated during the first 7 days to 
allow for spontaneous PDA closure (21). During epoch 2, July 2017 - September 2022, a 
targeted prophylactic indomethacin treatment approach was used: all infants <25 weeks’ 
gestation as well as infants ≥25 weeks’ gestation who still were intubated beyond 24 
hours were given prophylactic indomethacin during the first 72 hours. In both epochs, 
infants with moderate/large PDA L-R shunts could receive pharmacologic treatment with 
indomethacin or acetaminophen after 8 days if they met prespecified “Rescue” criteria 
previously described by Clyman et al. (22). Sixty-nine percent of infants with moderate/ 
large PDA-L-R shunts received pharmacologic PDA treatment. Infants with moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunts that failed to close after pharmacologic treatment were ligated or had 
a percutaneous device closure only if the infants’ ventilatory support was escalating for 
more than a week or failed to improve after 36 weeks’ PMA. PDAs that did not meet the 
definition of moderate/large PDA L-R shunt were considered to be “constricted” (small or 
closed) and were never treated. 
During the no-prophylactic indomethacin epoch, 56% of the infants received pharmacologic 
treatment (either indomethacin-alone (24%) or acetaminophen with indomethacin back- 
up (32%)) for a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt after the first week. During the 
targeted prophylactic indomethacin epoch, 50% of the infants received either prophylactic 
indomethacin (35%) or pharmacologic treatment (15%) of a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt. 

All infants requiring respiratory support ≥36 weeks’ PMA had systematic regular screening 
echocardiographic assessments for PH as part of the nursery’s standards of care protocol 



(23, 24). Beginning at 36 weeks’ PMA infants received monthly echocardiograms as long as 
they were still hospitalized and continued to need some form of respiratory support; after 
hospital discharge, less frequent echocardiographic examinations (every 2-3 months) were 
performed until they no longer were receiving respiratory support. If PH-targeted therapy 
was being considered, infants underwent cardiac catheterization before starting therapy to 
confirm the diagnosis, assess disease severity, and exclude any other potentially treatable 
diagnoses (23-26). Infants who had stopped needing any respiratory support before 36 weeks’ 
PMA were assumed to have little chance of developing PH (23, 24), and therefore did not 
receive routine screening echocardiograms for PH. 
Our echocardiographic criteria for determining PH and PVD have been previously published 
(27). An echocardiogram was considered positive for PH if the tricuspid regurgitant 
jet velocity was >2.9 m/sec, the PDA systolic flow velocity estimated a peak systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure >35 mm Hg, or if systolic septal flattening was present (based 
on end-systolic eccentricity index >1.0). The PH was considered to be flow-associated PH, 
due to the presence of a left-to-right PDA shunt (in the absence of a VSD), if there was 
left-to-right flow through the PDA in both systole and diastole and the echocardiographic 
signs of PH disappeared following ductus closure. 
An echocardiogram was classified as positive for PVD if it met the above criteria for PH 
in the absence of a PDA or VSD shunts (27). If a PDA or VSD shunt was present, the 
echocardiogram was only classified as positive for PVD if it met the above criteria for PH 
and there was bidirectional or right-to-left flow through the PDA or VSD, or left-to-right 
flow through a moderate/large PDA without holodiastolic flow reversal in the abdominal 
aorta. 
Our goal was to examine the relationship between different durations of moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunts and the outcomes BPD-PH and BPD-PVD (defined as the incidence of 
PVD after 36 weeks in infants who also continued to require respiratory support beyond 
36 weeks). Our primary outcome was BPD-PVD. Infants who were breathing room air 
spontaneously and no longer needed respiratory support before they reached 36 weeks were 
assumed to have no risk of PH and were not evaluated for PH (see above). 
We used several different definitions of BPD (BPD-RS, BPD grades 1-3, and BPD 2,3) to 
examine the association between the duration of PDA L-R shunt exposure and the outcomes 
BPD-PH and BPD-PVD after 36 weeks’ PMA. BPD-RS was defined as needing respiratory 
support (cannula, nasal positive pressure, or invasive ventilation) beyond 36 weeks’ PMA; 
BPD grades 1-3, was defined as needing respiratory support on the day an infant turned 
360/7 weeks as described by Jensen et al. (4); and, BPD grades 2,3, was defined as needing 
either nasal cannula flow rates >2 L/min, nasal positive pressure, or invasive mechanical 
ventilation on the day an infant turned 360/7 weeks as described by Jensen et al. (4). In 
addition, all infants (except those who required CPAP with ≥30% oxygen or mechanical 
ventilation) had a modified room air challenge test performed between 360/7 and 366/7 weeks 
(2). Those who failed the test (or who required CPAP with ≥30% oxygen or mechanical 
ventilation) were classified as “Failed Room Air Challenge test”. 





Gestational age was determined by the date of last menstrual period and early ultrasounds 
performed before 24 weeks’ gestation. Small for gestational age (SGA) infants had 
birthweight-for-gestational age z scores <−1.29 using the growth curves from Fenton 
and Kim (28). Serious intraventricular hemorrhages (sIVH) were defined as grades 3 
or 4 intraventricular hemorrhage (using the four-level grading system) (29). Necrotizing 
enterocolitis (NEC) was defined as Bell's classification II or greater (this included NEC 
that was treated medically or surgically) (30). Spontaneous intestinal perforations (SIP) were 
diagnosed by either the presence of a pneumoperitoneum on abdominal X-ray without signs 
of NEC or by the surgeon at the time of laparotomy. Serious pulmonary hemorrhages were 
defined by the presence of frank blood in the tracheal secretions, a sudden need for increased 
respiratory support, and chest X-ray changes. Severe retinopathy of prematurity (sROP) was 
defined as retinopathy requiring laser or bevacizumab treatment. 


Stata software (Release 17.0; StataCorp LP, College Station, Texas) was used for all 
statistical analyses. Chi-squared, Mann-Whitney U Test and Student’s t-tests were used to 
compare groups for categorical and parametric variables, respectively. We used an analysis 
of variance (ANOVA), a Kruskal-Wallis equality of populations rank test, and a Cochran– 
Armitage test for trend to determine if any of the demographic characteristics (Table 1) 
or outcomes listed in Table 2 were unevenly distributed among the infants with different 
lengths of PDA exposure. We created multivariable models to adjust for the possible 
confounding effects of unevenly distributed demographic characteristics on the relationship 
between our variable of interest (duration of PDA L-R shunt) and our primary outcome 
(BPD-PVD). These analyses were conducted with logistic regression using generalized 
estimating equations (GEE) techniques to account for clustering of infants within mothers. 
Our results were considered exploratory and were not adjusted for multiple comparisons. 
Three hundred and ten infants <28 weeks’ gestation were admitted during the study period. 
The study population was composed of the 256 infants who survived beyond 36 weeks’ 
PMA (Figure); 151/256 were classified as BPD-RS because they needed respiratory support 
beyond 36 weeks’ PMA; 105/256 were classified as No BPD-RS because they no longer 
needed respiratory support at 36 weeks. Although our nursery guidelines stated that routine 
screening echocardiograms to evaluate PH were not needed if infants were not receiving 
respiratory support beyond 36 weeks, 42/105 of the No BPD-RS infants continued to 
have echocardiograms performed for PDA follow-up beyond 36 weeks (until final PDA 
closure). None of the infants with No BPD-RS who were evaluated after 36 weeks had 
echocardiographic evidence of PH. 
Routine screening echocardiograms to evaluate PH were performed in all 151 of the infants 
with BPD-RS as long as they were receiving respiratory support. The median (IQR) number 
of echocardiograms performed after 36 weeks was 2 (1, 4). The median (IQR) age of the 



last echocardiogram was 48 weeks (IQR: 37-70). Among the infants with BPD-RS, 22/151 
(15%) had echocardiographic evidence of BPD-PH beyond 36 weeks. 
The 22 infants with BPD-PH differed from those without BPD-PH in several demographic 
characteristics: birthweight, SGA, duration of intubation, need for dopamine and colloid 
resuscitation, sROP, duration of PDA L-R shunt exposure, and death (Table 1). It is worth 
noting that although the 22 infants with BPD-PH were classified as having BPD-RS because 
they required respiratory support beyond 36 weeks, two of the infants would not have been 
classified as having BPD if we used either the Jensen definition (BPD grades 1-3) or the 
Room Air Challenge test definition of BPD (one infant with PH beyond 36 weeks required 
no respiratory support on the day the infant turned 360/7 weeks but needed support again 
starting after 366/7 weeks; one infant passed the Room Air Challenge test despite needing 
support for longer periods than the test’s conditions). Other studies have similarly observed 
that while late PH, beyond 36 weeks, usually occurs in infants with moderate/severe BPD, 
PH may even occur in infants with no or mild BPD (13). 
Among the 22 infants with BPD-PH, 13 had moderate/large PDA L-R shunts that persisted 
beyond 36 weeks (Table 1): the moderate/large PDA L-R shunts were associated with flow- 
associated PH in 12/13 infants; in one of the 13 infants, a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt 
and flow-associated PH was initially observed at 36 weeks but subsequent echocardiograms 
and a cardiac catheterization during the interval between 36 weeks and the infant’s death 
at 62 weeks were consistent with the diagnosis of PVD. The 9/22 remaining infants had a 
closed ductus with their BPD-PH and were considered to have BPD-PVD beyond 36 weeks 
(Table 1). 
Among the 10 infants with evidence of BPD-PVD, 6/10 had cardiac catheterizations in 
addition to their echocardiograms to evaluate their PH; 2/10 developed pulmonary vein 
stenosis (≤2 vessels) in addition to PH during the neonatal hospitalization; 5/10 received 
PH directed pharmacotherapy (bosentan with or without sildenafil); and 3/10 died after 36 
weeks’ PMA. 
The 10 infants with BPD-PVD differed from those without BPD-PVD in all the 
characteristics observed above for BPD-PH except for not having an increased incidence 
of PDA L-R shunt beyond 36 weeks’ PMA (Table 1). The main goal of our study was 
to examine the associations between increasing durations of exposure to a moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunt and the development of BPD-PVD. Although increasing durations of 
moderate/large PDA L-R shunt were associated with an increased incidence of BPD (no 
matter what definition of BPD was used (Table 2)), we found no association between 
increasing durations of exposure to a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt and BPD-PVD after 36 
weeks in either the total population of infants, with and without BPD-RS (n=256), or in a 
subpopulation composed only of infants with BPD-RS (n=151) (Table 2). 
While most demographic characteristics were similarly distributed among infants with 
different lengths of PDA L-R shunt exposure, a few characteristics appeared to be 
unevenly distributed among the PDA exposure groups (Table 2). Therefore, we created 
multivariable models to examine the potential confounding effects of these characteristics 



on the association, or lack of association, between the duration of PDA L-R shunt exposure 
and the presence of BPD-PVD after 36 weeks (Table 3). After adjusting for the potentially 
confounding characteristics listed in Table 3, we still did not find an association between the 
duration of PDA L-R shunt exposure and the presence of BPD-PVD after 36 weeks’ PMA. 
Among the 10 infants with BPD-PVD, 9/10 had evidence of PVD in the first 
echocardiographic study performed at 7 days after birth (3 had evidence of PH in the 
absence of a PDA shunt; 6 had evidence of PH with a PDA bidirectional or right-to-left 
shunt). Eight of the 10 infants with BPD-PVD had echocardiograms performed between the 
first week and 36weeks’ PMA; 5/8 continued to show evidence of PVD. 

We defined late BPD-PH as the presence of PH beyond 36 weeks’ PMA in infants diagnosed 
with BPD-RS. We found the same risk factors for BPD-PH that have been seen in other 
observational studies that have examined the incidence of BPD-PH (13): low birthweight, 
SGA, BPD severity, duration of ventilation, ROP severity, and persistence of a PDA L-R 
shunt (Tables 1 and 2). In our study, the association between a PDA L-R shunt and BPD-PH 
appeared to be due to an increased incidence of flow-associated PH from the moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunts that persisted beyond 36 weeks’ PMA. Fifty-nine percent of the infants 
who still had a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt after 36 weeks’ PMA had evidence of 
flow-associated BPD-PH that disappeared once the PDA was closed. 
Prolonged exposure to a PDA’s high flow and pressure ultimately induces pulmonary 
vascular remodeling and PVD in term infants with PDA-congenital heart disease (16, 17). 
We hypothesized that the presence of a moderate/large PDA L-R shunt in extremely preterm 
infants would accelerate the rate of developing PVD during the neonatal hospitalization. 
However, we found no association between the duration of exposure to a moderate/large 
PDA L-R shunt and the presence of BPD-PVD in either our univariate analysis (Table 2) or 
our adjusted multivariable analyses (Table 3). We failed to detect an increased incidence of 
BPD-PVD even in infants with PDA exposures ≥50 days (median (IQR)=70 (60-79) days) 
(Table 2). However, this does not mean that longer exposures to a PDA L-R shunt, beyond 
the nursery hospitalization, might not ultimately lead to PVD if left unchecked. Infants cared 
for at higher elevations than sea level may also be at increased risk for earlier development 
of BPD-PVD in the presence of a PDA L-R shunt. 
It is interesting to note that 9 of the 10 infants with BPD-PVD had evidence of PVD 
during the first week after birth and the majority had evidence of PVD on repeated 
echocardiograms performed before 36weeks’ PMA. This is consistent with the hypothesis 
that late PVD may be a manifestation of events that occur in utero or shortly after birth, 
rather than a consequence of prolonged exposure to PDA flow during the first few months of 
life. 
There are several limitations to our study. Prior studies have both questioned (31) and 
supported (32) the ability of echocardiography to evaluate BPD-PH. Echocardiography does 
not measure pulmonary pressures directly but rather uses blood flow velocities to estimate 



pulmonary artery pressures and PH (33, 34). Since pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary 
vascular resistance (PVR) are related to each other (Pressure = Flow x Resistance), elevated 
PVR is inferred from the estimated elevated pulmonary artery pressures when pulmonary 
blood flow is not increased. We previously showed that echocardiography can perform 
well as a screening tool for elevated PVR and BPD-PVD when post-tricuspid valve shunts 
are absent (accuracy, sensitivity, and PPV = 93%, 91.7%, and 100%, respectively) (27). 
Since post-tricuspid valve shunts transmit the systemic pressure to the pulmonary circulation 
regardless of the presence or absence of PVD, the presence of a purely left to right shunt 
does not necessarily exclude PVD from being present. Although we classified infants with 
pure PDA L-R shunts and PH in our study as having flow-associated PH, we feel that this 
is the most likely diagnosis since in each case the PH disappeared as soon as the PDA 
was closed. Similarly, even though bidirectional PDA shunts do not always imply elevated 
PVR, the one infant in our study with a bidirectional PDA shunt beyond 36 weeks that we 
classified as having PVD also had PVD at cardiac catheterization. 
Our study cannot address the incidence of brief transient periods of PH that appear and 
disappear prior to 36 weeks’ PMA since routine echocardiographic screening evaluations 
for PH were not started until a diagnosis of BPD-RS was made at 36 weeks. In addition, 
since routine echocardiographic evaluations for BPD-PH were performed only in infants 
who required respiratory support beyond 36 weeks, infants who did not have BPD-RS were 
not routinely evaluated for PH and were assumed to have normal pulmonary artery pressures 
beyond 36 weeks. It is possible that some of the infants who never developed BPD, and 
never were evaluated for late PH, may have had PH that was missed. However, 42 infants 
without a diagnosis of BPD-RS had echocardiograms performed beyond 36 weeks (because 
they needed PDA follow-up) and none of them had any evidence of PH on their follow-up 
echocardiograms. In addition, we found the same relationships between PDA exposure and 
the outcomes BPD-PH and BPD-PVD in the subpopulation of infants with BPD-RS, where 
every infant had echocardiographic evaluations for PH performed beyond 36 weeks, as we 
did in the total population. 
We used data from a single center. Since the incidence of moderate/large PDA and neonatal 
morbidities differ by center, our results may not be generalizable to centers where the rates 
differ from ours. Our study was not a randomized controlled trial. As an observational study, 
it cannot distinguish between causation and association and should be used primarily for 
hypothesis generation. Even though our analyses were adjusted for potential confounding 
variables, there may have been unmeasured changes in practice that could have affected our 
results. In addition, the relatively small size of our study may have made it difficult to detect 
significant differences for some of our study outcomes. We cannot exclude the possibility 
that our findings were due to insufficient power. However, our study size was necessarily 
limited by the small number of infants who develop BPD-PH and BPD-PVD in our nursery. 
In conclusion we found that persistent moderate/large PDA L-R shunts can increase the risk 
of flow-associated BPD-PH when they are present beyond 36 weeks’ PMA. On the other 
hand, persistent moderate/large PDA L-R shunts do not appear to increase the incidence of 
BPD-PVD found by echocardiography during the neonatal hospitalization. 




We would like to thank Drs. Mark Cocalis, Michael Brook, Anita Moon-Grady, Shabnam Peyvandi, Nicole 
Cresalia, Kavitha Pundi, Shafkat Anwar and Emilio Quezada for their expert help in reading and interpreting the 
echocardiograms, and to the neonatal faculty, fellows, nurses, respiratory therapists and dieticians for their excellent 
care and their commitment to the nursery’s quality improvement projects and its consensus driven protocols. 

This work was supported by a grant from U.S. Public Health Service NHLBI (HL109199) and by gifts from the 
Clyman Family Foundation 

The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from 
the corresponding author on reasonable request 

1. Ehrenkranz RA et al. Validation of the National Institutes of Health consensus definition of 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Pediatrics 116, 1353–1360, (2005). [PubMed: 16322158] 


3. Shennan AT, Dunn MS, Ohlsson A, Lennox K, & Hoskins EM Abnormal pulmonary outcomes 
in premature infants: prediction from oxygen requirement in the neonatal period. Pediatrics 82, 
527–532, (1988). [PubMed: 3174313] 



bronchopulmonary dysplasia: clinical features and outcomes in the surfactant era. Pediatrics 120, 
1260–1269, (2007). [PubMed: 18055675] 

hypertension in extremely low birth weight infants. Pediatrics 129, e682–689, (2012). [PubMed: 
22311993] 


8. Hocq C et al. Early diagnosis and targeted approaches to pulmonary vascular disease in 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Pediatr Res 91, 804–815, (2022). [PubMed: 33674739] 
9. Pierro M et al. Association of the dysfunctional placentation endotype of prematurity with 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia: a systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression. Thorax 77, 
268–275, (2022). [PubMed: 34301740] 


11. Nagiub M, Kanaan U, Simon D, & Guglani L Risk Factors for Development of Pulmonary 
Hypertension in Infants with Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: Systematic Review and Meta- 
Analysis. Paediatr Respir Rev 23, 27–32, (2017). [PubMed: 28188008] 

Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: A Meta-Analysis. Front Pediatr 9, 695610, (2021). [PubMed: 
34249820] 

extremely preterm infants: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 32, 
258–267, (2018). [PubMed: 29341209] 

arteriosus in preterm lambs with respiratory distress. J. Pediatr 111, 579–587, (1987). [PubMed: 
3655990] 










Management of the Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Extremely Preterm Infants: Effects on Neonatal 
Outcomes. J Pediatr 187, 119–126, (2017). [PubMed: 28396025] 
19. Jhaveri N, Moon-Grady A, & Clyman RI Early surgical ligation versus a conservative approach for 
management of patent ductus arteriosus that fails to close after indomethacin treatment. J Pediatr 
157, 381–387, (2010). [PubMed: 20434168] 

a comparison of different markers. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 90, F419–422, (2005). 
[PubMed: 16113155] 
21. Koch J et al. Prevalence of spontaneous closure of the ductus arteriosus in neonates at a birth 
weight of 1000 grams or less. Pediatrics 117, 1113–1121, (2006). [PubMed: 16585305] 
22. Clyman RI et al. PDA-TOLERATE Trial: An Exploratory Randomized Controlled Trial of 
Treatment of Moderate-to-Large Patent Ductus Arteriosus at 1 Week of Age. J Pediatr 205, 41–48, 
(2019). [PubMed: 30340932] 

Association and American Thoracic Society. Circulation 132, 2037–2099, (2015). [PubMed: 
26534956] 
24. Krishnan U et al. Evaluation and Management of Pulmonary Hypertension in Children with 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia. J Pediatr 188, 24–34 e21, (2017). [PubMed: 28645441] 
25. Berkelhamer SK, Mestan KK, & Steinhorn R An update on the diagnosis and management of 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD)-associated pulmonary hypertension. Semin Perinatol 42, 432– 
443, (2018). [PubMed: 30384985] 



Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 33, 378–388 e371, (2020). [PubMed: 
31948712] 


29. Papile LA, Burstein J, Burstein R, & Koffler H Incidence and evolution of subependymal and 
intraventricular hemorrhage: a study of infants with birth weight < 1500 grams. J. Pediatr 92, 
529–534, (1978). [PubMed: 305471] 



echocardiography for the diagnosis and management of pulmonary vascular disease in young 
children with chronic lung disease. Pediatrics 121, 317–325, (2008). [PubMed: 18245423] 

in infants at risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia among masked reviewers. J Perinatol 39, 248– 
255, (2019). [PubMed: 30464221] 


34. Groh GK et al. Doppler echocardiography inaccurately estimates right ventricular pressure 
in children with elevated right heart pressure. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 27, 163–171, (2014). 
[PubMed: 24183542] 








In our study preterm infants (<28 weeks’ gestation) with bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia (BPD) had a 15% incidence of pulmonary hypertension (PH) 
beyond 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age as a comorbidity. 
Moderate/large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) shunts increased the risk of 
flow-associated PH when present beyond 36 weeks. 
Although months of prolonged PDA exposure can cause pulmonary vascular 
remodeling and pulmonary vascular disease (PVD) in term infants with PDA- 
congenital heart disease, we found no echocardiographic evidence for an 
association between the duration of PDA exposure and the incidence of late 
PVD during the neonatal hospitalization in preterm infants with BPD. 


Figure 1: Flow diagram of patient distribution. 
BPD-RS: infants who needed respiratory support (cannula, CPAP, or ventilation) beyond 
36 weeks’ PMA; PH: pulmonary hypertension; BPD-PH, infants with bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia-associated pulmonary hypertension; BPD-PVD, infants with bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia-associated pulmonary vascular diseases/disorders. 



Distribution of demographic characteristics among infants in the total study population (n=256) who had BPD 
and pulmonary hypertension (BPD-PH) or BPD and pulmonary vascular disease (BPD-PVD) beyond 36 
weeks. 


















No BPD-PH 
(n=234) 
BPD-PH 
(n=22) 
No BPD-PVD 
(n=246) 
BPD-PVD 
(n=10) 



































































































































 


No BPD-PH 
(n=234) 


BPD-PH 
(n=22) 


No BPD-PVD 
(n=246) 
BPD-PVD 
(n=10) 















a 
Colloid received: total volume of either packed red blood cells, platelets, or fresh frozen plasma received during 1st 72 hours 
b 
Days exposed to moderate/large PDA: see Methods: Infants with a constricted ductus at postnatal day 7 (the first echocardiogram) were assumed 
to have had 0 days of moderate/large PDA exposure during the first 7 days. 
c 
BPD-RS: infants needing respiratory support (cannula, CPAP, or ventilation) beyond 36 weeks’ PMA 
d 
BPD grades 1-3 (Jensen): infants with any grade of BPD (1, 2, or 3) as described by Jensen et al (4) 
e 
BPD grades 2,3 (Jensen): infants with grade BPD grades 2, or 3 as described by Jensen et al (4) 
f 
Failed Room Air Challenge test: infants who failed to pass a modified room air challenge test performed between 360/7 and 366/7 weeks (2). 










 
 




,p 
* 
































 
 







,p 
* 











