

FOLFIRINOX in Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer: The 
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center Experience 
JASON E. FARIS,a LAWRENCE S. BLASZKOWSKY,a SHAUNAGH MCDERMOTT,c ALEXANDER R. GUIMARAES,c JACKIE SZYMONIFKA,d 
MAI ANH HUYNH,b CRISTINA R. FERRONE,e JENNIFER A. WARGO,f JILL N. ALLEN,a LAUREN E. DIAS,g EUNICE L. KWAK,a KEITH D. LILLEMOE,e 
SARAH P. THAYER,e JANET E. MURPHY,a ANDREW X. ZHU,a DUSHYANT V. SAHANI,c JENNIFER Y. WO,b JEFFREY W. CLARK,a 
CARLOS FERNANDEZ-DEL CASTILLO,d DAVID P. RYAN,a THEODORE S. HONGb 
aDepartment of Hematology/Oncology, bDepartment of Radiation Oncology, cDepartment of Radiology, dBiostatistics Center, 
eDepartment of General and Gastrointestinal Surgery, and fDepartment of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; gDepartment of Hematology Oncology, North Shore Cancer Center, Danvers, Massachusetts 
Disclosures of potential conflicts of interest may be found at the end of this article. 
Key Words. FOLFIRINOX • Locally advanced pancreatic cancer • Neoadjuvant • R0 resection • Chemoradiation 

The objective of our retrospective institutional experience is to 
report the overall response rate, R0 resection rate, progression- 
free survival, and safety/toxicity of neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX (5- 
fluorouracil [5-FU], oxaliplatin, irinotecan, and leucovorin) and 
chemoradiation in patients with locally advanced pancreatic 
cancer (LAPC). Patients with LAPC treated with FOLFIRINOX 
were identified via the Massachusetts General Hospital Can- 
cer Center pharmacy database. Demographic information, 
clinical characteristics, and safety/tolerability data were com- 
piled. Formal radiographic review was performed to deter- 
mine overall response rates (ORRs). Twenty-two patients with 
LAPC began treatment with FOLFIRINOX between July 2010 
and February 2012. The ORR was 27.3%, and the median pro- 
gression-free survival was 11.7 months. Five of 22 patients 
were able to undergo R0 resections following neoadjuvant 
FOLFIRINOX and chemoradiation. Three of the five patients 
have experienced distant recurrence within 5 months. Thirty- 
two percent of patients required at least one emergency de- 
partment visit or hospitalization while being treated with 
FOLFIRINOX. FOLFIRINOX possesses substantial activity in pa- 
tients with LAPC. The use of FOLFIRINOX was associated with 
conversion to resectability in (cid:1)20% of patients. However, the 
recurrences following R0 resection in three of five patients 
and the toxicities observed with the use of this regimen raise 
important questions about how to best treat patients with 
LAPC. TheOncologist2013;18:543–548 
Implications for Practice: The prognosis for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer, who constitute about almost a third 
of patients presenting with a new diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, is quite poor, with a median survival of approximately 1 year. The 
ideal treatment paradigm for these patients is unclear, but based on the experience with FOLFIRINOX in the metastatic setting, 
multiple institutions have begun to treat with FOLFIRINOX for patients with locally advanced disease. In this paper, we describe 
our institutional experience with FOLFIRINOX followed by chemoradiation in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. 
We provide evidence for substantial activity, with conversion to surgical resectability in more than 20% of patients. We believe that fur- 
ther study is warranted on this promising treatment approach for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. 

Pancreatic cancer is estimated to have affected over 43,000 
patients and to have caused 37,000 deaths in the United 
States in 2012 [1]. Only 10%–20% of patients present with sur- 
gically resectable disease, and for patients who undergo sur- 
gical resection, the 5-year overall survival rate is 15–20%. 
Approximately 30% of patients presenting with a new diagno- 
sis of pancreatic cancer lack evidence of systemic metastases 
and present with locally advanced disease [2, 3], for which me- 
dian overall survival is approximately 1 year. 
The optimal treatment paradigm and the role for chemora- 
diationforpatientswithlocallyadvancedpancreaticcancerisun- 
clear, with no definitive guidance from studies to date on the 
superiority of chemotherapy versus chemoradiation ap- 
proaches. With regard to gemcitabine alone versus gemcitabine- 
based chemoradiation, two recent randomized controlled 
studies reached different conclusions. The Federation Franco- 
phone de Cancerologie Digestive and Societe Francophone de 
Radiotherapie Oncologique trial demonstrated improved 
overall survival with gemcitabine alone compared with induc- 
tion chemoradiation followed by gemcitabine chemoradia- 
tion employing 5-FU/cisplatin [4]. In contrast, the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group 4201 trial compared gemcit- 
Correspondence: Jason E. Faris, M.D., Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Yawkey 7E, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. 
Telephone: 617-724-4000; Fax: 617-726-0452; E-Mail: jfaris@partners.org Received November 11, 2012; accepted for publication April 4, 2013; 
first published online in The Oncologist Express on May 8, 2013. ©AlphaMed Press 1083-7159/2013/$20.00/0 http://dx.doi.org/10.1634/ 
theoncologist.2012-0435 


abine alone with gemcitabine-based chemoradiation, with 
improved overall survival with the chemoradiation arm (one- 
sided p (cid:2) .017), which was accompanied by substantial in- 
creases in grade 4/5 toxicities [5]. Both studies did not accrue 
to planned patient enrollment, hampering the interpretation 
of results. There have been no randomized trials to assess the 
potential benefit of initial chemotherapy followed by chemo- 
radiation, although retrospective data support this approach 
[6, 7]. In addition, some patients with locally advanced pancre- 
atic cancer will be rendered resectable by virtue of having an 
excellent response to therapy [8 –10]. 
The landscape for systemic therapy for metastatic pan- 
creatic cancer has changed significantly with the use of 
FOLFIRINOX (5-fluorouracil [5-FU], oxaliplatin, irinotecan, 
and leucovorin). In a randomized phase III study comparing 
FOLFIRINOX with gemcitabine in 342 chemotherapy-naive pa- 
tients with metastatic pancreatic cancer, FOLFIRINOX was as- 
sociated with an improved survival, progression-free survival, 
and response rate. [11]. Based on the data supporting the use 
of FOLFIRINOX in the metastatic setting, there is great interest 
in assessing the activity of FOLFIRINOX for patients with locally 
advanced pancreatic cancer. Two important unanswered 
questions are (a) will the benefit in response rate and overall 
survival in the metastatic setting translate to patients with lo- 
cally advanced pancreatic cancer? and (b) are curative-intent 
resections possible in patients who respond to treatment? In 
this report, we present our institutional experience in patients 
with exclusively locally advanced pancreatic cancer treated 
with FOLFIRINOX. 
METHODS 
All patients with a diagnosis of locally advanced pancreatic 
cancer (LAPC) who began treatment with FOLFIRINOX at the 
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) Cancer Center be- 
tween July 2010 and February 2012 were identified by search- 
ing the cancer center pharmacy database under a minimal risk 
study approved by the institutional review board. MGH is a 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)-designated 
institution and follows the NCCN definition of unresectable, 
which includes those with distant metastases, metastases to 
lymph nodes beyond the resection field, and then varies ac- 
cording to disease location in the head, body, or tail of the pan- 
creas, but including (cid:1)180 degree encasement of the superior 
mesenteric artery, unreconstructable superior mesenteric 
vein or portal vein occlusion, aortic invasion, or celiac encase- 
ment [12]. 
For those patients receiving full-dose FOLFIRINOX, dosing 
was as per the phase III trial of FOLFIRINOX [11], with 5-FU ad- 
ministered as a bolus of 400 mg/m2, bolus leucovorin 400 mg/ 
m2, followed by continuous infusion at 1200 mg/m2 per day 
for 46 hours, oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2, and irinotecan 180 mg/m2. 
Prophylactic pegfilgrastim was administered to all patients 24 
hours after the 46-hour infusion in all cycles containing 5-FU, 
oxaliplatin, and irinotecan. Although based on clinical status 
and organ function at the time of starting FOLFIRINOX, choices 
regarding dosing modifications were determined by the indi- 
vidual treating oncologist. If one of these three drugs was 
omitted, pegfilgrastim was administered at the discretion of 
the treating physician. The approach for all patients included 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by chemoradiation. 




Male 
Female 
Median age at FOLFIRINOX (range) 
Weight loss (lb) at presentation 
History of smoking 
Never 
Former or current 
History of diabetes prior to diagnosis 
History of pancreatitis 
Presence of stent prior to FOLFIRINOX 
Prior chemotherapy regimens 
0 
1 
(cid:1)2 

0 
1 
Not recorded 

Head/uncinate 
Tail 

13 
9 
63 (45–78) 
18 (82%) 
13 (59%) 
9 (41%) 
6 (27%) 
3 (14%) 
10 (45%) 

0 
1 (5%) 
12 (55%) 
8 (36%) 
2 (9%) 
14 (64%) 
8 (36%) 
Median CA 19–9 at presentation 
Median CEA at presentation (n (cid:2) 17) 
Baseline laboratory values 
457 ((cid:3)1 to 3,630) 
1.8 (1–10) 
Creatinine 
Alanine transaminase 
Aspartate transaminase 
Total bilirubin 
White blood cells 
Hematocrit 
Platelets 

28.5 
21 
0.45 
6.9 
38.6 

Abbreviation: ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; CA 19 –9, 
carbohydrate antigen 19 –9; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen. 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisted of four cycles of 
FOLFIRINOX, followed by repeat computed tomography (CT) 
imaging. If stable disease or better was observed compared 
with baseline, an additional four cycles of FOLFIRINOX was 
planned. If repeat CT imaging again revealed stable disease or 
better, all patients were recommended to undergo chemora- 
diation. For all patients, treatment was continued until dis- 
ease progression, patient preference, or limiting toxicities. For 
patients receiving chemoradiation following neoadjuvant 
FOLFIRINOX, a radiosensitizing chemotherapy, such as contin- 
uous infusion 5-FU or capecitabine, was employed along with 
intensity-modulated radiation therapy delivered to 50.4 Gy in 
28 fractions. Multidisciplinary review with radiology, surgery, 
radiation oncology, and medical oncology was performed for 
baseline scans and for scans following completion of chemo- 
radiation treatment. 
Demographic information, clinical characteristics, safety/ 
tolerability as measured by gradable toxicities, and emer- 


gency department visits (or hospitalizations) were tabulated. 
Formal radiographic review was retrospectively performed to 
determine overall response rates (ORRs). Patients were as- 
sessed for tumor response according to the Response Evalua- 
tion Criteria in Solid Tumors guidelines (RECIST, version 1.1) 
[13]. The images were consensus-read by two radiologists, 
with 6 and 15 years experience. We compared measurable 
target lesions (TLs), which are defined as soft-tissue lesions 
that could be accurately measured in at least one dimension, 
with the largest diameter being at least 1 cm or at least 1.5 cm 
in the short axis for lymph nodes. Progressive disease (PD) was 
considered when there was at least a 20% increase in the sum 
of the total size of TLs or the presence of a new unequivocal 
metastatic disease, partial response (PR) when there was at 
least a 30% decrease in the total size of TLs, and stable disease 
(SD) when there was any percent change between (cid:4)19% and 
(cid:5)29% in the sum of the total size of TLs. Progression-free sur- 
vival (PFS) was calculated from the date of FOLFIRINOX to the 
earliest of the following: date of radiographic progression (lo- 
cal or metastatic), appearance of metastatic disease at surgi- 
cal exploration, or death. Patients without radiographic 
progression were censored at the time of last radiographs. PFS 
estimates were obtained using the Kaplan-Meier method, and 
Greenwood’s formula was used to obtain two-sided 95% con- 
fidence intervals. All patients receiving FOLFIRINOX were 
eligible for toxicity analysis. Descriptive statistics were em- 
ployed to summarize data from the above analyses. 
RESULTS 
Twenty-two patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer 
received FOLFIRINOX at the MGH Cancer Center in the 20- 
month period spanning July 2010 to February 2012. Baseline 
demographic and clinical characteristics are listed in Table 1. 
The median age of patients was 63 years (range: 49 –78 years), 
including 13 men and 9 women. All patients except one were 
chemotherapy na¨ive. Fifty-eight percent of patients had pan- 
creatic head/uncinate lesions and 42% had body/tail lesions. 
Ten of the 22 patients had a biliary stent in place at the start of 
FOLFIRINOX. All patients with a recorded status in clinic notes 
had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance 
status of 0 or 1. Median follow-up for patients was 19.3 
months. 
A total of 178 cycles of chemotherapy were given to the 22 
patients, of which 156 cycles contained all three active drugs 
(5-FU, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin). Sixty-six cycles were with 
full doses of FOLFIRINOX. Five patients were started on 
FOLFOX during the initial cycle(s) of chemotherapy, with addi- 
tion of irinotecan to later cycles. An additional five patients 
were started on FOLFIRINOX, with eventual discontinuation of 
oxaliplatin or irinotecan. Patients received a median of 8 cy- 
cles of FOLFIRINOX, and 7.5 cycles in which all three active 
drugs were included (Table 2). Patients received a median of 
2.5 full-dose FOLFIRINOX cycles. Of the 17 patients who re- 
ceived 5-FU, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin on the first cycle, 13 
received full doses of each drug, including the 5-FU bolus of 
400mg/m2. Following FOLFIRINOX, all but two patients re- 
ceived fluoropyrimidine-based chemoradiation (Table 2). In 
the five patients undergoing surgical resections, a median of 8 
cycles of FOLFIRINOX were delivered (range 6 – 8), with a me- 
dian of 4 full-dose cycles of FOLFIRINOX (range 3– 8). 


Median number of cycles 
Median number of cycles with 5-FU, oxaliplatin, 
irinotecan 
Median number of cycles with full-dose 
FOLFIRINOX 
No. of patients starting with 5-FU, oxaliplatin, 
irinotecan 
No. of patients omitting irinotecan with first 
cycle 
No. of patients completing at least 2 full-dose 
FOLFIRINOX cycles 
No. of patients completing at least 4 full-dose 
FOLFIRINOX cycles 
No. of patients completing at least 6 full-dose 
FOLFIRINOX cycles 
No. of patients completing at least 8 full-dose 
FOLFIRINOX cycles 
No. of patients receiving radiation after 
FOLFIRINOX 
5-FU/capecitabine as radiosensitizer 
5-FU/capecitabine (cid:4) other 
Median number of fractions (range) 
Total dose delivered, Gy (range) 

8 
7.5 








18 
2 
28 (28–30) 
50.4 (45–54) 


Complete response 
Partial response 
Stable disease 
Progressive disease 
No. of 
patients 
(n (cid:1) 22) 
0 
6 
16 
0 
Point 
estimate 
(%) 
0.0 
27.3 
72.7 
0.0 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
NA 
(10.7–50.2) 
(49.8–89.3) 
NA 

Overall, six nonconfirmed partial responses (PR) were observed 
in 22 evaluable patients (ORR 27.3%) while on FOLFIRINOX (Table 
3).Oneadditionalpatient had a nonconfirmed partial response 
following chemoradiation, and another had a nonconfirmed 
partial response following chemoradiation and intraoperative 
IORT, for a total of 8 of 22 evaluable patients (ORR 36.4%). In 
all, 19 of 22 patients had decreases in CA19 –9 by 30% or more, 
and 17 of the 22 had decreases of 50% or more from baseline 
CA19 –9 prior to starting FOLFIRINOX. A total of 13 of 22 pa- 
tients had (cid:1)20% reductions in target lesion measurements as 
indicated by the waterfall plot in Figure 1. Following neoadju- 
vant FOLFIRINOX, 12 patients were taken to the operating 
room for exploration. Five patients underwent R0 resections 
(Fig. 2), of whom one patient had no remaining evidence of tu- 
mor. Seven patients had surgically unresectable disease and 
six of these patients had intraoperative radiation therapy 
(IORT) administered, with or without palliative hepaticojeju- 
nostomy and/or gastrojejunostomy; of the six undergoing 
IORT, only one patient has experienced progressive disease. 
Our decision to proceed with IORT was based on the experi- 
ence of Willett et al. [14], in which the retrospective experi- 
ence with IORT for unresectable pancreatic cancer at MGH 





Figure 2. Waterfall plot of maximum percent change from base- 
line scans during FOLFIRINOX treatment. 
DISCUSSION 
This is the largest published series of patients with locally ad- 
vanced pancreatic cancer treated with FOLFIRINOX. Recently, 
the activity of FOLFIRINOX in patients with borderline or lo- 
cally advanced pancreatic cancer was reported [15], which in- 
cluded a total of 18 patients, of whom 14 had locally advanced 
disease. In these 14 patients, four patients proceeded directly 
to surgery after 3–12 cycles of FOLFIRINOX, and two of these 
14 had an R0 resection. An additional three patients under- 
went R0 resections after completing chemoradiation treat- 
ment. Thus, the R0 resection rate in this case series, excluding 
the patients with borderline resectable disease, was 36% (5 of 
14 patients). Our R0 resection rate of 23% (5 of 22 patients) is 
in the range reported by Hosein et al. [15] and may reflect a 
new era of converting locally advanced pancreatic cancer into 
resectable pancreatic cancer with the use of FOLFIRINOX. 
Given the superior activity of FOLFIRINOX in comparison 
with gemcitabine, it is extremely important to establish the 
activity and toxicity of FOLFIRINOX in patients with locally ad- 
vanced pancreatic cancer. Our experience raises at least four 
important issues. The first major issue involves the subjective 
definition of locally advanced and borderline pancreatic can- 
cer. The R0 resection rates range from 8%– 64% in 510 pa- 
tients from 13 studies employing various neoadjuvant 
chemoradiation protocols for unresectable pancreatic cancer 
[16]. Despite the large discrepancy in R0 resection rates, over- 
all survival is similar between the studies, suggesting that the 
extreme heterogeneity in resection rates observed in this 
meta-analysis is due more to the subjective definition of bor- 
derline and locally advanced disease. Our series is restricted to 
patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer as deter- 
mined by an experienced pancreatic surgery group. It is critical 
that future studies separate patients with locally advanced 
and borderline resectable disease. In addition to evaluating 
these two categories separately, establishing formal consen- 
sus criteria for locally advanced and borderline disease is of 
critical importance. At present, one institution’s locally ad- 
vanced pancreatic cancer may be considered a borderline re- 
sectable patient in another institution. The uneven definition 
and application of criteria used to assign categories to the ra- 
diographic presentation of patients with pancreatic cancer 
probably introduces the greatest amount of variability in the 
percentage of patients who can undergo a potential curative 
resection. There are criteria to define locally advanced and 






Time 
6 months 
9 months 
12 months 
15 months 
Point estimate 
90.9% 
67.3% 
44.8% 
29.9% 
95% confidence interval 
(68.3%, 97.6%) 
(43.2%, 82.9%) 
(22.5%, 65.0%) 
(10.5%, 52.4%) 

was characterized. The 3-year survival was 7%, with five pa- 
tients surviving more than 5 years. 
One patient did not receive IORT due to the discovery of 
peritoneal and omental implants. Of the five patients who had 
R0 resections, three have experienced distant recurrence, at a 
median of 81 days (range: 74 –144 days). One patient is now 
more than 500 days since resection and has no evidence of 
recurrence. Median progression-free survival for the entire 
cohort was 11.7 months (95% confidence interval: 8.3–21.8 
months; Fig. 2), with 14 of the 22 patients demonstrating lo- 
cal or distant progression thus far. Overall survival was not 
calculated because only five patients have died since start- 
ing FOLFIRINOX. 
With regard to tolerability, only events that could be cap- 
tured and appropriately graded from the medical record were 
included (Table 4). A total of 7 of the 22 (32%) required hospi- 
talization or emergency department visits during FOLFIRINOX, 
(cid:1)50% of which were for non-neutropenic fevers or dehydra- 
tion/diarrhea. Because three patients were admitted multiple 
times, there were 12 hospitalization events. Although there 
were four patients who developed grade 3 or 4 neutropenia, 
there were no cases of febrile neutropenia. Only two patients 
discontinued FOLFIRINOX for toxicities related to treatment. 
In the five patients who underwent R0 resections, the median 
length of stay was 7 days (range 5–35). Two of the five patients 
had no postsurgical complications. Two patients had postop- 
erative infections. One patient was readmitted 10 days after 
discharge with fevers and leukocytosis, although cultures and 
workup was negative. One of the patients who had a postop- 
erative infection also had to undergo permanent transhepatic 
drain placement due to multiple biliary strictures after neoad- 
juvant FOLFIRINOX and chemoradiation (transhepatic drains 
placed during Whipple surgery). 





Biliary obstruction/cholangitis 
Diarrhea/dehydration 
Fevers (nonneutropenic, nonbacteremic) 
Nonneutropenic bacteremia 
Oxaliplatin desensitization 
Pulmonary embolism 
Neutropenia 
Grade 1 
Grade 2 
Grade 3 
Grade 4 
Febrile neutropenia 
Anemia 


Grade 1 
Grade 2 
Grade 3 
Thromboembolic events 
Elevated ALT/AST 
Grade 1 
Grade 2 
Grade 3 
12 
1 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
6 
0 
2 
3 
1 
0 
22 (100%) 
22 
18 
16 
1 
1 
1 
16 
11 
3 
2 
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate 
transaminase; ED, emergency department. 
borderline pancreatic cancer, which are defined by NCCN 
guidelines specifically by location in the pancreatic head, 
body, or tail [12]. As of yet, however, there has not been com- 
plete acceptance of and adoption of these criteria. At MGH, 
we have a multidisciplinary meeting with radiology, surgery, 
radiation oncology, and medical oncology, during which the 
imaging, consisting of a pancreatic-protocol CT, is reviewed in 
detail to assign a stage based on NCCN criteria. A major criti- 
cism of the current study is the lack of an independent review 
board assessing our adherence to these criteria. 
A second important issue involves the contribution and 
sequencing of chemoradiation following neoadjuvant 
FOLFIRINOX. In our study, with the exception of one patient 
with progressive disease and another who declined chemo- 
radiation, all patients proceeded to chemoradiation after 
FOLFIRINOX. In the Hosein et al. study [15], a subset of pa- 
tients were brought directly to the operating room for 
attempted resection following maximal response to FOL- 
FIRINOX; interestingly, only half of these patients (two of four 
patients) were able to have R0 resections. Although chemora- 
diation may ultimately prove essential for R0 resections, crit- 
ics argue that this window of time could allow for 
micrometastatic disease, previously controlled via FOLFIRI- 
NOX, to develop. Importantly, our experience suggests that 
this is an uncommon event. The timing and sequencing of neo- 
adjuvant chemotherapy and chemoradiation is an active de- 
bate at all cooperative group meetings. 
Third, it is critical to assess the tolerability of FOLFIRINOX 
specifically in patients with locally advanced disease who of- 
ten have compromised biliary drainage prior to embarking on 
a multi-institutional study. With more than 30% of patients re- 
quiring an emergency department visit or admission during 
FOLFIRINOX treatment, this regimen is quite toxic in a patient 
population that is considered technically incurable. Although a 
third of these hospitalizations were brief admissions for diar- 
rhea/dehydration, there were two admissions for non-neutro- 
penic bacteremia. Reassuringly, with the use of prophylactic 
growth factor with all cycles of FOLFIRINOX in this series, there 
were no cases of febrile neutropenia. Given our experience, 
upfront dose modification of the FOLFIRINOX regimen might 
be necessary, particularly in less well-selected populations of 
patients. Currently, the impact on dose reductions, such as 
elimination of the 5-FU bolus, is unknown, both in terms of ef- 
ficacy and toxicity. The reason for the large discrepancy in full- 
dose FOLFIRINOX cycles in our study (37% of cycles) and the 
Hosein et al. study (83% of cycles) [15] is unknown, but it may 
relate to differences in patient selection, including age and 
performance status. In addition, approximately one-third of 
patients had borderline disease in the Hosein et al. study, 
whereas all patients in our study had locally advanced disease. 
A limitation of this retrospective analysis is that we cannot ac- 
curately grade subjective complaints such as peripheral neu- 
ropathy, fatigue, and diarrhea from the medical record. 
Retrospective data on subjective toxicities is inherently in- 
complete and unreliable and, thus, was not included. Al- 
though of clear importance to a discussion of tolerability of a 
newer chemotherapy regimen such as FOLFIRINOX, an accu- 
rate assessment of the frequency and severity of these side ef- 
fects must be assessed prospectively. 
A final and more basic question is whether a patient with 
initially unresectable disease who achieves an R0 resection af- 
ter neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX is really curable. Would palliative 
systemic chemotherapy and/or chemoradiation achieve the 
same outcome, avoiding the known morbidity and potential 
mortality of surgical resection? In our series, three of the five 
patients with an R0 resection developed distance recurrence 
at a median of 81 days after surgery. Although we share the 
enthusiasm that neoadjuvant therapy may permit resection 
for patients with initially unresectable disease, these early re- 
sults remind us that the vast majority of patients with pancre- 
atic cancer have systemic disease. 
Investigation of biomarkers that may allow for prediction 
of local versus systemic recurrence could prove helpful in de- 
cisions regarding chemoradiation for these patients. For ex- 
ample, an autopsy series found a strong association between 
local recurrence and an intact DPC4 gene [17]. If this finding is 
corroborated in other larger studies, chemoradiation could be 
reserved for patients with intact DPC4. Searching for additional 
biomarkers that might allow for prediction of response to and 
toxicity from FOLFIRINOX, as well as benefit from chemoradia- 
tion, would be helpful in personalizing therapies with ample po- 
tential to both improve response and reduce harm. 
Our institutional experience with FOLFIRINOX should 
serve as a template for future clinical trials designed to defini- 
tively address the utility of FOLFIRINOX for patients with both 
locally advanced and borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. 
Currently, we have separate protocols at our institution for 






patients with clearly resectable disease, borderline resectable 
disease, and locally advanced disease. The issues regarding in- 
tegration of FOLFIRINOX into these different stages of disease 
are critically important in the pancreatic cancer community. 
CONCLUSION 
For patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer, 
FOLFIRINOX possesses substantial activity, and its use was as- 
sociated with conversion to resectable status in more than 
20% of patients. However, recurrent disease was discovered 
in three of the five patients. There was a significant toxicity sig- 
nal, with nearly a third of patients requiring at least one emer- 
gency department visit or hospitalization. The optimal 
strategy for treating patients with locally advanced pancreatic 
cancer requires further study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
These data were presented in part at the ASCO Gastrointesti- 
nal Cancer Symposium 2012, San Francisco, California. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
Conception/Design: Jason Faris, Theodore Hong, Lawrence Blaszkowsky, Jef- 


Provision of study materials or patients: Theodore Hong 
Collection and/or assembly of data: Jason Faris, Shaunagh McDermott, Alex 

Data analysis and interpretation: Jason Faris, Shaunagh McDermott, Alexan- 
der Guimaraes, Jackie Szymonifka, Mai Anh Huyng, Theodore Hong, David 
Ryan, Lawrence Blaszkowsky 
Manuscript writing: Jason Faris, Lawrence Blaszkowsky, Shaunagh McDer- 
mott, Alexander Guimaraes, Jackie Szymonifka, Mai Anh Huynh, Cristina 
Ferrone, Jennifer Wargo, Jill Allen, Lauren Dias, Eunice Kwak, Keith Lillemoe, 
Sarah Thayer, Janet Murphy, Andrew Zhu, Dushyant Sahani, Jennifer Wo, 
Jeffrey W. Clark, Carlos Fernandez-Del Castillo, David Ryan, Theodore Hong 
Final approval of manuscript: Jason Faris, Lawrence Blaszkowsky, Shaunagh 
McDermott, Alexander Guimaraes, Jackie Szymonifka, Mai Anh Huynh, Cris- 
tina Ferrone, Jennifer Wargo, Jill Allen, Lauren Dias, Eunice Kwak, Keith Lil- 
lemoe, Sarah Thayer, Janet Murphy, Andrew Zhu, Dushyant Sahani, Jennifer 
Wo, Jeffrey W. Clark, Carlos Fernandez-Del Castillo, David Ryan, Theodore 
Hong 
DISCLOSURES 
Jason Faris: N-of-One (C/A); Roche (RF); Alexander Guimaraes: 
Siemens Medical (C/A); Andrew Zhu: Sanofi Aventis, Eisai, Exelixia, 
Daiichi Sankyo (C/A); Bayer Onyx, Lilly (RF); Theodore Hong: Illumina 
(C/A); Novartis (RF). The other authors reported no financial 
relationships. 
C/A: Consulting/advisory relationship; RF: Research funding; E: Employment; H: Honoraria received; 
OI: Ownership interests; IP: Intellectual property rights/inventor/patent holder; SAB: scientific 
advisory board 


2. Philip PA. Locally advanced pancreatic cancer: 
Where should we go from here? J Clin Oncol 2011; 
29:4066 – 4068. 


4. Chauffert B, Mornex F, Bonnetain F et al. Phase III 
trial comparing intensive induction chemoradiother- 
apy (60 Gy, infusional 5-FU and intermittent cisplatin) 
followed by maintenance gemcitabine with gemcit- 
abine alone for locally advanced unresectable pancre- 
atic cancer. Definitive results of the 2000 – 01 FFCD/ 
SFRO study. Ann Oncol 2008;19:1592–1599. 
5. Loehrer PJ Sr., Feng Y, Cardenes H et al. Gemcit- 
abine alone versus gemcitabine plus radiotherapy 
in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer: 
An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin 
Oncol 2011;29:4105– 4112. 
7. Krishnan S, Rana V, Janjan NA et al. Induction 
chemotherapy selects patients with locally ad- 
vanced, unresectable pancreatic cancer for optimal 
benefit from consolidative chemoradiation ther- 
apy. Cancer 2007;110:47–55. 
8. Huguet F, Girard N, Guerche CS et al. Chemora- 
diotherapy in the management of locally advanced 
pancreatic carcinoma: A qualitative systematic re- 
view. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:2269 –2277. 
9. Arvold ND, Ryan DP, Niemierko A et al. Long-term 
outcomes of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before 
chemoradiation for locally advanced pancreatic can- 
cer. Cancer 2012;118:3026–3035. 
10. Habermehl D, Kessel K, Welzel T et al. Neoad- 
juvant chemoradiation with gemcitabine for locally 
advanced pancreatic cancer. Rad Oncol 2012;7:28. 
11. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M et al. FOLFIRI- 
NOX versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic 
cancer. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1817–1825. 
13. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J et al. 
New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: 
Revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 
2009;45:228 –247. 
14. Willett CG, Del Castillo CF, Shih HA et al. 
Long-term results of intraoperative electron 
beam irradiation (IOERT) for patients with unre- 
sectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 2005;241: 
295–299. 
15. Hosein PJ, Macintyre J, Kawamura C et al. A ret- 
rospective study of neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX in unre- 
sectable or borderline-resectable locally advanced 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. BMC Cancer 2012;12: 
199. 
16. Morganti AG, Massaccesi M, La Torre G et al. A 
systematic review of resectability and survival after 
concurrent chemoradiation in primarily unresect- 
able pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 2010;17: 
194 –205. 
6. Huguet F, Andre T, Hammel P et al. Impact of 
chemoradiotherapy after disease control with che- 
motherapy in locally advanced pancreatic adeno- 
carcinoma in GERCOR phase II and III studies. J Clin 
Oncol 2007;25:326 –331. 
12. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. 
NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology; ver- 
sion 2.2012. Available at http://www.nccn.org// 
professionals/physician_gls/pdf/pancreatic.pdf. 
Accessed April 16, 2013. 
17. Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Fu B, Yachida S et al. 
DPC4 gene status of the primary carcinoma corre- 
lates with patterns of failure in patients with 
pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:1806 – 
1813. 


