Chapter 4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
as Cognitive Stimulation Method
for Patients with MCI
Ioannis Tarnanas, Apostolos Tsolakis and Magda Tsolaki
Abstract Advances in technology in the last decade have created a diverse ﬁeld of
applications for the care of persons with cognitive impairment. This chapter is an
attempt to introduce a virtual reality computer-based intervention, which can used
for cognitive stimulating and disease progression evaluation of a wide range of
cognitive disorders ranging from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer’s
disease and various dementias. Virtual reality (VR) environments have already been
successfully used in cognitive rehabilitation and show increased potential for use in
neuropsychological evaluation allowing for greater ecological validity while being
more engaging and user friendly. Nevertheless a holistic approach has been
attempted, in order to view the research themes and applications that currently exist
around the ‘‘intelligent systems’’ healthcare given to the cognitively impaired
persons, and thus looking at research directions, systems, technological frameworks
and perhaps trends.
Keywords Computerized cognitive training  Computerized testing  Cognitive
reserve  Dementia  Psychometrics
I. Tarnanas (&)  M. Tsolaki
School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 3rd Neurological Clinic,
Papanikolaou Avenue 570 10 Exohi, Thessaloniki, Greece
e-mail: i.tarnanas@alzheimer-hellas.gr
M. Tsolaki
e-mail: tsolakim1@gmail.com
A. Tsolakis
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Egnatia Street 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
e-mail: aptsolak@gmail.com
A. L. Brooks et al. (eds.), Technologies of Inclusive Well-Being,
Studies in Computational Intelligence 536, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-45432-5_4,
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
39

4.1 Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) are some of the most promising
and at the same time challenging applications of computer graphics. Virtual
Reality (VR) is stimulating the user’s senses in such a way that a computer
generated world is experienced as real. In order to get a true illusion of reality, it is
essential for the user to have inﬂuence on this virtual environment. All that has to
be done in order to raise the illusion of being in or acting upon a virtual world or
virtual environment, is providing a simulation of the interaction between human
being and this environment. This simulation is—at least—partly attained by means
of Virtual Reality interfaces connected to a computer. When considering VEs for
context-sensitive rehabilitation, it is important to ﬁrst evaluate the limitations and
potential of the underlying VR technology.
Over the past decades VR technology has been used in many different domains
such as education [1], simulation for expert training [2] and therapy. Looking at
medical uses in particular, Rizzo and Kim [3] and Rizzo et al. [4] discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of VR systems in a therapeutic context. Even
though both reviews have been conducted 6 and 7 years ago respectively, most of
what the authors discuss still appears to be of relevance. In Rizzo and Kim’s
overview the following aspects were among the key characteristics for VR systems
and therefore should be taken into account when developing VEs for individual-
ized rehabilitation. In this chapter we are going to present the beneﬁts of using a
particular type of virtual reality interface, named the virtual reality museum. The
VR Museum was used as an intervention tool for patients with Amnestic-type Mild
Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) in order to see if it can improve the task domains of
navigation, spatial orientation and spatial memory. Those tasks were chosen for
their relevance for patient with aMCI for whom it is essential to be spatially
oriented in order to live independently [5].
Firstly we are going to focus on MCI and the basic characteristics of aMCI
patients. It is essential to deﬁne the exact cognitive proﬁle of those patients in
order to understand the difﬁculties that non-invasive methods of intervention may
encounter. We are also going to describe related attempts to address those patients
with virtual reality.
On the second part we will describe the VR Museum, the clinical protocol, the
research methodology and the ﬁnal results.
At the end of the chapter, we will sum up our ﬁndings with general conclusions
and implications on the use of VR Museum as an intervention tool.
4.1.1 Individuals with Mild Cognitive Impairment
The concept of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) was derived from milder cases
of dementia and not Alzheimer’s disease (AD). MCI encompasses patients with
and without memory impairment. Of those with memory loss, some have memory
40
I. Tarnanas et al.

impairment as their only deﬁcit [amnestic MCI single domain (aMCIs)], whereas
others have impairments of memory loss plus changes in other cognitive domains
[amnestic MCI multiple domain (aMCImd) [6]. Multiple-domain MCI is more
common than pure amnestic type MCI and is characterized by slight impairment in
more than one cognitive domain but of insufﬁcient severity to constitute dementia
[7]. Of those without any memory loss, some patients have deﬁcits in one domain
only, such as executive functions, apraxia or aphasia. Or they may have deﬁcits in
several domains, excluding memory [8]. These prodromal states may progress to
non-AD dementias, such as vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, Lewy body
dementia, primary progressive aphasia, or corticobasal degeneration [9] (Fig. 4.1).
4.1.2 MCI Subtypes
Recently research by Winblad et al. [9], revealed the heterogeneity in the clinical
description of MCI leading to the classiﬁcation of four subtypes. Based on the
number: single or multiple and type: memory, non-memory or both, of impaired
cognitive domains we have:
1. Amnestic MCI—memory impairment only.
2. Multi-domain MCI-Amnestic (memory plus one or more non-memory domain).
Fig. 4.1 The typical progressive course of Dementia [10]
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
41

3. Multi-domain MCI-Non-Amnestic (more than one non-memory domain).
4. Single Non-Memory MCI (one non-memory domain).
Building on this classiﬁcation Hanfelt et al. [11] posited cognitive, functional
and neuropsychiatric traits that can distinguish individuals with MCI. This set the
basis for improved diagnosis because it provided a common ‘‘language’’ among
research centers for future research (Fig. 4.2).
Recently, the criteria for the presence of MCI have been deﬁned as [6, 12]:
• Subjective memory complaints, preferably validated by a third person.
• Memory impairment, non-characteristic for given age and education level.
• Preserved general cognitive function.
• Intact activities of daily living.
• Absence of dementia.
More importantly, impairment of Activities of Daily Living (ADL) has been
observed in some MCI subtypes and therefore Instrumental ADL (IADL) ques-
tionnaires [13] or recent video assisted observation tools [14] have been used for
their ability to act as a diagnostic marker for the MCI subtypes.
1.Complaint of cognitive deterioration from patient and/or 
informant
2.Objective deficit on neurocognitive testing
YES
3. Persistent new disfunction in basic or instrumental 
ADL
NO
MCI
Memory Affectd
Amnestic MCI
Single 
Domain
Multi-
Domain
Memory Non-Affected
Non-Amnestic 
MCI
Single Domain
Multi-Domain
YES 
Probable 
Dementia
NO
Probable Normal
Fig. 4.2 MCI subtypes
42
I. Tarnanas et al.

In summary, in order to have a MCI subtype diagnosis a variety of medical and
neuropsychological examinations is required. A thorough physical examination,
blood sample studies, imaging (MRI, RiB-PET), genetic tests (APOE, TREM2) as
well as biomarkers in CSF (beta-amyloid, tau and phospho-tau protein) [15].
Occasionally, a condition, such as vitamin B12 deﬁciency or thyroid disease, can
be identiﬁed as a cause for MCI [16]. However, one general conclusion to be
drawn is that none of the above mentioned tools should be used alone, on the
contrary the combination of different tools results in a more precise diagnosis.
Lastly, the most recent research ﬁndings showed that the pathophysiologic ﬁndings
in MCI may predict Alzheimer’s Disease (and perhaps other diseases) and
therefore the sooner the diagnosis the more effective the intervention [17].
4.1.3 Amnestic-Type Mild Cognitive Impairment
Decline in episodic memory is one of the hallmark features of Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) and is also a deﬁning feature of amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment
(aMCI), which is posited as a potential prodrome of AD. While deﬁcits in episodic
memory are well documented in MCI, the nature of this impairment remains
relatively under-researched, particularly for those domains with direct relevance
and meaning for the patient’s daily life. Recently in order to fully explore the
impact of disruption to the episodic memory system on everyday memory in MCI,
clinicians examine participants’ episodic memory capacity using a battery of
experimental tasks with real-world relevance [18]. They investigated episodic
acquisition and delayed recall (story-memory), associative memory (face-name
pairings), spatial memory (route learning and recall), and memory for everyday
mundane events in 16 amnestic MCI and 18 control participants. Furthermore,
they followed MCI participants longitudinally to gain preliminary evidence
regarding the possible predictive efﬁcacy of these real-world episodic memory
tasks for subsequent conversion to AD.
It has been reported for patients with aMCI and more frequently for patients
with AD that they have difﬁculties with spatial orientation in everyday activities
[19]. Patients often fail to ﬁnd their way in unfamiliar environments when facing
entirely new spatial settings during urban transportation, traveling or shopping. In
mild to more severe stages of the disease, they may be disoriented even within
their familiar neighborhood or inside their own ﬂat. The standard way to study
disorientation and spatial memory is with tests consisting of navigation inside a
hospital [20], sometimes as orientation in a circular arena [21] and remembering
object position [22]. To this day there are only two studies, to our knowledge,
which addressed spatial orientation in MCI [23, 24]. The Mapstone et al. [23]
study correlated motion ﬂow perception with results in a table-top Money Road
Map (MWM) test and the Hort et al. [24] study investigated allocentric and
egocentric navigation in an analogue of the MWM.
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
43

It is generally accepted that spatial navigation deﬁcit is particularly pronounced
in individuals with hippocampus-related memory impairment, such as aMCI and
may signal preclinical AD [5, 24]. Laczo et al. [5] analyzed several types of errors
made by the subjects’ during the task to investigate which of them contributed to
their impairment. They used the Hidden Goal Task, a human analogue of the
Morris Water Maze, to examine spatial navigation either dependent (egocentric) or
independent of individual’s position (allocentric). Overall, the aMCI group per-
formed poorer on spatial navigation than the non-aMCI group, especially in the
latter trials when the aMCI group exhibited limited capacity to learn and the non-
aMCI group exhibited a learning effect. Finally, the aMCI group performed almost
identically as the AD group. Hort et al. [24] examined aMCI, AD and healthy
controls using a four-subtests task that required them to locate an invisible goal
inside a circular arena, analogues to the MWM test. Each subtest began with an
overhead view of the arena showed on a computer monitor and then entered a real
navigation inside of the actual space, an enclosed arena 2.9 m in diameter. They
found that the AD group and amnestic MCI multiple-domain group were impaired
in all subtests. The amnestic MCI single-domain group was impaired signiﬁcantly
in subtests focused on allocentric orientation and at the beginning of the real space
egocentric subtest, suggesting impaired memory for allocentric and real space
conﬁgurations. These results suggest that spatial navigation impairment occurs
early in the development of AD and can be used for monitoring of the disease
progression or for evaluation of presymptomiatic AD.
4.2 Virtual Environments and aMCI
Virtual Reality is a relatively new technology regarding its use for neuropsycho-
logical research. Publications to date provide evidence of some cases where a
virtual environment creates the desired conditions and the necessary triggers for
amnestic MCI patients to be classiﬁed and assessed. To be more precise, appli-
cations of virtual reality in neuroscience can provide experiments in a controlled
environment where normal and impaired patient behavior, perception, control of
movement, learning, memory and emotional aspects can be observed [25]. VR
creates interactive, multimodal sensory stimuli that offer unique advantages over
other approaches to neuroscientiﬁc research and applications. VR compatibility
with imaging technologies such as functional MRI allows researchers to present
multimodal stimuli with a high degree of ecological validity and control while
recording changes in brain activity. Therapists, too, stand to gain from progress in
VR technology, which provides a high degree of control over the therapeutic
experience.
Normally, a real-time interaction is required in order to observe and analyze
human reactions of any kind, event or task. Otherwise, computer generated
experimental tasks designed for speciﬁc variables and aspects of human response
are required. During the last decade and a half, research towards that direction
44
I. Tarnanas et al.

provided information about the use of VR in Neuroscience [26–30]. For the
purposes of this chapter we are going to analyze the way VR can be used for
evaluating spatial perception and memory aspects in individuals with MCI.
4.2.1 Spatial and Visual Memory
Visual Memory is responsible for retaining visual shapes and colors whereas
spatial memory is responsible for information about locations and movement. It
could be described as cognitive imaging and cognitive mapping. This distinction is
not always clear since part of visual memory involves spatial information and vice
versa [31]. When it comes to MCI, impairment to both visual and spatial memory
could indicate memory deﬁcits [23] (Fig. 4.3).
Navigation combines the two types of memory. Successful navigation requires
a variety of thoughts and actions; planning, selection of an appropriate strategy and
possible alterations, prospective memory and remembering previously visited
locations. In particular, navigation is connected with the hippocampal function, a
brain area already impaired in individuals with MCI [32]. Thus, deﬁcits on
navigational skills and spatial memory could be a solid cognitive indicator for
MCI or early forms of Dementia.
Fig. 4.3 The neural network involved in spatial navigation [32]
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
45

The discovery of place-speciﬁc ﬁring in the hippocampus [33] and spatial
navigation impairment after hippocampal lesion in the water maze [34] gave strong
support to the theory of a cognitive map. This theory dissociates hippocampal
navigation, based on a conﬁguration of distal landmarks, from navigation to and
from landmarks. This concept has evolved into the dissociation between allocentric
navigation, using ﬂexible representation of an ensemble of distal landmarks and
independent of actual subject positions, and egocentric navigation, using distances
and angles to or from individual landmarks. In humans, the allocentric mode of
navigation was shown to be connected with the hippocampal function in analogues
of the Morris water maze (MWM) [35, 36], in place navigation inside a virtual town
[37], and in remembering the location of objects on a table [38].
4.2.2 Virtual Reality, Spatial Memory and aMCI
Immersive virtual reality environments can provide information and some times
rehabilitate spatial working memory [39]. Ensuring that the desired conditions are
ecologically valid, it is possible to use VR as a tool to evaluate spatial memory in
individuals with MCI by tracking their behavior inside the virtual environment in
real-time [40]. As described above spatial memory can be impaired in aMCI. In
one study, aMCI participants encountered two virtual environments; the ﬁrst, as
the driver of a virtual car (active exploration) and the second, as the passenger of
that car (passive exploration). Subjects were instructed to encode all elements of
the environment as well as the associated spatiotemporal contexts. Following each
immersion, we assessed the patient’s recall and recognition of central information
(i.e., the elements of the environment), contextual information (i.e., temporal,
egocentric and allocentric spatial information) and lastly, the quality of binding.
The researchers found that the AD patients’ performances were inferior to that of
the aMCI and increasingly so when compared to that of the healthy aged groups, in
line with the progression of hippocampal atrophy reported in the literature [28].
Spatial allocentric memory assessments were found to be particularly useful for
distinguishing aMCI patients from healthy older adults. Active exploration yielded
enhanced recall of central and allocentric spatial information, as well as binding in
all groups. This led aMCI patients to achieve better performance scores on
immediate temporal memory tasks. Finally, the patients’ daily memory complaints
were more highly correlated with the performances on the virtual test than with
their performances on the classical memory test.
Taken together, these results highlight speciﬁc cognitive differences found
between these three populations that may provide additional insight into the early
diagnosis and rehabilitation of pathological aging. In particular, neuropsycholog-
ical studies beneﬁt when using virtual tests and a multi-component approach to
assess episodic memory, and encourage active encoding of information in patients
suffering from mild or severe age-related memory impairment. The beneﬁcial
effect of active encoding on episodic memory in aMCI and early to moderate AD
46
I. Tarnanas et al.

is discussed in the context of relatively preserved frontal and motor brain functions
implicated in self-referential effects and procedural abilities.
In another study, a virtual navigation based reorientation task (VReoT) was
used [41] and again healthy subjects were compared with aMCI subjects regarding
their performance on the reorientation test. The performance of the aMCI was
signiﬁcantly worse than the controls suggesting that VReoT detects spatial
memory deﬁcits. A subsequent receiver-operating characteristics analysis showed
a sensitivity of 80.4 % and a speciﬁcity of 94.3 %.
4.3 The Virtual Reality Museum
Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Web3D technologies in con-
junction with database technology may facilitate the preservation, dissemination
and presentation of cultural artifacts in museum’s collections and also educate the
public in an innovative and attractive way. Virtual Reality signiﬁes a synthetic
world, whereas Augmented Reality refers to computer generated 2D or 3D virtual
worlds superimposed on the real world. Web3D is used to represent the application
of XML (eXtended Markup Language) and VRML (Virtual Reality Markup
Language) technologies to deliver interactive 3D virtual objects in 3D virtual
museums. Precedents made use of 3D multimedia tools in order to record,
reconstruct and visualize archaeological ruins using computer graphics and also
provide interactive AR guides for the visualization of cultural heritage sites [42].
These new emerging technologies are used not only because of their popularity,
but also because they provide an enhanced experience to the virtual visitors.
Additionally, these technologies offer an innovative, appealing and cost effective
way of presenting cultural information. Virtual museum exhibitions can present
the digitized information, either in a museum environment (e.g., in interactive
kiosks), or through the World Wide Web.
Our Virtual Museum system has been developed in XML and VRML and is
described in detail [43, 44]. The system allows museum curators to build, manage,
archive and present virtual exhibitions based on 3D models of artifacts. The inno-
vation of our system is that it allows end-users to explore virtual exhibitions
implemented using very simple everyday interfaces (e.g. joystick, mouse) (Fig. 4.4).
The cultural artifacts are digitized by means of a custom built stereo photo-
grammetry system (Object Modeler), mainly for digitizing small and medium-size
objects and a custom modeling framework (Interactive Model Reﬁnement and
Rendering tool) in order to reﬁne the digitized artifact. The 3D models are
accompanied by images, texts, metadata information, sounds and movies
(Fig. 4.5). These virtual reconstructions (3D models and accompanying data sets)
are represented as eXtensible Markup Language (XML) based data to allow
interoperable exchange between the museum and external heritage systems.
These virtual reconstructions are stored in a MySQL database system and
managed through the use of a specially designed Content Management Application,
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
47

which also allows building and publishing virtual exhibitions on the Internet or in a
museum kiosk system. The system is a complete tool that enables archiving of both
content and context of museum objects. The described interactive techniques can
transform the museum visitors ‘from passive viewers and readers into active actors
and players’ [44].
4.3.1 The Virtual Reality Museum Technical Components
Two main components of the system are of interest for the evaluation: the Content
Management Application (CMA) and Augmented Reality Interface (ARIF). CMA
allows publishing of virtual museums to both Web and a specially designed
application (ARIF) for switching between the Web and an AR system. The CMA
application is implemented in Java, trademark of Oracle Corporation and it
includes the database of the representations of cultural objects and their associated
media objects, such as images, 3D models, texts, movies, sounds and relevant
metadata. It enables user-friendly management of different types of data stored in
the Virtual Museum database, through various managers, such as the Cultural
Object Manager (deals with virtual representations of cultural artifacts), the
Presentation Manager (manages virtual exhibitions with the help of templates)
and the Template Manager (stores these visualization templates).
Fig. 4.4 Users can ‘walk’ freely in the virtual museum and interact with the artifacts. Once they
select an artifact they can choose to zoom in, rotate it at the X-, Y-, Z-axis and read details in tags
on the artifact itself
48
I. Tarnanas et al.

The ARIF component is a presentation or visualization framework that consists
of three main sub-components:
• The ARIF Exhibition Server. Data stored in the Database is visualized on user
interfaces via the ARIF Exhibition Server.
• The ARIF Presentation Domains with implemented web browser functionality,
suited for web-based presentations.
• The ARIF AR—Augmented reality functionality. This sub-component provides
an AR based virtual museum exhibition experience on a touch screen in the
museum environment using table-top AR learning experiences, e.g., AR quizzes
and on-line museum exhibitions.
4.3.2 The Virtual Reality Museum Cognitive Theory
It is difﬁcult to reconcile inconsistent ﬁndings pertaining to the effect of playing
cognitive training games on cognition [45–47], because the methodological dif-
ferences between these studies are substantial. More research is required to
Fig. 4.5 The interface is ergonomically made so that it can tolerate errors. All icons, fonts and
interactive objects are large and understandable
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
49

elucidate what aspects of brain training games facilitate transfer to untrained
cognitive abilities. Hence, the aim of our virtual museum was to test whether
playing some simple memory exercises inside an ecologically valid 3D environ-
ment does transfer to different measures of executive functions in amnestic-type
mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) older adults. Executive functions are a cog-
nitive system that controls and manages other cognitive processes. For example,
Updating is the ability to respond in a ﬂexible and adaptive manner in order to
keep up with the changes in the environment, e.g. during the period of road repairs
you need to change your permanent route and use the new route until the repairs
are ﬁnished.
According to the cognitive-enrichment hypothesis developed by Hertzog et al.
[48], the trajectory of cognitive development across the life span is not ﬁxed.
Although the trajectory of cognitive development at normal seniors is largely
determined by a lifetime of experiences and environmental inﬂuences, there is
potential for discontinuity in the trajectory given a change in cognition-enriching
behaviors. The cognitive-enrichment hypothesis is corroborated by ample evi-
dence for plasticity, i.e., the potential for improvement of ability as a consequence
of training [49] of everyday cognitive task-switching in the elderly population.
There are some reports providing evidence of improvements in ‘‘Updating’’ as part
of the bigger structure called ‘‘executive functions’’ [50–52]. There are also
promising reports showcasing seniors ‘‘Shifting’’ ability improvement, as a mental
process during which seniors redirect their focused attention from one channel of
information to another as quickly as possible or change the course of their actions
while maintaining accurate performance [53, 54]. Shifting can be initiated con-
sciously or unconsciously by a stimulus in our surroundings or by habit. For
example, while talking on the phone, we may have to switch to preventing a small
grandchild from touching a sharp object. Many older people encounter shifting
problems; they may ﬁnd it difﬁcult and frustrating to try to change their thinking,
routines or actions. Those who do not train their shifting ability may have prob-
lems changing undesirable habits. Finally, Davidson et al. [55] and Karbach and
Kray [56] reported improvement at ‘‘Inhibition’’, the ability to ignore irrelevant
stimuli or suppress irrelevant reactions while performing a task. Inhibition includes
the deliberate prevention of an act, behavior or response, when it is not desirable.
At work, for example, we must sometimes ignore our co-workers’ conversations
and focus our attention on our own tasks. Training this ability helps us concentrate
on relevant activities while ignoring disturbing stimuli. It will enable you, for
example, to write a letter while the television is on. In addition, domains such as
selective attention [57] and inductive reasoning [58] can be improved in older
adults.
We now know that the virtue of a cognitive-training technique depends on the
generalization or transfer of training to untrained tasks [59]. Different degrees of
transfer have to be distinguished. The minimal degree of transfer that can occur is
improvement within the same cognitive domain as subjected to training, assessed
using different stimuli, and requiring a different response than the training task.
This type of transfer is referred to as near transfer. Improvement of abilities in
50
I. Tarnanas et al.

other cognitive domains than the cognitive domain subjected to training is referred
to as far transfer.
Virtual Reality Museum exploration and interaction activities are considered to
provide an ideal context for cognitive enrichment [60, 61]. The unique charac-
teristics of virtual museums presumed to facilitate transfer are their motivating
nature, frequent presentation of feedback, precise reinforcement schedules, and
stimulus variability, analogues to the basic characteristics of good video games,
which are designed to enhance learning through effective learning principles
supported by research in the Learning Sciences [62]. As a result of their enter-
tainment value, virtual museums maintain the motivation to engage in practice for
much longer than monotonous laboratory tasks or traditional training programs.
Frequent feedback supports motivation and is also important for conditioning the
desired level of performance. When the difﬁculty level of the task is continuously
adapted to the performance, players will constantly be challenged at the limits of
their ability. It is in particular the phase of skill-acquisition that calls for cognitive
control (CC), whereas continued performance at a mastered level is associated
with cognitive load automation and release of CC resources [63, 64]. Furthermore,
small increments of difﬁculty level maximize the proportion of successful expe-
riences with the task. The stimulus variability also plays an important role in
training CC, because it helps to generalize learnt cognitive skills to multiple
stimulus contexts.
Transfer of virtual reality museum interventions to CC has, however, not been
demonstrated consistently. Owen et al. [46], for instance, demonstrated that
playing computerized cognitive training games like Nintendo’s Dr. Kawashima’s
Brain TrainingTM was not more beneﬁcial for CC functions than answering general
knowledge questions online. It is being assumed that because the sample of par-
ticipants in Owen et al.’s study was very heterogeneous and included both young
and old adults, it is possible that improvements of cognitive test performance were
attenuated in young adults due to ceiling performance at pretest. This could have
obscured possible transfer of training in the sub-sample of older adults. The notion
that sample heterogeneity can confound the observed effect of virtual reality
training substantially is corroborated by Feng et al. [65]. They found no effect of
playing action virtual reality games on spatial attention in a sample of young
adults. However, separate analysis of the effect in males and females revealed that
females did actually beneﬁt from playing. In addition, in the Owen et al. study the
participant sample was heterogeneous with respect to training adherence, so par-
ticipants who completed only two training sessions could have had a negative
impact on aggregated training outcomes. Another aspect of Owen et al.’s study
that makes the observed absence of transfer difﬁcult to interpret is that transfer was
assessed using a test battery comprising only four cognitive tests, three of which
were measures of working memory capacity.
Ackerman et al. [45] demonstrated that sample heterogeneity cannot account
for Owen et al.’s [46] ﬁndings. They found that playing cognitive training games
(Nintendo
 WiiTM Big Brain AcademyTM) does not beneﬁt cognitive abilities to a
greater extent than reading assignments do, in a homogeneous sample of healthy
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
51

seniors on a relatively ﬁxed and extensive training schedule. Moreover, a broader
assessment of cognitive abilities of interest was made than in Owen et al.’s study.
Still, Ackerman et al. focused predominantly on reasoning ability and perceptual
processing speed, while a large share of the cognitive games under study taxed
working memory updating and the large variety of the tasks probably stimulated
participants’ attention and task set shifting. Inclusion of transfer tasks, gauging
working memory, updating and set shifting, in Ackerman et al.’s study could have
led to different conclusions regarding transfer of playing cognitive training games.
Conversely, there is also some evidence against Owen et al.’s [46] and
Ackerman et al.’s [45] pessimistic conclusions regarding the beneﬁcial effects of
playing virtual reality educational games on CC functions. Namely, Peretz et al.
[47] found a larger improvement of visuospatial working memory, visuospatial
learning, and focused attention after playing Cogniﬁt Personal Coach cognitive
training games than after playing conventional 3D videogames that were matched
for intensity, in a sample of older adults. Even though there is some theoretical
overlap in the cognitive functions assessed by Peretz et al. and Owen et al. and
Ackerman et al., the speciﬁc cognitive tests used to assess transfer in these studies
was different. It is conceivable that some cognitive tests are more sensitive to
transfer effects than others, which might explain the discrepant results of these
studies.
Furthermore, playing 3D videogames not speciﬁcally designed for cognitive
training can also improve CC functions in older adults. Basak et al. [66] dem-
onstrated that playing a particular complex 3-D real-time strategy game (Rise of
Nations) was associated with greater improvements of shifting, updating, and
inductive reasoning than observed in the control condition. It must be noted that
the control group in this study was a no-contact control group, so it is not certain to
what extent the observed improvements in the videogame group are attributable to
placebo-effects. Nevertheless, the improvements of CC in this study were larger
than practice effects due to repeated exposure to the same cognitive test.
It has been argued that failures to demonstrate far transfer of playing cognitive
training games in the population of older adults may be due to a general age-
related decrease of the extent to which learning transfers to untrained abilities [45].
This assertion is supported by Ball et al.’s [57] ﬁnding that cognitive strategy
training programs for improving memory, processing speed and reasoning,
respectively, were associated with improvements within the trained cognitive
domain but not with far transfer to untrained cognitive abilities of older adults. In
contrast, however, far transfer of practicing basic cognitive tests has been reported
repeatedly in the cognitive aging literature [56, 67–69]. Brain training games like
Nintendo’s Dr. Kawashima’s Brain TrainingTM share many task components of
basic cognitive laboratory tasks and videogames have several additional charac-
teristics facilitating transfer [61]. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that transfer
of computerized cognitive training games in the population of older adults is
replicable.
52
I. Tarnanas et al.

4.3.3 The Virtual Reality Museum Cognitive Exercises
In general three tasks have been identiﬁed and developed within the scope of this
study. While the complete cognitive stimulation is expected to encompass several
tasks from each cognitive domain (memory, attention, executive functions), this
study is aiming to evaluate the task domains of navigation, spatial orientation and
spatial memory. Tasks were chosen speciﬁcally for patient with aMCI for whom it
is essential to be spatially oriented in order to live independently.
Generalization of skills during cognitive stimulation towards daily-life settings
has only received little support in the literature [70]. More speciﬁcally, task-
focused training appears to show no transfer to situations outside of the training
situation and the effectiveness of strategy training requires further evidence. While
the external validity of training applications seems to be of central importance to
the patients’ success in their daily life, most traditional rehabilitation studies have
not successfully demonstrated such transfer yet. Even though principles of context-
sensitive rehabilitation have been mentioned in several literature reviews [71],
context-sensitivity is often not associated with transfer to activities of daily life.
This is because context-sensitive tasks are essentially based on the unique expe-
riences that a patient has in his daily life. Hence, a transfer is often not necessary as
training tasks are either identical to common daily chores or replicate them as
closely as possible. Nonetheless, when traditional process-speciﬁc tasks are
combined with individualized context, task generalization across similar daily
activities seems to be of relevance.
The Virtual Reality Museum is designed to speed up auditory processing,
improve working memory, improve the accuracy and the speed with which the
brain processes speech information and reengage the neuromodulatory systems
that gate learning and memory. To reverse cognitive disuse and drive brain
plasticity, the program strongly engages the brain with demanding exercises and
an adaptive and reward-based daily training schedule, consistent with the rec-
ommendations of Tucker-Drob [72]. This procedure is based on practices of
context-sensitive rehabilitation suggested by Ylvisaker [73]. Cognitive exercises
provided by it are divided into three interrelated categories, that, in aggregate, span
the cognitive functions of seniors:
• Listen and Plan: Seniors follow instructions to locate and ﬁnd items in an order.
Instructions become more difﬁcult (phonetically and syntactically) progressively
(purpose: training on spatial navigation abilities and planning following com-
plex instructions with continuous processed speech).
• Storyteller: Seniors hear segments of museum items stories and are asked to
answer a set of questions concerning the details of the respective segment
(purpose: training on story comprehension and memory).
• Exer-gaming: Seniors are asked to actually represent the ‘‘scene’’ depicted at the
archeological artifacts or multimedia description, e.g. movement, dance,
wedding (purpose: training on executive function and orientation/praxis).
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
53

This type of intervention was used in the recent study by Smith et al. [69],
which was the ﬁrst double-blind large-scale clinical trial that demonstrated marked
improvement not only in the trained task, but also in several generalized measures
of memory and perception of cognitive performance in everyday life, relative to an
active control group that received a frequency and intensity-matched cognitive
stimulation program.
The modularity of the cognitive tasks above also reﬂects the standards of
current process-speciﬁc assessments [74]. The Virtual Reality Museum Listen and
Plan exercise is a spatial navigation task that is implemented as close as possible to
the actual Archeological Museum of Aiani, at Kozani, Greece from where we took
the layout and archeological artifacts. Consequently, this virtual navigation task is
also meaningful for clinical decision-making about real-world behavior as well.
Transfer was assessed by comparing performance on a battery of cognitive tests
before and after the intervention. Taking into account that some cognitive tests
may be more sensitive to transfer effects than others, several measures of updating,
shifting, and inhibition were included in the test battery. Although it is assumed
that training interventions boost functional or even plastic changes to the brain,
neuronal correlates of the training induced changes in intervention studies were
only examined in the last decade [75]. Knowledge about the intervention related
neuronal and functional changes is additionally useful in order to understand
the efﬁciency of the training and transfer effects to other tasks [76]. Therefore, in
the present study we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) derived from the
electroencephalogram (EEG) in order to study more closely the neuronal processes
which are affected by the training intervention.
4.4 Research Methodology
4.4.1 Design
Single-site randomized controlled double-blind trial.
4.4.2 Participants
One hundred and fourteen patients with MCI according to the revised Petersen
criteria [77], aged between 65 and 88 years, were recruited to participate in the
experimental study, which was conducted in Alzheimer Hellas day clinic Agios
Ioannis at Thessaloniki, Greece between May 2011 and October 2012. The par-
ticipants were randomly assigned to the training groups. We excluded subjects who
met criteria for dementia (DSM-IV), AD (NINCDS-ADRDA), depressive episode
(IDC-10), subjects with cerebrovascular disease (Hachinski scale score C4), and
54
I. Tarnanas et al.

those with any other medical or psychiatric identiﬁable cause accounting for their
complaints.
The neuropsychological battery used for the pre- and post- testing included tests
for the assessment of memory (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test—RAVLT),
language and semantic memory (15-items short-form of the Boston Naming Test,
category ﬂuency), praxis and visuospatial skills (Rey complex ﬁgure copy),
attention and executive function (Symbol Digit Modalities Test, Trail Making part
A and B, Stroop interference Test [78] and letter ﬂuency). A cognitive domain was
judged as impaired when subjects scored 1.5 SD below values for age and education
matched controls in at least one test. According to the results of the neuropsy-
chological exploration, subjects were classiﬁed as pure amnestic MCI (a-MCI),
patients fulﬁlling Petersen’s criteria for amnestic MCI, with memory being the only
affected domain (see Table 4.1 for details).
Participants also received an Auditory ERP-recording completed using a Nihon
Kohden–Neuropack M1 MEB-9200 evoked potential/EMG measuring system.
Event-related-potentials (ERPs) are used as a noninvasive clinical marker for brain
function in human patients (Fig. 4.6). Auditory ERPs are voltage changes speciﬁed
to a physical or mental occurrence that can be recorded by EEG [79]. Different
ERPs were used in order to pinpoint the functional processes which would be
improved by the cognitive process training and which may be affected by retesting.
The principal ERP components elicited after task-relevant visual stimuli are among
others the N1, the anterior N2, the P2, and the P3b. In Fig. 4.7, an example of an
Auditory ERP signal can be seen. The signal can be divided into two parts, a pre-
stimuli section consisting of a baseline with no clear potentials and a post-stimuli
section consisting of various potentials. The ﬁrst positive potential is called P1,
followed by a negative potential N1, then P2, N2, and so forth. The latency of these
potentials is measured from onset of stimuli to the peak of the potential. Sometimes
the peaks are named using the latency, e.g. if N1 occur at a latency of 40 ms it is
named N40 or if P3 occur at a latency of 300 ms it is named P300. The baseline
amplitude is the difference between the peak of a potential and the mean of the
pre-stimulus baseline. The baseline measurement used to discriminate between
the MCI amnestic patients and the controls in our study is shown in Fig. 4.6 [80].
4.4.3 Procedures
Thirty-nine of the participants represented a virtual reality museum cognitive
training group—experimental group (remaining N = 32; 12 men, mean age:
70.5 years; range 65–82; seven drop-outs because of technical problems, illness,
and tenancy changeover). The other participants formed an active control group
(N = 39; 16 men, mean age: 69.7 years; range: 65–88; no drop-outs) and a non-
contact control group (remaining N = 34; 13 men, mean age: 70.9 years; range:
65–87; two dropouts because of illness). The virtual reality museum cognitive
training group was exposed to a multilayered cognitive training over a period of
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
55

Table 4.1 Demographic characteristics and cognitive status of the participant groups
Group
Cognitive training
Active control
Non-contact control
Statistical signiﬁcance
Mean age
70.5 years (4.3)
69.7 years (4.5)
70.9 (4.4)
F(2, 102) = 1, P = 0.36
MMSE score
26.8 (3.6)
26.2 (3.6)
26.2 (3.1)
F(2, 102) = 1.4, P = 0.24
Stroop-test (color repetition)
73.4 (34.24)
74.4 (32.2)
70.6 (23.40)
RAVLT-immediate recall
15.4 (4.3)
15.5 (4.6)
15.0 (3.1)
RAVLT-delayed recall
1.6 (1.5)
1.7 (1.5)
2.2 (1.5)
RAVLT-recognition
5.6 (2.2)
5.5 (2.2)
7.4 (1.9)
BNT
10.42 (2.46)
10.60 (1.91)
11.22 (1.90)
Category ﬂuency
10.6 (3.98)
11.3 (3.1)
11.2 (4.3)
Letter ﬂuency
7.4 (3.54)
7.1 (2.6)
6.0 (3.4)
Ray ﬁgure copy
34.6 (1.3)
32.7 (1.9)
28.9 (8.5)
Ray ﬁgure immediate recall
11.9 (9.2)
11.4 (9.2)
7.0 (4.7)
Ray ﬁgure delayed-recall
11.6 (9.4)
10.6 (9.1)
7.2 (4.6)
Ray ﬁgure recognition
6.6 (2.9)
6.3 (2.5)
6.0 (1.4)
Forward digit repetition
6.2 (1.1)
6.1 (1.1)
5.8 (1.1)
Backward digit repetition
3.8 (0.8)
3.9 (0.7)
2.2 (1.3)
Trail-making test B
193.9 ms (98.5)
179.0 (83.7)
188.8 ms (55.1)
GDS
10.3 ± 2.5
11.3 ± 3.1
13.3 ± 2.5
Standard deviations are given in parentheses behind the mean values. There were no signiﬁcant group differences as is indicated by the statistical analysis
(last column)
56
I. Tarnanas et al.

5 month. At the same time, the active control group is a sample of the MCI
amnestic population from the Agios Ioannis day clinic in Thessaloniki that
received a learning-based memory training approach in which participants used
computers to make cognitive exercises, viewed DVD-based educational programs
on history, art and literature or participated at puzzle solving exercises. The active
control group was required to have high face validity and match the experimental
group for daily and total training time, interesting audiovisual content, and com-
puter use. Thus the AC cognitive training program employed a learning-based
memory training approach in which participants used computers to view DVD-
based educational programs on history, art and literature.
The participants in the virtual reality museum cognitive training and the active
control group trained twice a week for 90 min across 5 months. The virtual reality
Fig. 4.7 Grand average baseline AERP waveforms for MCI amnestic patients at our study and
comparison to baseline for controls
Fig. 4.6 Illustration of a possible Auditory ERP signal. On the X-axis the time is shown with 0 at
the stimuli. The Y-axis is the amplitude with 0 at the baseline. In the pre-stimuli window a
baseline is visible from which a horizontal average can be calculated
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
57

museum cognitive training was conducted on a one-to-one basis while the active
control trainings were conducted in small groups with not more than 12 participants
by professional psychologists. Two extra sessions were offered at the end of the
program for those participants who missed the regular sessions. The participants
were not encouraged to train outside the training sessions.
4.4.4 Data Recordings and Analysis
4.4.4.1 Electrophysiological Recording
The Electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 32 active electrodes posi-
tioned according to the extended 10–20 system (the electrodes mounted directly on
the scalp included the following positions: C3, C4, CP3, CP4, CPz, Cz, F3, F4, F7,
F8, FC3, FC4, FCz, Fp1, Fp2, Fpz, Fz, O1, O2, Oz, P3, P4, P7, P8, PO3, PO4,
POz, Pz, T7, and T8). Electrodes A1 and A2 were placed at the left and right
earlobes. The horizontal and vertical EOG was measured by electrodes placed at
the outer canthi (LO1, LO2) and above and below both eyes (SO1, SO2, IO1, IO2).
Electrode impedance was kept below 10 kX. The ampliﬁer band pass was
0.01–140 Hz. EEG and EOG were sampled continuously with a rate of 2,048 Hz.
Data was archived on a hard disk with triggers using post-session annotation.
Ofﬂine, the EEG was downscaled to a sampling rate of 500 Hz by using the
software Neuroworkbench (Nihon-Kohden, Japan). The epochs were 1,200 ms
long ranging from 100 ms before and 1,000 ms after stimulus onset. All epochs
with EEG amplitudes of more than ±120 lV or with drifts of more than 150 lV
within 300 ms were discarded. For all participants and conditions at mean 48
epochs (Min = 17; Max = 53; SD = 7.3) of the epochs remained for averaging
after artefact rejection and correction. The epochs were averaged according to the
stimulus conditions (target trials versus non-target trials) and referenced to linked
earlobes (excluding the EOG electrodes). For stimulus locked averages only
correct epochs were used, excluding trials with false alarms or misses. A digital
low-pass ﬁlter was set at 17 Hz in order to reduce oversampling.
4.4.4.2 Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed by means of repeated measures ANOVAs with
Greenhouse-Geisser corrected degrees of freedom. In case of signiﬁcant main
effects (if the factor included more than two levels) or interactions, additional
ANOVAs were applied for post hoc testing of contrasts and simple effects. For
response times (RTs; correct commission trials) the ANOVA included the within
factor time (session one, session n) and the between factor group (virtual reality
museum cognitive training group, active control group, no-contact control group).
Separate ANOVAs were carried out for false alarms and for misses, because they
58
I. Tarnanas et al.

are different types of errors either demanding a response or not. Both analysis
included the factors time and group.
The peak amplitude and latency of the N1 potential was measured at the two
occipital electrodes O1 and O2 were the potential showed its maximum. The N2
was quantiﬁed as the mean amplitude in the time interval between 240 and 300 ms
at the electrodes FCz, Cz and CPz where maximum amplitude resulted. A reliable
measurement of the peak was not possible due to the overlapping P2, and P3b
potentials. The P2 potential was quantiﬁed in amplitude and latency as the local
maximum at the electrodes FCz, Cz and CPz in the search interval between 200
and 400 ms where it showed the highest peaks. The peak amplitude and latency of
the P3b potential was measured as the local maximum at the electrodes Cz, CPz
and Pz in the search interval between 400 and 700 ms where it showed the highest
amplitudes.
Six separate ANOVAs were carried out for the peak amplitudes and latencies of
the N1, P2 and the P3b, respectively, including the between subject factor group
and the within subject factors session (session one, session two), stimulus type
(target, non-target) and electrodes (O1 and O2 for the N1; FCz, Cz, and CPz for
the P2 potential; Cz, CPz, and Pz for the P3b potential, resp.). An additional
ANOVA was carried out for the N2 mean amplitudes including the between
subject factor group and the within subject factors session, stimulus type, and
electrodes (FCz, Cz, and CPz).
We also used sLORETA [81] in order to closer examine the underlying neu-
ronal changes of the expected training effect of stimulus feature processing as
reﬂected by the P2. We examined only the target condition because the training
gains may especially help to improve target detection. The program sLORETA
estimates the sources of activation on the basis of standardized current density at
each of 6,239 voxels in the grey matter of the MNI-reference brain with a spatial
resolution of 5 mm. The calculation is based upon a linear weighted sum of the
scalp electric potentials with the assumption that neighboring voxels have a
maximal similar electrical activity. The voxel-based sLORETA images were ﬁrst
computed for each individual averaged ERP in the target condition in the interval
from 170 to 190 ms surrounding the P2 peak. Then, the differences of the sLO-
RETA images between test sessions were statistically compared between groups
using the sLORETA voxelwise randomization test (5,000 permutations) which is
based on statistical nonparametric mapping (SnPM) and implemented in sLO-
RETA. Two independent group tests were carried out for comparison of the three
groups (cognitive training group versus no-contact control groups, and versus
social control group). The tests were performed for an average of all time frames in
the interval with the null hypothesis that (T1 group A–T2 group A) = (T1 group
B–T2 group B). The tests were corrected for multiple comparisons [82].
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
59

4.5 Results
4.5.1 Neuropsychological Variables Outcome
In the virtual reality museum and active control aMCI group, there were signiﬁcant
differences between the delayed-recall scores on the RAVLT at baseline and those
at both the 5-month follow-up (1.6 ± 1.5 vs. 4.4 ± 1.5, p = 0.04; 1.6 ± 1.5 vs.
4.6 ± 2.3, p = 0.04) (Table 4.2). The immediate recall scores on the Rey Ost-
errieth Complex Figure (11.9 ± 9.2 vs. 15.8 ± 9.4; p = 0.04), the Trail-Making B
(193.9 ± 98.5 vs 104.1 ± 28.7; p = 0.04) and the MMSE (26.8 ± 3.6 vs.
28.2 ± 2.5; p = 0.04) were signiﬁcantly improved only at the 5-month follow-up
in the virtual reality museum aMCI group. There was a tendency toward
improvement of the digit span forward scores (6.2 ± 1.1 vs. 7.8 ± 1.3; p = 0.07)
at the follow-up of the virtual reality museum aMCI group and a general training-
induced BNT scores improvement (10.6 ± 1.9 vs. 12.0 ± 2.0; p = 0.07) com-
pared to the baseline scores in the virtual reality and the active control aMCI group
(Table 4.2). The GDS score was also improved after cognitive training, but the
difference did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (10.3 ± 2.5 vs. 8.9 ± 1.7;
p = 0.23). There were no signiﬁcant differences between the baseline and follow-
up scores in other outcome measures in the MCI wait-list control group.
4.5.2 Electrophysiological Measures Outcome
The P300 component latency and amplitude among the experimental groups (as
detected on the Pz electrode) for the two conditions (target and no-target auditory
stimuli) before and after training are summarized in Table 4.3. When the non-
target stimulus was presented, the P300 latency following training was signiﬁ-
cantly shorter in both memory training groups (Table 4.3). The P300 amplitude
was signiﬁcantly higher after training on both groups. However, when the target
stimuli was presented, the P300 latency following training was signiﬁcantly
shorter in both research groups; the Virtual Reality Museum latencies were sig-
niﬁcantly longer than those of the Active Control; and the amplitude was
signiﬁcantly lower for the Active Control than for the Virtual Reality Museum.
Our results are in line with previous training studies which also found evidence
for improvements of speciﬁc cognitive functions after cognitive training in older
participants (e.g. for working memory: [83], e.g., for dual task performance: [54]).
Performance improvements of older participants were also found for cognitive
training of visual conjunction search in other training studies [84, 85]. These
studies found evidence that seniors has learning skills just as good as the young
ones to efﬁciently use feature information and selectively attend to those objects in
the search array that share common features with the target. Our ﬁndings however
go further, because we used for a ﬁrst time a 3D Virtual Museum environment and
60
I. Tarnanas et al.

Table 4.2 Changes in outcome variables in the participants with aMCI
Virtual museum aMCI group
Active control aMCI group
Normal control aMCI group
Baseline
Follow-up
Baseline
Follow-up
Baseline
After 20 weeks
RAVLT, immediaterecall
15.4 ± 4.3
16.6 ± 5.1
15.5 ± 4.6
15.6 ± 4.1
15.0 ± 3.1
12.8 ± 5.9
RAVLT, delayedrecall
1.6 ± 1.5
4.4 ± 1.5*
1.7 ± 1.5
4.6 ± 2.3*
2.2 ± 1.5
2.4 ± 2.6
RAVLT, recognition
5.6 ± 2.2
7.0 ± 1.9
5.5 ± 2.2
6.4 ± 2.3
7.4 ± 1.9
7.4 ± 0.9
ROCF copy
34.6 ± 1.3
36.0 ± 0.0
32.7 ± 1.9
34.2 ± 1.6
28.9 ± 8.5
26.2 ± 8.8
ROCF, immediaterecall
11.9 ± 9.2
16.8 ± 9.4*
11.4 ± 9.2
11.0 ± 3.4
7.0 ± 4.7
9.3 ± 5.4
ROCF, delayedrecall
11.6 ± 9.4
16.3 ± 8.9
10.6 ± 9.1
15.4 ± 8.1
7.2 ± 4.6
9.6 ± 5.6
ROCF, recognition
6.6 ± 2.9
7.0 ± 2.8
6.3 ± 2.5
7.4 ± 2.5
6.0 ± 1.4
5.0 ± 0.7
Digitspanforward
6.2 ± 1.1
7.8 ± 1.3
6.1 ± 1.1
7.2 ± 1.1
5.8 ± 1.1
6.4 ± 1.5
Digitspanbackward
3.8 ± 0.8
4.0 ± 1.6
3.9 ± 0.7
3.6 ± 0.9
2.2 ± 1.3
2.6 ± 0.5
Stroop, colorreading
73.4 ± 35.2
86.6 ± 26.8
74.4 ± 32.2
80.2 ± 23.3
70.6 ± 23.4
59.8 ± 39.9
Categoryﬂuency
10.6 ± 2.2
13.4 ± 5.7
11.3 ± 3.1
13.2 ± 4.4
11.2 ± 4.3
11.6 ± 4.8
Letterﬂuency
7.4 ± 3.6
8.6 ± 4.8
7.1 ± 2.6
7.6 ± 2.9
6.0 ± 3.4
6.0 ± 5.0
TRAIL-B
193.9 ± 98.5
104.10 ± 28.7*
179.0 ± 83.7
210.0 ± 62.6
188.8 ± 55.1
228.8 ± 75.0
BNT score
10.4 ± 1.9
15.4 ± 2.4
10.6 ± 1.9
12.0 ± 2.0
11.2 ± 1.9
10.0 ± 2.2
MMSE score
26.8 ± 3.6
28.2 ± 2.5*
26.2 ± 3.6
27.0 ± 2.6
26.2 ± 3.1
24.6 ± 4.6
GDS score
10.3 ± 2.5
8.9 ± 1.7
11.3 ± 3.1
9.9 ± 2.7
13.3 ± 2.5
14.9 ± 2.2
* p\ 0.05,  p = 0.07
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
61

Table 4.3 Effect of cognitive training on P300 latency and amplitude (Pz electrode): mean (standard deviation)
Measures
Virtual museum
Active control
F
Before
training
After
training
T
Before
training
After
training
T
Maineffect:
training
Maineffect:
group
Interaction:
training
with group
Latency target stimuli
447.52 (84.0)
394.49 (60.53) 9.11*** 399.47 (82.80)
365.41 (65.14) 6.64** 14.30***
(1.59)
3.91* (1.59) 1.89 (1.59)
Amplitude target stimuli
4.07 (2.65)
4.39 (1.71)
3.67*
4.73 (2.70)
5.11 (1.81)
4.12*
4.46* (1.59)
4.32* (1.59) 0.89 (1.59)
Latency non-taget stimuli
468.75 (108.40) 418.47 (79.22) 6.87**
437.39 (139.10) 395.34 (88.66) 4.21*
9.56**
(1.59)
3.4* (1.59)
0.23 (1.59)
Amplitude non-target stimuli 4.18 (2.50)
4.42 (2.12)
2.21
4.30 (2.76)
4.58 (1.93)
1.94
3.18 (1.59)
1.06 (1.59)
0.45 (1.59)
* p \ 0.05; ** p \ 0.01; *** p \ 0.001
62
I. Tarnanas et al.

showed the neuronal correlates of the functional processes suggesting improve-
ments via the VR training as follows:
• In the Virtual Museum cognitive training occipotal N1 enhancement was evi-
dent post-training compared to pre-training for non-target stimuli. This suggests
that the participants developed mechanisms for enhanced attention of arrays,
which were not immediately recognized as targets, that is, the non-targets
(Fig. 4.8).
• The frontal N2 enhancement was also evident post-training compared to pre-
training for non-target stimuli. However, as this effect failed to reach signiﬁ-
cance, it can only be speculated that also the subsequent processing or even
inhibition of the non-target stimuli improved after cognitive training. Based on
the enhanced attention in non-target trials in the Virtual Museum cognitive
training group as was reﬂected in the N1 amplitude, one may expect also a
decrease in the false alarm rate (Fig. 4.8).
The N2 (see Fig. 4.8) showed a maximum at the electrodes FCz (1.2 lV) and
Cz (1.4 lV) and was less negative at CPz (2.1 lV; main effect of f electrodes:
Fig. 4.8 Stimulus-locked event-related potentials at the occipital electrodes O1 and O2
separately for target and non-target trials, for the ﬁrst (T1) and the second test session (T2) as
well as for the Virtual Museum cognitive training group, the Active Control group and the normal
control group
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
63

F(2,204) = 30.7, P \ 0.001). The tree-way-interaction of the factors session x
stimulus type x group reached also a signiﬁcance (F(2,102) = 3.01; P \ 0.003).
The increased amplitude of the P300 in target trials may suggest that feature
based stimulus processing was signiﬁcantly improved in our older participants
after only the Virtual Reality Museum cognitive training (Fig. 4.9). Consequently,
the improved discrimination of stimulus features in target-present trials should
decrease the likelihood of missed targets and increase the likelihood of target
detection. This effect on performance data was evident in our cognitive training
group post-training compared to the pre-training session and also when compared
to the control groups.
The sLORETA analysis of the P300 amplitude differences between test sessions
elucidates the neuronal basis of the training gain. Speciﬁcally, activation in the
lingual and parahippocampalgyri was increased only in the cognitive training
group and not in the two control groups. Most importantly, the increased P300
amplitude together with the signiﬁcant changes in brain activation show that the
cognitive training caused a change in brain processes on a functional level in a
near transfer task of visual search. Both regions are anatomically and functionally
connected [86] and are discussed as being sensitive for global visual feature
processing [87], as well as the global processing of spatial layout [88] and surface
properties like color and texture of scenes and objects in visual arrays [86]. For our
training group we found that the cognitive process training improved the textual
and spatial processing of visual arrays in general. The use various kinds of visual
material like pictures, objects, and text pages that were used in various tasks in the
training sessions did improve one basic cognitive process of global processing of
visual arrays. The present results also suggest the P300 potential of the ERP as a
possible marker for the improvement of this cognitive process (Fig. 4.10).
Fig. 4.9 Changes in P300 amplitudes in the Museum Group (Pz average) compared to the other
groups pre- (T1) and post- (T2) training
64
I. Tarnanas et al.

4.6 Discussion
In the present study we were able to distinguish the functional processes which
were sensitive to the training intervention from retest effects. The effect of test
sessions on the topography of the P300 applies to all groups. We assume that the
P300 may reﬂect memory-based stimulus processing. Thus, whereas attentional
processing of target-absent trials (N1 results) and feature-based stimulus pro-
cessing of target-present trials (P3 results) were only modulated by the cognitive
training intervention, the improvement of stimulus categorization, which is based
on memory representations (P300), was sensitive to retesting. In our study, the
amplitude of the P300 component increased and latency shortened signiﬁcantly
following training in both experimental groups. This adds to the evidence that the
P3b contains a component related to response selection or execution [89, 90]. The
idea of a functional compromise associated with MCI is not new, and previous
studies have reported a higher degree of functional impairment in MCI subjects
when compared with matched healthy subjects [91–99].
To a limited extent, the present ﬁndings support Basak et al.’s [66] ﬁnding that
inhibition can be improved by playing videogames and Schmiedek [100]
demonstration that functional impairment can be improved by practicing basic
cognitive tasks. The results from the present study suggest that modest improve-
ments of the functional ability, processing speed and memory can also be achieved
by means of playing virtual reality cognitive training games. A similar partially
positive result of 3D games for cognition-enriching everyday activities and pro-
cessing speed was reported by Nouchi et al. [101].
Fig. 4.10 Graphical representation of the sLORETA results comparing the differences of the
target-P300. The blue colour indicates local maxima of lower activation in the ﬁrst compared to
the second test session for the cognitive training group in the right lingual and parahippocampal
gyri, which may explain the amplitude difference of the P300 between sessions in the tested
interval surrounding the P300 peak
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
65

Not all 3D virtual reality environments however are created equal [60] and
given an individual’s stage of cognitive development, one environment can be
more beneﬁcial for cognitive functions than the other. For example, the cognitive
training games used in the Virtual Reality Museum were very similar to those used
in an actual educational museum visit [57]. Preliminary evidence for far transfer of
the cognitive training was found in the present study using the neural correlates.
The different extent of transfer in our study may be explained by the additional
focus of the aMCI group to use speciﬁc strategies to perform the training tasks.
All our data support the a priori intuitive notion that highly cognitive-dependent
skills are more likely to be affected as a consequence of the Virtual Reality Museum
cognitive training, and that aMCI subjects show signiﬁcant improvement in these
functional domains. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that differences between
groups were not restricted to the neuropsychological variables or the neural cor-
relates, but also to behavioral areas as well, such as depression and motivation,
although this change was not signiﬁcant. As suggested by Green and Bavelier [61],
motivation is a key condition for transfer to occur. The engaging nature of the
virtual reality museum used in the present study could thus have facilitated transfer
of training. It is clear that more research in this direction is required. Nevertheless, it
can be concluded that our ﬁndings support the notion of plasticity in the neural
system underlying virtual reality cognitive training and point to a relationship
between the more ecological validity of Virtual Reality Museum and enhancement
of speciﬁc cognitive skills.
4.7 Conclusion
The results from our study suggest that older adults do not need to be techno-
logically savvy to beneﬁt from virtual reality training. Almost none of the aMCI
participants in the reviewed studies had prior experience with the technologies
(i.e., video games, computers) used in the intervention study and yet they were still
able to beneﬁt from these novel approaches. Previous research has shown par-
ticipants’ prior use of computers was not signiﬁcantly associated with acquisition
of computer skills during training sessions, suggesting older adults can beneﬁt
from novel technologies [102].
Despite common misconceptions older adults do enjoy learning to use new
technology, perceptions of the computerized training programs were positive for
the older adults who completed computerized training [103]. In spite of many
older adults reporting anxiety about using unfamiliar technology at the beginning
of training, most reported high levels of satisfaction after training was completed.
Some patients also stated they could use their new video game skills to connect
more with their grandchildren, like we have seen many times in the literature
[104]; whereas others were very willing to learn to use video games and believed
they could be a positive form of mental exercise [105].
66
I. Tarnanas et al.

In conclusion, the present study lends modest support to the notion that playing
virtual reality cognitive training games improves untrained cognitive functions in
aMCI. Since these functions facilitate adaptive behavior in various contexts,
improved cognitive processing can be expected to help older adults to overcome
cognitive challenges in their daily routines. Virtual Reality provides an entertaining
and thus motivating tool for improving cognitive and executive functions. The
Virtual Reality Museum doesn’t require physical well-being and mobility of
the participant as much as physical exercise interventions; although these seem to
be more effective in buffering decline of executive function [106]. Additionally, the
virtual reality museum is not expensive to administer as compared to interventions
supervised by a therapist. Virtual Reality cognitive rehabilitation, such as the
process-speciﬁc RehaCom tasks used by Weiand [107] appear to be successful at
keeping patients motivated for continuous training even after the supervised ses-
sions at the clinic have ﬁnished. As such, the process-speciﬁc training seems to be a
good choice for long-term self-guided exercises. The present study suggests that the
Virtual Reality Museum should not be dismissed as a cognitive training tool.
Even within the homogeneous sample of older adults that participated in the
present study, some participants beneﬁted more from playing the virtual reality
museum than others. A variety of factors may be responsible for individual dif-
ferences in sensitivity to cognitive training. For instance, recent ﬁndings from our
lab indicate that inter-individual genetic variability modulates transfer of training
to untrained tasks [108]. Therefore, caution concerning the interpolation of
aggregate data to individuals is advised, and individual differences in cognitive
training outcomes are an important topic to be addressed in future studies.
Geusgens et al. [109] reviewed 41 studies speciﬁcally looking for transfer effects
during cognitive rehabilitation. They only included studies that trained compen-
sation strategies as opposed to cognitive skills training. Out of the 41 reviewed
studies, 36 were able to demonstrate some form of transfer. However, only
22 studies actually evaluated transfer to daily-life activities while the others looked
at either simulated lab-based activities or activities that were very similar to the
previously trained ones. Out of these 22 studies, 18 were able to show transfer of
learned abilities, but only six included statistical evidence for their results. Fur-
thermore, the sample sizes of most studies were very small or based on single-case
designs. Consequently, no clear-cut conclusions for or against strategy training
transfer to daily activities can be drawn.
The artwork of the virtual reality museum we presented here was maybe not
nearly as advanced and capturing as commercial off-the-shelf games, which could
create even higher levels of realism. Modern game engines already provide the
technology to develop environments that can be easily recognized by users and
allow for high visual quality. Transparency and ‘‘realism’’ in a broader sense can
relate to plausibility and place illusions which are described by Slater [110].
Plausibility illusion refers to the fact that the user believes the virtual scenario is
actually occurring. It is caused by events and the scenario relating directly to the
user (e.g. virtual character talking to user). For example, a cognitive task that is
embedded in a user-relevant scenario directly relates to the therapy goal of the
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
67

patient and represents a desired outcome of the patient’s rehabilitation (e.g. virtual
kitchen with cooking tasks relates to the scenario that the patient aims to engage in
independently at home). This stands in contrast to the abstract nature of traditional
neuropsychological tests which may have little in common with real-world sce-
narios (e.g. using abstract objects for mental rotation). Scenarios of high realism
are believed to be of advantage when patients deny their cognitive deﬁcits. The
realism of a task can potentially lead patients to compare their performance with
common standards and past experiences and make them realize that their cognitive
abilities may not match their subjective perception. This is the basis for patients
actively engaging in cognitive training and making progress throughout their
cognitive rehabilitation. As the growing number of serious games suggests,
engaging game-like training content appears to be a method of choice to prevent
frustration and boredom of users.
It is important to note that inconsistencies may be due to several factors not
related to the actual training program itself, including different cognitive outcome
measures and modiﬁcations of the training program. The electrophysiological data
helped to elucidate the functional processes which were sensitive to the training
intervention and, on the other hand, to retest effects due to task repetition. Addi-
tionally, the mediating neuronal basis of the training gain was identiﬁed, thus,
underlining the efﬁciency of the training to induce functional changes in the brain.
More speciﬁcally, the cognitive training especially improved the global feature
processing of visual arrays which may explain the improvement in target detection
within a given time window in the near transfer task of visual conjunction search.
These results cannot be explained by test repetition or by the mere social inter-
action of the training intervention, suggesting that a multilayered formal cognitive
training is sufﬁcient to facilitate neuronal plasticity in older age.
Our study bears several shortcomings which may give directions for further
studies. First of all, the cognitive training was multidimensional and aimed mainly
at enhancing basic and executive functions tested by a number of our tasks in order
to improve daily life activities. As the training was domain unspeciﬁc, it is not
possible to show divergent results in two or more tasks in the effects of the training
procedure. Further studies which aim to evaluate broad cognitive trainings should
bear in mind (1) to use more than one transfer task which assess the same cognitive
function in order to show convergent effects of the training and/or, (2) to use
transfer tasks assessing cognitive functions which were not intended to be
improved by the training in order to show divergent effects. An additional short-
coming of the present study is the fact that the virtual museum interface system
was outdated compared to the more intuitive solution provided recently by
Microsoft Kinect1 for full-body tracking [111]. The virtual reality museum group
received basic PC-practice which may have made them more experienced with
computer technology than the other groups. However, although modern interaction
devices such as the Microsoft KINECT 3D sensor for natural gesture interaction is
1 Microsoft Kinect—www.kinectforwindows.org/www.xbox.com/kinect.
68
I. Tarnanas et al.

more senior-friendly [112], our study interaction with the PC was reduced to a
minimum and the manual responses were collected with special response buttons
and not with a computer keyboard or a mouse. Therefore, we do think that a more
advanced interaction for the cognitive training group may elicit even more transfer
effects. Further training studies should try to exclude any confounding effect of the
training procedure on the evaluation of the training effects.
Older adults are the now fastest growing segment of Internet users [113].
According to a 2010 Pew Internet and American Life survey, 78 % of adults aged
50–64 years and 42 % of adults older than 65 years of age use the Internet. This is
a sharp increase from 2000 when only 50 % of adults 50–64 years and 15 % of
adults older than 65 years of age used the Internet [114]. As ownership of personal
computers continues to grow and older adults have access to the Internet [115],
cognitive training programs need to take fuller advantage of these outlets to
improve cognitive function and delay cognitive decline in later life.
References
1. Virvou, M., Katsionis, G.: On the usability and likeability of virtual reality games for
education: the case of VR-ENGAGE. Comput. Educ. 50, 154–178 (2008)
2. Lewis, T.M., Aggarwal, R., Rajaretnam, N., Grantcharov, T.P., Darzi, A.: Training in
surgical oncology: the role of virtual reality simulation. Surg. Oncol. 20, 134–139 (2011)
3. Rizzo, A., Kim, G.J.: A SWOT analysis of the ﬁeld of virtual reality rehabilitation and
therapy. Presence 14(2), 119–146 (2005)
4. Rizzo, A., Schultheis, M., Kerns, K.A., Mateer, C.: Analysis of assets for virtual reality
applications in neuropsychology. Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 14(1/2), 207–239 (2004)
5. Laczo, J., Vlcek, K., Vyhnalek, M., Vajnerova, O., Ort, M., Holmerova, I., Tolar, M., Andel,
R., Bojar, M., Hort, J.: Spatial navigation testing discriminates two types of amnestic mild
cognitive impairment. Behav. Brain Res. 202, 252–259 (2009)
6. Petersen, R.C., Smith, G.E., Waring, S.C., Ivnik, R.J., Tangalos, E.G., Kokmen, E.: Mild
cognitive impairment: clinical characterization and outcome. Arch. Neurol. 56(3), 303–308
(1999)
7. Gauthier, S., Reisberg, B., Zaudig, M., Petersen, R.C., Ritchie, K., Broich, K., Belleville, S.,
et al.: Mild cognitive impairment. Lancet 367(9518), 1262–1270 (2006)
8. Petersen, R.C.: Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. J. Intern. Med. 256(3),
183–194 (2004)
9. Winblad, B., Palmer, K., Kivipelto, M., Jelic, V., Fratiglioni, L., Wahlund, L.-O., Nordberg,
A., et al.: Mild cognitive impairment–beyond controversies, towards a consensus: report of
the International Working Group on Mild Cognitive Impairment. J. Intern. Med. 256(3),
240–246 (2004)
10. Eschweiler, G.W., Leyhe, T., Klöppel, S., Hüll, M.: New developments in the diagnosis of
dementia. Dtsch. Ärzteblatt Int. 107(39), 677–683 (2010)
11. Hanfelt, J.J., Wuu, J., Sollinger, A.B., Greenaway, M.C., Lah, J.J., Levey, A.I., Goldstein,
F.C.: An exploration of subgroups of mild cognitive impairment based on cognitive,
neuropsychiatric and functional features: analysis of data from the National Alzheimer’s
Coordinating Center. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry: Ofﬁcial J. Am. Assoc. Geriatr. Psychiatry
19(11), 940–950 (2011)
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
69

12. Petersen, R.C., Roberts, R.O., Knopman, D.S., Boeve, B.F., Geda, Y.E., Ivnik, R.J., Smith,
G.E., et al.: Mild cognitive impairment: ten years later. Arch. Neurol. 66(12), 1447–1455
(2009)
13. Gold, D.A.: An examination of instrumental activities of daily living assessment in older
adults and mild cognitive impairment. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 37–41 (2012)
14. Perneczky, R., Pohl, C., Sorg, C., Hartmann, J., Komossa, K., Alexopoulos, P., Wagenpfeil,
S., et al.: Complex activities of daily living in mild cognitive impairment: conceptual and
diagnostic issues. Age Ageing 35(3), 240–245 (2006)
15. Guerreiro, R., Wojtas, A., Bras, J., Carrasquillo, M., Rogaeva, E., Majounie, E., Cruchaga,
C., et al. : TREM2 Variants in Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. (2012)
(121114171407007)
16. Patel, B.B., Holland, N.W.: Mild cognitive impairment: hope for stability, plan for
progression. Clevel. Clin. J. Med. 79(12), 857–864 (2012)
17. Albert, M.S., DeKosky, S.T., Dickson, D., Dubois, B., Feldman, H.H., Fox, N.C., Gamst,
A., et al.: The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease:
recommendations
from
the
National
Institute
on
Aging-Alzheimer’s
Association
workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dement.
J. Alzheimer’s Assoc. 7(3), 270–279 (2011)
18. Wang, H.-M., Yang, C.-M., Kuo, W.-C., Huang, C.-C., Kuo, H.-C.: Use of a modiﬁed
spatial-context memory test to detect amnestic mild cognitive impairment. PLoS ONE 8(2),
e57030 (2013)
19. Pai, M.C., Jacobs, W.J.: Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 19, 250–255 (2004)
20. Cherrier, M.M., Mendez, M., Perryman, K.: Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol. Behav. Neurol.
14, 159–168 (2001)
21. Kalova, E., Vlcek, K., Jarolimova, E., Bures, J.: Behav. Brain Res. 159, 175–186 (2005)
22. Kessels, R.P., Feijen, J., Postma, A.: Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 20, 184–191 (2005)
23. Mapstone, M., Steffenella, T.M., Duffy, C.J.: A visuospatial variant of mild cognitive
impairment: getting lost between aging and AD. Neurology 60(5), 802–808 (2003)
24. Hort, J., Laczó, M., Vyhnálek, M., Bojar, J., Bureš, J., Vlcˇek, K.: Spatial navigation deﬁcit
in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104(10), 4042–4047 (2007)
25. Rey, B., Alcañiz, M.: Research in Neuroscience and Virtual Reality. InTech (2010)
26. Cornwell, B.R., Johnson, L.L., Holroyd, T., Carver, F.W., Grillon, C.: Human hippocampal
and parahippocampal theta during goal-directed spatial navigation predicts performance on
a virtual Morris water maze. J. Neurosci.: Ofﬁcial J. Soc. Neurosci. 28(23), 5983–5990
(2008)
27. Harvey, C.D., Collman, F., Dombeck, D.A., Tank, D.W.: Intracellular dynamics of
hippocampal place cells during virtual navigation. Nature 461(7266), 941–946 (2009)
28. Plancher, G., Tirard, A., Gyselinck, V., Nicolas, S., Piolino, P.: Using virtual reality to
characterize episodic memory proﬁles in amnestic mild cognitive impairment and
Alzheimer’s disease: inﬂuence of active and passive encoding. Neuropsychologia 50(5),
592–602 (2012)
29. Slater, M., Antley, A., Davison, A., Swapp, D., Guger, C., Barker, C., Pistrang, N., et al.: A
virtual reprise of the Stanley Milgram obedience experiments. PLoS ONE 1, e39 (2006)
30. Waller, D., Richardson, A.R.: Correcting distance estimates by interacting with immersive
virtual environments: effects of task and available sensory information. J. Exp. Psychol.
Appl. 14(1), 61–72 (2008). doi:10.1037/1076-898X.14.1.61
31. Klauer, K.C., Zhao, Z.: Double dissociations in visual and spatial short-term memory.
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 133(3), 355–381 (2004)
32. Lithfous, S., Dufour, A., Després, O.: Spatial navigation in normal aging and the prodromal
stage of Alzheimer’s disease: insights from imaging and behavioral studies. Ageing Res.
Rev. 12(1), 201–213 (2012)
33. O’Keefe, J., Dostrovsky, J.: Brain Res. 34, 171–175 (1971)
34. Morris, R.G., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J.N., O’Keefe, J.: Nature 297, 681–683 (1982)
70
I. Tarnanas et al.

35. Astur, R.S., Taylor, L.B., Mamelak, A.N., Philpott, L., Sutherland, R.J.: Behav. Brain Res.
132, 77–84 (2002)
36. Feigenbaum, J.D., Morris, R.G.: Neuropsychology 18, 462–472 (2004)
37. Maguire, E.A., Burgess, N., Donnett, J.G., Frackowiak, R.S., Frith, C.D., O’Keefe, J.:
Science 280, 921–924 (1998)
38. Abrahams, S., Pickering, A., Polkey, C.E., Morris, R.G.: Neuropsychologia 35, 11–24
(1997)
39. De Lillo, C., James, F.C.: Spatial working memory for clustered and linear conﬁgurations of
sites in a virtual reality foraging task. Cogn. Process. 13(Suppl 1), S243–S246 (2012)
40. Koenig, S., Crucian, S., Dalrymple-Alford, J., Dünser, A.: Assessing navigation in real and
virtual environments: a validation study. Int. J. Disabil. Hum. Dev. 10(4), 325–330 (2010)
41. Caffo, A., De Caro, M., Picucci, L., Notarnicola, A., Settanni, A., Livrea, P., Lancioni, G.,
Bosco, A.: Reorientation deﬁcits are associated with amnestic mild cognitive impairment.
Am. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. Dement. 27(5), SAGE Aug 1 (2012)
42. Liarokapis, F., Anderson, E.: Using augmented reality as a medium to assist teaching in
higher education. To appear in Eurographics 2010, Education Program, Norrkfping,
Sweden, 4–7 May 2010
43. Tsolaki, M., Kounti, F., Agogiatou, C., Poptsi, E., Bakoglidou, E., Zafeiropoulou, M.,
Soumbourou, A., et al.: Effectiveness of nonpharmacological approaches in patients with
mild cognitive impairment. Neuro-degenerative Dis. 8(3), 138–145 (2011)
44. Tsatali, M., Tarnanas, I., Malegiannaki, A., Tsolaki, M.: Does cognitive training with the
use of a virtual museum improve neuropsychological performance in aMCI? In: 22nd
Alzheimer Europe Conference in Vienna, Assistive Technologies P3, 121–134 (2012)
45. Ackerman, P.L., Kanfer, R., Calderwood, C.: Use it or lose it? WII brain exercise practice
and reading for domain knowledge. Psychol. Aging 25, 753–766 (2010)
46. Owen, A.M., Hampshire, A., Grahn, J.A., Stenton, R., Dajani, S., Burns, A.S., Howard, R.J.,
Ballard, C.G.: Putting brain training to the test. Nature 465, 775–778 (2010)
47. Peretz, C., Korczyn, A.D., Shatil, E., Aharonson, V., Birnboim, S., Giladi, N.: Computer-
based, personalized cognitive training versus classical computer games: a randomized
double-blind prospective trial of cognitive stimulation. Neuroepidemiology 36, 91–99
(2011)
48. Hertzog, C., Kramer, A.F., Wilson, R.S., Lindenberger, U.: Enrichment effects on adult
cognitive development: can the functional capacity of older adults be preserved and
enhanced? Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 9, 1–65 (2009)
49. Denney, N.W.: A model of cognitive-development across the life-span. Dev. Rev. 4,
171–191 (1984)
50. Baron, A., Mattila, W.R.: Response slowing of older adults: effects of time-limit
contingencies on single- and dual-task performances. Psychol. Aging 4, 66–72 (1989)
51. Buschkuehl, M., Jaeggi, S.M., Hutchison, S., Perrig-Chiello, P., Dapp, C., Muller, M., Breil,
F., Hoppeler, H., Perrig, W.J.: Impact of working memory training on memory performance
in old–old adults. Psychol. Aging 23, 743–753 (2008)
52. Dahlin, E., Neely, A.S., Larsson, A., Backman, L., Nyberg, L.: Transfer of learning after
updating training mediated by the striatum. Science 320, 1510–1512 (2008)
53. Sammer, G., Reuter, I., Hullmann, K., Kaps, M., Vaitl, D.: Training of executive functions
in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol. Sci. 248, 115–119 (2006)
54. Bherer, L., Kramer, A.F., Peterson, M.S., Colcombe, S., Erickson, K., Becic, E.: Transfer
effects in task-set cost and dual-task cost after dual-task training in older and younger adults:
further evidence for cognitive plasticity in attentional control in late adulthood. Exp. Aging
Res. 34, 188–219 (2008)
55. Davidson, D.J., Zacks, R.T., Williams, C.C.: Stroop interference, practice, and aging.
Neuropsychol. Dev. Cogn. B AgingNeuropsychol. Cogn. 10, 85–98 (2003)
56. Karbach, J., Kray, J.: How useful is executive control training? Age differences in near and
far transfer of task-switching training. Dev. Sci. 12, 978–990 (2009)
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
71

57. Ball, K., Berch, D.B., Helmers, K.F., Jobe, J.B., Leveck, M.D., Marsiske, M., Morris, J.N.,
Rebok, G.W., Smith, D.M., Tennstedt, S.L., Unverzagt, F.W., Willis, S.L.: Effects of
cognitive training interventions with older adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 288,
2271–2281 (2002)
58. Schmiedek, F., Lovden, M., Lindenberger, U.: Hundred days of cognitive training enhance
broad cognitive abilities in adulthood: ﬁndings from the COGITO study. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 2, 27 (2010)
59. Klingberg, T.: Training and plasticity of working memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 317–324
(2010)
60. Achtman, R.L., Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.: Video games as a tool to train visual skills.
Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 26, 435–446 (2008)
61. Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.: Exercising your brain: a review of human brain plasticity and
training-induced learning. Psychol. Aging 23, 692–701 (2008)
62. Gee, J.P.: What Video Games Have to Teach Us about Learning and Literacy. Palgrave
Macmillan, New York, NY (2007)
63. Shiffrin, R.M., Schneider, W.: Controlled and automatic human information processing: II.
Perceptual learning, automatic attending and a general theory. Psychol. Rev. 84, 127–190
(1977)
64. Logan, G.D.: Automaticity, resources, and memory: theoretical controversies and practical
implications. Hum. Factors 30, 583–598 (1988)
65. Feng, J., Spence, I., Pratt, J.: Playing an action video game reduces gender differences in
spatial cognition. Psychol. Sci. 18, 850–855 (2007)
66. Basak, C., Boot, W.R., Voss, M.W., Kramer, A.F.: Can training in a real-time strategy video
game attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychol. Aging 23(4), 756–777 (2008)
67. Mahncke, H.W., Connor, B.B., Appelman, J., Ahsanuddin, O.N., Hardy, J.L., Wood, R.A.,
Joyce, N.M., Boniske, T., Atkins, S.M., Merzenich, M.M.: Memory enhancement in healthy
older adults using a brain plasticity-based training program: a randomized, controlled study.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 12523–12528 (2006)
68. Uchida, S., Kawashima, R.: Reading and solving arithmetic problems improves cognitive
functions of normal aged people: a randomized controlled study. Age (Dordr.) 30, 21–29
(2008)
69. Smith, G.E., Housen, P., Yaffe, K., Ruff, R., Kennison, R.F., Mahncke, H.W., Zelinski,
E.M.: A cognitive training program based on principles of brain plasticity: results from the
improvement in Memory with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT)
study. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 57, 594–603 (2009)
70. Cicerone, K.D., Dahlberg, C., Kalmar, K., Langenbahn, D.M., Malec, J.F., Bergquist, T.F.,
Felicetti, T., Giacino, J.T., Harley, P.J., Harrington, D.E., Herzog, J., Kneipp, S., Laatsch,
L., Morse, P.A.: Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: recommendations for clinical
practice. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 81, 1596–1615 (2000)
71. Cicerone, K.D., Dahlberg, C., Malec, J.F., Langenbahn, D.M., Felicetti, T., Kneipp, S.,
Ellmo, W., Kalmar, K., Giacino, J.T., Harlez, P., Laatsch, L., Morse, P., Catanese, J.:
Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated review of the literature from 1998 through
2002. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 86, 1596–1615 (2005)
72. Tucker-Drob, E.M.: Neurocognitive functions and everyday functions change together in
old age. Neuropsychology 25, 368–377 (2011)
73. Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L.S., Coelho, C.: Behavioral and social interventions for
individuals with traumatic brain injury: a summary of the research with clinical
implications. Semin. Speech Lang. 26(4), 256–257 (2005)
74. Sohlberg,
M.M.,
Mateer,
C.A.
(eds.):
Cognitive
rehabilitation:
an
integrative
neuropsychological approach. Guilford Press, New York (2001)
75. Mozolic, J.L., Hayasaka, S., Laurienti, P.J.: A cognitive training intervention increases
resting cerebral blood ﬂow in healthy older adults. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4 (2010)
76. Lustig, C., Shah, P., Seidler, R., Reuter-Lorenz, P.A.: Aging, training, and the brain: a
review and future directions. Neuropsychol. Rev. 19(4), 504–522 (2009)
72
I. Tarnanas et al.

77. Petersen, R.C., Parisi, J.E., Dickson, D.W., et al.: Neuropathologic features of amnestic mild
cognitive impairment. Arch. Neurol. 63(5), 665–672 (2006)
78. Stroop, J.R.: Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. J. Exp. Psychol. 18, 643–662
(1935)
79. Papaliagkas, V., Kimiskidis, V., Tsolaki, M., Anogianakis, G.: Usefulness of event-related
potentials in the assessment of mild cognitive impairment. BMC Neurosci. 9, 107 (2008)
80. Kimiskidis, V., Papaliagkas, V.: Event-related potentials for the diagnosis of mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Opin. Med. Diagn. 6(1), 15–26 (2012)
81. Pascual-Marqui, D.: Standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography
(sLORETA): technical details. Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol. D 24, 5–12 (2002)
82. Holmes, A.P., Blair, R.C., Watson, J.D.G., Ford, I.: Nonparametric analysis of statistic
images from functional mapping experiments. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 16(1), 7–22
(1996)
83. Li, S.C., Schmiedek, F., Huxhold, O., Röcke, C., Smith, J., Lindenberger, U.: Working
memory plasticity in old age: practice gain, transfer, and maintenance. Psychol. Aging
23(4), 731–742 (2008)
84. Dennis, W., Scialfa, C.T., Ho, G.: Age differences in feature selection in triple conjunction
search. J. Gerontol. B 59(4), P191–P198 (2004)
85. Ho, G., Scialfa, C.T.: Age, skill transfer, and conjunction search. J. Gerontol. B 57(3),
P277–P287 (2002)
86. Cant, J.S., Goodale, M.A.: Attention to form or surface properties modulates different
regions of human occipitotemporal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 17(3), 713–731 (2007)
87. Mechelh, A., Humphreys, G.W., Mayall, K., Olson, A., Price, C.J.: Differential effects of
word length and visual contrast in the fusiform and lingual gyri during reading. Proc. Royal
Soc. B 267(1455), 1909–1913 (2000)
88. Epstein.,
R.A.:
Parahippocampal
and
retrosplenial
contributions
to
human
spatial
navigation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12(10), 88–396 (2008)
89. Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J.: Effects of choice complexity on different
subcomponents
of
the
late
positive
complex
of
the
event-related
potential.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 92(2), 148–160 (1994a)
90. Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J.: Time pressure effects on late components of
the event-related potential (ERP). J. Psychophysiol. 8(1), 22–30 (1994b)
91. Tam, C.W., Lam, L.C., Chiu, H.F., Lui, V.W.: Characteristic proﬁles of instrumental
activities of daily living in Chinese older persons with mild cognitive impairment. Am.
J. Alzheimers Dis. Dement. 22, 211–217 (2007)
92. Pereira, F.S., Yassuda, M.S., Oliveira, A.M., Forlenza, O.V.: Executive dysfunction
correlates with impaired functional status in older adults with varying degrees of cognitive
impairment. Int. Psychogeriatr. 20, 1104–1115 (2008)
93. Ahn, I.S., et al.: Impairment of instrumental activities of daily living in patients with mild
cognitive impairment. Psychiatry Inv. 6, 180–184 (2009)
94. Burton, C.L., Strauss, E., Bunce, D., Hunter, M.A., Hultsch, D.F.: Functional abilities in
older adults with mild cognitive impairment. Gerontology 55, 570–581 (2009)
95. Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., Woo, E., Greeley, D.R.: Characterizing multiple memory
deﬁcits and their relation to everyday functioning in individuals with mild cognitive
impairment. Neuropsychology 23, 168–177 (2009)
96. Aretouli, E., Brandt, J.: Everyday functioning in mild cognitive impairment and its
relationship with executive cognition. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 25, 224–233 (2010)
97. Bangen, K.J., et al.: Complex activities of daily living vary by mild cognitive impairment
subtype. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 16, 630–639 (2010)
98. Teng, E., Becker, B.W., Woo, E., Cummings, J.L., Lu, P.H.: Subtle deﬁcits in instrumental
activities of daily living in subtypes of mild cognitive impairment. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn.
Disord. 30, 189–197 (2010)
4
Assessing Virtual Reality Environments
73

99. Teng, E., Becker, B.W., Woo, E., Knopman, D.S., Cummings, J.L., Lu, P.H.: Utility of the
functional activities questionnaire for distinguishing mild cognitive impairment from very
mild Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 24, 348–353 (2010)
100. Schmiedek, F., Bauer, C., Lovden, M., Brose, A., Lindenberger, U.: Cognitive enrichment
in old age: web-based training programs. GeroPsych 23(2), 59–67 (2010)
101. Nouchi, R., Taki, Y., Takeuchi, H., Hashizume, H., Akitsuki, Y., Shigemune, Y., Sekiguchi,
A., Kotozaki, Y., Tsukiura, T., Yomogida, Y., Kawashima, R.: Brain training game
improves executive functions and processing speed in the elderly. PLoS ONE 7, e29676
(2012)
102. Saczynski, J.S., Rebok, G.W., Whitﬁeld, K.E., Plude, D.J.: Effectiveness of CD-ROM
memory training as a function of within-session autonomy. Int. J. Cogn. Technol. 9(1),
25–33 (2004)
103. Lee, B., Chen, Y., Hewitt, L.: Age differences in constraints encountered by seniors in their
use of computers and the internet. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27(3), 1231–1237 (2011)
104. Torres, A.: Cognitive effects of video games on older people. ICDVRAT 19, 191–198
(2008)
105. Belchior, P.D.C. Cognitive training with video games to improve driving skills and driving
safety among older adults [dissertation]. ProQuest Information and Learning (2008)
106. Colcombe, S., Kramer, A.F.: Fitness effects on the cognitive function of older adults: a
meta-analytic study. Psychol. Sci. 14, 125–130 (2003)
107. Weiand,
C.:
Neuropsychologische
Behandlungsmethoden
im
Vergleich—Eine
randomisierte klinische Studie [Comparing neuropsychological treatment methods—A
randomized clinical trial]. PhD dissertation, University of Konstanz, Konstanz (2006)
108. Colzato, L.S., Van Muijden, J., Band, G.P.H., Hommel, B.: Genetic modulation of training
and transfer in older adults: BDNF Val66Met polymorphism is associated with wider useful
ﬁeld of view. Front. Psychol. 2, 199 (2011)
109. Geusgens, C., Winkens, I., van Heugten, C., Jolles, J., van den Heuvel, W.: The occurence
and measurement of transfer in cognitive rehabilitation: a critical review. J. Rehabil. Med.
39(6), 425–439 (2007)
110. Slater, M.: Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive virtual
environments. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 364, 3549–3557 (2009)
111. Lange, B., Rizzo, A., Chang, C.-Y., Suma, E., Bolas, M.: Markerless Full Body Tracking:
Depth-Sensing Technology within virtual environments. Paper presented at the Interservice/
Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), Orlando (2011)
112. Nebelrath, R., Lu, C., Schulz, C.H., Frey, J., Alexandersson, J.: A gesture based system for
context-sensitive interaction with smart homes. In: Wichert, R., Eberhardt, B. (eds.), 4.
AALKongress, pp. 209–222 (2011)
113. Hart, T.A., Chaparro, B.S., Halcomb, C.G.: Evaluating websites for older adults: adherence
to ‘senior-friendly’ guidelines and end-user performance. Behav. Info. Technol. 27(3),
191–199 (2008)
114. Pew Internet and American Life Project: Changes in internet use by age, 2000–2010.
Accessed 24 Jul 2011 (2010)
115. Gamberini, L., Alcaniz, M., Barresi, G., Fabregat, M., Ibanez, F., et al.: Cognition,
technology and games for the elderly: an introduction to ELDERGAMES project.
PsychNology J 4(3), 285–308 (2006)
74
I. Tarnanas et al.

