Effects of online group exercises for older 
adults on physical, psychological and 
social wellbeing: a randomized pilot trial 
Marcos Baez1, Iman Khaghani Far2, Francisco Ibarra1, Michela Ferron3, 
Daniele Didino4,5 and Fabio Casati1 
1 Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Trento, Trentino, Italy 
2 College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, United States 
3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Trentino, Italy 
4 Department of Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany 
5 Department of Economy, Tomsk Polytechnical University, Tomsk, Russia 
How to cite this article Baez et al. (2017), Effects of online group exercises for older adults on physical, psychological and social wellbe- 
ing: a randomized pilot trial. PeerJ 5:e3150; DOI 10.7717/peerj.3150 
Submitted 15 November 2016 
Accepted 6 March 2017 
Published 5 April 2017 
Corresponding author 
Marcos Baez, baez@disi.unitn.it 
Academic editor 
Tjeerd Boonstra 
Additional Information and 
Declarations can be found on 
page 22 

Copyright 
2017 Baez et al. 
Distributed under 
Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 


Background. Intervention programs to promote physical activity in older adults, either 
in group or home settings, have shown equivalent health outcomes but different 
results when considering adherence. Group-based interventions seem to achieve higher 
participation in the long-term. However, there are many factors that can make of group 
exercises a challenging setting for older adults. A major one, due to the heterogeneity of 
this particular population, is the difference in the level of skills. In this paper we report 
on the physical, psychological and social wellbeing outcomes of a technology-based 
intervention that enable online group exercises in older adults with different levels of 
skills. 
Methods. A total of 37 older adults between 65 and 87 years old followed a personalized 
exercise program based on the OTAGO program for fall prevention, for a period of eight 
weeks. Participants could join online group exercises using a tablet-based application. 
Participants were assigned either to the Control group, representing the traditional 
individual home-based training program, or the Social group, representing the online 
group exercising. Pre- and post- measurements were taken to analyze the physical, 
psychological and social wellbeing outcomes. 
Results. After the eight-weeks training program there were improvements in both 
the Social and Control groups in terms of physical outcomes, given the high level of 
adherence of both groups. Considering the baseline measures, however, the results 
suggest that while in the Control group fitter individuals tended to adhere more to the 
training, this was not the case for the Social group, where the initial level had no effect 
on adherence. For psychological outcomes there were improvements on both groups, 
regardless of the application used. There was no significant difference between groups 
in social wellbeing outcomes, both groups seeing a decrease in loneliness despite the 
presence of social features in the Social group. However, online social interactions have 
shown to be correlated to the decrease in loneliness in the Social group. 
Conclusion. The results indicate that technology-supported online group-exercising 
which conceals individual differences in physical skills is effective in motivating and 
enabling individuals who are less fit to train as much as fitter individuals. This not 
only indicates the feasibility of training together despite differences in physical skills 
but also suggests that online exercise might reduce the effect of skills on adherence 
Subjects Geriatrics, Kinesiology, Public Health, Human-Computer Interaction, Computational 
Science 
Keywords Home-based intervention, Group exercises, Older adults, Fall prevention, Virtual 
environments, Technology, Preclinical trial 
INTRODUCTION 
Background 
Extensive research has documented the association of regular physical activity with positive 
outcomes in health and wellbeing in later age (Thibaud et al., 2012; Stuart et al., 2008; 
Landi et al., 2010). Engaging in physical activities reduces the risk of falls (Thibaud et al., 
2012), slows the progression of degenerative diseases (Stuart et al., 2008), and improves 
cognitive performance and mood in older adults (Landi et al., 2010). Conversely, sedentary 
behaviour is associated with mortality, risk of depression and adverse effects on health and 
wellbeing in older adults (Rezende et al., 2014; Teychenne, Ball & Salmon, 2010). 
Intervention programs to promote physical activity in older adults, either in group 
or individual (home) settings, have demonstrated the potential to improve health and 
functional performance (El-Khoury et al., 2013). Both types of intervention have shown 
equivalent health outcomes (Freene et al., 2013) but with different results when considering 
adherence. Group-based interventions seem to achieve higher participation in the long-term 
(Van Der Bij, Laurant & Wensing, 2002), while in the short-term the results are comparable 
or not conclusive (Van Der Bij, Laurant & Wensing, 2002; Freene et al., 2013). 
The existing evidence for a higher participation to group-based interventions can be 
explained by the importance of socialization as a motivating factor in physical training 
(Phillips, Schneider & Mercer, 2004; De Groot & Fagerström, 2011). As reported by De Groot 
& Fagerström (2011), older adults do prefer training with others rather than individually. 
However, there are many factors that can make group exercises a challenging (or infeasible) 
setting for older adults. A major obstacle, due to the heterogeneity of this broad population, 
is the big difference in the level of physical abilities between participants: unless the 
training class is tailored to the needs and abilities of each group, we are likely to see 
limited effectiveness as well as lack of motivation in performing the exercises (De Groot 
& Fagerström, 2011; Müller & Khoo, 2014), which proves itself difficult in heterogeneous 
groups. This difference in physical abilities, along with the logistic and practical obstacles 
that make it more difficult, as we age, to regularly attend a gym and perform group exercises, 
means that, for some adults, home-based individual intervention is the only viable training 
option. 
Objective 
In this paper we report on a technology-based physical intervention that enables older 
adults with different abilities, and indeed in spite of their different abilities, to engage in 


in a social context. However, results from this pilot are limited to a small sample size 
and therefore are not conclusive. Longer term interventions with more participants are 
instead recommended to assess impacts on wellbeing and behavior change. 
group exercises from home while keeping these differences invisible to the group. The 
intervention is based on the OTAGO Exercise Program for fall prevention (Gardner et 
al., 2001) and supported by a set of applications that allow older adults to follow virtual 
training sessions via a tablet device under the supervision of a remote Coach. 
The study presented in this paper is Part II of the intervention program presented in Far 
et al. (2015) that studied the effect of virtual fitness environments on adherence and social 
interactions. In this paper we report on the physical, psychological and social wellbeing 
outcomes related to the intervention. The primary objectives of this study, and of the paper 
are: 

social and psychological wellbeing influence the adherence of older adults to the training 
program. 
• to assess the effectiveness of an OTAGO-based exercise program delivered via an online 
group-exercising tool - effectiveness measured as the improvements in the physical 
functions expected by the exercise program. 


Related work 
Previous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of the OTAGO Exercise Program 
in reducing falls and fall-related injuries among high risk individuals, and increasing the 
percentage of older adults who are able to live independently in their community (Campbell 
et al., 1997; Campbell & Robertson, 2003). Although this specific program was designed for 
home-based training, a meta-analysis including other exercise programs for fall prevention 
found that combining group-based and home-based exercises is a strategy used in several 
effective trials, thus recommending both options to be available (Sherrington et al., 2011). 
Technology-based interventions have also demonstrated to be effective in increasing and 
maintaining physical activity (refer to Müller & Khoo, 2014 and Aalbers, Baars & Rikkert, 
2011 for systematic reviews). Among the technological components that have been explored 
we can mention: online newsletters (Hageman, Walker & Pullen, 2005), personalized 
emails (Ferney et al., 2009), web-based videos (Irvine et al., 2013; Benavent-Caballer et al., 
2015), tablet applications (Silveira et al., 2013a) and video game consoles (Jorgensen et 
al., 2013). However, most of the existing intervention studies have focused on individual 
training, or provided a social context that was limited to forums or chats (Aalbers, Baars 
& Rikkert, 2011). Even exergames, a type of technology that have traditionally provided 
more immersive experiences (e.g., via MS Kinect and Nintendo Wii), have not been 
explored in an online group setting. A systematic review on exergames besides reporting 
on lack of conclusive results on the improvements in physical functioning, reported only 
one interventions with exercise performed in pairs, but that required physical presence 
(Molina et al., 2014). 
In summary, there are no interventions exploring online group-exercising in home 
settings, where training programs were tailored to individuals. In this paper, we report 


on the feasibility and outcomes of a technology-based intervention in such settings. It 
complements our previous reports on the same intervention: 
• Baez et al. (2016), on the application design and human factors. We describe the design 
rationale and its evolution, and report on the technology acceptance, usage and usability, 
and the nature of online interactions. 
• Far et al. (2015), on whether the application motivated participants to adhere to the 
training program, and whether the virtual gym design motivated older adults to train 
together in a group. 

accepted, (ii) it motivated individuals to follow the training program, (iii) and to join 
the training sessions in groups as opposed to alone. In this paper, however, we focus in 
understanding how baseline measures of physical, social and psychological wellbeing affect 
the adherence to the training program, and how this effect is modified by training in an 
online social setting. We also report on the effectiveness of the training program in terms 
of physical outcomes, and additionally on social and psychological wellbeing. 

The methods followed in this intervention study have been described in detail in Far et al. 
(2015). In this section, we elaborate on the aspects related to the specific objectives of this 
paper. 
Training application 
Gymcentral (http://gymcentral.net) is a web and tablet application designed to enable and 
motivate older adults of different abilities to participate in group training sessions from 
home, under the supervision of a human coach. The technology provided by Gymcentral 
supports the online group-exercising as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
The design of the application is based on the metaphor of a virtual gym, mimicking the 
spaces and services found in a real gym. The main features of the service are: 
• Reception. The entry point to all the services of the gym. 
• Locker room. As in a real gym, a space where trainees usually meet each other and get 
ready for the training classes. In the locker room, users can see each other, interact by 
means of predefined messages (e.g., ‘‘Hi, let’s go to the classroom’’), and invite members 
who are not online to join. 

space users are not only able to see the Coach, but also each other as avatars, giving the 
feeling of training together. 



participation of users in each session, and reminding them of the upcoming sessions. 
• Messaging. Messaging features allow users to exchange public and private messages. 



• Positive and negative reinforcement. After the completion of a training session, 
positive or negative reinforcement messages are presented to users depending on 
the number of exercises completed. 
In Gymcentral, personalisation is related to the level of difficulty of the exercise, and it 
works from two perspectives. On one hand, the user is able to request for an increase in 
the training level (level-up). A coach receives and manages the requests of users (Fig. 1, 
point 5) and, for each individual case, is able to accept or reject the request, based on user 
performances. Additionally, each exercise in the training plan can be suspended if necessary 
(e.g., in case of illness or aches). A key aspect here is that users can train in a virtual group 
even if each participant is shown different exercise instructions and videos, matching 
their personalized level of training. Even if users are able to see their training partners 
exercising while they are in the same training sessions, they are not aware of the difference 
in training levels. Therefore, trainees can train together despite their different capabilities. 
The main difference between Gymcentral and previous tools is in the possibility of 
following group training programs from home, in a virtual gym, supervised by a remote 
Coach. A detailed discussion of the design and evolution of the Gymcentral app can be 
found in Baez et al. (2016). 



Study design 
The study followed a framework for the design and evaluation of complex interventions 
in health settings (Campbell et al., 2000). Using a matched random assignment procedure, 
participants were assigned either an experimental (‘‘social’’) condition or to a control con- 
dition (McBurney & White, 2009; Whitley & Kite, 2013), considering age and participants’ 
frailty level as the random assignment variables. The randomization was performed using 
the statistical software SPSS. The allocation was concealed to the researchers who enrolled 
and assessed the participants (the Coach and a social scientist). Once baseline measures 
were taken, a third researcher, using the statistical software SPSS, performed the random 
assignment (at once) to Control and Social conditions from the pool of 40 subjects. The 
overall study flow is depicted in Fig. 2. 
Participants in the social group were given a version of the Gymcentral Trainee App 
that included the personalized training program, social environment for group exercising, 
messaging and persuasion features. Participants were aware that they were exercising 
together and they could choose to do so. In the control condition, participants received a 
version of the application that focused only on the home-based program, delivering the 
personalised training but without social or individual persuasion features. Participants 
from both groups were offered technology training modules (∼1.5 h each) focusing on 
operating the tablet, the use of the main applications and the Gymcentral app. The training 
took place after the pre-measurements. 

assigned version of the application installed, the user guide including the names and 
telephone numbers of the support team, instructions about the use of the tablet and the 
assigned application, one pair of ankle weights to perform the exercises and a folder to 
allow the vertical positioning of the tablet. 

were collected in three meetings: (i) in the first meeting, demographic information, the 
Groningen Frailty Indicator score (GFI; Steverink et al., 2001) and the Rapid Assessment of 
Physical Activity Questionnaire score (RAPA; Topolski et al., 2006) were measured; (ii) in the 
second meeting we collected self-reported measures of psychological and social wellbeing; 
and (iii) in the third meeting a personal trainer performed a physical assessment. The 
latter allowed for personalised tailoring of exercise type and progression levels (in terms of 
duration, use of weights, and number of repetitions), and for personalisation of the starting 
level of each participant. Measurements were performed by the Coach and the sociologist 
of the local senior citizen organization. Both were not aware of the group allocation at the 
time of the measurements. 
The study took place in Trento, Italy, over a period of 10 weeks from October to 
December 2014. The duration and size of this study is similar to previous technology- 
supported interventions that have seen significant results in adherence and improvements 
physical measures (e.g., Silveira et al., 2013b). The first week was devoted to technical 
deployment and application testing, followed by 8 weeks of training and 1 week of post- 
training measurements. The training program was supervised by a training coach, who 
could intervene to advance trainees in the exercise program, and to provide technical 


support upon request. The same level of technical support was made available to both 
groups. 

Research Involving Human Beings (Application N. 2014-001). As the study follows a 
framework for the design of complex interventions in healthcare (Campbell et al., 2000), at 
this stage it is considered as a pilot study. 
Participants 
We considered eligible for the study participants aged 65 or older, independent-living, 
self-sufficient and with a non-frail, transitionally frail or a mild frailty level. The latter was 
measured using the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI; Steverink et al., 2001), considering 
eligible those participants scoring lower than 7 in the scale from zero (not frail) to fifteen 
(very frail). Participants wearing pacemakers were not considered eligible, since the study 
required the use of a mobility sensor, as well as participants not able to undergo the exercise 
program according to their family doctor. 



Week 10 
POST measurements 
PRE measurements 
Technology training activities 
Physical assessment tests 

* A replacement was found, without affecting the balance 
between both groups 
Week 1 
Technical deployment and application testing 
Week 2 to 9 
Training based on the Otago Exercise Program 

Lost to follow-up (n=0) 
• Discontinued intervention (n=0) 
Allocated to control (n=20) 
• Received allocated intervention (n=20) 
• Did not receive allocated intervention (n=0) 

Randomized (age, GFI) 
N=40 
Allocated to intervention (n=20) 
• Received allocated intervention (n=19) 
• Did not receive allocated intervention (n=1)* 

Lost to follow-up (n=3) 
• Discontinued intervention (n=3) 
- Health-issues (NCD) (n=1) 
- Family problems (n=1) 
- 


Analysed (n=17) 
• Excluded from analysis (n=3) 

Analysed (n=20) 
• Excluded from analysis (n=0) 
Inclusion criteria: 
GFI score < 7 (non-frail, transitionally 
frail or mild frailty level) and written 
approval by family doctor 

Excluded (n=30) 
• Not meeting inclusion criteria (n=14) 
• Declined to participate (n=10) 
• Other reasons (n=6) 


RAPA, mean (SD) 
Self-reported measures, after allocation* 
PACES, mean (SD) 
Subjective wellbeing score (SD) 
Physical assessment, after allocation* 
Starting level, mean (SD) 

aDifferences computed using independent samples t -test. 
bDifferences computed using Pearson Chi squared test. 
*Control group was reduced to 17 participants after dropouts. 
p-value 
0.515a 
1.000b 
0.284a 
0.902a 
0.444a 
0.562a 
0.811a 
0.003a 
0.029a 
0.017a 
We recruited participants through members of local associations (Ada and Auser) that 
promote initiatives for elderly persons in Trento, Italy. We sent invitations to the 70 persons 
that visited the associations more recently. Out of these, 10 persons declined the invitation, 
6 were excluded because they lived in an area without 3G or LTE coverage, and 14 did 
not meet the frailty criteria. In the end, a total of 40 participants between 65 and 87 years 
old were recruited for the study (29 females and 11 males, mean age = 71, s.d. = 5.7). 
All participants obtained a formal written approval by their family doctor to allow them 
to participate in the study. Both doctors and participants received a written outline and 
explanation of the study and signed the consent before participating. 
From the initial group of participants, 4 older adults withdrew at different times during 
the course of the study due to unpredictable health or family problems. One participant 
was substituted because the withdrawal occurred before the beginning of the study, while 
the others could not be replaced since they withdrew during the course of the study. For 
this reason, the results are based on the data from 37 participants (27 females and 9 males, 
mean age = 71.2, s.d. = 5.8, between 65 and 87 years old). 



before, and less than 10% used it regularly. Thus, and as mentioned in the previous 
subsection, all participants were provided introductory courses on how to use the tablet. 
In Table 1 we summarise the initial measures for both groups. A t -test for independent 
groups shows no statistical difference between control and experimental groups in terms 
of the initial measures, except for the ones related to the physical assessment. This issue is 
addressed later in the analysis. 





























Intervention: activity program 
The exercise program implemented in this study was developed on the basis of the OTAGO 
Exercise Program (Gardner et al., 2001), and was adapted by a professional personal trainer 
in order to fit the original program into 10 levels of increasing difficulty (Table S1). 
The OTAGO Exercise Program is used worldwide and is one of the most tested fall 
prevention programs (with four randomized controlled trials and one controlled multi- 
center trial (Stevens, 2010)). The program includes muscle strengthening and balance- 
retraining exercises of increasing levels in terms of duration and repetitions. The duration 
of the exercise sessions ranged from 30 to 40 min, with longer sessions in the higher levels. 
Participants from both the social and control group were assigned an initial level by the 
Coach based on the pre-test analysis. As a minimum requirement, participants were then 
asked to participate in two exercise sessions per week. Participants of both groups were able 
to progress in the exercise program every week, via an automatic level-up suggestion by the 
system. If participants agreed to level-up, the personal trainer would verify the attendance 
and completeness of exercises before enabling the following level. 
TEST PROCEDURES AND OUTCOME MEASURES 
Primary outcomes 
Participation measures 
Attrition. The attrition rate was used to measure the proportion of participants lost at the 
end of the study. 
Adherence. The adherence was used to measure the conformity of the participants with the 
exercise program. For each participant, two measures were considered. The first is related 
to persistence throughout the eight weeks of the exercise program, and it was computed 
considering the ratio between the number of participations in exercise sessions by a 
participant and the number of the exercise sessions planned in the program. Participation 
was measured by logging the attendance to the scheduled training sessions in the virtual 
classroom (considering also partial participation, where participants skipped exercises). 
The second measure is related to the level of completeness of the exercise sessions. It was 
calculated considering, for each session, the percentage of exercises videos that the user 
actually followed (watched)—excluding the time of preparation and skipped exercises— 
with respect to the total duration of the exercises planned for the session. 
Physical assessment exercises 
Specific assessment exercises, developed and validated within the Otago Exercise Program 
(Campbell et al., 1997; Campbell & Robertson, 2003), were used to measure participants’ 
leg muscle strength and walking ability at the beginning and at the end of the study, in a 
face-to-face session with each participant. In particular, the assessment exercises were: 
• 30 s Chair Stand test (Jones, Rikli & Beam, 1999): the purpose of this test is to evaluate 
leg strength and endurance. From seated position, the participant rises to a full standing 
position and then sit back down again for 30 s. The outcome measure is the number of 
times the participant comes to a full standing position in 30 s. 


• Timed Up & Go test (Podsiadlo & Richardson, 1991; Rossiter-Fornoff et al., 1995): the 
purpose of this test is to assess older adult mobility. From the seated position, the 
participant stands up from the chair, walks for 3 m at his/her normal pace, then turns, 
walks back to the chair and sits back down again. The outcome measure is the number 
of seconds to complete the test. 
Secondary outcomes 
Psychological dimensions 
We investigated changes in psychological dimensions related to different aspects of physical 
activity and wellbeing, by collecting participants’ feedback before and after the study on 
the following measures: 
Enjoyment of physical activity. Past literature has shown that intrinsically motivated 
people tend to engage in physical activity for personal improvement and because they enjoy 
it (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Pelletier et al., 1995). Enjoyment of physical activity is believed to 
develop positive attitudes toward exercise, enhance intrinsic motivation, and consequently 
foster long-lasting adherence to physical activity (Ryan et al., 1997; Wankel, 1993). In order 
to measure participants’ enjoyment of physical activity at the beginning and at the end of 
the study, we used the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (PACES; Kendzierski & DeCarlo, 
1991), which has been validated in several studies, including one with an Italian sample 
(Carraro, Young & Robazza, 2008). The scale includes 16 items scored on a 5-point Likert 
scale with the range from 1 (disagree a lot) to 5 (agree a lot). Total enjoyment scores range 
from 16 to 80 (maximum enjoyment). 
Subjective wellbeing. In order to investigate the effectiveness of the application and 
training in improving subjective wellbeing, we collected participants’ feedback before and 
after the training period using the Wellbeing scale of the Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire (MPQ; Tellegen & Waller, 2008). This scale was developed to assess positive 
emotional tendencies as distinct from the absence of a negative emotional disposition. 
Wellbeing represents individual dispositions to experience positive emotions, and is an 
important marker of the higher order Positive Emotionality dimension. The scale includes 
12 items requiring a true / false response, with the total scoring ranging from 0 to 12. 
People who score higher in this scale tend to describe themselves as cheerful, optimistic, 
hopeful, having interesting experiences and engaging in enjoyable activities (Tellegen & 
Waller, 2008, p. 274). 
Social wellbeing 
The effects of the technology-based intervention on the social wellbeing was assessed on 
the basis of participants’ feedback, collected at the beginning and at the end of the study 
using a measure of loneliness. 
Loneliness is an aspect that negatively affects social wellbeing. Shifts in the social 
environment, and in particular loneliness, are believed to be an important aspect in 
the life of aging people (see for example Hughes et al., 2004; Liu & Rook, 2013). Loneliness 
involves individual perception of social isolation and feelings of not belonging and being 
disconnected, and is a central aspect of a group of socio-emotional states including, among 
others, self-esteem, optimism, anxiety, anger and social support. To measure loneliness, 


we used a shorter version of the R-UCLA Loneliness Scale (revised version of the UCLA 
Loneliness Scale developed by University of California, Los Angeles) (Russell, Peplau & 
Cutrona, 1980) developed by Hughes et al. (2004). The scale used includes 3 items scored 
on a 5-point Likert scale, with the total score ranging from 3 to 15, and higher scores 
indicating higher levels of loneliness. 

Program Adherence. We analyze persistence with an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with 
group (social vs. control) and initial scores of gait speed, leg muscle strength and PACES 
(enjoyment of physical activity) as between-subject factors. Gait speed, and leg muscle 
strength, and PACES scores are grouped into three equally distributed intervals: Low, 
Medium, and High. In this ANOVA, we take into account only the interactions between 
group and the other three factors. 
Gait speed and leg muscle strength. We analyzed Gait speed (in terms of Timed Up & Go 
test score) with a repeated-measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with group (control 
vs. social) as between-subject factor, time (pre- vs. post-measurement) as within-subject 
factor, and persistence as covariate. In the ANCOVA, we take into account the interaction 
between group and time. We perform the same analysis for muscle strength (in terms of 
30 s Chair Stand test score). 
Enjoyment of physical activity. We perform a repeated-measures of covariance 
(ANCOVA) to determine a statistically significant difference in the PACES scores between 
control and social group, using pre- and post- measurement points as within-subject factor, 
and persistence as covariate. We compute the main effect for time, and the interaction 
between time and group. 
Subjective wellbeing. We used the median value to dichotomise this variable into ‘‘Low’’ 
(respondents with less than or equal to median subjective wellbeing score) and ‘‘High’’ 
wellbeing (respondents with more than median score). We analyze the subjective well- 
being score by means of a logistic regression with group (control vs. social), time (pre- vs. 
post-measurement), and persistence as factors. The model includes also the interaction 
effect of time with both group and persistence. In the logistic regression, ‘‘High’’ is used as 
reference level of the dependent variable. 
Loneliness. We used the median value (i.e., 5) to dichotomise this variable into ‘‘Low’’ 
(respondents with less than or equal to median loneliness score) and ‘‘High’’ loneliness 
(respondents with more than median loneliness score). This binary variable is analyzed 
by means of a logistic regression with group (control vs. social), time (pre- vs. post- 
measurement), and persistence as factors. The model includes also the interaction effect of 
time with both group and persistence. In the logistic regression, ‘‘High’’ is used as reference 
level of the dependent variable. 


We perform the analyses using the open source statistical software R (R Core Team, 
2013), using the ggplot2 (Wickham, 2009) and ggnet (Schloerke et al., 2016) packages for 


plotting the results. We consider as extreme values the data points in the 1.5 interquartile 
ranges (IQRs) below the first quartile or above the third quartile. Results excluding extreme 
values are reported when the normality assumption of the test is not met. 
RESULTS 
Application usage 
Before reporting on the main outcome measures, we summarise the results from Baez 
et al. (2016), which reported on how participants of the intervention—also studied in 
this paper—perceived and used the trainee application. We also report on online social 
interactions, to put the social wellbeing outcome in context. 
Participants’ perception 
To collect feedback on the participant’s perception of the tool, we used a questionnaire 
(https://goo.gl/zl7daL) assessing the most stimulating aspect of the overall experience and 
the usefulness of the various features. 
Most stimulating aspects. A manual classification using a emerging coding scheme was 
performed to identify main themes in participants’ open-ended responses. 
As stimulating aspects, two main themes emerged in the social group: training with 
others and the possibility of following the training program. Other participants expressed 
the possibility of messaging or challenging themselves. In the control group the possibility 
of training from home was also a main theme along with the personal satisfaction of doing 
the exercises. Interestingly, in this group one person reported that ‘‘The experience was 
interesting, though it was a pity that the Coach was in the video and not actually present’’. 
As negative aspects, the dominant issue was the intermittent interruptions in the Internet 
service that occurred at some point during the study, and which affected both groups 
equally. 
Usefulness of features. Participants of the social group continued to use all features of 
the application throughout the study, although with different perceived usefulness. As 
reported in Baez et al. (2016), the features that are instrumental to the training were 
naturally experienced by most of the trainees, and this includes exercising in the classroom, 
checking out the schedule, and more importantly, training with the company of others. 
Together these features were highly valued. Persuasion features were also among the most 
experienced and valued. This includes, following the progress and visualizing their own 
progress in the garden and, still very positive but to a lesser extent, inviting others to join 
a training session 
Interestingly, social interaction features received mixed results. While group chat was 
used widely, personal messaging was heavily used to interact with the Coach but less with 
other participants. 
The results above show not only that participants of the social group did feel as if they 
were training with others but also that they considered it as one of the most stimulating 
aspects. This supports the results reported in Far et al. (2015), where it was observed that 


participants in an online group setting resulted in a significantly higher number of joint 
sessions (training together as opposed to training alone) compared to the control group. 
Online social interactions 
We briefly summarise the usage of the online social interaction features that were available 
in the social group: private messages and bulletin board (public messages). The usage was 
analyzed by looking at the database of messages exchanged among participants. 
Private messages were preferred over the public messages, accounting for 75% of all 
the messages exchanged (544 messages). The most active user was the Coach, who had to 
contact the trainees to check on their progress on a weekly basis, followed by the Technician. 
We illustrate the interactions between all the participants in Fig. S1 . 
A qualitative content analysis of the online interactions was presented in Baez et al. 
(2016), where we reported the distinctive use of private and public messages. We developed 
a coding scheme based on relevant literature about online behaviour and communities, 
developing a final coding scheme composed of 5 top- and 12 sub-categories. Then two inde- 
pendent researchers coded the messages (Cohen’s kappa: public messages .85 and .84 for top 
and sub categories; private messages .87 and .85 for top and sub categories correspondingly). 


around physical activity and, in particular, by offering support. Trainees instead lead 
discussions focused on community building, and entertainment (e.g., sharing jokes). 
When discussing about physical activity, trainees focused on reporting their personal 
experience with the exercises. Discussions about the application were shared mostly with 
the technician and were related to issues with the application. 

congratulating users after each week of training. Trainees participated more actively in 
community building, and in discussions about physical activity where they also provided 
support and encouragement to their peers. Positive comments about the application 
were interestingly largely more predominant in public. 
Participants of the control group enjoyed the same type of support, although via phone 
calls, diaries and transcripts of the interactions with the Staff were not available, limiting 
the comparison of effects at the group level and the detailed analysis of interactions to the 
Social group. 
Program adherence 
The results initially described in Far et al. (2015), provided interesting insights on the effect 
of social features on participants’ adherence. In this work, we extend on the previous 
analysis to report on the effect of participants’ physical abilities and attitudes towards 
exercising on their adherence to the training. 
Attrition 
The intervention resulted in a 7.5% attrition rate (corresponding to 3 participants), 
measured in terms of the proportion of participants lost at the end of the study. Reasons 


behind the withdrawal of these participants were related to unexpected health and family 
problems or, in one case, because of Internet connection issues which could not be solved. 
Persistence 
The overall persistence rate in the two groups was of 76% (SD = 22.6%), when considering 
the total number of sessions available (Fig. 3A). In the social group the persistence rate 
was 85%, while in the control group it was 64%. A between-subjects analysis of variance 
was performed to compare the persistence of both groups while controlling for the initial 
scores in the measures of gait speed and leg muscle strength (physical measures), and the 
enjoyment of physical activity. The independent variables were grouped in three equally 
distributed intervals (Low, Medium, High). The analysis showed a significant interaction 
between group and the initial measures of leg muscle strength (F (2,23) = 5.966, p = .008, 
partial eta squared = .342), but no significant interaction with gait speed (F (1,23) = 3.42, 
p = .08, partial eta squared = .13) nor enjoyment of physical activity (F (2,23) = 1.93, 
p = .17, partial eta squared = .144). In Fig. 3B we show the relevant interaction plot. 
The same analysis, exploring the effect of the initial loneliness score as independent variable 
(with and without controlling for the other variables) reveal no significant interaction with 
group. 
The interaction between group and leg muscle strength shows a higher persistence 
in participants of the control group that scored higher in the initial leg muscle strength 
test. For the social group however, there is no significant difference in the persistence 
of participants based on their initial leg muscle strength score. This suggests that, when 
training individually, fitter participants tend to adhere more to the training, but when 
social elements are in place these differences in fitness no longer determine adherence. 
There was also a significant main effect for group (F (1,23) = 13.151, p = .001, partial 
eta squared= .364), with the social group showing a higher persistence rate (M = 85.4%, 
SD = 16.1%) compared to the control group (M = 64.2%, SD = 24.1%). Considering 















Medium 
Initial leg muscle strength 










Figure 3 Interaction plots for persistence and (A) initial measures of leg muscle strength and (B) phys- 
ical activity enjoyment. 
the minimum number of sessions per week as recommended by the Coach (2 sessions per 
week), it results in a higher level of persistence for both groups: social group (M = 97.5%, 
SD = 6.8%) and control group (M = 85%, SD = 25.9%). 
The lower variability of persistence in the social group can be explained by the social 
features (normative influence, social facilitation, social learning) that might have motivated 
users to comply with the community norm. In the control group, the higher variability 
suggests a stronger effect of individual differences due to the lack of social awareness. 
Completeness 
The overall completeness rate in the two groups was 90.32% (SD = 17.4%), suggesting that 
participants tended to complete the working sessions once they started. The completeness 
rate in the social group (M = 91.75%, SD = 12.46%) was slightly higher compared to that 
of the control group (M = 88.63%, SD = 22.24%), although not statistically significant. As 
in the previous measure, a between-subjects analysis of variance was performed to compare 
the completeness of both groups while controlling for the initial scores in the measures 
of gait speed and leg muscle strength, enjoyment of physical activity and loneliness. No 
interaction was found between group and the initial scores, but a main effect for initial leg 
muscle strength (F (2,23) = 5.075, p = .015, partial eta squared = .306). We attribute this 
effect to the duration of the video exercises that were assigned to fitter individuals (e.g., 
required more repetitions), which were longer for higher levels of intensity. 

by the presence of self-monitoring tools (e.g., positive and negative reinforcement) and 
social facilitation (exercising with others), which were lacking in the training sessions of 
the control group participants. 
Muscle strength and gait speed 
Two types of assessment exercises, developed and validated within the OTAGO Exercise 
Program (Campbell et al., 1997; Campbell & Robertson, 2003), were used to measure 
participants’ leg muscle strength and walking ability at the beginning and at the end 
of the study. 
Leg muscle strength 
A repeated-measures of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed to determine a statistically 
significant difference in the 30 s Chair Stand scores between control and social group, using 
pre- and post- measurement points as repeated measures variable, and persistence as 
covariate (Fig. 4A). The analysis showed a significant main effect for time (F (1,29) = 
37.803, p < .001, partial eta squared = .566) but no interaction between group and time 
(F (1,29) = 0.704, p = .404, partial eta squared= .024). This suggests that, while there is an 
overall improvement, time did not have a substantially different effect on the performance 
of the two groups nor on participants with different levels of adherence. We attribute this 
effect to (i) high adherence with the minimal recommendations by the Coach and (ii) the 
duration of the pilot that might not have been enough to see statistically significant results. 


The analysis also revealed a main effect of group (F (1,29) = 6.809, p = .014, partial eta 
squared = .19) and persistence (F (1,29) = 10.233, p = .003, partial eta squared = .261). 
We should note that despite randomization and the non-significant difference between the 
self-reported physical activity in the two groups (measured with the Rapid Assessment of 
Physical Activity Questionnaire by Topolski et al. (2006)), participants in the Social group 
performed better than participants in the Control group in the 30 s Chair Stand pre-test. 
Gait speed 
A repeated-measures of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed to determine a statistically 
significant difference in the Timed Up & Go scores between control and social group, using 
pre- and post- measurement points as repeated measures variable, and persistence as 
covariate (Fig. 4B). 
The analysis showed a significant main effect for time (F (1,31) = 11.952, p = .002, 
partial eta squared= .278) but no interaction between group and time. The results bear 
similarities with the ones of leg muscle strength test, suggesting overall improvement in gait 
speed after the training program, but not a significant different effect on the two groups 
nor on participants with different levels of adherence. The analysis also revealed a main 
effect of group (F (1,31) = 11.789, p = .002, partial eta squared = .276) and persistence 
(F (1,31) = 5.086, p = .031, partial eta squared = .141). As in the previous measure, we 
attribute the effect to the overall high adherence and to the duration of the pilot study. 


























Figure 4 Physical outcomes before and after eight weeks of training (A) participants’ scores in the 
30 s chair stand, measuring leg muscle strength, (B) participants’ gait speed in the Timed Up & Go test, 
measuring walking ability. 
Psychological dimensions 
Enjoyment of physical activity 
We used the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (PACES; Carraro, Young & Robazza, 2008; 
Kendzierski & DeCarlo, 1991) to measure participants’ enjoyment of physical activity at the 
beginning and at the end of the study (Fig. 5). 
A repeated-measures of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed to determine a 
statistically significant difference in the PACES scores between control and social group, 
using pre- and post- measurement points as repeated measures variable, and persistence as 
covariate. The analysis showed a main effect for time (F (1,33) = 16.998, p < .001, partial 
eta squared = .278) but no interaction between group and time. An analysis excluding 
extreme values resulted in comparable results, with a main effect for time (F (1,31) = 23.297, 
p < .001, partial eta squared = .429). These results show that participants enjoyed more 
engaging in physical activity at the end of the study regardless of the group and their level 
of adherence. 


Subjective wellbeing 
Subjective wellbeing was measured by means of MPQ (Tellegen & Waller, 2008) before and 
after the study (Fig. 6). In the logistic regression performed on the subjective wellbeing 
score, only time was a significant factor (B = −1.050, OR = 0.350, 95% CI [0.129–0.909], 












Figure 5 Participants’ mean scores in the physical activity enjoyment scale before and after the eight- 
week period of the exercise program, excluding extreme values from the original dataset. 
p = .034). This suggest that subjective wellbeing improved for participants of both groups, 
regardless of the version of the app. 
Social wellbeing 
Loneliness 
In the logistic regression performed on the loneliness score, only the factor time was 
significant in improving (reducing) loneliness (B = 1.121, OR = 3.068, 95% CI [1.177– 
8.380], p = .024). To investigate the extent of the improvement according to the initial 
loneliness score (t1) we also tested the interaction between that initial score (grouped in 
three equally distributed intervals: Low, Medium, High) and time. Although the interaction 
is not statistically significant we can see a stronger trend for higher initial levels of loneliness. 
In Fig. 7 we illustrate the loneliness scores before and after the training. 
These results suggest that, overall, the perception of loneliness significantly decreased after 
the training, regardless of the group and adherence to the training. We attribute this effect 
to the attention given by the Coach to both groups. 
To investigate if the use of social features predicts the improvement in the loneliness 
score for the social group, we performed a correlation test (with Spearman method) using 
the number of private and public messages as predictors (Fig. 8). For private messages 
we took message received, as the exchanges were nearly symmetrical. The results show 
that number of messages received is significantly correlated with the improvement in the 
loneliness scores (rho = −.635, p = .003). Public messages, on the other hand, were not 
correlated (rho = −.244, p = .314). 














Figure 6 Participants’ scores in the wellbeing scale of the multidimensional personality questionnaire 
before and after the training period (range, 1–12). 
DISCUSSION 
Main ﬁndings 
In virtual group exercising, adherence by persons with low starting levels 
of physical skills reaches the same level as that of more ﬁt participants 
Training adherence outcomes show that the initial level of skill had no significant influence 
on the adherence of participants of the Social group, while in the Control group we observed 
that fitter participants tended to adhere more to the training. These results suggest that 
(i) the online group-exercising could potentially overcome a major issue reported in the 
literature (De Groot & Fagerström, 2011) in terms of negative effect of group-exercising 
in the motivation of heterogeneous groups, and 





























Figure 7 Participants’ mean scores in the abbreviated form of the R-UCLA Loneliness Scale before and 
after the eight-week period of the exercise program. 




















Figure 8 Regression lines for (A) number of messages received and (B) number of public messages 
posted. 
We should notice that despite the small sample we have observed a large effect size 
(partial eta squared = .327). This pilot thus motivates further studies into the effect of 
baseline measures on adherence. 

This comes from the debriefing of participants, and after observing the participation 
of trainees in the Social group, who were able to choose whether to train alone or in 
company, and largely participated of training sessions in company (after controlling for 
casual meet-ups) (Far et al., 2015). This is in line with existing literature pointing to the 
importance of social features in fitness applications (Far et al., 2016). 
These results contribute to the literature studying the effects of group-based and 
home-based training, which on short-term settings have not provided conclusive results 
(Van Der Bij, Laurant & Wensing, 2002; Freene et al., 2013). However, the hybrid nature of 
the proposed intervention requires further studies, to compare its effectiveness to that of 
traditional interventions. 
Virtual group-exercising enables tailored home-based intervention with 
positive physical outcomes and increased persistence 
In terms of physical outcomes, at the end of the eight-week program, both Social and 
Control groups showed significant improvement in gait speed and leg muscle strength, 
given the high levels of adherence in both groups. It is important to note that by providing 
the feeling of training together to an otherwise tailored exercise program, participants of 
the Social Group observed the benefits of performing exercises that were tailored to their 
individual abilities (traditionally part of an individual training program) while enjoying 
the extra motivation of the social context (as indicated by the greater persistence of the 
social group). 

outcomes of traditional group- and home-based training (Freene et al., 2013), though in 
this setting we have achieved these results with a heterogeneous group. However, further 
studies are required in order to observe these effects in long-term settings. 
Positive eﬀects on enjoyment and subjective wellbeing at the end of the 
training program (regardless of the control or social condition) 
The psychological measures have shown a significant improvement after the eight-week 
training program. Participants from both groups showed a significant increase in the 
enjoyment of physical activity, as measured by the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale 
(PACES; Carraro, Young & Robazza, 2008; Kendzierski & DeCarlo, 1991), and in subjective 
wellbeing, as measured by the MPQ (Tellegen & Waller, 2008). This supports the literature 
associating regular physical activity with positive outcomes in health and wellbeing in later 
age (Thibaud et al., 2012; Stuart et al., 2008; Landi et al., 2010). However, the difference in 
the adherence observed between both groups did not account for a statistical difference in 
psychological outcomes. Further analysis is required to understand whether these measures 
are not affected by the exercise settings or differences in the software features. 


Decrease in loneliness in both groups, attributed to contacts with the Coach 
(and between participants) 
We also observe that, although social features played a part in motivating participation to 
training sessions in the Social group (Far et al., 2015), there was no significant difference 
in terms of loneliness scores with respect to the Control group after the eight weeks of 
training. A plausible explanation for the improvement in the Control group is the frequent 
contact with participants via telephone. This is common practice in clinical evaluation 
studies involving older adults, where social visits to the control group are performed to 
mirror the time and attention provided to the treatment group, and even suggested by 
several authors (for example, Hogan et al., 2001; Michael et al., 2010; Tinetti et al., 1994). 
In our study, each participant in the control group was contacted by phone, rather than 
via the messaging features of the application, and it is possible that the effect of this 
contact was strong enough to produce a significant decrease in participants’ perception of 
loneliness. Indeed, previous work relying on the R-UCLA loneliness scale, and with similar 
intervention periods (6–15 weeks), have achieved significant reductions of loneliness 
but have also included the physical presence of educators, trainers, and peers during the 
intervention (Shapira, Barak & Gal 2007; Fukui et al., 2003). 
Thus, we found noteworthy the significant decrease in the level of loneliness in the Social 
group despite the use of remote interactions and in such a short period. What is more, the 
online interactions in the form of private messages were found to predict the decrease in 
loneliness. 
Limitations 
The complexity of the study setting resulted in limitations that are acknowledged in the 
following: 
Different tools for support. The interactions of the Coach with the participants were part 
of the study protocol and designed to give the same type of support. However, while 
in the Social group the communication was carried on within the app via messaging 
features, in the Control group it was done via phone. This was done so given the absence 
of social features in the version of the app used by the Control group. This difference in 
the communication—i.e., using a more direct channel in the Control group—might have 
introduced a potential bias in the social wellbeing outcomes in favour of the Control group. 
Sample size and gender imbalance. Random variability, probably due to the small 
sample size, might have influenced the initial difference between groups in some of 
the measures. Although the comparisons reported in the paper were done in terms of 
relative improvements and not strict comparisons, this should be noted as a potential bias. 
The gender imbalance, resulting in a skewed female to male ratio, should also be noted 
as a potential limitation. Previous studies, however, provide evidence in favour of the 
generalization of our results, noting that male and female react equally to sport, despite 
differences in initial motives for participation (Koivula, 1999; Ryan et al., 1997). 
Duration of the training. The pilot intervention ran for a period of two months, which 
was significant for observing differences in adherence and even some effects in physical 
measures. However, the OTAGO program this intervention is based on, relied on a 


longer duration (four months). Thus, this constitutes a limitation of our study, for more 
meaningful comparisons and outcomes might be observed in longer periods. 
No cognitive measures at baseline. While the usability of the application was among the 
pre- and post- measures, we did not include any standard instrument for measuring 
cognitive abilities of individuals, as to relate the usability (and other outcomes) to the 
cognitive abilities of the participants. However, as reported in this paper, participants 
were independent-living older adults that did not show any issues during the tablet and 
application training sessions. 

In this paper we introduced a technology-based physical intervention to enable older adults 
with different abilities, and indeed in spite of their different abilities, to engage in group 
exercises from home while keeping these differences invisible to the group. We focused 
particularly on the feasibility of delivering a tailored exercise program while keeping the 
feeling of training in a group, and measuring the effects of such an intervention on the 
adherence of trainees of different abilities, and on the physical outcomes. In addition, we 
explored the effects of the intervention on psychological and social wellbeing outcomes. 
The results indicate that technology-supported online group exercising which conceals 
individual differences in physical skills is effective in motivating and enabling individuals 
who are less fit to train as much as fitter individuals. This not only indicates the feasibility of 
training together despite differences in physical skills but also suggests that online exercise 
can reduce the effect of skills on adherence in a social context. Longer term interventions 
with more participants are instead recommended to assess impacts on wellbeing and 
behavior change. 

We thank Elena Isolan for her collaborative efforts, Associazione per i Diritti degli Anziani 
(A.D.A), Associazione per l’invecchiamento attivo (Auser), and Smart CROWDS Trento 
and their staff for their help and support during the study. 
Funding 
This work was performed in collaboration with Tomsk Polytechnic University within the 
project in Evaluation and enhancement of social, economic and emotional wellbeing of 
older adults under the Agreement No.14.Z50.31.0029. The project was also funded by the 
European Institute of Technology (EIT Digital) under the grant ‘‘Personal Fitness Club’’. 
The grants paid for the research work on the definition of the study protocol and execution 
of the study. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision 
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. 



Grant Disclosures 
The following grant information was disclosed by the authors: 
Tomsk Polytechnic University. 
European Institute of Technology (EIT Digital). 
Competing Interests 
Marcos Baez, Iman Khaghani Far, Francisco Ibarra, Fabio Casati are researchers at 
their corresponding institutions and are also associated with Gymcentral, a training 
platform maintained by the University of Trento and freely available to researchers at 
http://gymcentral.net; however, they do not receive compensation from Gymcentral nor 
did Gymcentral have any role in their research or publications. 
Author Contributions 
• Marcos Baez conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments, 
analyzed the data, contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools, wrote the paper, 
prepared figures and/or tables, reviewed drafts of the paper. 






• Daniele Didino analyzed the data, wrote the paper, reviewed drafts of the paper. 
• Fabio Casati conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments, 
contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools, wrote the paper, reviewed drafts of the 
paper. 
Human Ethics 
The following information was supplied relating to ethical approvals (i.e., approving body 
and any reference numbers): 


Data Availability 
The following information was supplied regarding data availability: 

Supplemental Information 
Supplemental information for this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/ 
peerj.3150#supplemental-information. 

Aalbers T, Baars MAE, Rikkert MO. 2011. Characteristics of effective internet-mediated 
interventions to change lifestyle in people aged 50 and older: a systematic review. 
Ageing Research Reviews 10(4):487–497 DOI 10.1016/j.arr.2011.05.001. 





2015. The effectiveness of a video-supported group-based Otago exercise programme 
on physical performance in community-dwelling older adults: a preliminary study. 
Physiotherapy 102(3):280–286 DOI 10.1016/j.physio.2015.08.002. 

DM. 1997. Randomised controlled trial of a general practice programme of home 
based exercise to prevent falls in elderly women. BMJ: British Medical Journal 
315(7115):1065–1069 DOI 10.1136/bmj.315.7115.1065. 
Campbell AJ, Robertson MC. 2003. Otago exercise programme to prevent falls in older 
adults. In: A home-based, individually tailored strength and balance retraining 
programme. Available at http:// www.acc.co.nz/ PRD_EXT_CSMP/ groups/ external_ 
providers/ documents/ publications_promotion/ prd_ctrb118334.pdf (accessed on 1 July 
2014). 
Campbell M, Fitzpatrick R, Haines A, Kinmonth AL, Sandercock P, Spiegelhalter D, 
Tyrer P. 2000. Framework for design and evaluation of complex interventions to 
improve health. BMJ 321(7262):694–696 DOI 10.1136/bmj.321.7262.694. 
Carraro A, Young MC, Robazza C. 2008. A contribution to the validation of the physical 
activity enjoyment scale in an Italian sample. Social Behavior and Personality: An 
International Journal 36(7):911–918 DOI 10.2224/sbp.2008.36.7.911. 
De Groot GCL, Fagerström L. 2011. Older adults’ motivating factors and barriers to ex- 
ercise to prevent falls. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy 18(2):153–160 
DOI 10.3109/11038128.2010.487113. 



prevention exercise programmes on fall induced injuries in community dwelling 
older adults: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. 
BMJ 347:Article f6234 DOI 10.1136/bmj.f6234. 

terplay of physical and social wellbeing in older adults: investigating the relationship 
between physical training and social interactions with virtual social environments. 
PeerJ Computer Science 1:e30 DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.30. 

training. IEE Pervasive Computing 15(4):56–65 DOI 10.1109/MPRV.2016.76. 
Ferney SL, Marshall AL, Eakin EG, Owen N. 2009. Randomized trial of a neighborhood 
environment-focused physical activity website intervention. Preventive Medicine 
48(2):144–150 DOI 10.1016/j.ypmed.2008.10.022. 
Freene N, Waddington G, Chesworth W, Davey R, Cochrane T. 2013. Physiotherapist- 
led home-based physical activity program versus community group exercise for 
middle-aged adults: quasi-experimental comparison. Open Journal of Preventive 
Medicine 3(2):229–237 DOI 10.4236/ojpm.2013.32031. 



vention on loneliness and social support for Japanese women with primary breast 
cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum 30(5):823–830 DOI 10.1188/03.ONF.823-830. 
Gardner MM, Buchner DM, Robertson MC, Campbell AJ. 2001. Practical implementa- 
tion of an exercise based falls prevention programme. Age and Ageing 30:77–83 
DOI 10.1093/ageing/30.1.77. 
Hageman PA, Walker SN, Pullen CH. 2005. Tailored versus standard internet-delivered 
interventions to promote physical activity in older women. Journal of Geriatric 
Physical Therapy 28(1):28–33 DOI 10.1519/00139143-200504000-00005. 
Hogan DB, MacDonald FA, Betts J, Bricker S, Ebly EM, Delarue B, Fung TS, Harbidge 
C, Hunter M, Maxwell CJ, Metcalf B. 2001. A randomized controlled trial of a 
community-based consultation service to prevent falls. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal 165(5):537–543. 
Hughes ME, Waite LJ, Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT. 2004. A Short scale for measuring 
loneliness in large surveys results from two population-based studies. Research on 
Aging 26(6):655–672 DOI 10.1177/0164027504268574. 
Irvine AB, Gelatt VA, Seeley JR, Macfarlane P, Gau JM. 2013. Web-based intervention 
to promote physical activity by sedentary older adults: randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 15(2):e19 DOI 10.2196/jmir.2158. 
Jones CJ, Rikli RE, Beam WC. 1999. A 30-s chair-stand test as a measure of lower body 
strength in community-residing older adults. Research Quarterly for Exercise and 
Sport 70.2:113–119. 

Nintendo Wii training on mechanical leg muscle function and postural balance 
in community-dwelling older adults: a randomized controlled trial. The Journals 
of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 68(7):845–852 
DOI 10.1093/gerona/gls222. 




Landi F, Abbatecola AM, Provinciali M, Corsonello A, Bustacchini S, Manigrasso L, 
Cherubini A, Bernabei R, Lattanzio F. 2010. Moving against frailty: does physical 
activity matter? Biogerontology 11:537–545 DOI 10.1007/s10522-010-9296-1. 
Liu BS, Rook KS. 2013. Emotional and social loneliness in later life: associations with 
positive versus negative social exchanges. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 
30(6):813–832 DOI 10.1177/0265407512471809. 
McBurney D, White T. 2009. Research methods. Cengage Learning. 
Michael YL, Lin JS, Whitlock EP, Gold R, Fu R, O’Connor EA, Zuber SP, Beil TL, Lutz 
KW. 2010. Interventions to prevent falls in older adults: an updated systematic 
review. In: Evidence synthesis No. 80. AHRQ publication No. 11-05150-EF-1. 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville. Available at https:// www. 
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ books/ NBK51685/ . 


Molina KI, Ricci NA, De Moraes SA, Perracini MR. 2014. Virtual reality using games for 
improving physical functioning in older adults: a systematic review. Journal of Neu- 
roengineering and Rehabilitation 11(1):Article 156 DOI 10.1186/1743-0003-11-156. 

adults: a systematic review. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical 
Activity 11(1):Article 35 DOI 10.1186/1479-5868-11-35. 
Pelletier LG, Fortier MS, Vallerand RJ, Tuson KM, Briere NM, Blais MR. 1995. Toward 
a new measure of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and amotivation in 
sports: the Sport Motivation Scale (SMS). Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 
17:35–35 DOI 10.1123/jsep.17.1.35. 


Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. 1991. The timed ‘‘Up & Go’’: a test of basic functional 
mobility for frail elderly persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 
39(2):142–148 DOI 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1991.tb01616.x. 
R Core Team. 2013. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing Available at http:// www.R-project.org/ . 
Rezende LFM, Rey-López JP, Matsudo VKR, Luiz OC. 2014. Sedentary behavior and 
health outcomes among older adults: a systematic review. BMC Public Health 
14(1):333 DOI 10.1186/1471-2458-14-333. 
Rossiter-Fornoff JE, Wolf SL, Wolfson LI, Buchner DM. 1995. A cross-sectional valida- 
tion study of the FICSIT common data base static balance measures. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 50(6):M291–M297. 
Russell D, Peplau LA, Cutrona CE. 1980. The revised UCLA loneliness scale: concurrent 
and discriminant validity evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
39(3):472–480 DOI 10.1037/0022-3514.39.3.472. 

and exercise adherence. International Journal of Sport Psychology 28(4):335–354. 
Schloerke B, Crowley J, Cook D, Briatte F, Marbach M, Thoen E, Elberg A, Larmarange 
J. 2016. Ggally: extension to ggplot2. R package version 1.2.0. Available at https: 
// CRAN.R-project.org/ package=GGally. 

training and use. Aging & Mental Health 11(5):477–484 
DOI 10.1080/13607860601086546. 
Sherrington C, Tiedemann A, Fairhall N, Close JC, Lord SR. 2011. Exercise to prevent 
falls in older adults: an updated meta-analysis and best practice recommendations. 
New South Wales Public Health Bulletin 22(4):78–83 DOI 10.1071/NB10056. 
Silveira P, Daniel F, Casati F, De Bruin ED. 2013a. Motivating and assisting physical 
exercise in independently living older adults: a pilot study. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics 82:325–334 DOI 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.11.015. 

2013b. Tablet-based strength-balance training to motivate and improve adherence 
to exercise in independently living older people: a phase II preclinical exploratory 
trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research 15(8):e159 DOI 10.2196/jmir.2579. 



community-dwelling older adults. 2nd edition. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Available at 
https:// www.cdc.gov/ HomeandRecreationalSafety/ pdf/ CDC_Falls_Compendium_ 
lowres.pdf . 
Steverink N, Slaets J, Schuurmans H, Van Lis M. 2001. Measuring frailty: developing 
and testing the GFI (Groningen Frailty Indicator). Gerontologist 41:236–237. 
Stuart M, Chard S, Benvenuti F, Steinwachs S. 2008. Community exercise: a vital 


opment of the multidimensional personality questionnaire. The SAGE Handbook of 
Personality Theory and Assessment 2:261–292. 

a review. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine 17(4):246–254 
DOI 10.1007/s12529-010-9075-z. 
Thibaud M, Bloch F, Tournoux-Facon C, Brèque C, Rigaud AS, Dugué B, Kemoun 
G. 2012. Impact of physical activity and sedentary behaviour on fall risks in older 
people: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. European 
Review of Aging and Physical Activity 9:5–15 DOI 10.1007/s11556-011-0081-1. 

K, Horwitz RI. 1994. A multifactorial intervention to reduce the risk of falling 
among elderly people living in the community. New England Journal of Medicine 
331(13):821–827 DOI 10.1056/NEJM199409293311301. 

rapid assessment of physical activity (RAPA) among older adults. Preventing Chronic 
Disease 3(4):Article A118. 
Van Der Bij AK, Laurant MG, Wensing M. 2002. Effectiveness of physical activity 
interventions for older adults: a review1 1The full text of this article is available 
via AJPM Online at www. elsevier.com/locate/ajpmonline. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine 22(2):120–133 DOI 10.1016/S0749-3797(01)00413-5. 
Wankel LM. 1993. The importance of enjoyment to adherence and psychological benefits 
from physical activity. International Journal of Sport Psychology 24(2):151–169. 






