Animal-Assisted Therapy and 
Loneliness in Nursing Homes: Use of 
Robotic versus Living Dogs 

Loneliness is a common problem in long-term care 
facilities (LTCF) and previous work has shown that 
animal-assisted therapy (AAT) can to some degree 
reverse loneliness. Here, we compared the ability of 
a living dog (Dog) and a robotic dog (AIBO) to treat 
loneliness in elderly patients living in LTCF. In com- 
parison with a control group not receiving AAT, 
both the Dog and AIBO groups had statistically sig- 
niﬁcant improvements in their levels of loneliness. 
As measured by a modiﬁed Lexington Attachment 
to Pets Scale (MLAPS), residents showed high levels 
of attachment to both the dog and AIBO. Subscale 
analysis showed that the AIBO group scored lower 
than the living dog on “animal rights/animal welfare” 
but not on “general attachment” or “people substi- 
tuting.” However, MLAPS measures did not correlate 
with changes in loneliness, showing that attachment 
was not the mechanism by which AAT decreases lone- 
liness. We conclude that interactive robotic dogs can 
reduce loneliness in residents of LTCF and that resi- 
dents become attached to these robots. However, 
level of attachment does not explain the decrease in 
loneliness associated with AAT conducted with either 
a living or robotic dog. (J Am Med Dir Assoc 2008; 9: 
173–177) 
Keywords: Animal-assisted therapy; robots; nursing 
home; loneliness; attachment 
Loneliness is a common problem frequently encountered 
among the elderly1 in long-term care facilities (LTCF). Many 
factors contribute to loneliness. The model of Peplau and 
Perlman2 differentiates between predisposing factors that 
make individuals prone to loneliness and precipitating events 
that can cause the onset of loneliness. Predisposing factors to 
loneliness include characteristics of the person (for example, 
a shy individual or one who lacks social skills), characteristics 
of the situation, and general cultural attitudes. Precipitating 
events include the breakup of a relationship or moving to a 
new community. Precipitating events result in a mismatch 
between the individual’s social relations and the person’s 
social needs or desires. A change in 1 of these 2 factors 
without a corresponding change in the other can result in 
loneliness. Those with major disruptions in their lives are 
prone to loneliness. Women, regardless of age, are more prone 
to loneliness than men.3,4 Many predisposing and precipitat- 
ing factors are extremely common in residents of LTCF.4 
Loneliness, unlike dementia or depression, essentially is a 
subjective perception. In other words, those who perceive 
Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO (M.R.B., W.A.B.); Center for Outcomes Re- 
search, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO (L.M.W.). 

Address correspondence to William A. Banks, MD, 915 N. Grand Boulevard, 
St. Louis, MO 63106. E-mail: bankswa@slu.edu 


themselves as lonely, regardless of objective assessments or 
outside opinions, are, in fact, lonely. Evaluation, therefore, 
must rely on instruments like the University of California Los 
Angeles (UCLA) Loneliness scale5 that can ascertain the 
individual’s perceptions. 
One suggested method of decreasing loneliness in long- 
term care facilities is the use of animal-assisted therapy 
(AAT), also termed pet therapy or pet-facilitated therapy. 
Elderly who live with a pet are less lonely than those who do 
not.6 Previous work has shown that AAT can reduce loneli- 
ness in residents in LTCF.7–9 Previous work found that visits 
as infrequent as once per week are effective in reducing 
loneliness.8 Work has also shown that it is interaction with 
the dog, not increased socialization among the residents, that 
accounts for the improvement in loneliness.9 As such, one- 
on-one visits with an AAT animal are likely to be more 
effective than group visits. 
The exact mechanisms by which AAT results in decreased 
loneliness are unclear. One hypothesis is that the human 
becomes attached to the AAT animal.7 Attachment has been 
deﬁned as an emotional bond that supports a sense of close- 
ness, well-being, and security.10 Supporting this, Baun et al11 
found that relaxation as assessed by decreasing blood pressure 
was greater when one was petting a familiar dog than when 
one was petting an unfamiliar dog. Voith12 found that hu- 
mans become attached to their pets and that 99% of pet 
owners consider the pet to be a member of the family. When 
pet ownership and attachment are correlated with loneli- 
ness7–9 and happiness,13 only attachment correlated with de- 
pression.14 Of the several scales used to measure attachment 


to pets, the one most appropriate to nursing homes is that of 
Johnson et al,15 termed the Lexington Attachment to Pets 
Scale (LAPS). This is a 23-item questionnaire originally de- 
signed for telephone interview and validated in community- 
dwelling pet owners. Principal component analysis has shown 3 
orthogonal factors: “general attachment,” “people substitut- 
ing,” and “animal rights/animal welfare.” 
An interesting trend has been to use robotic dogs as pets. 
This has occurred especially in Japan and other Western 
countries among those who have lifestyles that make it difﬁ- 
cult to attend to the biological needs of living dogs. The most 
investigated robotic dog is AIBO (Sony Corporation, Tokyo, 
Japan). Chat room analysis indicates that humans become 
psychologically engaged with AIBO, with 79% ascribing es- 
sences (presence of biological or animistic underpinning), 
60% ascribing agency (presence of mental states such as 
intentions, feelings, and psychological states), and 59% as- 
cribing social standing (engagement of AIBO in communica- 
tions, connections, and companionship) to their AIBOs.16 
However, moral standing (worthy of moral regard or respon- 
sibility, having rights, or deserving respect) was seldom as- 
signed to AIBO. In a study comparing a living dog and AIBO, 
children 7–15 years of age were more interactive with the 
living dog and ascribed higher levels of physical essences, 
mental states, sociability, and moral standing to the living 
dog.17 However, AIBO also achieved very high levels on 
these scores. A study from Hamamatsu University18 found 
that AAT with AIBO improved loneliness and other health- 
related quality of life measures. 
Here, we asked a series of questions in a study of AAT with 
AIBO and a living dog in residents in a LTCF located in a 
midwestern US metropolitan area: Does AAT with AIBO 
decrease loneliness and, if so, how does this compare with that 
of a living dog? Does attachment occur with AIBO or with a 
living dog and, if so, how do these compare? Does the decrease 
in loneliness correlate with measurable attachment to AIBO 
and a living dog? 

Residents were interviewed at 3 LTCF in St. Louis, MO. 
Studies were approved by the IRB at Saint Louis University 
School of Medicine. Residents were excluded if they scored 
less than 24 on the the modiﬁed mini-mental status exam,19 
had allergies to dogs or cats, scored less than 30 on the UCLA 
loneliness scale, or had a known history of psychiatric disease 
or Alzheimer’s disease. Recruited individuals were randomized 
to a group that received no AAT (Control) or to groups that 
received AAT with AIBO (AIBO) or a living dog (Dog). The 
AIBO used was a model 210A (Figure 1) with hearing 
and communication capabilities. The AAT groups received 
weekly visits lasting 30 minutes from either AIBO or the 
living dog for 8 weeks. Sessions occurred in the resident’s 
room and consisted of the resident sitting in his or her chair 
or upright in bed with the dog or AIBO next to the resident. 
AIBO was kept stationary in its recharging cradle next to the 
resident, but not allowed to walk about. Residents in all 3 
groups were given the UCLA loneliness scale (Version 3) 

before any sessions of AAT and then again (posttest) 7 weeks 
later (control group) or during week 7 of the AAT sessions. 
Two residents each dropped out of the AIBO and Dog groups. 
The Lexington Attachment to Pets Scale (LAPS) was 
modiﬁed (MLAPS) to be more appropriate to the LTCF 
setting. Speciﬁcally, the following changes were made: (1) 
Questions 1–23: All instances of “my pet” changed to “the 
pet”; (2) Question 17: “I play with my pet quite often” is 
omitted; (3) Question 22: “Owning” is changed to “Having” 
and so reads “Having a pet adds to my happiness.” The 
MLAPS was validated in its target population of community 
dwellers by giving both it and the LAPS to 20 community- 
dwelling individuals. Possible scores for the MLAPS ranged 
from 0 to 66. Three subscale scores (general attachment, 
people substitution, and animal rights/animal welfare) were 
generated based on principal component analysis performed 
on the LAPS by Johnson et al15 who scored each item for the 
orthogonal factor for which it was most robustly associated. 
Means are given with their standard error terms and n. Two 
means were compared by Student’s t test and more than 2 
means were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
followed by Newman-Keuls range test. Correlation and re- 
gression analyses were performed by the least squares method 
using the Prism 4.0 statistical package (GraphPad, Inc., San 
Diego, CA). 
Changes in the loneliness score (delta Loneliness) were 
calculated by subtracting the posttest score from the pretest 
score so that a positive value indicates improvement in lone- 
liness and a negative value indicates increased loneliness. 



There were no statistical differences among the pretest 
UCLA loneliness scale scores for the Control (n (cid:1) 13), 
AIBO (n (cid:1) 12), or Dog (n (cid:1) 13) groups. The mean loneli- 
ness score was 45.9 (cid:2) 1.16 (n (cid:1) 38). The delta loneliness 
scores are shown in Figure 2. ANOVA showed a statistical 
difference among the groups (F(2, 35) (cid:1) 37.3, P (cid:3) .01). 
Newman-Keuls posttest showed that the Control group (n (cid:1) 
13) was statistically different from the AIBO (P (cid:3) .05, n (cid:1) 
12) and the Dog (P (cid:3) .05, n (cid:1) 13) group, but there was no 
statistically signiﬁcant difference between the AIBO and Dog 
groups. Pretest loneliness scores correlated with posttest scores 
and with delta loneliness scores for control and combined 
results, but not for Dog or AIBO alone. The correlation 
between pretest and delta loneliness scores for combined 
results was m (cid:1) 0.437, i (cid:1) ((cid:4)18.9), r (cid:1) 0.459, n (cid:1) 38, P (cid:3) 
.005. 
The MLAPS and LAPS were compared in 20 community- 
dwelling individuals (Figure 3). The Pearson r (cid:1) 0.9937, the 
r2 (cid:1) 0.9874, the slope correlating LAPS (x) to MLAPS (y) 
was 1.01, and the intercept was ((cid:4)3.04). 
The MLAPS showed signiﬁcant attachment in both the 
AIBO (47.2 (cid:2) 4.03, n (cid:1) 12) and the Dog (55.0 (cid:2) 3.73, n (cid:1) 
13) groups (Figure 3; maximum score 66). Student 2-tailed t 
test showed no statistical difference between these 2 groups 
(Figure 4). Subscale analyses showed no differences between 
the Dog and AIBO for scale 1 (general attachment: Dog: 
25.5 (cid:2) 1.4, AIBO: 23.1 (cid:2) 1.6, maximal score 30) or scale 2 
(people substituting: Dog: 16.5 (cid:2) 1.7, AIBO: 13.4 (cid:2) 1.9, 
maximal score 21) with both receiving high scores. Because of 
previous work showing that AIBO is seldom ascribed moral 
standing,16 we hypothesized a priori that AIBO would score 
lower in the LAPS scale 3 (animal rights/animal welfare) and 
so compared these groups with a 1-tailed t test. AIBO (10.3 (cid:2) 
0.91) scored lower than the Dog (12.6 (cid:2) 0.712) by 1-tailed t 
test (t (cid:1) 2.0, df (cid:1) 23, P (cid:3) .05; 2-tailed showed a strong trend 
Fig. 3. LAPS versus MLAPS as assessed in community-dwelling pet 
owners. A high degree of correlation between LAPS and MLAPS 
indicates that the modiﬁcations did not affect the validity of the 
scale. 
with P (cid:1) .058), but both groups still scored high out of a 
maximum score of 15 (Figure 5). 
Figure 6 correlates the delta Loneliness scores with the 
MLAPS scores. There was no statistically signiﬁcant correla- 
tion between these 2 parameters. 

We found here that elderly residents living in long-term 
care facilities who received scheduled AAT with either a 
living or robotic dog were signiﬁcantly less lonely than 
those who did not receive AAT (Figure 2). We found no 
difference between the effectiveness of a living and robotic 
Fig. 2. Effects of AAT with a robotic dog (AIBO) and a living dog 
(Dog) on loneliness. AAT with either AIBO or a living dog resulted 
in similar improvements in loneliness when compared with a con- 
trol group (P (cid:3) .05) not receiving AAT. 
Fig. 4. Attachment as measured by the MLAPS in residents receiv- 
ing AAT with either AIBO or a living dog. Both groups showed high 
levels of attachment that were not statistically different from each 
other. 


dog in reducing loneliness. As in a previous study,8 we 
found a correlation between pretest and posttest loneliness 
scores and between pretest and delta loneliness, indicating 
that those who were most lonely improved the most. This 
correlation existed for the control group as well, indicating 
that the most lonely who did not receive AAT became 
increasingly lonely. 
Previous work has shown that enhancement of interactions 
among residents does not account for the AAT-associated 
improvements in loneliness.9 Here, we tested whether attach- 
ment could underlie the AAT effect. The LAPS was modiﬁed 
(MLAPS) to be more appropriate as indicated in the methods 
section to the parameters of the study. The MLAPS was 
validated by comparing MLAPS and LAPS scores in commu- 
nity dwelling individuals who owned pets, the original popu- 
lation for which the LAPS was designed (Figure 3). This 
comparison found a Pearson r in excess of 0.99, suggesting 
that the MLAPS retained in original validity of the LAPS. 
Residents scored high on attachment scales to both AIBO 
and a living dog (Figure 4). Residents who received the living 
dog had an arithmetically higher level of attachment than 
those who received AIBO, but the difference was not statis- 
tically signiﬁcant. More importantly, attachment as measured 
by the MLAPS did not correlate with the change in loneliness 
(Figure 6). The lack of correlation between delta loneliness 
and MLAPS suggests that attachment to either AIBO or 
the living dog does not account for their abilities to reduce 
loneliness. 
Subscale analysis of MLAPS showed differences only in 
scale 3 (Figure 5), but not in scales 1 and 2. Scale 3 correlates 
with animal rights/animal welfare concerns and its lower score 
is consistent with a previous analysis of an online chat room 
talk that indicates that AIBO is seldom ascribed moral stand- 
ing (worthy of moral regard or responsibility, having rights, or 
deserving respect). 
Fig. 5. Subscale analysis for the orthogonal factor associated with 
animal rights/animal welfare. AIBO scored lower (P (cid:3) .05) than the 
living dog. 
Fig. 6. Relation between change in loneliness (Delta Loneliness) 
and MLAPS. There was no correlation between change in loneliness 
and MLAPS for AIBO, the living dog, or the combined group. 
Anecdotally, some residents and staff were initially reluc- 
tant to interact with AIBO; however, with exposure, this 
resistance largely dissipated. Acceptance of interactive robot- 
ics suggests their widespread use in geriatric facilities is feasi- 
ble. Robotics are increasingly being used for in-home moni- 
toring. We should note that AIBO was not used to its full 
capacity, but was kept in its recharging cradle sitting next to 
the resident. It was not allowed to walk around and its voice 
and face recognition programs were not used to full capacity. 
It is possible that if these options were used and if residents 
were assigned or given a personal robotic dog, then its effects 
might be further enhanced. In conclusion, this study found 
that interactive robotic dogs are effective in decreasing lone- 
liness in residents of LTCF, that residents become attached to 
both the robotic and living dog, but that attachment did not 
underlie the effect of AAT on loneliness. Robotic dogs may 
be an option for those desiring pets or needing AAT in 
circumstances where the needs of living animals cannot be 
met. 





3. Holmen K, Ericsson K, Andersson L, Winblad B. Loneliness among 
elderly people living in Stockholm: A population study. J Adv Nurs 
1992;17:43–51. 










8. Banks MR, Banks WA. The effects of animal-assisted therapy on lone- 
liness in an elderly population in long-term care facilities. J Gerontol A 
Biol Sci Med Sci 2002;57A:M428 –M432. 
9. Banks MR, Banks WA. The effects of group and individual animal- 
assisted therapy on loneliness in residents of long-term care facilities. 
Anthrozoos 2005;18:396 – 408. 
10. Bowlby J. Attachment theory, separation anxiety, and mourning. In: 
Arieti S, ed. American Handbook of Psychiatry. New York: Basic Books, 
1974. p. 292–309. 




13. Ory MG, Goldberg EL. Pet possessions and life satisfaction in elderly 
women. In: Katcher AH, Beck AM, eds. New Perspectives on Our Lives 
with Companion Animals. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1983. p. 303–319. 
14. Garrity TF, Stallones L, Marx MB, Johnson TP. Pet ownership and 
attachment supportive factors in the health of the elderly. Anthrozoos 
1989;3:35– 43. 
15. Johnson TP, Garrity TF, Stallones L. Psychometric evaluation of the 
Lexington attachment to pets scale (LAPS). Anthrozoos 1992;5: 
160 –175. 
16. Friedman B, Kahn PH, Hagman J. Hardware companions? What online 
AIBO discussion forums reveal about the human-robotic relationship 
Proceedings of CHI 2003;5:273–280. 
17. Melson GF, Kahn PH, Beck AM, Friedman B, Roberts T, Garrett E. 
Robots as Dogs? Children’s interactions with the robotic dog AIBO and 
a live Australian shephard. Proceedings of CHI 2005;1649 –1652. 
18. Kanamori M, Suzuki M, Tanaka M. [Maintenance and improvement of 
quality of life among elderly patients using a pet-type robot.] Nippon 
Ronen Iggakkai Zasshi 2002;39:214 –218. Japanese. 
19. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. Mini-Mental State: A practical 
guide for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psy- 
chiatr Res 1975;12:189 –198. 


