
Peer Support Telephone Dyads for Elderly 
Women: Was This the Wrong Intervention? 1 
Kenneth Heller, ~ Mark G. Thompson, 
Petri E. Trueba, John R. Hogg, and Irene Vlachos-Weber 
Indiana University 

Tested a preventive 
in which peer telephone dyads were 
developed f o r low-income, community-living, elderly women with low 
perceived social support. A f t e r an initial assessment, respondents were ran- 
domly assigned to either an assessment-only control or received 10 weeks o f 
friendly s t a f f telephone contact. A f t e r a second assessment, participants 
receiving the s t a f f contact were randomly assigned to continue that contact 
or were paired in dyads to continue p h o n e contact with one another. Depen- 
dent variables were measures o f perceived social support, morale, depres- 
sion, and loneliness. All groups, particularly the staff contact group, showed 
some improvement in mental health scores over time, but there were no 
significant differences between intervention groups, or between interven- 
tion and assessment-only control groups. The results suggest that participa- 
tion in the study and in personal assessment interviews at home were pro- 
bably morale enhancing, and that additional telephone contact dM not 
significantly add to that effect. Evidence also indicates that, in this sample, 
low perceived family support was significantly related to p o o r mental 
Editor's Note. This paper raises a number of interesting and provocative issues for com- 
munity psychologists and other researchers. Following this study are a series of nine commen- 
taries offering a variety of perspectives on these issues. 
~Research described in this paper was supported by research grant R01MH41457 to the first 
author from the National Institute of Mental Health. Participation by the second author was 
supported by training grant PHS T32 MH 15789-11, Measurement of Affect and Affective 
Processes, directed by Peggy A. Thoits, from the National Institute of Mental Health. We 
acknowledge the conscientious effort of Kathy McFall, project coordinator, and Constance 
Baker, Caroline Clay, Ann French, Elaine Hehner, Madeline Heide, Allison Lendman, 
Sharon Martin, and Coralee Sons, who served as interviewers. Help with data analysis was 
provided by Suzanne Dancer, Robert Holden, Daniel Mathalon, and Sharon Martin. 
2All correspondence should be sent to Kenneth Heller, Department of Psychology, Indiana 
University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405. 




health, so it is possible that a program designed to increase friend support 
may have been the wrong intervention. 
There are numerous studies in the epidemiological literature indicating that 
individuals with social support experience higher levels of psychological 
well-being than those with weak ties. This result has been found across the 
age range (Kaplan, Roberts, Camacho, & Coyne, 1987; Seeman, Kaplan, 
Knudsen, Cohen, & Guralnik, 1987) and for indices of both physical and 
mental health (Berkman & Syme, 1979; Gottlieb, 1987; House, Robbins, & 
Metzner, 1982; Kessler & McLeod, 1985; Wethington & Kessler, 1986). 
However, the intervention literature is much less clear as to whether support 
interventions are capable of increasing the sense of well-being among those 
with initial low levels of support (Gottlieb, 1988). 
In the present study, peer support telephone dyads were established in 
groups of low-income elderly women who reported low initial levels of 
friend support or high loneliness. Neither peer telephone dyads or telephone 
contacts with staff members improved the morale or sense of well-being of 
participating women, compared with a randomized control group of elderly 
women who were assessed every 3 months but who received no further con- 
tact. This paper describes the intervention and its results and addressess 
possible reasons for its failure. Although one can never draw firm conclu- 
sions concerning the reasons for null results, the literature on the effec- 
tiveness of support interventions is so equivocal that more thought needs to 
be given to the factors responsible for both intervention success and failure. 
That is the spirit in which this report is presented. 
There is reason to spotlight the elderly in studies of social support. 
This group is not only the fastest growing segment of our population, but 
potentially also the most vulnerable to problems associated with role loss 
and loss of attachments (Lowenthal & Robinson, 1976; Rosow, 1973, 1985). 
Although some have argued that isolation has functional value for the 
elderly and is a result of voluntary disengagement (Cumming & Henry, 
1961), the increasingly more common belief is that role loss is involuntary 
and can result in loss of social identity eventually leading to pathology 
(Scheidt, 1982). 
One can speculate that the isolation of the elderly may be endemic to 
technological societies in which career advancement depends upon the 
generation of new knowledge rather than the accumulation of wisdom. Fur- 
thermore, when the mobility of citizens encourages the dispersion of kin, 
the elderly are cut off from a useful social role, as the bearers of traditional 
knowledge concerning family relations and child care. This is not to imply 
that the majority of elderly are cut off from family contact (Shanas, 1979), 
because technology also can provide tools (e.g., telephones, airplanes) to 


bridge geographic isolation (Wellman, 1979). Still, there is cause for con- 
cern because recent evidence indicates that isolation and role loss are factors 
in the increased risk for morbidity and ultimate mortality among the elder- 
ly. Studying an elderly population, Blazer (1982) found that decreased 
social interaction, impaired roles and attachments, and low perceived sup- 
port were significant predictors of early mortality among the aged; the mor- 
tality rate among those with low perceived support was 3 ½ times higher at a 
30-month follow-up than for those with moderate to high perceived sup- 
port. 
The exact mechanisms by which social support produces health 
benefits are still unknown. One possibility is that support may buffer social 
stressors, producing an attenuated effect upon the individual. Thus, having 
someone to talk to about a worry or concern may reduce its emotional in- 
tensity. Another possibility is that supportive others may increase the 
likelihood that health-enhancing behavior will occur. For example, compa- 
nions may encourage visits to physicians when symptoms are reported, or 
may increase the likelihood that proper diet is maintained. Furthermore, 
since social support is often a reciprocal process, the benefits of support 
may accrue from being a support provider as well as a support receiver. 
Finally, social ties also may be a crucial ingredient in well-being, simply 
because of the increased activity that social interaction induces. For exam- 
ple, group participation and physical activity have been found to be major 
predictors of successful aging (Palmore, 1979). 
The reciprocal nature of social support needs special emphasis. In- 
digenous support involves reciprocal interactions in which participants both 
give and receive support. Yet, in the social support literature the focus of at- 
tention is almost exclusively on receiving support (Rook & Dooley, 1985). 
The assumption is that loss of support leads to increased risk because the in- 
dividual no longer is the recipient of caring or affirmation from others. 
Equally plausible is that being a support provider is psychologically enhanc- 
ing, and that the loss of close relationships means no longer being able to 
care for others. The point is that if social support is a reciprocal process, 
providing support may be as important as receiving it, and this aspect of 
supportive relationships should receive greater attention. 
The emphasis in this project was on indigenous social support, that is, 
behaviors that the elderly can provide for one another with a minimum of 
professional intervention. Over the years, there has been a general recogni- 
tion that psychological help has become overprofessionalized, with a con- 
comitant neglect of the useful social roles that friends and family play in the 
lives of most people. An early recognition of the value of indigenous sup- 
port was provided by Gurin, Veroff, and Feld (1960) in their national 
survey which found that most people do not turn to mental health workers 
in times of personal distress. A second reason to focus on indigenous sup- 


port, particularly among the elderly, is to counter the problem of role loss 
so eloquently described by Rosow (1967). Rosow argued that there is no ef- 
fective substitute for roles that are lost "except an equally significant status 
which is as highly valued and rewarded" (p. 317). Thus, it is important to 
emphasize personal responsibility and initiative and to minimize an over- 
reliance on professional help in programs for the elderly. Finally, we were 
sensitive to the problem of potential negative aftereffects of research which 
can occur after projects are terminated. Schulz and Hanusa (1978) followed 
up an earlier study by Schulz (1976) in which elderly residents of a nursing 
home were visited by undergraduate companions. The follow-up revealed 
that the positive effects of the intervention dissipated over time. Residents 
who initially could predict and control the frequency and duration of the 
visit were now worse off than those who were not visited. Thus, the problem 
we faced was to design an intervention that did not establish artificial rela- 
tionships that could not be sustained in the research participants' natural en- 
vironment. We believed that indigenous networks of peer dyads would meet 
these requirements. 
There are reports in the literature of projects that employed older 
citizens as voluntary helpers, senior companions, or peer counselors (Becker 
& Zarit, 1978; Blonsky, 1973; Priddy & Knisely, 1982; Ruffini & Todd, 
1979). However, most support intervention studies reporting positive ef- 
fects are either uncontrolled demonstration projects with very few attempts 
to systematically assess effects on the volunteer helpers or the recipients of 
their services, or use participants who are preselected in some way. 
Volunteers, such as those who participate in senior center activities, are like- 
ly to be healthier and more motivated, and of higher economic and educa- 
tional level. Thus it is not surprising that Fogelman, Roberts, and Dunbar 
(1983) found that a senior volunteer companion program had a greater im- 
pact on the volunteer companions than on their more functionally impaired 
clients. Intervention programs with support components that utilize control 
groups produce more equivocal results both for the elderly (Andersson, 
1985; Baumgarten, Thomas, Poulin de Courval, & Infante-Rivard, 1988; 
Bogat & Jason, 1983; Reich & Zautra, 1989) and for other special popula- 
tion groups (Cohen et al., 1988; Hinrichsen, Revenson, & Shinn, 1985; also 
see review by Gottlieb, 1988). 
The goals of the current project were to determine whether indigenous 
peer telephone dyads could be established among low-income elderly 
women and whether such supportive contacts were effective in maintaining 
and enhancing health, activity, and morale. Respondents first participated 
in friendly telephone contacts with staff members who then introduced par- 
ticipants to randomly assigned partners. Telephone contacts were chosen 
over in-person contacts for several reasons. Many elderly do not have the 


mobility or transportation resources to sustain in-person visits. Telephones 
are generally available to most individuals and they can be accessed in all 
weather conditions. Telephone contacts also allow an easier modulation of 
depth of involvement. Individuals who might prefer less personal involve- 
ment than their dyad partner should be more comfortable with telephone 
contacts. In-person visits among dyad partners were not discouraged, but 
they were not chosen as the basis of this intervention in order not to exclude 
elderly who had neither the physical or social resources to sustain personal 
visitation. 


Respondents were solicited for an intervention study whose goal was 
to establish telephone friendship dyads among low-support, community- 
living, elderly women. Initial case-finding telephone contacts were made 
with a random sample o f residences in low-income housing tracts in three 
Indiana communities varying in urbanicity. The initial phone contact was to 
determine the presence o f a woman living alone, or with one other person in 
the household, willing to receive a letter describing the study. Letters were 
sent to 1,314 women. Of these, 685 refused participation and 607 completed 
an in-home screening interview. Respondents were required to pass a brief 
mental status exam (Kahn, Goldfarb, Pollack, & Peck, 1960; Zarit & Zarit, 
1983) to exclude those with gross cognitive and sensory impairment. There 
were 22 respondents who agreed to participate but who did not complete the 
screening interview due to various impairments that would have prevented 
their further participation (e.g., cognitive or hearing losses). 
Since the goal of the study was to target women in need of new social 
bonds, the selection criteria involved a yearly household income below the 
median for Indiana senior citizens ($13,800), and a score below the median 
on a perceived support from friends index or above the median on a 
loneliness measure. There were 291 women who met these criteria (316 were 
excluded). A comparison of the final intervention sample with those exclud- 
ed indicated that both groups were of similar age and education, but the 
women selected for the study were significantly lonelier, more depressed, o f 
lower income, and had lower perceived support scores. Complete data 
across all assessment periods was obtained for 265 women. The median age 
of this final sample was 74 years, their median income was within the 
$7,000-9,000 category, and their median education was l lth grade; 67°70 
were widowed, 18O7o were currently married, 12o7o were divorced, and 3O7o 


were never married. Seventy-four percent of the sample lived alone, and the 
remaining respondents either lived with their spouse (18%) or with a relative 
(8%). 

In the initial case-finding phase of the study, potential respondents 
were contacted by trained female interviewers via telephone. The project 
was described as a study concerned with "social life and health" among the 
elderly. Potential respondents were asked if they were willing to receive fur- 
ther information about the project in the mail and a visit from an inter- 
viewer who would explain the project further. Commitment and consent to 
participate were obtained in writing during the first home visit. This screen- 
ing interview covered demographic information, the Activities of Daily Liv- 
ing (ADL) scale (Fillenbaum, 1985), the Center for Epidemiological Studies 
Depression scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977), and the Perceived Social Support 
scales from friends and family (PSS-FR and PSS-FA; Procidano & Heller, 
1983). All respondents participating in the screening interview received $5. 
Respondents then completed a more detailed two-part assessment 
interview which was administered within a 3-day period. The interview con- 
tained further questions about social network contacts and social activities, 
as well as the Philadelphia Geriatric Center (PGC) Morale scale (Lawton, 
1972, 1975), a physical health measure and a measure of stressful events and 
daily hassles adapted from Murrell and Norris (1984), and a measure of 
social competence specifically developed for this study (Hogg & Heller, 
1990). Respondents were then randomly assigned to staff contact (n = 238) 
or to an assessment only control group (n = 53) for 10 weeks. 
Respondents receiving staff contact were told by their assessment in- 
terviewer that she was interested in maintaining further contact with them 
and permission was requested for periodic phone calls. Interviewers called 
twice a week for 5 weeks and then once a week for 5 weeks thereafter. Inter- 
viewers were mature women between the ages of 30 and 55. They approached 
the contact as one would carry on a phone conversation between two 
friends. Interviewers inquired about the respondent's health and well-being, 
and discussed topics raised by the respondent. Events of the week and the 
participant's reaction to the events were discussed. Interviewers also were 
encouraged to talk about themselves and the events in their lives. If 
respondents mentioned stressful life events, interviewers attempted to 
clarify the respondent's perceptions and emotions accompanying the event. 
Only after a discussion of alternative actions applicable to the event would 
interviewers directly respond to requests for specific advice. The second and 
next to last telephone conversation between the interviewer and the respon- 


dent was recorded and later coded to determine conversational competence 
(Hogg & Heller, 1990). 
After the first 5 weeks of friendly phone calls from their staff inter- 
viewer, respondents received a set of five self-addressed stamped postcards 
which they were to return after each subsequent phone conversation. The 
cards asked respondents to indicate the date o f the phone call and to check a 
number of positive or negative adjectives indicating how she felt immediate- 
ly after the call. The purpose of the cards was to monitor the phone contacts 
in the next phase of the study when peer dyads were established. They were 
introduced here to acclimate respondents to returning the cards. 
After the 10-week period, at Time 2, a second assessment interview 
was conducted, after which respondents in the staff contact group were ran- 
domly assigned to continue staff contact, to be initiators or recipients of 
peer telephone contact, or to become no-contact controls. Initiators were 
asked if they would be willing to take the responsibility to call another 
woman in the study who was similar to them. Recipients were asked if they 
would be willing to receive phone calls from a similar other. Calling was ex- 
plained as a way for women in the study to keep in touch with one another 
and to make another friend. Hesitancies about calling a stranger were 
countered by noting that recipients were interested in and had volunteered 
for further contact, and by pointing to specific similarities between the dyad 
pair. This could be done because we knew quite a bit about each woman in 
the study by this point, and while dyads were randomly paired, some 
similarities between dyad members could be found for each pair. In addi- 
tion, regular phone contact was maintained with dyad initiators for 2 weeks 
to check on dyad progress and to make sure that no initial difficulties were 
developing. For example, some initiators had trouble reaching their part- 
ners and needed to be informed about the best times to call. Staff members 
also clarified any initial miscommunication that may have occurred between 
dyad partners. 
Those who declined to participate in peer dyads were not dropped 
the study but were offered continued staff contact. Twenty 
from 
respondents refused to participate in a peer dyad and were continued by 
staff in a "refuser" group. Seven participants dropped out of peer dyads 
after having only one telephone conversation with their assigned partner 
and were also assigned to continued staff contact in the refuser group. The 
number of continuing participants included 53 women who participated in 
assessment interviews only and never received staff or peer periodic phone 
calls, 49 initiators and 49 recipients of peer contact, 44 women randomly 
assigned to staff contact, 27 women assigned to staff contact after refusing 
peer contact, and 49 women who received friendly phone calls from a staff 
member during the previous phase of the study but who now became 
members o f a second assessment-only control group. Among these par- 


ticipants, 6 individuals were subsequently lost due to relocation, illness, or 
death, leaving us with complete intervention data on 265 women. 
After a second 10-week period, at Time 3, all respondents received a 
third interview, which included a Phone Partner Questionnaire, for those 
individuals assigned to dyads. Respondents were followed up for another 10 
weeks during which there was no regular staff contact for any of the par- 
ticipants. In the peer dyad condition, respondents were encouraged to keep 
in contact with their telephone partner. 
After the final 10-week period, at Time 4, another assessment was 
conducted. Respondents reported whether they were still in contact with 
their dyad partner and if so, completed the rest of the Phone Partner Ques- 
tionnaire. 
The design of the study and the specific assessment instruments are 
outlined in Table I. Only those measures relevant to this report are de- 
scribed in detail. 

Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale. The PGC (Lawton, 1972, 
1975) was used to measure subjective well-being. The revised version of the 
17-item scale (Lawton, 1975) contains three factors: agitation, attitude 
toward aging, and lonely dissatisfaction. In addition, a total morale score 
was obtained by summing the three subscales. The total morale score (based 
on yes/no items) ranged from 17 to 34 with higher scores indicating higher 
subjective well-being. Lawton (1972) reported a split-half reliability of .74 
and test-retest reliabilities ranging from .75 to .91. The internal consistency 
of the PGC was .79 in the present study. 
Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale. The CES-D 
(Radloff, 1977) was used to measure depression. The CES-D is often used 
to assess current depressive symptoms, particularly depressed mood, in 
general community populations. The 20-item CES-D used in this study had 
a 4-point response format based upon symptom frequency in the past week, 
ranging from rarely to most or all of the time. Scores could vary from 0 to 
60 with high scores indicating higher levels of depression. Murrell and Nor- 
ris (1984) used the CES-D with an elderly population, reporting an internal 
consistency of .89 for their community sample. The internal consistency of 
the CES-D was .79 in the present study. The CES-D has been found to 
discriminate between inpatient psychiatric and community samples of the 
elderly (Himmelfarb & Murrell, 1983). 
Loneliness. A 7-item loneliness scale developed by Paloutzian and 
Ellison (1982) for elderly populations was included. The scale has shown 
high test-retest reliability (r = .85), and a correlation of .73 with the UCLA 
Loneliness Scale. Respondents rated how often they experienced feeling 






~a 
:~ 
















g 
0 
Z 













misunderstood, emotionally distant, and lonely on a 4-point scale ranging 
from often to never. 
Physical Health. Physical health was assessed using the Murrell and 
Norris (1984) revision of a health measure developed by Belloc, Breslow, 
and Hochstim (1971). The 20-item scale covers physical complaints and 
symptoms, difficulties in locomotion, and the presence of chronic condi- 
tions or illnesses. Overall physical health scores ranged from 20 to 49 with 
high scores indicating poor physical health. An internal consistency of .89 
was reported for a community sample of elderly (Murrell & Norris, 1984). 
The internal consistency of the physical health measure was .80 in the pre- 
sent study. 
Activities of Daily Living. The ADL was used to measure how well 
elderly individuals could live independently in the community (Fillenbaum, 
1985). The ADL contains 15 items assessing the capacity to perform various 
instrumental and physical (or bodily care) tasks. Fourteen items have a 
3-point scale (1 -- cannot do task even with help, 2 = can do task with some 
help, 3 -- can do task without help) and one item has a yes/no scale. ADL 
scores ranged from 15 to 44 with high scores indicating more independence 
in living. Test-retest reliabilities (average retest interval 5 weeks) on the 
ADL are reported to range from .71 to .82. The internal consistency of the 
ADL was .82 in the present study. In past research the ADL significantly 
discriminated between samples of community-residing, health clinic- 
referred, and institutionalized elderly (Fillenbaum, 1985). 
Perceived Social Support Scale. The PSS (Procidano & Heller, 1983) 
assessed the degree to which individuals perceived that they were receiving 
adequate levels of support from friends (PSS-FR) and family members 
(PSS-FA) and also served as a screening instrument in the study. The two 
scales, PSS-FR and PSS-FA, each contain 20 yes/no items. Scores on each 
scale ranged from 20 to 40, with high scores indicating high perceived ade- 
quacy of support. Exploratory factor analyses revealed that there is essen- 
tially only one major factor for each scale which examines evaluations of 
emotional support and general satisfaction with social relationships. Pro- 
cidano and Heller (1983) reported internal consistencies of .88 for the PSS- 
FR and .90 for the PSS-FA. The internal consistencies of the PSS scales in 
the present study were .85 for the PSS-FR and .90 for the PSS-FA. Validity 
studies are reported in Procidano and Heller (1983) and further validity in- 
formation can be found in Benson and Heller (1987), Frame (1981), Frazier 
(1982), and Steinmetz, Lewinsohn, and Antonuccio (1983). 
Network Embeddedness. Scales were developed for family and friend 
networks that examined the number of network ties and estimates of in- 
teraction frequency (Thompson & Heller, 1990b). Network embeddedness 
was examined using both global and weekly estimates. The family embed- 


dedness scale consisted of three items. Respondents were asked how often 
they regularly visited with their relatives (0-never to 6-daily) and whether 
they had visited and/or been visited by relatives in the past week (3-point 
scale). Respondents also were asked to list the people they had contact with 
during the previous month. The third family item was the number of family 
members they listed. The friend embeddedness scale also consisted of three 
items. The first item was the number of friends listed on the network size 
question. The second item was the sum of two questions (each on a 6-point 
scale) examining regular participation in church activities and community/ 
club activities which formed a 12-point scale of formal nonkin activities. 
The final item asked respondents for a weekly estimate of their participa- 
tion in church or clubs (3-point scale). 


Multivariate analyses of variance were conducted for intervention 
Conditions (6), Sites (3), and Conditions by Sites to determine whether 
groups were equivalent at the start of the study. Table II shows the means 
and standard deviations of the social support and mental health variables 
for all four assessment periods. At T1 there were no significant initial dif- 
ferences between intervention groups on any of the measures. However, 
there were significant initial differences among respondents in the three in- 
tervention sites on three variables: income, education, and CES-D. 
Respondents in the most urban of the three sites had higher income and 
education and lower depression scores than respondents in the less urban 
sites. (See Table III.) 
Initial correlations between the mental health, social support, and 
physical health variables are presented in Table IV. There were significant 
correlations between physical and mental health and between family sup- 
port and mental health. Respondents in poorer health were significantly 
more lonely and depressed and had lower morale. Similarly, those with 
higher family support showed higher scores on all of the mental health 
variables. Despite significant correlations between perceived friend and 
family support (r = .39) and between friend and family network embed- 
dedness (r = 
.20), perceived friend support was, for the most part, 
unrelated to mental health at Time 1. On the other hand, controlling for 
perceived friend support and network embeddedness, participants with 
higher family support still showed better mental health scores (Thompson & 
Heller, 1990b). 


Table II. Means and Standard Deviations o f the Perceived Support and Mental Health Varia- 
bles for the Four Assessment Periods 















CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA" 
PSS-FR 


CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA a 
PSS-FR 


CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA a 
PSS-FR 


CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA ~ 
PSS-FR 


CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA a 
PSS-FR 


CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
PSS-FA a 
PSS-FR 
31.1 
28.6 
13.1 
35.3 
33.3 
31.6 
27.6 
13.6 
34.8 
34.0 
32.0 
27.9 
13.6 
35.0 
33.3 
33.0 
27.4 
13.4 
35.3 
32.5 
29.7 
28.6 
12.9 
35.3 
33.9 
32.8 
27.1 
14.2 
36.2 
33.4 
8.4 
3.9 
2.7 
5.5 
4.6 
6.8 
3.3 
3.2 
4.9 
3.9 
9.2 
3.6 
3.5 
5.0 
3.5 
8.8 
3.6 
4.3 
4.3 
3.7 
6.5 
3.4 
2.7 
4.7 
4.3 
8.3 
3.4 
2.9 
3.9 
4.7 
30.2 
28.9 
13.2 
. 
33.8 
31.4 
28.0 
12.8 
. 
33.6 
30.1 
28.4 
12.5 
. 
32.6 
31.7 
27.9 
12.4 
. 
32.4 
30.2 
28.8 
11.4 
. 
34.2 
30.6 
28.1 
12.8 
. 
34.3 






8.6 
3.5 
3.1 
. 
4.8 
7.7 
3.4 
3.1 
. 
5.2 
7.3 
3.9 
3.4 
. 
4.2 
9.5 
3.3 
2.9 
. 
4.7 
7.9 
3.9 
2.9 
. 
4.8 
7.9 
3.7 
3.1 
. 
4.3 
29.9 
28.3 
12.5 

9.4 
4.6 
3.3 


30.0 
27.6 
12.2 

6.8 
3.8 
2.7 


29.7 
29.3 
12.1 

8.4 
3.7 
3.3 


29.1 
28.1 
11.8 

7.5 
3.9 
3.2 


27.9 
29.1 
12.0 

7.0 
3.6 
3.2 


29.9 
27.6 
12.5 

8.0 
3.5 
3.1 


31.3 
28.6 
12.9 
35.0 
34.2 
30.5 
27.4 
12.8 
34.8 
33.5 
31.2 
28.3 
13.3 
35.5 
33.3 
32.5 
27.8 
12.9 
34.9 
33.0 
28.9 
29.1 
11.8 
35,9 
34,0 
30.4 
27.8 
12.7 
36.5 
34.5 
10.1 
3.9 
3.3 
5.4 
4.8 
7.6 
3.4 
2.8 
5.3 
5.1 
9.3 
4.0 
3.5 
4.7 
4.6 
9,7 
3,1 
3.4 
4.2 
4.3 
5.6 
3.3 
3.1 
4.1 
4.9 
7.1 
3.2 
2.9 
3.9 
4.5 
aThis measure was not administered at T2 and T3. 
b o n e participant was lost from the Dyad receiver group at T3, two were 
CThree participants were lost from the Dyad refuser group at T3. 
dTwo participants were lost from the contact discontinues group at T3. 














 
 
 
 
 
 







Age 
Education 
Income o 

Symptoms 
Conditions 
Functional heMth 
Social support 
PSS-FA 
F a m - E m b b 
PSS-FR 
FR-E mb b 

CES-D 
P G C 
Loneliness 
74.1 
10.2 
3.3 
31.8 
11.5 
42.0 
35.0 
0.0 
33.7 
0.1 
32.6 
27.4 
13.4 
74.0 
10.7 
3.6 
32.2 
11.6 
41.9 
35.5 
-0.4 
33.0 
-0.3 
32.8 
28.0 
13.8 
75.4 
11.1 ~ 
4.6 ~ 
31.3 
11.5 
42.6 
35.4 
0.3 
33.6 
0.2 
29.8 "~ 
28.0 
13.2 
"Income category 3 = $6,000-6,999; income category 4 = $7,000-8,999. 
~Embeddedness scores are sums of 3 items in stand ard score format. 
~Difference between groups significance at p < .05. 
dDifference between groups significant at p < .01. 
°Difference between groups significant at p < .001. 
health among members of the intervention groups compared to assessment- 
only controls. There were two interventions that occurred in sequence. Staff 
telephone contacts for all respondents except the assessment-only controls, 
followed by random assignment to peer, staff, or no further contact (see 
Table I). To determine the effects associated with each intervention and 
then their combined effects, changes were examined across each of the in- 





Symptoms 
Conditions 
Functional ability 

PSS-FA 
Family embeddedness 

PSS-FR 
Friend embeddedness 
"Significant a t p < .01. 
~Significant at p < .001. 
.24 b 
.19 ~ 
-. 14 ° 
-.36 b 
-.22 ~ 
-.11 
-. 12 
.481' 
.27~' 
-.28 h 
-.271' 
-.19 e 
-. 16" 
-.04 
-.45 ~ 
-.35b 
.25 
.18 ~ 
.21 b 
.05 
.08 


tervention periods, T1-T2, T2-T3, T3-T4; and then for the entire ex- 
perimental period, T1-T3; and again for the entire experiment, T1-T4. 
Changes were also examined between intervention groups and within each 
group across time. The means and standard deviations for each of these 
comparisons are shown in Table II. 
Overall, there were no significant social support or mental health 
changes for either of the interventions compared to the assessment-only 
controls. Nor were there significant differential effects for the two interven- 
tions compared to each other. However, there were significant univariate 
effects on some of the measures within groups across time indicating 
simultaneous changes in both intervention and control groups. From T1 to 
T2, respondents receiving friendly phone calls from staff showed improved 
morale and less loneliness, but so did assessment-only controls who received 
the same in-home assessments as the intervention group but no biweekly 
and weekly phone calls. From T2 and T3, respondents assigned to peer 
dyads continued to show reductions in loneliness, while those continuing 
with staff contact showed further improvements in morale. Mental health 
scores of those receiving staff contact improved steadily and significantly 
from T1 to T3. The assessment-only controls showed no further im- 
provements in mental health at T3, but they maintained the improvements 
noted in the previous period. When formal contact was withdrawn during 
the follow-up period, gains in morale and loneliness noted earlier were 
dissipated, so that by the T4 assessment there were no significant T1-T4 dif- 
ferences, expect for the assessment-only controls who continued to main- 
tain the reduction in loneliness noted at T2. 


Even though the participants in the peer dyad intervention did not 
show significant changes in well-being compared to assessment-only con- 
trols, a number of dyad partners did become friends, and it would be of 
value to future research to determine the characteristics that distinguish 
dyads 
terminated early. 
from 
Respondents assigned to peer dyads were asked at both T3 and T4 to in- 
dicate whether they were still in contact with their dyad partner and if so to 
describe that individual on a phone partner questionnaire. At T3, 71°70 of 
the dyads were still in contact, and at T4, 56°7o were still in contact. As 
validation of the still-in-contact measure, we found that dyads members still 
in contact at T3 reported having received more emotional support from 
phone partners than dyads no longer in contact (p < .001). They also pro- 
vided more positive (p < .001) and less negative (p < .05) descriptions of 
their dyad partners. Similar results were found at T4 (Hogg & Heller, 1990). 




Participants in continuing dyads at T3 also had higher initial levels of 
perceived support from friends (p < 
.04), a greater number of friends (p 
< .03), and higher levels of functional ability as indicated by ADL scores (p 
< 
.03) than did members of less successful dyads. These latter differences 
were not evident at T4. 
To determine whether initialy dyad similarity predicted dyad conti- 
nuance, discriminant analyses were conducted using dyad continuance at T3 
and T4 as the criterion variables (Trueba, 1990). Predictors were similarity 
in demographic characteristics (age, education, income, marital status, and 
the presence of children), similarity in activity levels (frequency of church 
and club attendance), social competency levels, and similarity in social com- 
petence. Among these variables, the only significant predictor was similari- 
ty in social competence. Dyad members still in contact at T3 were more 
similar in social competence than were those no longer in contact (p < 
.05) 
(Hogg & Heller, 1990). 

There is a substantial body of literature to lead one to expect that peer 
friendships among the elderly should be morale enhancing (Larson, Man- 
nell, & Zuzanek, 1986; Lowental & Haven, 1968). For example, Larson et 
al. (1986) suggested that while family members are increasingly relied upon 
for social contact, active leisure occurs more frequently among friends and 
is more likely to involve reciprocity, a sharing of interests, and positive af- 
fect. Yet in this study, an intervention primarily designed to enhance peer 
friendships did not have a significant impact on psychological well-being. 
Although one can never be sure about the reasons for lack of significance, it 
may be instructive to future research to consider why the peer dyad in- 
tervention in this study was not effective. 
We must recognize at the outset that it is difficult to determine 
whether the nonsignificant findings represented a weak intervention or in- 
sensitive measures. The psychological well-being measures were chosen for 
their proven stability and validity in discriminating normal affective states 
from more extreme clinical instances of depression and low morale. The 
measures may not have been sensitive enough to pick up subtle mood 
changes or changes in morale and satisfaction that may have occurred as a 
result of the telephone calls. In describing their dyad partners, participants 
often were complementary, mentioning similarities that the two shared. 
Yet, dyads that stayed together through the follow-up assessment showed 
no differences on the well-being measures compared to those that ter- 
minated early. More sensitive measures to consider in future research might 
include daily mood measures completed as part of a daily diary, or in 


response to reminders activated by transponders worn by elderly par- 
ticipants (Larson et al., 1985). 
The fact that there were no significant changes in perceived friend support 
or in network composition as a result of the intervention also might reflect 
insensitive measures, but this result is more damaging to the experimental 
hypotheses. It is harder to argue that peer telephone dyads are a viable way 
of increasing friendships for elderly women if there were no significant 
changes in perceived friend support as a result of the intervention, and dyad 
friends were not nominated in significant numbers on the network list or 
circle of friends that appeared as part of the follow-up assessment. The par- 
ticipants may have indeed enjoyed the telephone contacts and may have 
thought highly of their dyad partners, but these contacts still may not have 
had sufficient impact on their sense of well-being or on their regular pattern 
of social life. 
A reasonable possibility is that the intervention may have been too 
weak to show effects on the well-being measures. Telephone contacts were 
chosen because we wanted to be of particular help to isolated community- 
living elderly, many of whom have mobility restrictions that make an active 
social life difficult to maintain. Still, it is possible that telephone friendships 
were too limiting and did not allow sufficient contact for the development 
of intimacy and mutual sharing. Furthermore, the peer dyad intervention 
involved the construction of new friendships, while the literature on the 
morale-enhancing value of friendship may primarily refer to relationships 
that have been ongoing for a number of years, and which may be non- 
substitutable if lost. Intimacy among friends occurs gradually over time and 
is most often built upon personal contact and shared activity. Telephone 
contacts may enhance the maintenance of already established friendships 
but may simply be an insufficient foundation for friendship development. 
The fact that all groups, including the assessment-only control group, 
showed small but significant changes in morale and loneliness over time 
may mean that participation in the study and being visited every 3 months 
by a university-connected interviewer was itself esteem enhancing. Indeed, 
we have indication that respondents looked forward to their assessment in- 
terviews. They often made it difficult for interviewers to leave, and seemed 
proud of the fact that they had been picked for such an "important" study. 
They were socially useful again, and someone cared enough about their life 
experiences and current feelings to inquire in some detail about these mat- 
ters. While weekly telephone contacts from staff members may have added 
to this effect with steady improvements in mental health from T1 to T3, 
telephone contacts with elderly peers did not. 
The meager findings concerning the characteristics of continuing dyad 
members compared to those in dyads that terminated early point to the dif- 


ficulty of predicting criteria used by the elderly in developing new friends. It 
has long been held that friendships develop on the basis of attraction be- 
tween similar individuals (Byrne, 1961; Byrne, Griffit, & Stefaniak, 1967; 
Duck, 1973; Lea & Duck, 1982). Yet in this study, only one similarity 
variable predicted peer dyad continuance. There may have been attenuation 
due to restrictions in range on the predictor variables, but the findings are 
sobering because they provide few clues as to how future friendship dyads 
might be best constituted. We were initially hesitant to assign dyad partners 
randomly, since friendships clearly do not develop on a random basis. 
There were several instances of concern among our interviewers about the 
wisdom of specific pairings of individuals whom they believed would have 
little in common. But, in fact, these dyads had the same continuation rates 
as the others, and we could not predict which dyad members would become 
friends based upon interviewer impressions or similarity data. We must 
reluctantly conclude that random assignment was as good a method of dyad 
assignment as any other. 
The data on the characteristics of continuing dyad members also rein- 
force the general finding in the intervention literature that those individuals 
with the greatest number of assets are most likely to take advantage of the 
opportunities provided by intervention programs. In this study, individuals 
were more likely to be in continuing dyad friendships if they initially had a 
large number of friends, had higher levels of perceived friend support, and 
were not physically impaired. These were not the most needy elderly 
women, and unfortunately, we have no evidence from post-hoc analyses 
that either the peer dyad or staff interventions benefited those who were the 
most socially isolated or those in poorest functional health or experiencing 
stressful life events. 
A major alternative to consider in evaluating the results of this study is 
that the enhancement of peer friendships may have been the wrong in- 
tervention for this sample. Despite the literature indicating that family 
members are primarily relied upon for physical care rather that as a source 
of confidante relationships (Larson et al., 1986), in this study family support 
appeared to be more important than friend support. Interviewers noted em- 
barrassment and shame among women who reported that family members 
did not value them or offer assistance. When respondents were asked to rate 
network members in terms of their intimacy and closeness, family members, 
on average, composed 75°7o of the closest group. The majority of our 
respondents nominated family members, particularly adult daughters, as 
their confidantes. Furthermore, the correlations reported in Table IV and a 
separate analysis (Thompson & HeUer, 1990b) indicate that it was perceived 
family support and not perceived friend support that was related to 
initial levels of mental health. We also have preliminary evidence that low 


levels of perceived family support are related to mortality in this group 
(Vlachos-Weber & Heller, study in progress). 
A lesson to be learned from this study is that intervention programs 
should not be designed relying only on what is known in the extant 
literature. Data on the role of social ties for the specific intervention sample 
also are crucial. Campbell (1987) argued for greater attention to "local 
molar validity" in intervention research because complex interactions of set- 
ting factors and treatment variables make it difficult to generalize from one 
setting to another. Without careful ethnographic study preceding interven- 
tion programs, subtle sample characteristics can be missed. In a pilot study 
conducted before the intervention was undertaken, respondents did talk 
about the importance of family relationships, but they also admitted to 
loneliness and low perceived friend support. It was not clear until we col- 
lected much more data in the main study that family support may have been 
more important to their sense of well-being. 
Elderly with low perceived family support present a dilemma for in- 
tervention. Missing or nonsupportive family members may be non- 
substitutable (Lieberman, 1986). This means that activity and companion- 
ship programs for the elderly that increase peer contact still may be unable 
to make up for missing family support. Interventionists may need to think 
about how to enhance the supportiveness of existing ties rather than focus- 
ing exclusively on building new ones. For example, one strategy for in- 
dividuals already embedded in family networks but who lack perceived 
family support would be to address the "support skill" inadequacies of the 
target individual and network members that prevent effective support seek- 
ing and provision (Thompson & Heller, 1990a), as well as the structural 
aspects of social life that decrease perceived family support. One may not be 
able to bring affection to family relations that have become strained over 
the years, but family support may be remediable to the extent that it in- 
volves unskilled support provision by family members motivated to do bet- 
ter. 
It would be interesting to speculate about the aspects of family sup- 
port that may be nonsubstitutable. One possibility are family roles, such as 
those involved in parent-child relationships, and the positive affect and 
sense of esteem that develops as individuals enact roles over time. Both roles 
and the esteem that develops through competent role performance may be 
duplicated by building family-like roles with individuals who might act as 
surrogate family members. For example, even though children and grand- 
children may have moved away, or may no longer look to their elders for 
encouragement or guidance, there may be other young people in the com- 
munity who would benefit from a mentoring relationship with an older 


woman. More difficult to duplicate, however, is the potential inequity that 
m a y develop over time in some parent-child relationships. Parents who 
sacrifice for their children often expect some return when their children 
become adults. If these expectations remain unmet and there is not a 
reciprocity in the perception of caring, a source of frustration and disap- 
pointment remains that probably cannot be dissolved by surrogate activities 
or relationships. 
Changing social structures to increase useful social roles for the elderly 
is another way of increasing the likelihood of more normal social engage- 
ment. For example, intergenerational dyads and exchange networks that en- 
courage linkages to the elderly provide opportunities for reestablished social 
usefulness. The loss of h o m e m a k e r or work roles does not mean that the 
elderly need be socially nonproductive if new relationships can be estab- 
lished that would restore lost role functions. Demoralization is reduced if 
one can maintain a view of self as an active societal contributor. Maintain- 
ing meaningful and useful activity also increases the likelihood that family 
and friends will see the elderly as more interesting companions. Their con- 
versations can move beyond bodily complaints and past glories that have 
been heard before by network members, to a more varied discussion of cur- 
rent happenings that, after all, comprise the bulk of daily social inter- 
change. 
This project was built on the assumption that peer telephone dyads 
were one way for the elderly to maintain useful social roles by providing in- 
digenous support to one another. Although one can never be certain of how 
to interpret null findings, in hindsight, we believe that we m a y have em- 
barked on the wrong intervention. Telephone contacts may provide a weak 
basis for the formation of new friendships, and family support may be more 
important than friend support for this population. Both alternatives present 
dilemmas for intervention. Many elderly with limited resources and mobili- 
ty restrictions have difficulty maintaining in-person contacts, so ways to 
overcome physical isolation are needed. At the same time, our data point to 
the importance o f family ties for this age group and challenge us to discover 
ways in which greater family interconnectedness might be established. 



Baumgarten, M., Thomas, D., Poulin de Courval, L., & Infante-Rivard, C. (1988). Evalua- 
tion of a mutual help network for the elderly residents of planned housing. Psychology 
andAging, 3, 393-398. 






Benson, C. S., & Heller, K. (1987). Factors in the current adjustment of young adult daughters 
of alcoholic and problem drinking fathers. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 
305-312. 
Berkman, L., & Syme, S. L. (1979). Social networks, host resistance and mortality: A nine year 
follow-up of Alameda County residents. American Journal of Epidemiology, 109, 
184-204. 


Blonsky, L. E. (1973). An innovative service for the elderly. Gerontologist, 13, 189-196. 
Bogat, G. A., & Jason, L. A. (1983). An evaluation of two visiting programs for elderly com- 
munity residents. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 17, 267- 
279. 




Campbell, D. T. (1987). Guideliness for monitoring the scientific competence of Preventive 
Intervention Research Centers. Knowledge: Creation, Diffusion, & Utilization, 8, 
389-430. 
Cohen, S., Lichtenstein, E., Mermelstein, R., Kingsolver, K., Baer, J., & Kamarck, T. (1988). 
Social support interventions for smoking cessation. In B. H. Gottlieb (Ed.), Marshaling 
social support: Formats, processes and effects (pp. 211-240). Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 
Cumming, E., & Henry, W. (1961). Growing old. New York: Basic Books. 
Duck, S. W. (1973). Similarity and perceived similarity of personal constructs as influences 
on friendship choice. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 12, 1-6. 
FiUenbaum, G. G. (1985). Screening the elderly: A brief instrumental activities of daily living 

Fogelman, C. J., Roberts, J. C., & Dunbar, M. E. (1983). Volunteering: Helping yourself 
or helping others. In M. A. Stayer & M. Gatz (Eds.), Mental health and aging: Pro- 
grams and evaluations (pp. 231-244). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

outpatients: A descriptive study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana Univer- 
sity. 
Frazier, C. L. (1982). Depression, self-esteem, and physical health as a function of social 
support in the elderly. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, New School for Social 
Research. 


Gottlieb, B. H. (1988). Support interventions: A typology and agenda for research. In S. W. 
Duck (Ed.), Handbook of personal relationships (pp. 519-541). New York: Wiley. 
Gurin, G., Veroff, J., & Feld, S. (1960). Americans view their mental health: A nationwide 



Hinrichsen, G. A., Revenson, T. A., & Shinn, M. (1985). Does self-help help? An empirical 
investigation of scoliosis peer support groups. Journal of Social Issues, 41, 65-87. 
Hogg, J. R., & Heller, K. (1990). A measure of relational competence for community-living 

House, J. S., Robbins, C., & Metzner, H. L. (1982). The association of social relationships 
with mortality: Prospective evidence from the Tecumseh community health study. 
American Journal of Epidemiology, 116, 123-140. 


Kahn, R. L., Goldfarb, A. I., Pollack, M., & Peck, R. (1960). Brief objective measures for 
the determination of mental status in the aged. American Journal of Psychiatry, 117, 
326-328. 
Kaplan, G. A., Roberts, R. E., Camacho, T. C., & Coyne, J. C. (1987). Psychosocial pre- 
dictors of depression: Prospective evidence for the human population laboratory 
studies. American Journal of Epidemiology, 125, 206-219. 
Kessler, R. C., & McLeod, J. D. (1985). Social support and mental health in community sam- 
ples. In S. Cohen & S. L. Syme (Eds.), Social support and health (pp. 219-240). Or- 
lando, FL: Academic Press. 


Lawton, M. P. (1972). The dimensions of morale. In D. Kent, R. Kastenbaum, & S. Sherwood 
(Eds.), Research, planning and action for the elderly (pp. 144-165). New York: Be- 
havioral Publications. 








Lowenthal, M. F., & Robinson, B. (1976). In R. H. Binstock & E. Shanas (Eds.), Handbook 
of aging and the social seiences (pp. 432-456). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. 
Murrell, S. A., & Norris, F. H. (1984). Resources, life events, and changes in positive affect 
and depression in older adults. American Journal of Community Psychology, 12, 
445-465. 
Palmore, E. (1979). Predictors of successful aging. Gerontologist, 19, 427-431. 
Paloutzian, R. F., & Ellison, C. W. (1982). Loneliness, spiritual well-being and the quality of 
life. In L. A. Peplau and D. Perlman (Eds.), Loneliness: A soureebook of current 
theory, research, and therapy (pp. 224-237). New York: Wiley. 


Procidano, M. E., & Heller, K. (1983). Measures of perceived social support from friends 
and from family: Three validation studies. American Journal of Community Psy- 
chology, 11, 1-24. 






Rosow, I. (1967). Social integration of the aged. New York: Free Press. 
Rosow, I. (1973). The social context of the aging self. Gerontologist, 13, 82-87. 
Rosow, I. (1985). Status and role change through the life cycle. In R. H. Binstock & E. Shanas 
(Eds.), Handbook of aging and the social sciences (pp. 62-93). New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold. 


Scheidt, R. J. (1982). Implications of social psychological research for the training of psy- 
chologists for work in aging. In J. F. Santos & G. R. Vandenbos (Eds.), Psychology 
and the older adult: Challenges for training in the 1980"s (pp. 187-206). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Schulz, R. (1976). The effects of control and predictability on the physical and psychological 
well-being of the institutionalized aged. Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology, 
33, 563-573. 


Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability enhancing 
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social psy- 
chology, 36, 1194-1201. 
Seeman, T. E., Kaplan, G. A., Knudson, L. P., Cohen, R. D., & Guralnik, J. (1987). Social 
network ties and mortality among the elderly in the Alameda County study. American 
Journal of Epidemiology, 126, 714-723. 


Steinmetz, J. L., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Antonuccio, D. O. (1983). Prediction of individual 
outcomes in a group intervention for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 51, 331-337. 
Thompson, M. G., & Heller, K. (1990a). Optimizing support interventions' effectiveness 
through a focus on transactional processes. In K. Heller (Chair), Understanding the fac- 
tors responsible for support intervention success and failure. Symposium conducted at 
the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association. 
Thompson, M. G., & Heller, K. (1990b). Facets of support related to well-being: Quantitative 
social isolation and perceived family support in a sample of elderly women. Psychology 
and Aging, 5, 535-544. 
Trueba, P. E. (1990). Similarity variables influencing the formation and maintenance of 
telephone friendships between elderly women. Unpublished manuscript, Indiana 
University. 




Zarit, S. H., & Zarit, J. M. (1983). Cognitive impairment. In P. M. Lewnsohn & L. Teri 
(Eds.), Clinical geropsychology: New directions in assessment and treatment (pp. 38- 
80). New York: Pergamon. 
