
Effects of a social internet-based intervention 
programme for older adults: An explorative 
randomised crossover study 
Ellinor Larsson1, Mojgan Padyab2, Maria Larsson-Lund3 
and Ingeborg Nilsson4 
British Journal of Occupational Therapy 
2016, Vol. 79(10) 629–636 
! The Author(s) 2016 
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/0308022616641701 
bjo.sagepub.com 
Abstract 
Introduction: Restraints and changes in social activities might contribute to loneliness and health decline for older adults. To 
reduce loneliness and support activities, social internet-based interventions are indicated to be effective. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate the effects of a social internet-based intervention for older adults who are vulnerable to loneliness. 
Method: An explorative, randomised, crossover study with an AB/BA sequence was completed. The intervention was conducted 
over a period of three months. Thirty participants were included (24 women and six men, 61–89 years old) and allocated to two 
groups. Data were collected at three time points. The primary outcome was the UCLA loneliness scale, and the secondary outcomes 
were satisfaction with social contacts and social interaction skills. Statistical analyses were conducted with the paired t-test, 
Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test and repeated-measures analysis of variance. 
Results: Loneliness was significantly decreased in both groups post intervention, and satisfaction with social contacts online 
significantly increased in one group. Significant treatment effects were detected for all outcomes. 
Conclusion: The results of the social internet-based intervention programme are promising, but further evaluations are needed. 
Keywords 
Loneliness, social activities, social contacts 


Health decline among older adults can originate from 
experiences of loneliness (Adams et al., 2004). Loneliness 
is evident for older adults in the Western world, and inﬂu- 
enced by cultural diﬀerences 
(De Jong-Gierveld and 
Havens, 2004). In Sweden, the prevalence of reported lone- 
liness is more than 7% among older adults, and it increases 
with age (Yang and Victor, 2011). Considering loneliness as 
an actual threat to health, the exploration of intervention 
programmes with the potential to reduce or prevent loneli- 
ness is critical (O’Luanaigh and Lawlor, 2008). Research 
has shown that older adults perceive that their social con- 
tacts and participation in activities can be supported and 
improved by social 
(SIBAs; 
internet-based activities 
Larsson et al., 2013; Nyman and Isaksson, 2015). 



Loneliness 
restraints or 
alterations in social contacts and activities such as becom- 
ing a retiree, living alone (Mullins et al., 1991), entering 
widowhood (Dahlberg et al., 2015) or being aﬄicted by 
reduced mobility and social 
interaction skills (Cohen- 
Mansﬁeld and Parpura-Gill, 2007). As the restraints and 
alterations in social contacts are experienced diﬀerently by 
individuals (Stanley et al., 2010), loneliness is deﬁned as a 
subjective experience of lacking satisfying social contacts 
(Peplau and Perlman, 1982). 



indicated that participation in 
internet-based activities and the use of SIBAs in interven- 
tions for older adults might reduce experiences of loneli- 
ness (Ballantyne et al., 2010; Cotten et al., 2013; Tsai and 
Tsai, 2011). SIBAs could be used to include seniors in the 
internet-based society, to support online social contacts 
and to complement social contacts outside the internet 
to reduce loneliness more 
(Lelkes, 2013). However, 
1PhD, Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, Umea˚ 
University, Umea˚, Sweden 
2Senior Researcher, Centre for Demographic and Ageing Research (CEDAR) 
and Department of Social Work, Umea˚ University, Umea˚, Sweden 
3Professor, Program Director, Department of Health Science, Occupational 
Therapy, Lulea˚ University of Technology, Lulea˚, Sweden 
4Associate 
and 
Rehabilitation, Occupational Therapy, Centre for Demographic and Ageing 
Research (CEDAR), Umea˚ University, Umea˚, Sweden 




Corresponding author: 
Ellinor Larsson, Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Occupational Therapy, Umea˚ University, 90187 Umea˚, Sweden. 
Email: ellinor.larsson@umu.se 


eﬀectively using SIBAs and the internet, research has 
emphasised the importance of using individual adapted 
programmes (Aarts et al., 2014), rather than general, pre- 
deﬁned internet introduction programmes. Consequently, 
the intervention programme should be client centred 
(Hammell, 2001) to support older adults more eﬃciently 
to be active and independent in preventing loneliness 
(Stanley et al., 2010). However, such a programme for 
older adults has not yet been suﬃciently explored in pre- 
vious research. 
Therefore, a multiple case study was conducted prior 
to this study in order to explore a social internet-based 
intervention programme (Larsson et al., 2013) for socially 
vulnerable older adults (vulnerability is understood as 
self-reported loneliness, reduced social contacts and/or 
social activities). The results show that the intervention 
programme is promising for reducing loneliness and sup- 
porting participation in social activities. More research is 
required to determine the intervention eﬀects of the social 
internet-based intervention programme. Therefore, the 
aim of this study was to evaluate the eﬀects of a social 
internet-based intervention for older adults who are vul- 
nerable to loneliness. 

The method follows the CONSORT (2010) statements for 
non-pharmacological treatment interventions, and a mod- 
iﬁed CONSORT ﬂow chart (Figure 1) shows the crossover 
design of the study. 

An explorative study with a two-period crossover design 
(AB/BA) was conducted. The crossover design tradition- 
ally includes a washout period in which the participants 
are observed until measures equal to baseline values are 
reached (Wang et al., 2006). A washout period was not 
applicable in this study because of the educational feature 
of the intervention in which the knowledge was expected 
to be sustained, as well as because of a lack of research 
regarding estimation of the correct washout period length 
(previously applied by Prosperini et al., 2013). Despite the 
omission of a washout period, the crossover design was 
chosen based on the ethical beneﬁts, as all participants 
were oﬀered the intervention. 
After enrolment, the participants received an initial pre- 
test at measurement point one (T1; Figure 1). The partici- 
pants were then randomised to one of the following 
sequences: I/C (intervention period/control period) or 
C/I (control period/intervention period). Group 1 (I/C) 
received the intervention for the ﬁrst three months and 
then crossed over to the control group for three additional 
months. For group 2 (C/I), the periods were reversed. 
During the control periods, no additional intervention was 
oﬀered to the participants in the study. Measurement 
point two (T2) followed the ﬁrst three months for both 
groups, and measurement point three (T3) followed the 
ﬁnal intervention and control period. The study lasted 
34 weeks, 
and T3). 


The power analysis was based on one of the secondary 
outcomes, 
the Evaluation of Social Interaction Skills 
(ESI; Fisher and Griswold, 2013) because standard error 
(SE) and mean values for a normal sample of older adults 
were provided. The pre–post mean value in a group of 
adults was 0.34 logits (Simmons and Griswold, 2010), 
although two SE values were used to minimise the risk 
of errors, resulting in a mean diﬀerence of 0.30. Using 
the sample of older 
the standard deviation (SD) of 
adults in the ESI database (equal to 0.38) provided an 
eﬀect size of 0.79 (0.30/0.38 ¼ 0.79). A power of 0.8 was 
selected, and a sample of 25 participants was anticipated 
to be suﬃcient for the statistical analysis (Lipsey and 
Hurley, 2009). 

To enrol participants, information regarding the study and 
contact details was announced on bulletin boards and in 
local daily newspapers in a mid-sized northern city in 
Sweden. Older adults who were interested in participating 
could contact the project leaders via email or telephone. 
The inclusion criteria were: (a) living in ordinary housing 
with no home care services, (b) aged 60 years old or older, 
(c) retired, (d) reporting experiences of loneliness, (e) 
reporting decreased social contacts and/or decreased par- 
ticipation in social activities, (f) internet users (including 
email) and (h) having a computer with Internet access at 
home. The exclusion criteria were: (a) regular participa- 
tion in SIBAs such as Facebook and Skype, (b) inability to 
communicate verbally and/or in writing and (c) inability to 
receive individual support in their homes due to geograph- 
ical distance. During the two-month recruitment period, 
the older adults’ eligibility was assessed by the project 
leader during individual phone calls. Eighteen older 
adults were excluded based on the established criteria 
(Figure 1). Finally, 30 older adults (24 women and six 
men aged 61–89 years) were enrolled, and the majority 
were single and/or were widows/widowers (Table 1). 
At recruitment, 
the participants received verbal and 
written information about the study and its purpose and 
about their right to withdraw at any time. Before the ini- 
tiation of the study, all participants signed a voluntary 
consent letter. 
The 30 participants were randomised using a compu- 
terised programme. The ﬁrst author wrote in the sequence 
boundaries (1–24, 25–30) for randomisation, and the par- 
ticipants were stratiﬁed according to sex. The numbers 
were then randomly assigned into two groups by one 
employee who was working at the same department as 
the research group (not otherwise included in the study). 
The ﬁrst author then received a preset list from a second 
employee (within the research group) with a number for 


Figure 1. A flow chart displaying participant recruitment and allocation. The number of participants at the different time points is 
displayed. T1: measurement point one; T2: measurement point two; T3: measurement point three; group 1 (I/C): intervention period/ 
control period; group 2 (C/I): control period/intervention period. 
each participant that revealed each participant’s group 
enrolment. 

two participants dropped out: 
woman from group 1 (I/C) and one man from group 2 
(C/I). The reasons given for withdrawal were a lack of 
time and no need for the intervention. One male partici- 
pated only in the measurement periods but not in the 
intervention, and one female did not participate in the 
last month of her intervention period. These two partici- 
pants were not considered as dropouts, thereby supporting 
future comparisons to studies in which not all participants 
comply with the intervention plans. 

The intervention programme (Larsson et al., 2013) was 
based on the client-centred approach described in the 
Intervention Process Model 
Occupational Therapy 
(OTIPM; Fisher, 2009). The focus of the intervention 
programme was to support 
individually adapted and 
goal-directed participation in SIBAs. The intervention 
programme combines individual and group meetings, 
including in-home support and remote support via the 
internet or telephone. The programme characteristics 
include a description of the frame (that is, the time and 

Pre-test one, n = 30 
(T1) 

Allocated to intervention. Group 1: 
I/C (n = 15) 
Allocated to control. Group 2: C/I 
(n = 15) 
Discontinued intervention (lack of 
time) (n = 1). Post-test 1 for group 1: 
I/C (n =14) 
Post-test 1 for group 2: C/I (n =14). 
Discontinued intervention (n = 0) 
Excluded (n = 18) 
* Did not meet inclusion 
criteria (n = 18) 
* Declined to participate 
 (n = 0) 
* Other reasons (n = 0) 
Discontinued intervention (no need 
of the intervention) (n = 1). Pre-test 
2 for group 2: C/I (n = 14) 


Allocated to intervention. Group 2: 
C/I (n = 14) 
Post-test 2 for group 1: I/C (n = 14). 
Discontinued intervention (n = 0) 
Follow-up 
(T2) 

Follow-up 
(T3) 
Analysed (n = 14) 
Excluded from analysis (drop-outs) 
(n = 1) 
Analysed (n = 14) 
Excluded from analysis (drop-outs) 
(n = 1) 



Table 1. Baseline characteristics of the participants, including 
age, sex, educational level, living arrangements and frequencies of 
social activity participation and email use. 

An external rater who was blinded to group allocation and 
was trained to administer all of the measurements per- 
formed all data collection during the three measurement 
points (T1, T2 and T3). At T1, baseline characteristics 
were collected, and initial evaluations of the primary and 
secondary outcomes were conducted. At T2 and T3, the 
primary and secondary outcomes were re-evaluated. 
Baseline characteristics. At baseline, information was col- 
lected on the participants’ age, educational level, living 
arrangements, frequency of email use and participation 
in other social activities. Moreover, computer-related 
skills were evaluated using the Assessment of Computer- 
Related Skills (ACRS; Fischl and Fisher, 2007), an obser- 
vational tool that evaluates 37 skills required for computer 
and Internet use. The ACRS information was only used to 
describe the target group, not for pre–post comparisons. 
Total sample: n ¼ 30; group 1 (I/C): n ¼ 15; group 2 (C/I): n ¼ 15. 
Group 1 (I/C): intervention period/control period; group 2 (C/I): control 
period/intervention period. 
place of the intervention) and the content (that is, preset 
actions and individual tasks; Table 2). In the frame, an 
hour and a half is set as the maximum time for each 
meeting (in groups and individually). The individual 
meetings are oﬀered weekly, and the frequency and 
type of support (in home or remotely) are adapted to 
the participants’ needs for support, and can therefore 
take place more frequently for some participants. The 
group meetings are oﬀered every second week. The pro- 
gramme content 
includes pre-decided actions for the 
occupational therapists, for example to establish a col- 
laborative 
the 
OTIPM), as well as pre-decided tasks and individually 
adapted goal-directed tasks for the participants (see 
Table 2 for examples). Goal achievements are not eval- 
uated in this article because of the large volume of data 
available, but the goals could include ﬁnding a new 
friend with the same interests or learning how to partici- 
pate in debates using SIBAs. 




In total, three part-time occupational therapists (two 
per intervention period) provided the intervention. They 
worked in parallel and were responsible for six to eight 
participants each per intervention period. The occupa- 
therapists had previous experience of working 
tional 
with older adults, and prior to the intervention, they 
attended a two-day course on how to apply the interven- 
tion programme. 
Primary outcome. The primary outcome was self-reported 
loneliness, measured using the UCLA loneliness scale 
(Russell, 1996), which has been found to be valid and reli- 
able when used for groups of older adults and in interven- 
tion studies (Cattan et al., 2005). For this study, a Swedish 
version of the UCLA loneliness scale that was previously 
translated by Engelberg and Sjo¨ berg (2005) was used. The 
scale contains 20 questions graded on a four-step scale, 
where 1 ¼ never, 2 ¼ rarely, 3 ¼ sometimes and 4 ¼ always. 
Nine questions are reversed before the answers are graded. 
The scores are summarised to yield a total score ranging 
from 20 to 80. A higher total score indicates a higher 
loneliness (20(cid:2)34 ¼ low, 35(cid:2)49 ¼ moderate, 
degree of 
50(cid:2)64 ¼ moderately high and 65(cid:2)80 ¼ high experiences 
of loneliness; Perry, 1990). 
Secondary outcomes. The secondary outcomes were satis- 
faction with social contacts online and oﬄine, which were 
measured using the visual analogue scales (VASs) from the 
Social Network Online and Oﬄine (SN) questionnaire 
(Larsson et al., 2013). The scales ranged from 0 ¼ not 
satisﬁed to 10 ¼ very satisﬁed. The ESI (Fisher and 
Griswold, 2013) was used to observe and rate the quality 
of 27 social interaction skills when participating in social 
activities oﬄine. The performance quality was rated using 
a 
limited, 
where 
2 ¼ ineﬀective, 3 ¼ questionable and 4 ¼ competent. The 
measurement is valid to use for groups of older adults 
(Simmons et al., 2010). The ESI software (ESI, 2015) 
uses the Rasch measurement model to transform ordinal 
data into interval data, generating a measure (in logits) of 
the quality in social interaction skills for each person. The 
age normative limits ((cid:3)2 SD) for each age group are: 60– 
69 years old, 1.3 logits; 70–79 years old, 1.0 logits; and 80 
years old and older, 0.8 logits (Fisher and Griswold, 2013). 




Descriptive statistics and t-tests were used for baseline 
intervention 
characteristics. To compare pre–post 




















Total sample 
(n ¼ 30) 
Group 1 
(I/C; n ¼ 15) 
Group 2 
(C/I; n ¼ 15) 













































Individual meetings offered weekly, 
or more frequently if needed 

meeting via Skype by reading a blog 
post and formulate questions to 
discuss 
diﬀerences, the paired t-test or Wilcoxon signed-rank 
test was used (for linear or ordinal data, respectively). 
In addition to the comparison of pre- and post-test 
intervention scores, a calculation of 
the percentage 
change was added, which is a comparison of the mean 
change between the measurement points (T2–T1 and 
T3–T1). To assess whether the intervention eﬀects 
were sustained for three months post intervention (no 
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between T3 and T2 for group 1 [I/ 
C]), the Bonferroni post hoc test was used. The sustain- 
ability test was not applicable for group 2 (C/I) because 
they were not followed up after three months. With 
repeated-measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA), 
diﬀerences within and between subjects were compared 
using the measurement points (T1, T2 and T3) and the 
group allocations (group 1 [I/C], group 2 [C/I]), respect- 
ively. A time–treatment interaction analysis was applied 
to assess the treatment eﬀect at T3. The result of this 
analysis is referred to as the time eﬀect. Possible covari- 
ates of the main outcome (age, educational level and 
living arrangements) were 
included in the RM- 
ANOVA. The analyses were conducted using IBM 
SPSS Statistics 
for Windows v22.0 (IBM Corp., 
Armonk, NY). A p-value of (cid:4) 0.05 was set to detect sig- 
niﬁcant changes. 


satisfaction with social 
satisfaction with social 
Baseline diﬀerences between the two groups were controlled 
for; no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found for loneliness 
(p ¼ 0.464), 
contacts online 
(p ¼ 0.705), 
contacts oﬄine 
(p ¼ 0.273) or ESI (p ¼ 0.285). No diﬀerences were detected 
for the living arrangement (p ¼ 0.690) or educational level 
(p ¼ 0.512), but a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for age 
(p ¼ 0.047; group 1 [I/C] had a higher mean age, including 
participants older than 80 years of age). At baseline, 87% of 
the participants partook in social activities oﬄine once per 
week or more frequently, and 70% used email once a week 
or more frequently (for more details, see Table 1). The 
ACRS observations at baseline indicated that the most 
challenging skills for the participants (displayed by ineﬃ- 
cient and/or deﬁcient skills for 93% of the participants) 
were adapting their performance and modifying their 
behaviour while using computers and the internet. 

Analysis using Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test revealed signiﬁ- 
cantly reduced experiences of loneliness post intervention in 

Time 
Place 
Additional support (to accomplish the tasks or 

Preset educational group meetings 
offered every second week 
1.5 hours/occasion 
Remotely via Skype 
Remotely during meetings 
1.5 hours/occasion 
In the participants’ homes 
Remotely or in their homes 



Examples of the content in the intervention programme 
Occupational therapists’ predetermined actions 

Participants’ individual and 
goal-directed tasks 
Establish collaborative relationship at an individual 
meeting and support goal establishment with 
interview and measurement tools 

manuals) on how to use chosen SIBAs, in accord- 
ance with participants’ goals 


Identify and define goals with par- 
ticipation in SIBAs; learn about 
security settings 
Use one social media platform at a 
time instead of another approach 
(that is, instead of using the 
regular phone) 






‘like’ on another comment on 
Facebook 

Provide education (verbally, in writing and using 
manuals) on how to connect web camera and 
headphones to the participants’ computers 
Prepare the participants for the Skype meeting 
Act as a group leader at the meeting 





Participate at the group meeting with 
the theme ‘Contemporary debates 
in society’ 

Consider the individual progress and 
whether the goals are achieved 



both groups (group 1 [I/C] p ¼ 0.003; group 2 [C/I] p ¼ 0.049). 
Satisfaction with social contacts online was signiﬁcantly 
improved post intervention for group 2 (C/I; p ¼ 0.05), and 
no change was detected for group 1 (I/C; p ¼ 0.266; Table 3). 
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences for satisfaction with social contacts 
intervention were detected (group 1 [I/C] 
oﬄine post 
p ¼ 0.451; group 2 [C/I] p ¼ 0.074). Analysis of the ESI meas- 
urement by a paired t-test showed that the participants’ social 
interaction skills were signiﬁcantly lowered post intervention 
for group 1 (I/C; p ¼ 0.007), but no change was detected for 
group 2 (C/I; p ¼ 0.210; Table 3). Because of the negative 
trend in social interaction skills for one group, the ESI data 
were further explored using a box plot. Outliers in the data 
were found but were not removed due to the already small 
size of the sample. 
The Bonferroni post hoc test showed that the interven- 
tion eﬀects for all variables (loneliness, p ¼ 1.000; satisfac- 
tion with social contacts online, p ¼ 0.499; satisfaction 
with social contacts oﬄine, p ¼ 0.165; and ESI measure- 
ment, p ¼ 0.393) were sustained for group 1 (I/C) three 
months post intervention, as no signiﬁcant changes were 
detected for the already established eﬀects. 
Comparisons among measurement points 
T1, T2 and T3 

RM-ANOVA showed no interaction between the inter- 
vention and group allocation (group 1 [I/C] vs group 2 
[C/I]), indicating that the sequence (AB vs BA) had no 
eﬀect on the intervention. The time-treatment interaction 
analysis (time eﬀect) showed signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects 
for all variables (experiences of loneliness: F ¼ 13.156, 
p < 0.001; 
contacts online: 
F ¼ 13.159, p < 0.001; satisfaction with social contacts oﬀ- 
line: F ¼ 11.723, 
and ESI measurement: 
F ¼ 3.375, p ¼ 0.050; Table 3). The F-statistic is the ratio 
between within-subject variation (intervention eﬀect) and 
error variation (random/unsystematic diﬀerences). A large 
F-statistic yields a correspondingly small p-value, suggest- 
ing that there is a large variation in means between the 
measurement points over time. When age, educational 
level and living arrangement were added to the model, 
the treatment eﬀect remained unchanged. 


The results indicate that the individually adapted SIBA 
intervention programme for socially vulnerable older 
adults has the potential to reduce experiences of loneliness. 
The intervention eﬀects were sustained post intervention, 
which was expected and desired as part of the goal of the 
programme. As previous research indicated a relationship 
between health and loneliness (O’Luanaigh and Lawlor, 
2008), the results from this study indicate that the SIBA 
intervention has the potential to be used by occupational 
therapists in health-promotive actions for older adults. 
The occupational therapists’ ability to work in a client- 
centred way, to tailor the intervention to the individual 
(that is, level of independence and time needed to learn) T 


and to support meaningful goal-directed online activities 
(Larsson et al., 2013) might have inﬂuenced the positive 
results. Previous studies have identiﬁed that the frequency 
or time online cannot entirely explain or support a reduc- 
tion in loneliness (Aarts et al., 2014). Furthermore, the 
implementation of the intervention can be facilitated by 
collaborating with several actors in society (for example, 
senior organisations, professionals in health care and 
other 
establishments), which could help to reduce 
demands on health care. However, due to the explorative 
study design, 
the results should be interpreted with 
caution. 
In this study, the majority of participants were women 
living alone, who represent a group indicated to be more 
vulnerable to loneliness (Dahlberg et al., 2015). Despite 
this characteristic of our study population, none of the 
participants reported high levels of loneliness at baseline 
indicating that the 
according to the loneliness scale, 
intervention was tested on a group with low to moderate 
levels of loneliness. Therefore, continuing to explore the 
applicability 
for 
older adults with diﬀerent levels of loneliness, especially 
for 
is 
important. 




The secondary outcome, satisfaction with social con- 
tacts online, was signiﬁcantly improved for one group 
post intervention, but no signiﬁcant change was detected 
for satisfaction with social contacts oﬄine. However, at 
T3, the treatment eﬀect was signiﬁcantly improved for sat- 
isfaction with social contacts both online and oﬄine. 
Previous research has highlighted that satisfaction with 
social contacts and high-quality social relationships can 
decrease loneliness (Routasalo et al., 2006; Stanley et al., 
2010). Therefore, the results from this study, indicating 
that satisfaction online and oﬄine has improved over 
time, are promising but still very preliminary. The incon- 
clusive results of this study related to satisfaction with 
social contact could be due to the high baseline values in 
the groups, indicating less possibility for improvement. 
Consequently, satisfaction with social contacts should be 
controlled for in forthcoming studies. Additionally, priv- 
acy and technological issues that are known to limit suc- 
cessful use of internet-based activities (Nef et al., 2013) 
must also be controlled for and recognised as factors 
that can aﬀect the establishment of and satisfaction with 
friendships via the internet. 
Social interaction skills (measured by the ESI) were 
related to participation in SIBAs. 
assumed to be 
However, one group unexpectedly displayed decreased 
social 
interaction skills during the intervention. This 
result must be considered and followed up in future stu- 
dies. A possible explanation for the decrease in social 
interaction skills includes unreported diagnoses (that is, 
depression and cognitive decline), as that could aﬀect 
social interaction skills and must be evaluated accordingly 
(Fisher and Griswold, 2013). 
This explorative study, which included a small sample 
size, can form the basis for future larger, controlled studies 
and robust power calculations (Devane et al., 2004). 
The strengths of this study include the randomisation 
strategy and the use of an external rater who evaluated 
the study outcomes. An additional strength is that the 
occupational therapists who provided the intervention 
were not otherwise included in the study and were not 
biased by expectations of the study outcome. However, 
as no alternative intervention was oﬀered during the con- 
trol periods, the eﬀects might have been biased by the 
attention received by the participants from the intervening 
occupational therapists. To isolate the eﬀects of the indi- 
vidual approach applied in this programme, a comparison 
study with a general predeﬁned intervention programme 
should be conducted. Consequently, if an alternative inter- 
vention or no intervention had been provided to one of the 
groups, 
the study might have been 
strengthened. 


The present study indicates that this individually adapted 
SIBA intervention programme has the potential to reduce 
loneliness in socially vulnerable older 
experiences of 
adults. If occupational therapists embrace this SIBA inter- 
vention programme, their readiness to support seniors 
in the technological changing society might be enhanced. 
To advance the applicability of the intervention pro- 
gramme, further randomised controlled studies should be 
conducted. 
Ethics 
The Ethical Committee Umea˚ , Sweden (Dnr 2011-109-31 M) 
approved this study. 
Declaration of conflicting interests 
The authors conﬁrm there is no conﬂict of interest. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council’s 
Linnaeus Grant (no 2006-21576-36119-66), the C Wikstro¨ m Grant, 
the Swedish Research Council’s Strategic Research Programme in 
Care Sciences at Umea˚ University, 
the Interreg IV A Botnia- 
the Regional Council of Ostrobothnia, 
Atlantica programme, 
Novia University of Applied Sciences (Finland), A˚ bo Akademi 
University (Finland), Umea˚ University (Sweden) and Umea˚ 
Municipality (Sweden). 

. The SIBA intervention programme is client-centred, 
individually adapted and goal directed to support the 
participation of seniors in SIBAs. 



This study adds knowledge about the social eﬀects from 
participation in the client-centred, individually adapted 
SIBA intervention programme and the need to use such 
programmes in a more technology-based society. 


References 
Aarts S, Peek STM and Wouters EJM (2014) The relation 
between social network site usage and loneliness and mental 
health in community-dwelling older adults. International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 30(9): 942–949. 
Adams KB, Sanders S and Auth EA (2004) Loneliness and 
depression in independent 
living retirement communities: 
Risk and resilience factors. Aging and Mental Health 8(6): 
475–485. 
Ballantyne A, Trenwith L, Zubrinich S, et al. (2010) ‘I feel less 
lonely’: What older people say about participating in a social 
networking website. Quality in Ageing and Older Adults 11(3): 
25–35. 
Cattan M, White M, Bond J, et al. (2005) Preventing social iso- 
lation and loneliness among older people: A systematic review 
of health promotion interventions. Ageing and Society 25(1): 
41–67. 
Cohen-Mansfield J and Parpura-Gill A (2007) Loneliness in 
older persons: A theoretical model and empirical findings. 
International Psychogeriatrics 19(2): 279–294. 
CONSORT (2010) Non-Pharmacologic treatment (NPT) inter- 
ventions. Available at: www.consort-statement.org/exten- 
sions/interventions/non-pharmacologic-treatment-interven- 
tions/ (accessed 29 September 2015). 
Cotten SR, William AA and McCullough BM (2013) Impact of 
internet use on loneliness and contact with others among older 
adults: Cross-sectional analysis. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research 15(2): e39. 
Dahlberg L, Andersson L, McKee KJ, et al. (2015) Predictors of 
loneliness among older women and men in Sweden: a national 
longitudinal study. Aging and Mental Health 19(5): 409–417. 
De Jong-Gierveld J and Havens B (2004) Cross-national com- 
parisons of social isolation and loneliness: Introduction and 
overview. Canadian Journal on Ageing 23(2): 109–113. 
Devane D, Begley CM and Clarke M (2004) How many do I 
need? Basic principles of sample size estimation. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing 47(3): 297–302. 
Engelberg E and Sjo¨ berg L (2005) Emotional intelligence and 
interpersonal skills. In: Roberts RD and Schulze R (eds) 
International Handbook 
Intelligence. 
of 
Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe, 289–308. 

ESI (2015) ESI Computer-scoring software. Center for innova- 
tive OT solutions. Available at: www.innovativeotsolutions. 
com/content/esi/software/ (accessed 29 September 2015). 
Fischl C and Fisher AG (2007) Development and Rasch analysis 
of the assessment of computer-related skills. Scandinavian 
Journal of Occupational Therapy 14(2): 126–135. 
Fisher AG (2009) Occupational Therapy Intervention Process 
Model: A Model for Planning and Implementing Top-Down, 
Client-Centered and Occupation Based Interventions. Fort 
Collins, CO: Three Star Press. 


Hammell KW (2001) Using qualitative research to inform the 
client-centred evidence-based practice of occupational ther- 
apy. British Journal of Occupational Therapy 64: 228–234. 
Larsson E, Nilsson I and Larsson-Lund M (2013) Participation 
in social internet-based activities: Five seniors’ intervention 
processes. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy 
20(6): 471–480. 


Lipsey MW and Hurley SM (2009) Design sensitivity: Statistical 
power for applied experimental research. In: Bickman L and 
Rog DJ (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Applied Social Research 
Methods, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 44–77. 
Mullins CL, Sheppard LH and Andersson L (1991) Loneliness 
and social isolation in Sweden: Differences in age, sex, labor 
force status, self-rated health, and income adequacy. Journal 
of Applied Gerontology 10(4): 455–468. 
Nef T, Ganea RL, Mu¨ ri RM, et al. (2013) Social networking sites 
International 

and older users: A systematic 
Psychogeriatrics 25(7): 1041–1053. 
Nyman A and Isaksson G (2015) Togetherness in another way: 
Internet as a tool for togetherness in everyday occupations 
among older adults. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational 
Therapy 22(5): 387–393. 
O’Luanaigh C and Lawlor BA (2008) Loneliness and the health 
of older people. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 
23(12): 1213–1221. 
Peplau LA and Perlman D (1982) Perspectives on loneliness. 
In: Peplau LA and Perlman D (eds) Loneliness: A 
Sourcebook of Current Theory, Research and Therapy, 
1st ed. New York: Wiley-Interscience. 
Perry G (1990) Loneliness and coping among tertiary level adult 
cancer patients in the home. Cancer Nursing 13(13): 293–302. 
Prosperini L, Fortuna D, Gianni C, et al. (2013) Home-based 
balance training using the Wii balance board: A randomized, 
crossover pilot study in multiple sclerosis. Neurorehabilitation 
and Neural Repair 27(6): 516–525. 
Routasalo PE, Savikko N, Tilvis RS, et al. (2006) Social contacts 
and their relationship to loneliness among aged people: A 
population-based study. Gerontology 52(3): 181–187. 
Russell DW (1996) UCLA loneliness scale (version 3): Reliability, 
Journal of Personality 
structure. 

validity, 
Assessment 66(1): 20–40. 
Simmons CD and Griswold LA (2010) Using the Evaluation of 
Social Interaction in a community-based program for persons 
with traumatic brain injury. Scandinavian Journal of 
Occupational Therapy 17(1): 49–56. 
Simmons CD, Griswold LA and Berg B (2010) Evaluation of 
interaction during occupational engagement. The 
social 
American Journal of Occupational Therapy 64(1): 10–17. 
Stanley M, Moyle W, Ballantyne A, et al. (2010) ‘Nowadays you 
don’t even see your neighbours’: Loneliness in the everyday 
lives of older Australians. Health and Social Care in the 
Community 18(4): 407–414. 
Tsai HH and Tsai YF (2011) Changes in depressive symptoms, 
social support, and loneliness over 1 year after a minimum 3- 
month videoconference program for older nursing home resi- 
dents. Journal of Medical Internet Research 13(4): e93. 
Wang D, Lorch U and Bakhai A (2006) Crossover trials. 
In: Wang D and Bakhai A (eds) Clinical Trial: A Practical 
Guide to Design, Analysis, and Reporting. London: Remedica, 
90–100. 


