Effectiveness of comprehensive social support 
interventions among elderly patients with 
tuberculosis in communities in China: 
a community-based trial 
Xuhui Li,1,2 Bin Wang,1 Dixin Tan,1 Mengyu Li,1 Dandan Zhang,1 Cong Tang,1 
Xiaonan Cai,1 Yaqiong Yan,3 Sheng Zhang,4 Bo Jin,5 Songlin Yu,1 Xunchang Liang,1 
Qian Chu,6 Yihua Xu1,2 
 ► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// dx. doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
jech- 2017- 209458). 
1Department of Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, School of 
Public Health, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China 
2Ministry of Education (MOE) 
Key Lab of Environment and 
Health, School of Public 
Health, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, China 
3Wuhan Municipal Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 
Wuhan, China 
4Gutian Community Health 
Service, Wuhan, China 
5Xincun Street Community 
Health Service, Wuhan, China 
6Department of Oncology, Tongji 
Hospital of Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China 
Correspondence to 
Dr Yihua Xu, Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Ministry of Education (MOE) Key 
Lab of Environment and Health, 
School of Public Health, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan 430030, 
China; xuyihua_ 6@ hotmail. com 
Received 13 May 2017 
Revised 28 November 2017 
Accepted 6 January 2018 
Published Online First 
19 January 2018 
AbsTrACT 
background With the increasing of ageing 
population, tuberculosis in the elderly brings a 
challenge for the tuberculosis (TB) control in China. 
Enough social support can promote the treatment 
adherence and outcome of the elderly patients with 
TB. Exploring effective interventions to improve the 
social support of patients is of great significance for TB 
management and control. 
Methods A community-based, repeated measurement 
trial was conducted. Patients with TB >65 years of 
age were allocated into the intervention or control 
group. Patients in the intervention group received 
comprehensive social support interventions, while those 
in the control group received health education alone. The 
social support level of patients was measured at baseline 
and at the first, third and sixth months during the 
intervention to assess the effectiveness of comprehensive 
social support interventions. 
results A total of 201 patients were recruited 
into the study. Compared with the control group, 
social support for patients in the intervention group 
increased significantly over time (βgroup*time=0.61, 
P<0.01) in the following three dimensions: objective 
support (βgroup*time=0.15, P<0.05), subjective support 
(βgroup*time=0.32, P<0.05) and support utilisation 
(βgroup*time=0.16, P<0.05). The change in the scores in the 
control group was not statistically significant. 
Conclusions The intervention programme in 
communities, including health education, psychotherapy 
and family and community support interventions, can 
improve the social support for elderly patients with TB 
compared with single health education. 
Trial registration number ChiCTR-IOR-16009232 
InTroduCTIon 
Although great progress 
in tuberculosis (TB) 
control has been made over the last two decades,1 
TB remains one of the biggest health problems in 
China.2 3 Concurrently, WHO reported that the 
burden of TB disease is shifting to the elderly,4 as 
the proportion of the older population will increase 
from 12.4% in 2010 to 28% in 2040 in China.5 
According to the fifth national TB survey conducted 
in China in 2010, the TB prevalence increased with 
age and peaked in the 75–79 age group.6 TB in 
the elderly has already become a problem beyond 
neglect for TB control in China. 
Advanced age, concomitant diseases and waning 
immunity make older people vulnerable to devel- 
oping TB due to the reactivation of Mycobacte- 
rium tuberculosis from infection at a young age.7 8 
Compared with other people, elderly individuals 
with TB need more support because they are more 
likely to experience negative life events, such as 
reduced mobility, loss of social status, loneliness 
after retirement, stigma, social isolation, financial 
burden and adverse effects of medication.9–11 A 
qualitative study found that educational, psycho- 
logical and emotional supports were needed for 
these patients.12 Evidence has shown that social 
support is positively associated with health-seeking 
behaviours, 
treatment adherence and health 
outcomes and that it can act as a stress buffer 
for the psychosocial well-being of patients.13–15 
However, a study conducted in Zhejiang Prov- 
ince of China reported that patients with TB had 
a low level of social support.16 It is meaningful to 
explore feasible and effective social support inter- 
ventions in communities for TB management and 
control. 
Social support intervention in patients with TB 
was recommended by WHO for the programmatic 
management of drug-resistant TB and the new End 
TB Strategy.17 Social support via various educa- 
tional, psychosocial interventions has also been 
implemented to enhance treatment adherence.14 
However, as the types of support, patterns of inter- 
vention, target groups and study settings were 
different, the magnitude of the benefit of these 
social support interventions should be considered 
with caution.18 Additionally, most of the studies 
focused on the effect of social support interventions 
on treatment adherence or outcomes. Hardly any 
study assessed the effect of these interventions on 
the level of social support patients perceived. The 
social support patients perceived may act as an inter- 
mediate variable between the social support inter- 
vention and the treatment adherence or outcomes. 
Exploring the effect of social support interventions 
on the level of social support of patients can help 
to understand how social support intervention 
influences the treatment adherence or treatment 
outcomes of patients. 



To cite: Li X, Wang B, Tan D, 
et al. J Epidemiol Community 
Health 2018;72:369–375. 
To the best of our knowledge, no research has explored inter- 
ventions to improve the social support of elderly patients with 
TB in China. Therefore, based on the hypothesis that compre- 
hensive social support interventions might increase the social 
support of the elderly with TB, we conducted this communi- 
ty-based trial to assess the effects of the comprehensive interven- 
tions on the improvement of social support of elderly patients 
with TB. 
MeThods 
study settings 
This study was conducted in Hubei Province, China, from 
November 2015 to April 2016. Hubei Province is one of the 
top 10 high TB-incidence provinces in China and the Directly 
Observed Treatment, Short-course (DOTS) strategy has been 
well implemented among its communities.19 After treated in 
hospitals for the intensive phase, patients with TB are treated 
as outpatients in communities. Community health centres are 
responsible for the management of these patients with TB. 
All patients with TB that are newly diagnosed in all medical 
institutions must be reported to the local Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention through the internet-based National 
Infectious Diseases Reporting System (NIDRS).20 So infor- 
mation on patients with TB, such as gender, age, occupation 
before retirement, diagnosis date and sputum smear result, 
was collected from the NIDRS. 
sample size 
As the social support scores of patients were designed to be 
measured four times during the study, the sample size was 
calculated according to the repeated-measures formula: M=2 
[1+(k-1)ρ] σ2(Z1-α/2+Z1-β)2/kδ2.21 The following parameters 
were used in this formula: power of 85% and type I error of 5% 
(two-sided), number of repeated times K=4, smallest detected 
meaningful difference δ=4.2, correlation coefficient among 
measures ρ=0.70 and SE σ=10 based on the results of pilot 
study. Consequently, 195 patients were needed for this study. 
To obtain sufficient patients, 12 communities in both cities were 
estimated to be randomly selected. 
study sample 
To perform interventions more easily and avoid information 
contamination among patients, we used a multistage sampling 
method. Among the 16 major cities in Hubei Province, Wuhan 
City and Enshi City were randomly selected and assigned to 
the intervention and control groups, respectively. Then, 12 
communities in each city were randomly selected. The elderly 
patients with TB in these communities who were registered 
in the NIDRS were all included in the corresponding group. 
Because all of the patients in one community were in the same 
group and because all staff (psychologists, community health 
workers and administrators) who conducted the intervention 
could not be blinded to the study group, the patients and staff 
were not blinded. 
Patients in this study met the following inclusion criteria: (a) 
diagnosed with TB at a local medical institute for TB control 
according to the WHO guideline,22 (b) >65 years of age, (c) 
local residents, (d) registered in the NIDRS, (e) normal commu- 
nication ability and (f) volunteered to participate in this study. 
Patients were excluded if they (a) were suffering from mental 
health disorders, (b) had cognitive impairment or (c) were 
enrolled in other studies. 
Interventions 
This study lasted for 6 months with an intervention frequency 
of twice per month. Patients in the control group received the 
health education intervention alone, and those in the interven- 
tion group received psychotherapy and family and community 
support interventions in addition to health education. Except for 
the psycho-educational workshops in the family and community 
support interventions, these interventions were performed in a 
one-to-one setting rather than a group setting to avoid cross-in- 
fection among patients. 
Health education 
Health education consisted of basic knowledge about TB 
(including transmission route, treatment policy, therapeutic 
regimen), psychological coping skills (including treatment 
side effects, effective communication, confidence enhance- 
ment), reasonable diet (including light diet, low salt and fat 
diet, high protein diet) and healthy lifestyle (including smoking 
and drinking cessation, regular physical exercise). TB health 
brochures were also delivered to the patients. It was conducted 
by community health workers at patients’ homes and lasted 
approximately 30 min per patient. 
Psychotherapy 
To eliminate the mental health problems of patients, Morita 
therapy was delivered to patients at their home by psychologists 
of the Tongji Research Center of Mental Health at Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. A 
checklist of the key components of Morita therapy was devel- 
oped according to prior studies23–25 before the intervention and 
was strictly followed during the intervention. Throughout the 
study, every patient was asked to complete a diary for psychol- 
ogists to evaluate the intervention. Every psychotherapy session 
lasted approximately 30 min per patient. 
Family and community support interventions 
This part included home visits, psycho-educational workshops 
and peer support. During the study, one community health 
worker and one community administrator conducted home 
visits to communicate and construct a harmonious relation- 
ship with the patients. Simultaneously, family members and 
friends of patients were invited to attend psycho-educational 
workshops to receive basic knowledge about TB and encourage 
them to express their emotional pressure. Additionally, recov- 
ered patients with TB and their family members were invited 
to provide peer support. They shared their experiences with 
patients and their family members about how to solve problems 
and improve self-care. 
outcome measurement 
The primary outcome was the social support level of patients 
and was evaluated by the Social Support Rating Scale (SSRS). 
This multidimensional scale consists of three dimensions that 
measure objective support, subjective support and support 
utilisation. The total SSRS score ranges from 12 to 66, with 
a higher score indicating the better availability of support. 
The reliability and validity of this scale were relatively high 
when it was applied to measure social support in the Chinese 
population.16 26 In this sample, Cronbach’s alpha for the total 
score was 0.91. Details of the SSRS are available in the online 
supplementary appendix 1. 







Table 1 Demographic and tuberculosis (TB)-related characteristics of 
the elderly patients with TB at baseline (n=183) 
*The total awareness rate of the five key messages about TB prevention and treatment 
proposed in Guidelines for implementation of tuberculosis control program in China 
(2008 edition). 
†Other common chronic diseases coexisting with TB, including hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, coronary heart disease, tumour, 
arthritis, and so on. 
data collection 
Data were collected at baseline and at the first, third and sixth 
months after intervention initiation. Each patient was given 
the scale and asked to complete it alone. Investigators could 
provide an explanation for any confusion about the scale to 
avoid any error and ensure the data quality. The investigation 
was supervised and coordinated by a supervisor. Data were 
double-entered into the EpiData V.3.1 software. Scales with 
missing data concerning any items were excluded from the 
final analysis. 
statistical analysis 
The normality of the data was tested by the Kolmogor- 
ov-Smirnov test. Continuous and categorical variables were 
presented as the means (SD) and frequencies (percentages), 
respectively, and compared by the t-test and χ2 test, respec- 
tively. Considering the structure of repeated-measures data, 
a multilevel model was performed to assess the changes of 
social support scores between two groups. These analyses 
were performed using the Statistical Analysis System V.9.2, 
and the sample size was calculated using the Power Analysis 
and Sample Size software V.11.0. A two-sided P value <0.05 
was considered statistically significant. 
resulTs 
demographic and Tb-related characteristics 
A total of 201 patients were recruited at the beginning of the 
study (69 in the intervention group and 132 in the control 
group). During the intervention, 18 patients in two groups 
were excluded (one died, three showed poor compliance 
and four dropped out in the intervention group; two died, 
four showed poor compliance and four dropped out in the 
control group). Finally, 183 patients were included in the final 
analysis (61 in the intervention group and 122 in the control 
group) (see figure 1). Overall, the percentages of men in the 
two groups were similar and the mean ages of the two groups 
Figure 2 The change in Social Support Rating Scale (SSRS) score and scores for the three dimensions of social support in elderly patients with 
tuberculosis. 




Intervention 
group 
(n=61) 
Control 
group 
(n=122) 









Primary school 
 
 


Senior high school 
 
 




Factory workers 
 
 


 
 
 
















Junior middle school 
 
 


College or above 
 
 


 
 
 


Civil servant 
 
 






*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001. 
τ00, random intercept variance; τ10, covariance of random intercept and random slope; τ11, random slope variance of time variable; σε 
Support Rating Scale; TB, tuberculosis. 
were both close to 72 years. No significant differences were 
observed in the baseline characteristics between the groups 
(see table 1). 
Adverse effects 
Due to the appropriate guidance, no adverse events associated 
with comprehensive social support interventions were reported 
for any patients during the trial. 
Change in social support scores 
At baseline, the average scores of SSRS, objective support, 
subjective support and support utilisation of 183 patients were 
37.04, 8.17, 22.10 and 6.77, respectively. The total SSRS score 
and scores of its three dimensions (objective support, subjective 
support and support utilisation) all showed an increasing trend 
in two groups during the intervention, but this trend was more 
obvious in the intervention group. At the end of intervention, 
these four scores in the intervention group were all higher than 
those in the control group (see figure 2). 
Multilevel model analysis of social support scores 
The methods of multilevel analysis are available in the online 
supplementary appendix 2. After the background variables 
were controlled, the total SSRS scores and subjective support 
scores of the two groups were significantly different at base- 
line (βgroup=2.35, P<0.05 and βgroup=2.00, P<0.001, respec- 
tively). Additionally, the score of SSRS and its three dimensions 
(objective support, subjective support and support utilisation) 
at four times did not change significantly in the control group 
(βtime=0.24, P>0.05; βtime=0.04, P>0.05; βtime=0.16, P>0.05; 
and βtime=0.01, P>0.05, respectively). However, the differences 
in these four scores between the groups increased with changes 
in the time (βgroup*time=0.61, P<0.01; βgroup*time=0.15, P<0.05; 
βgroup*time=0.32, P<0.05; and βgroup*time=0.16, P<0.05, respec- 
tively) (see table 2). 
dIsCussIon 
Based on the DOTS strategy, comprehensive social support 
interventions, including health education, psychotherapy and 
family and community support interventions, can increase the 
social support of elderly patients with TB compared with single 
health education. 
Qualitative studies reported that health education was needed 
by patients with TB.9 12 Receiving more information about the 
disease might empower the patient to feel more confident and 
active in his or her treatment.12 However, a Cochrane review 
found insufficient evidence for the promotion of treatment 
adherence through health education.27 We found that the social 
support of patients was not improved obviously through health 
education. It indicates that TB health education alone is not 
effective in improving the social support for patients with TB. 
Effective educational interventions are those that aim to modify 
patients’ behaviour rather than simply providing information 
about the disease.28 Considering these, to promote the social 
support and health behaviour of elderly patients with TB, health 
education should be provided to those patients combined with 
other interventions rather than a single one. 
Mental disorders, such as depression and anxiety, are often 
complicated with TB29 due to adverse reactions of drugs, inad- 
equate social support and social stigma.30 Mental health inter- 
ventions are suggested to provide for patients with TB to tackle 






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TB knowledge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Level 2 (between individuals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Level 1 (within individuals) 
 
2 
σε 
 
 
 










































































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
their mental issues.9 12 30 Psychotherapies, such as group psycho- 
therapy,31 have been proved to be effective in improving treat- 
ment adherence.13 32 
In our study, Morita therapy was implemented for elderly 
patients with TB. Morita therapy is a psychotherapy that was 
developed in Japan by Dr Shoma Morita in 1919 and is aimed 
at eliminating the mental health problems of patients through 
transferring their attention from negative stress.33 This therapy 
is based on the premise that unpleasant symptoms are a natural 
part of the human experience.23 We found that most elderly 
patients with TB often isolated themselves from others because 
of stigma, but many of them gradually participated in social 
activities and then sought and used help from others during the 
intervention. Another significant change was that many patients 
were willing to disclose their disease to others after the interven- 
tion. Some studies pointed out that most of the patients with TB 
who disclosed their disease status to a wider audience received 
more positive support.12 34 These suggest that psychotherapy, 
such as Morita therapy, is effective in improving psychological 
issues of elderly patients with TB and should be considered as an 
essential part of the intervention to facilitate the social support 
of elderly patients with TB. 
As the place in which elderly patients with TB lived, commu- 
nities have great potential to provide valuable social support for 
patients.12 Involvement of family and community members to 
support patients with TB was found to be one way to improve 
treatment outcomes and overcome social issues like stigma.11 
Hence, we incorporated the family and community interven- 
tions into the comprehensive interventions. 
Through home visits, community health workers and admin- 
istrators knew more about the elderly patients with TB and their 
families. These patients also expressed that they felt they were 
cared for and supported. They trusted these health workers and 
were also willing to ask for help from them. These phenomena 
indicate that the good patient–health worker relationship, 
which can be achieved through home visits, is significant for the 
support patients perceived and for their treatment, as has been 
found in other studies.12 16 
Simultaneously, a study pointed out that caregivers might lose 
confidence during the treatment of patients with TB, which would 
result in reduced social support for patients.16 We held psycho-ed- 
ucational workshops for the family members and friends of the 
elderly patients with TB to lessen their psychological stress and 
increase their knowledge about TB. Many family members 
expressed that they experienced isolation by others and lacked 
knowledge about TB treatment. Through workshops, they gained 
more confidence and were more active in supporting patients’ 
treatment. This suggests that not only does the patients need 
psychological intervention and health education, but also family 
members and other caregivers need psycho-educational interven- 
tion to better support the elderly patients with TB.9 12 
Additionally, we invited recovered patients with TB as peer 
support for the elderly patients with TB. During the interven- 
tion, most patients expressed that these former patients with 
TB understood how they felt. Some elderly patients with TB 
even developed valuable friendship with the recovered patients 
with TB. Several studies, which involved other chronic diseases, 
also proved that peer support was a useful method to support 
patients.35 36 It is of practical significance to treat recovered 
patients with TB as peer support to provide emotional support 
for the elderly with TB.12 
Due to the design of the study, several limitations should be 
acknowledged. First, there might be some bias caused by the 
differences in the economic and medical level between Wuhan 
City and Enshi City. Although Wuhan City and Enshi City were 
selected and allocated into different groups randomly, patients 
with TB in Wuhan City, which is the biggest city in Hubei Prov- 
ince, might receive better medical services than patients in Enshi 
City. Second, we did not assess the social support of patients 
after the end of the study. Therefore, we are uncertain about 
whether our interventions could consistently influence the social 
support of patients. Further studies can be done to explore the 
long-term effects of these interventions on the social support of 
elderly patients with TB in communities. Third, although the 
scale used to evaluate the primary outcome in this study was 
developed based on China’s social conditions and tested with a 
good reliability and validity in China, it was not widely used to 
assess social support in foreign studies. This made the results of 
our study less comparable to foreign studies. 
ConClusIons 
The key aspect of our study was to identify effective compre- 
hensive social support interventions and assess its impact on the 
social support level of elderly patients with TB in communities. 
Our results showed that compared with the single health educa- 
tion the interventions, consisting of health education, psycho- 
therapy and family and community support interventions, could 
effectively promote the social support for the elderly with TB in 
communities. The comprehensive interventions provide a refer- 
ence value for the management of elderly patients with TB in 
China. 
Acknowledgements The authors thank all patients, psychologists, community 
health workers, community administrators and other participants for their support for 
this study. 
Contributors XL, BW and YX designed this research. XL wrote the manuscript. 
BW analysed the data. XL, DT, ML, DZ, CT, XC, YY, SZ and BJ organised the field 
intervention and collected questionnaires. SY, XL, QC and YX gave instructions on 
the study. 
Funding This work was supported by National Social Science Fund of China (grant 
number 15BSH118) and Innovation Research Fund of Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology (no. 2013TS004). 


ethics approval This study was approved by the ethics committee of Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. 





Evidence has shown that social support is positively associated 
with treatment adherence and health outcomes. But no study 
has explored effective interventions to improve the social 
support of elderly patients with tuberculosis (TB) in communities 
of China. 

This community-based trial found that interventions which 
consisted of health promotion, psychotherapy and family and 
community support interventions were effective to improve 
the social support for the elderly with TB. These could provide a 
reference value for the TB management in communities of China. 
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// creativecommons. org/ 
licenses/ by- nc/ 4. 0/ 
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted. 
RefeRences 
 1 An J, Gao M, Chu N, et al. Transregional movement of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
in north China: an underlying threat to tuberculosis control. Sci Rep 2016;6:29727. 
 2 Wang L, Zhang H, Ruan Y, et al. Tuberculosis prevalence in China, 1990-2010; a 
longitudinal analysis of national survey data. Lancet 2014;383:2057–64. 







epidemiological survey in 2010. Chin J Antituberculosis 2012;34:485–508. 
Chinese. 




 9 Morris MD, Quezada L, Bhat P, et al. Social, economic, and psychological impacts of 
MDR-TB treatment in Tijuana, Mexico: a patient’s perspective. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 
2013;17:954–60. 
10 Rajeswari R, Muniyandi M, Balasubramanian R, et al. Perceptions of tuberculosis 
 
patients about their physical, mental and social well-being: a field report from south 
India. Soc Sci Med 2005;60:1845–53. 
11 Thomas BE, Shanmugam P, Malaisamy M, et al. Psycho-Socio-Economic Issues 
 
Challenging Multidrug Resistant Tuberculosis Patients: A Systematic Review. PLoS One 
2016;11:e147397. 
12Paz-Soldán VA, Alban RE, Jones CD, et al. The provision of and need for social support 
 
among adult and pediatric patients with tuberculosis in Lima, Peru: a qualitative 
study. BMC Health Serv Res 2013;13:1–12. 
13van Hoorn R, Jaramillo E, Collins D, et al. The effects of psycho-emotional and 
 
socio-economic support for Tuberculosis patients on treatment adherence 
and treatment outcomes - a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2016;11:e154095. 
14 Munro SA, Lewin SA, Smith HJ, et al. Patient adherence to tuberculosis treatment: a 
 

15 Lönnroth K, Glaziou P, Weil D, et al. Beyond UHC: monitoring health and social 
 
protection coverage in the context of tuberculosis care and prevention. PLoS Med 
2014;11:e1001693. 
16 Chen B, Peng Y, Zhou L, et al. Social support received by multidrug-resistant 
 
tuberculosis patients and related factors: a cross-sectional study in Zhejiang Province, 
People’s Republic of China. Patient Prefer Adherence 2016;10:1063–70. 
17 World Health Organization. Companion Handbook to the WHO Guidelines for the 
 
Programmatic Management of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis. Geneva: WHO Document 
Production Services, 2014. 
18 Jakubowiak WM, Bogorodskaya EM, Borisov SE, et al. Risk factors associated with 
 
default among new pulmonary TB patients and social support in six Russian regions. 
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2007;11:46–53. 
19 Zhang G, Huang S, Duan Q, et al. Application of a hybrid model for predicting the 
 

20 Wang L, Liu J, Chin DP. Progress in tuberculosis control and the evolving public-health 
 

21 Liu H, Wu T. Sample size calculation and power analysis of time-averaged difference. J 
 

22 World Health Organization. Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines. 4th edition. Geneva: 
 

23 Morita M, Kondō A, LeVine P. Morita therapy and the true nature of anxiety-based 
 

24 Ogawa B. Desire for life: the practitioner’s introduction to morita therapy for the 
 

25 LeVine P. Morita-based therapy and its use across cultures in the treatment of bulimia 
 

26 Xu J, Ou L. Resilience and quality of life among Wenchuan earthquake survivors: the 
 
mediating role of social support. Public Health 2014;128:430–7. 
27M’imunya JM, Kredo T, Volmink J. Patient education and counselling for 
 
promoting adherence to treatment for tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2012;5:CD006591. 
28 Becker MH. et al Theoretical models of adherence and strategies for improving 
 
adherence. In: Shumaker SA, Schron EB, Ockene JK, Parker CT, Probstfield JL, . eds. 
Handbook of behavior change. New York: Springer, 1990. 
29 Peltzer K, Naidoo P, Matseke G, et al. Prevalence of psychological distress and 
 
associated factors in tuberculosis patients in public primary care clinics in South 
Africa. BMC Psychiatry 2012;12:89. 
30 Pachi A, Bratis D, Moussas G, et al. Psychiatric morbidity and other factors 
 
affecting treatment adherence in pulmonary tuberculosis patients. Tuberc Res Treat 
2013;2013:1–37. 
31 Acha J, Sweetland A, Guerra D, et al. Psychosocial support groups for patients 
 
with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: five years of experience. Glob Public Health 
2007;2:404–17. 
32 Janmeja AK, Das SK, Bhargava R, et al. Psychotherapy improves compliance with 
 

33 Sugg HV, Richards DA, Frost J. Morita therapy for depression and anxiety (Morita Trial): 
 

34Baral SC, Karki DK, Newell JN. Causes of stigma and discrimination associated with 
 
tuberculosis in Nepal: a qualitative study. BMC Public Health 2007;7:211–21. 
35Duckworth K, Halpern L. Peer support and peer-led family support for persons living 
 

36Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al. Peer support of complex health behaviors in 
 
prevention and disease management with special reference to diabetes: systematic 
reviews. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4. 



