

Cancer and Aging: Reflections for Elders (CARE): A pilot 
randomized controlled trial of a psychotherapy intervention for 
older adults with cancer 
Christian J. Nelson1, Rebecca M. Saracino1, Andrew J. Roth1, Elizabeth Harvey1, Anne 
Martin1, Mark Moore2, Dana Marcone2, Shannon R. Poppito3, and Jimmie Holland1 
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York, USA 



Objective: Cancer and Aging: Reflections for Elders (CARE) is a novel, telephone-delivered 
intervention designed to alleviate distress in older cancer patients. This pilot randomized 
controlled trial tested the feasibility and initial efficacy of CARE, drawing from age-appropriate 
developmental themes and well-established coping theory. 
Method: Eligible patients were ≥70 years old; ≥6 months post-diagnosis of lung,prostate, breast, 
lymphoma, or gynecological cancer; on active cancer treatment or within 6 months of ending 
cancer treatment; and had elevated scores on the Distress Thermometer (≥4) or Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale (≥6). Participants completed five sessions of psychotherapy over 7 weeks 
with assessments at study entry, post-intervention, and 2 months post-intervention. Primary 
outcomes were feasibility and initial efficacy on anxiety and depression; secondary outcomes 
included demoralization, coping, loneliness, and spiritual well-being. 
Results: Fifty-nine participants were randomized to either the CARE arm (n = 31) or the 
enhanced Social Work Control arm (n = 28). The intervention was feasible and tolerable, meeting 
a priori criteria for rates of eligibility, acceptance, retention, assessment, and treatment fidelity. 
Upon completion of the intervention, participants in the CARE arm demonstrated lower mean 
depression scores (d = 0.58 [CI: 0.04–1.12],P = 0.01) and trended towards increased coping- 
planning (d = 0.30 [CI: −0.83 to 0.24], P = 0.18). Promising trends in anxiety (d = 0.41 [CI: −0.17 
to 0.98], P = 0.10) emerged at 2 months post-intervention; effects for coping-planning dissipated. 
Conclusion: These pilot data suggest the CARE intervention is feasibly delivered, potentially 
impacts important psychosocial variables, and is accessible for older, frail patients with cancer. 
Future research will evaluate this intervention on a larger scale. 
Correspondence Christian J. Nelson, PhD, 641 Lexington Ave, 7th Floor, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, NY, 
NY 10022, USA, nelsonc@mskcc.org. 
ENDNOTES 
SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Psychooncology. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 22. 






In 2016, nearly 62% of almost 16 million cancer survivors in the United States were aged 65 
or older. By 2040, an estimated 73% of 26 million cancer survivors will be 65 or older.1,2 
These are primarily older patients with breast, prostate, and colon cancer, for whom cancer 
treatment continues for long periods, analogous to a chronic disease.1 Thus, many older 
adults must cope with the demands of both aging and cancer for long periods of continuous 
treatment and monitoring. 
Patients of all ages struggle to cope with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. In a large 
study of adult cancer patients of all ages, 35% experienced a significant level of distress; the 
rate was even higher for cancer sites associated with poorer prognosis.2 Older people tend to 
cope better with illness and loss than younger individuals.2–6 However, the presence of 
aging-related physical concerns, comorbidity, and symptom burden can overwhelm coping 
abilities, leading to increased distress, anxiety, and depression.7,8 Additionally, comorbid 
medical illness is often a key feature of geriatric mood disorders, and older adults with 
cancer have some of the highest rates of completed suicide.9 Unfortunately, older adults with 
anxiety or depression are likely to remain undiagnosed and thus often go untreated.9–11 But 
even if diagnosed correctly, clinicians cannot assure that mental health intervention can or 
will be feasible, effective, and safe. Thus, a compelling rationale for the current study was to 
introduce and test a pilot intervention to assist older patients in coping with aging and 
cancer. 
Interventions for older adults with chronic illness have found that while antidepressant 
pharmacotherapy is effective to address depressive symptoms, most older adults prefer 
psychotherapeutic or psychoeducational interventions over medication.10–12 While there is a 
growing psychotherapy evidence base for older adults broadly,13,14 we identified only two 
studies focusing on older patients with cancer. In one, a multidisciplinary team offered 
treatment to older adults with cancer, including physical therapy, cognitive behavioral 
training, symptom education, spiritual guidance, and a 200-page manual.15 The second 
study examined a subset of data from the IMPACT study.16 This study tested the use of a 
depression care manager who followed patients for 12 months under the supervision of both 
a primary care physician and psychiatrist; the authors reported a reduction in depressive 
symptoms at 6 and 12 months.16 These are sound interventions with positive outcomes; 
however, these were relatively small studies, lacked a theoretically driven intervention, and 
were not specifically tailored to the developmental issues related to aging or the needs of 
older adults. 
The theoretical framework for the Cancer and Aging: Reflections for Elders (CARE) 
intervention is based on the integration of two well-established models in the psychosocial 
literature: the coping paradigm of Folkman17–19 and the developmental stages of life as 
outlined by Erikson20–22 and expanded on by Vaillant.23 Folkman’s model proposes that 



people deal with significant distress by using “meaning schemas” or basic beliefs about the 
world as rational assumptions for what happens to them. When confronted with a life- 
threatening event such as cancer, these assumptions can be shattered. An individual must 
develop a new meaning schema that integrates the new catastrophic event with an acceptable 
and tolerable “present.” The process of reappraisal, in which an individual revises the 
meaning of events in ways that are more consistent with their new situation, is a critical 
element of adaptive coping, and we identify it as a core mechanism of the CARE 
intervention.17 The theoretical foundation of the CARE model integrates Folkman’s concept 
of reappraisal within the context of Erikson’s theory of development in the later stages of 
life. Erikson’s 8th stage of life is based on the developmental tasks of establishing comfort 
with one’s lived life (i.e., ego integrity) or the alternative—unsuccessful achievements, 
which result in despair (i.e., regrets and despondency). “Ego integrity” is achieved by 
putting one’s life into a tolerable perspective, and by developing a sense of generativity by 
giving back to younger generations. According to the theory, older adults who do not 
achieve ego integrity are more likely to experience despair and disdain and have fewer 
resources for coping with stressors like cancer.20–22 Thus, the CARE intervention is founded 
on joining Folkman’s reappraisal to Erikson’s life stages with the goal of helping older 
adults to better cope with the demands of illness and aging to achieve peace and acceptance 
of their life stage. This includes helping patients problem solve ways to become more 
socially connected and engage in helpful coping. 
The primary aim of this pilot RCT was to test the feasibility, toler- ability, and acceptability 
of CARE by examining the rates of eligibility, acceptance, and adherence. We hypothesized 
that CARE would be feasible, tolerable, and acceptable. An exploratory aim was to examine 
the preliminary effects of CARE on measures of psychological well-being compared with a 
control group that received an enhanced social work intervention. 


Participants were recruited from two Northeastern Comprehensive Cancer Centers, Joan 
Karnell Cancer Center at the Pennsylvania Hospital and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center (MSK). This study was approved by the MSK (protocol # 09–116) and Joan Karnell 
Cancer Center (protocol # 814950) Institutional Review Boards. This trial was registered at 
the US National Institutes of Health (ClinicalTrials.gov) #NCT00984321. 

Patients eligible for the pilot intervention were (1) 70 years of age or older; (2) ≥6 months 
post-diagnosis for breast, prostate, lung, lymphoma, or gynecological cancer and on active 
cancer treatment (or within 6 months of active treatment); (3) English-speaking; (4) score of 
≥4 on the Distress Thermometer,24 or a score of ≥6 on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (HADS25–27); (5) ≥60 on Karnofsky Performance Rating (KPR28); and (6) ≤11 on the 
Blessed Orientation Memory Concentration (BOMC29) test. 




There was a two-step screening process for this study. The first step was a review of the 
medical charts of prospective participants to screen for initial eligibility (ie, age, cancer 
diagnosis, and cancer treatment) and, if initial eligibility criteria were met, then these 
patients were contacted by letter and follow-up phone calls. Interested participants went 
through the second step of the screening process for eligibility by completing the HADS and 
Distress Thermometer, KPR, and the BOMC over the phone. Patients who met the distress 
criteria then provided verbal consent over the phone and were enrolled to the study. In 
following the Code of Federal Regulations Title 45, Part 46, Subpart A, a signed consent 
was not required for this study. This study was considered “minimal risk” by our IRB, and 
written consent was not required. No participants were ruled out for KPR or BOMC. 
Participants were randomized (with equal probability) to either the CARE intervention or the 
Enhanced Social Work Control (ESWC). The randomization was stratified by cancer type 
(breast, prostate, lung, lymphoma, and gynecological) and gender by the MSK Office of 
Clinical Research Protocol Participation Registration system. 
Participants were administered a battery of questionnaires at study entry (at the time of 
enrollment and within 2 weeks prior to starting the intervention), post-intervention (within 1 
month of completing the last intervention session), and at 4-month post-study entry. The 
questionnaires were completed over the phone with a research assistant who was blinded to 
group assignment. Other research assistants who were not blinded had minimal contact with 
the participants and were responsible for consenting participants, screening for distress, and 
coordinating the participants’ initial session. 

2.3.1. 
Folkman’s cognitive model of coping and Erikson’s developmental model of psychosocial 
tasks associated with the later stages of life (Figure 1). Based on the theoretical framework 
described above, CARE was developed to encompass several therapeutic approaches to help 
patients reappraise their situation in the context of achieving ego integrity. Therapeutic 
elements such as information-giving and information- receiving, discussion of concerns, 
problem solving, coping skills training, expression of emotion, and social support, are all 
structured to help patients put past regrets into a tolerable perspective, and to consider how 
to give back to younger generations. 
Expert panel: The structure and themes of CARE were originally presented to an expert 
panel of older adults with cancer. Over the course of seven meetings, the participants gave 
feedback on the relative salience and utility of intervention content. After the manual was 
revised with their feedback, the intervention was tested with a second group of older patients 
in a group format. They, too, provided feedback and suggestions for modification. 
CARE structure: The CARE intervention consisted of five sessions* (45 min; Table 1) that 
took place over approximately 7 weeks. All sessions were facilitated by a master’s or 
doctoral-level trained mental health professional (four interventionists total). Each session 
*The original study protocol included seven sessions; after the first 11 participants completed the interventions (CARE = 7; ESWC = 
4), the number of sessions was reduced to 5. This decision was made after discussion by study investigators, as it became clear that the 



followed a similar pattern: (1) reviewing the session topic; (2) defining challenges associated 
with the topic; (3) exploring “guided questions” surrounding the topic; and (4) assessing 
ways to reframe stressful emotions, thoughts, or behaviors; identifying past coping skills or 
problem solving related to the challenges. Homework assignments were distributed at the 
end of each session. 
ESWC structure: The control condition (ESWC), which is currently considered standard of 
care, consisted of an initial telephone session with one of several social workers specializing 
in geriatrics (six interventionists total) and four subsequent phone calls (spaced at similar 
time interval as the CARE arm sessions, ranging from 15 to 30 min) from the social worker 
in order to control for the number of sessions held with participants in the CARE arm. Phone 
session content after the initial social work assessment was focused on checking in regarding 
patient progress on goals and plans set in the initial assessment and general supportive 
psychotherapy. Participants in the ESWC who completed the study were given the option to 
participate in the intervention arm if interested. 
The CARE arm received in-depth training: (1) in-person review of the manual with study 
investigators, (2) observation of several cases, and (3) conducting 1 to 2 “mock” cases with 
study investigators. CARE therapists received weekly, hour-long ongoing supervision 
throughout the course of the study. For ESWC, there was weekly supervision facilitated by 
the primary social worker at MSK. 
2.3.2. Outcomes—We adopted Leon, Davis, and Kraemer’s (2011) criteria for 
demonstrating feasibility in a pilot study. As such, the primary outcome of this pilot study 
was the feasibility of the CARE intervention, which was determined by rates of eligibility 
(percent screened for participation who were eligible), acceptance (proportion of those who 
screen eligible who enroll),† retention (attrition and number of sessions completed by study 
arm), assessment process (proportion of planned assessments that are completed by 
participants), and treatment fidelity (percentage of session content covered across sessions 
by study therapists). 
Our benchmark for retention and assessment is 80% such that if 80% of participants 
complete all sessions and assessments, then study feasibility will be demonstrated. 
We estimated statistical power in the following binomial hypotheses: We assumed a null 
hypothesis that the population completion rate is 0.60 and an alternative hypothesis that the 
population completion rate is 0.85. If we observe 48 or more completers out of 60 to be 
enrolled, we will have a 92% power to reject the null hypothesis of 0.60 at a two-sided type I 
error rate of approximately 0.0002. 
CARE intervention and ESWC content could be consolidated into five sessions, thus minimizing participant time commitment while 
still covering all content in sufficient detail. 
†The acceptance rate (the percent of patients who agreed to take part in the study) can easily be calculated. However, many of those 
who refused to take part in the study may not have been distressed and would not actually have qualified to take part in the study. In 
order to obtain an estimate of the proportion of distressed individuals who we were able to engage in the CARE intervention study, we 
implemented a brief substudy for those who refused to participate (see Figure S1). 



Research assistants rated fidelity utilizing a standardized adherence checklist form to 
evaluate sessions for a subset (60%) of participants in each arm (see supplemental materials 
for sample checklist). Treatment fidelity scores range from 0 to 100% based on the number 
of manualized session topics that were covered in the session; fidelity of 80 to 100% will be 
considered high fidelity.30 The study also examined the impact of CARE on several 
psychosocial variables. HADS25 was the primary outcome measure of anxiety and 
depression, with higher scores indicating more severe symptoms.25,31,32 Secondary 
outcomes included measures of demoralization (Demoralization Scale; higher scores 
indicating worse symptoms33), coping (3 out of 15 subscales from the COPE; higher scores 
indicating better coping34), spiritual well-being (FACIT Spiritual Well-Being Scale; higher 
scores indicating better well-being35,36), and loneliness (UCLA Loneliness Scale-Short 
Form; higher scores indicating worse symptoms37). 
2.3.3. Statistical analyses—Analyses were conducted to examine differences in two 
primary psychosocial outcomes, depressive symptoms and anxiety, as well as the secondary 
psychosocial measures over time by group membership. Given the pilot nature of the data, 
the study was not powered to determine significant differences between the intervention and 
control groups but was powered to determine feasibility and initial efficacy. As such, both 
significance levels and effect sizes (Cohen’s d) are reported (d = 0.2, small; d = 0.5, 
medium; and d = 0.8, large effect). ANCOVA was used to identify differences in the 
psychosocial variables by arm with group assignment and scores at study entry predicting 
the 2- and 4-month scores. 


Sixty-eight participants consented to the study and of those, 59 were randomized (CARE n = 
31; ESWC n = 28). Participants were recruited between September 2009 and September 
2013 when target enrollment was achieved; follow-up assessments were completed in 
February 2014. The sample was approximately evenly split by gender (53% female; n = 33) 
with a mean age of 76 (SD = 4). Participants were primarily Caucasian (90%; n = 56) and 
well-educated (81% had a college degree; n = 50). Half of the participants were married 
(52%; n = 32), 18% were divorced (n = 11) or single (n = 11), and 13% were widowed (n = 
8). 

3.2.1. Feasibility—There were no adverse events reported throughout the course of the 
trial. In total, 541 patients met initial eligibility criteria and were contacted about the study. 
Of those, 118 (22%) agreed to be screened for distress and participate in the study. In total, 
68 patients (13% of those who met initial eligibility criteria and 58% of those who agreed to 
be screened) met distress eligibility and were offered participation in the study. All 68 
individuals were consented and enrolled, reflecting a high acceptance rate among those who 
met both stages of eligibility. 



Ultimately, 59 participants were randomized (Figure S2). Of the 31 participants who started 
the CARE intervention, three participants did not complete all sessions (89.3%). In the 
ESWC arm, 28 participants initiated the treatment and 1 did not complete all sessions 
(96.4%). Fifty-five participants provided follow-up data at the 2-month time point (post- 
intervention) across the intervention (n = 28) and control arms (n = 27), and 48 provided 
follow-up data at 4-month assessment point (n = 25, n = 23, respectively). Thus, 81.4% (48 
out of 59) of participants completed the full number of sessions and the final study 
assessment, indicating adequate retention and assessment per our a priori cut-off of 80% as a 
benchmark for feasibility. Study attrition rate was not different by group at time 1 or time 2. 
Treatment fidelity was 88.5% or higher for all sessions (88.5–94.6%), again exceeding our 
threshold of 80% as an indication of high fidelity. 
3.2.2. Psychosocial outcomes—At the 2-month assessment (Table 2), the CARE arm 
reported lower mean total HADS scores compared with the ESWC arm (d = 0.46 [CI: –0.07 
to 0.99], P = 0.02) and lower mean HADS depression scores (d = 0.58 [CI:0.04–1.12], P = 
0.01), with no differences related to anxiety (d = 0.15 [CI: –0.38 to 0.68], P = 0.44). The 
CARE arm, compared with ESWC, demonstrated promising trends, with small effects for 
reduced loneliness (d = 0.19 [CI: –0.34 to 0.72], P = 0.21), disheartenment (d = 0.28 [CI: – 
0.25 to 0.08], P = 0.12), and sense of failure (d = 0.26 [CI: –0.27 to 0.79], P = 0.19), 
increased meaning (d = 0.22 [CI: –0.75 to 0.31], P = 0.27), and improved coping-planning (d 
= 0.30 [CI: –0.83 to 0.24], P = 0.18), although these differences did not reach statistical 
significance. Participants in the ESWC arm trended towards larger increases in active coping 
(d = –0.28 [CI: –0.25 to 0.81], P = .26). 
At 4 months (2 months without either intervention, Table 2), the CARE group continued to 
trend towards making gains on main outcome variables. The effect on total HADS scores 
remained consistent (d = 0.42 [CI: –0.16 to 0.99], P = 0.09). The CARE arm trended towards 
reporting lower anxiety scores compared with ESWC (d = 0.41 [CI: –0.25 to 0.81], P = 
0.10), while the observed differences in HADS depression scores lessened (d = 0.28 [CI: – 
0.30 to 0.85], P = 0.20). Effect sizes (d) also increased for disheart- enment (d = 0.33 [CI: – 
0.25 to 0.91], P = 0.09) and meaning (d = 0.48 [CI: –1.06 to 0.11], P = 0.04), indicating 
greater improvement for participants in the CARE arm across constructs. The effects on 
coping-planning did not persist (d = 0.04 [CI: –0.61 to 0.54], P = 0.88), and those in the 
ESWC arm maintained their increases in active coping (d = –0.43 [CI: –0.15 to 1.01], P = . 
10) relative to those in the CARE arm. 

To date, there are no psychotherapeutic interventions specifically designed to address the 
emotional distress of older cancer patients. Interventions studied thus far in this population 
are designed for the general population and then retrospectively tested in the elderly with 
cancer. CARE is the only telephone-facilitated psychotherapy intervention specifically 
designed for older cancer patients with the input of older people with cancer. The primary 
aim of this pilot study, which was to demonstrate the feasibility of the CARE intervention, 
was achieved. 



We calculated the acceptance rate in a number of different ways and project that 30% of 
those distressed older cancer patients agreed to participate in the study. This 30% needs to 
be viewed in the context that our recruitment was conducted by sending an initial invitation 
letter and then following up with a phone call to invite participation in the study. We would 
have expected a higher recruitment rate if this was done in person in the cancer clinics. 
However, we decided to recruit by phone to demonstrate that this recruitment could be 
accomplished without in-person contact. We also propose that the potential lower accrual 
rate achieved via telephone recruitment may be a reasonable trade-off for this population in 
terms of accessing homebound or more physically frail older adults who are not regularly 
attending outpatient appointments and may otherwise be overlooked for intervention 
participation. In future iterations of the study, we may test varying recruitment methods and 
solicit qualitative feedback from older patients about preferences for approaches. 
The feasibility of the intervention was supported by the results, which indicate that all of the 
patients we contacted who we confirmed were experiencing moderate distress were 
interested in the intervention. In developing this intervention, our expert panel emphasized 
the importance of feasibility in a successful intervention, highlighting ease of session 
scheduling (e.g., telephone sessions compared with having to travel for appointments) and 
content of sessions. The pilot data demonstrate the benefits of this flexible, telephone-based 
approach as evidenced by the low attrition rate in the CARE arm and the fact that most 
participants completed all sessions. Our intervention also needed to be adaptable in multiple 
settings where there may be no access to psychiatrists or psychologists. It was therefore 
delivered by those with master’s level counseling degrees and proved possible in this pilot 
study. Future larger RCTs will also include a range of clinicians. The CARE intervention is 
also manualized to help deliver consistency among various therapists. These aims were 
achieved as the study utilized several different therapists, all of whom achieved high levels 
of treatment fidelity when rated by independent coders. 
The second goal of the study was to examine the preliminary effects of the intervention. The 
results of this randomized trial comparing CARE to the ESWC intervention (matched for 
number of sessions) were encouraging. CARE demonstrated promising trends in 
psychosocial outcomes relative to the ESWC, as CARE participants reported reduced 
depression, anxiety, and demoralization. In psycho-social interventions, it is common for 
effects to decrease following the end of the intervention. While this occurred with HADS 
depression scores, the effect remained consistent for total HADS scores and strengthened for 
HADS Anxiety, disheartenment, and meaning scores. A future, larger scale study will 
potentially include booster sessions in order to enhance and maintain the skills achieved 
during the intervention. Moreover, we will examine the CARE treatment content relative to 
ESWC in order to try to understand why the ESWC arm reported larger improvements in 
active and behavioral disengagement coping skills. It is also important to note that the 
effects that were observed emerged when compared against an effective and proven control 
group that was run by experienced social workers in psycho-oncology. In sum, these 
preliminary results indicate that the CARE intervention has significant promise and warrants 
a larger scale RCT. 




Cancer and Aging: Reflections for Elders is a novel intervention and hypothesized to be 
effective for several key reasons. First, it involved feedback and ongoing discussion with 
older patients with cancer from the very initial development phases. This iterative process of 
elicitation from an expert panel of older adults with cancer speaks to the external validity of 
the themes and content of the sessions. With this solid foundation, it is also the first 
psychotherapy intervention to incorporate the developmental issues distinctive to older 
adults and the combined issues of aging and cancer. Finally, it was developed and tested 
through the telephone to reach older patients with cancer who have difficulty getting out of 
the house, navigating inclement weather or transportation, or who are geographically 
isolated. Thus, CARE has tremendous potential to reach those who are most in need of 
intervention. 

Despite the promising findings related to feasibility and preliminary effects on psychological 
well-being identified here, as with any pilot study, there are some limitations to 
interpretability. First, our sample was predominately White and college-educated. Thus, the 
generaliz- ability of the effects and of patient satisfaction with the intervention may be 
limited. Future larger trials will include a more racially, ethnically, and educationally diverse 
sample in order to tailor the CARE intervention as necessary. Similarly, the homogeneity of 
the sample suggests that there may have been a selection bias in who opted to participate in 
the study, so future larger scale studies should make concerted efforts to recruit patients with 
a range of functional statuses in order to demonstrate acceptability and outcomes in patients 
with greater functional impairment. Additionally, we could not reliably compare those 
participants who completed the original 7 session format to the later 5 session format; in the 
next trial participants will all receive the standard session number. Although all participants 
completed pre-randomization and all subsequent study measures over the phone, we did not 
explicitly screen for hearing impairments, which will be important in future larger studies to 
ensure adequate session engagement. Finally, there were several relevant variables not 
captured in the data collected in this study, such as measures of successful aging and 
wisdom, which would allow analyses to be conducted on the hypothesized change 
mechanism of the CARE intervention; these constructs will be assessed in the next phase of 
intervention testing. Further research in a larger study should potentially modify the 
intervention to include brief monthly booster calls to help maintain the effects of the 
intervention over time. 

These pilot data suggest the CARE intervention is feasibly delivered by a range of clinicians 
and provides a positive signal that the CARE intervention impacts important psychosocial 
variables for older patients with cancer. This novel treatment is unique in that it draws from 
age appropriate developmental themes in combination with well-established coping theory 
to deliver a targeted intervention for older patients in the oncology setting. Additionally, it 
has the potential to be highly accessible to frail older adults who may not be able to attend 
in-person sessions with regular frequency. Thus, by developing an intervention from the 



bottom up rather than retrofitting existing psychotherapy to this specific population, we 
demonstrate that it is possible to better serve the needs of our older patients. 



Jimmie Holland died on December 24, 2017. She lived almost 90 years. Her impact on the human side of cancer 
care will last for generations. The journal you are reading and the article before you were brainstorms of this 
pioneer of Psycho-Oncology. Cancer and Aging: Reflections for Elders (CARE): A Pilot Randomized Controlled 
Trial of a Psychotherapeutic Intervention for Older Adults with Cancer was Jimmie’s last completed project, and 
this article most likely represents her last publication in the journal which she began. Yet it is but one of her many 
efforts that engaged her heart and soul. Jimmie aged gracefully with good humor, working until the very end. She 
shared those values with her patients, her colleagues, her friends, and of course her family and left her rich legacy 
for those she will never know who have cancer. 
Funding for this study was provided by the Silbermann Foundation, Muriel Duenewald Lloyd Inspiration Fund, the 
National Cancer Institute (T32CA009461–34 and P30 CA08748–48), and the CALGB Foundation. 

Silbermann Foundation; CALGB Foundation; Muriel Duenewald Lloyd Inspiration Fund; National Cancer Institute, 
Grant/Award Numbers: P30 CA08748–48 and T32CA009461–34 


trajectories and comorbidity burden among older cancer survivors in the United States. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016;25(7):1029–1036. [PubMed: 27371756] 













Diagnosis and Treatment of Depression in Late Life. Washington: American Psychiatric Press; 
1994:9–19. 
9. Erlangsen A, Stenager E, Conwell Y. Physical diseases as predictors of suicide in older adults: a 
nationwide, register-based cohort study. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015;50(9):1427– 
1439. [PubMed: 25835959] 


11. Unützer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, et al. Depression treatment in a sample of 1,801 depressed 
older adults in primary care. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51(4):505–514. [PubMed: 12657070] 
12. Lin EHB, Katon W, von Korff M, et al. Effect of improving depression care on pain and functional 
outcomes among older adults with arthritis: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;290(18): 
2428–2429. [PubMed: 14612479] 







15. Lapid M, Rummans TA, Brown PD, et al. Improving the quality of life of geriatric cancer patients 
with a structured multidisciplinary intervention: a randomized controlled trial. Palliat Support 
Care. 2007;5(2):107–114. [PubMed: 17578061] 




18. Folkman S, Lazarus RS, Dunkel-Schetter C, DeLongis A, Gruen RJ. The dynamics of a stressful 
encounter: cognitive appraisal, coping, and encounter outcomes. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1986;50(5): 
992–1003. [PubMed: 3712234] 


20. Erikson E Childhood and Society. London: Vintage Books; 1950. 
21. Erikson E, Erikson J, Kivnick H. Vital Involvement in Old Age. New York: W.W. Norton & 



23. Vaillant G Aging Well. New York: Little Brown and Company; 2002. 
24. Roth AJ, Kornblith AB, Batel-Copel L, Peabody E, Scher HI, Holland JC. Rapid screening for 
psychologic distress in men with prostate carcinoma: a pilot study. Cancer. 1998;82(10):1904– 
1908. [PubMed: 9587123] 







examination of its reliability and validity in a research setting. Cancer. 1984;53(9):2002–2007. 
[PubMed: 6704925] 
29. Katzman R, Brown T, Fuld P, Peck A, Schechter R, Schimmel H. Validation of a short orientation- 
memory-concentration test of cognitive impairment. Am J Psychiatry. 1983;140(6):734–739. 
[PubMed: 6846631] 



cancer patients: the effects of disease and treatment. Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A(1):37–40. [PubMed: 
8142161] 
32. Spinhoven P, van der Does AJ. Somatization and somatosensory amplification in psychiatric 
outpatients: an explorative study. Compr Psychiatry. 1997;38(2):93–97. [PubMed: 9056127] 
33. Kissane DW, Wein S, Love A, Lee XQ, Kee PL, Clarke DM. The demoralization scale: a report of 
its development and preliminary validation. J Palliat Care. 2004;20(4):269–276. [PubMed: 
15690829] 








dimensions and an overall sense of well-being, in Third World Congress of Psycho-Oncology 
1996: New York, NY. 





FIGURE 1. 
CARE model. Adapted from the original work of Folkman17–19 and Erikson20,21 



















