


Hayley Robinson MSc a, Bruce MacDonald PhD b, Ngaire Kerse PhD c, Elizabeth Broadbent PhD a,* 
a Department of Psychological Medicine, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 
b Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 
c Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 
Keywords: 
Robotics 
Paro 
loneliness 
depression 
quality of life 
human-robot interaction 

Objectives: To investigate the psychosocial effects of the companion robot, Paro, in a rest home/hospital 
setting in comparison to a control group. 
Design: Randomized controlled trial. Residents were randomized to the robot intervention group or 
a control group that attended normal activities instead of Paro sessions. Sessions took place twice a week 
for an hour over 12 weeks. Over the trial period, observations were conducted of residents’ social 
behavior when interacting as a group with the robot. As a comparison, observations were also conducted 
of all the residents during general activities when the resident dog was or was not present. 
Setting: A residential care facility in Auckland, New Zealand. 
Participants: Forty residents in hospital and rest home care. 
Measurements: Residents completed a baseline measure assessing cognitive status, loneliness, depres- 
sion, and quality of life. At follow-up, residents completed a questionnaire assessing loneliness, 
depression, and quality of life. During observations, behavior was noted and collated for instances of 
talking and stroking the dog/robot. 
Results: In comparison with the control group, residents who interacted with the robot had signiﬁcant 
decreases in loneliness over the period of the trial. Both the resident dog and the seal robot made an impact 
on the social environment in comparison to when neither was present. Residents talked to and touched the 
robot signiﬁcantly more than the resident dog. A greater number of residents were involved in discussion 
about the robot in comparison with the resident dog and conversation about the robot occurred more. 
Conclusion: Paro is a positive addition to this environment and has beneﬁts for older people in nursing 
home care. Paro may be able to address some of the unmet needs of older people that a resident animal 
may not, particularly relating to loneliness. 

The growing aging population is a major concern for the future.1 
An increasing number of older people will require formal long term 
care as their health deteriorates and they cannot source as much 
human care and support in the community.2,3 For an older person, 
admission to an elder care facility is rarely easy and is not a highly 
anticipated milestone in a person’s life.4 Moving to a nursing home is 
often precipitated by the loss of a loved one, an inability to look after 
oneself, declining health, and a lack of control over one’s life.5 These 
factors, combined with the institutional environment of elder care 
facilities, means that older people lose aspects of their lives that 
constitute high life satisfaction.6 Older people in nursing homes often 
report feelings of helplessness, boredom, and isolation,7 increasing 





their risk of depression8e11 and loneliness,12,13 and in general they 
report a lower quality of life than those residing in the community.14 
Older people may experience problems in nursing homes upon 
shifting, because residents may ﬁnd they have fewer of the social 
connections that previously gave their life meaning. Even when older 
people have become used to their new living environment, often the 
feeling of loneliness and isolation does not abate over time as they 
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to form new relationships with the people around 
them.8 Research has found that there are negative effects on health 
for older people after entering formal care. Some early studies have 
reported that there is a high mortality rate among the aged due to 
institutionalization,15 whereas other research has found that moving 
frail elderly from one setting to another results in mental and physical 
deterioration.16,17 
Many nursing homes now incorporate animal visitations and 
interactions into care models. Animals help fulﬁll criteria aimed at 
promoting better quality of life by increasing social interactions, 
decreasing loneliness, countering boredom, and helping foster 
1525-8610/$ - see front matter Copyright (cid:1) 2013 - American Medical Directors Association, Inc. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2013.02.007 




a sense of purpose. Furthermore, almost anyone can interact with an 
animal regardless of physical and cognitive impairment, as any 
person can communicate nonverbally with an animal by touching 
and stroking.18 Over the past few decades, the health beneﬁts of both 
pet ownership and animal activities in hospitals and elder care 
settings have been widely reported in the literature.19 Research has 
found that interactions with pets or animals have 3 effects: (1) 
physiological effect (eg, improvement of vital signs), (2) psychological 
effect (eg, relaxation, reduction of distress, and improvements in 
mood and depression); and (3) social effect (eg, facilitate commu- 
nication).20e22 Research has found that animals have many positive 
beneﬁts for people, particularly older people, and in a nursing home 
setting animals can be a social icebreaker, and can provide compan- 
ionship, meaning and comfort to a person.23,24 
Because animal therapy has been so successful with older people, 
research has turned to creating companion robots that may offer the 
same beneﬁts as live animals but require less care and are more 
hygienic. Animals can cause problems in an elder care setting; they 
may be a trip hazard, may scratch or bite, may introduce parasites 
and infectious diseases to the environment, and require extra care 
considerations on top of daily staff duties.25 A robot animal that does 
not have to be fed, cleaned, or cared for and that cannot cause harm, 
may be an adequate substitute for a live animal. Research with 
companion robots in nursing homes has been conducted predomi- 
nately with the companion robot AIBO (a metallic doglike robot) and 
Paro (a white ﬂuffy seal robot). This work has found that these 
companion robots can have a physiological effects by reducing stress 
hormones26,27 and can improve brain functioning.28 Research has also 
found that companion robots have a positive psychological effect and 
can help forge social relationships.29 For example, in a 5-year longi- 
tudinal study30 conducted in an elder care facility in Japan with 14 
residents who suffered from mild to moderate dementia, Paro 
improved mood and depression and decreased stress levels. The 
nursing staff commented that Paro is a “necessity” for the facility, as 
Paro made people laugh and more active. In a different study con- 
ducted in Japan over 2 months31 in a care home with 12 residents, 
Paro was given a home on a table in a public space for residents to 
play with for the duration of the day and returned to the ofﬁce at 
night. The results showed that Paro encouraged residents to 
communicate with each other and strengthened their social ties. 
Overall, the current research suggests that companion robots have 
positive social, psychological, and physical effects in elder care 
settings.26 However, much of the research that has been conducted 
does not have robust study designs, as control or comparison 
conditions are not used and studies generally take place with small 
sample sizes and over a short period of time.32,33 No previous work 
has been published that has conducted a randomized controlled trial 
speciﬁcally with Paro in a rest home setting, although some have 
been conducted with AIBO.34 Most of the research is exploratory, 
reﬂecting that this area is relatively new. Additionally, much of the 
research with Paro has been done in Japan, with less research per- 
formed in other cultures. Overall, more research is needed to see if 
implementation of robotic therapy with Paro has beneﬁts over a long 
period of time in different settings and with different cultures. The 
aim of this research was to address some of the shortcomings of the 
previous research with Paro by using a randomized controlled trial, 
and in a Western country. This study aimed to explore how the 
psychosocial effects of Paro could be compared with a control group. 
This research also evaluated the impact Paro had on the social envi- 
ronment by observing how residents interacted with the robot and 
with each other when the robot was present in comparison to when 
the resident dog was present. Although research with the companion 
robot AIBO has looked at the difference between interactions with 
a robotic dog and a live dog in children,35,36 and one study has looked 
at the effect of a live dog or AIBO on loneliness,34 the effects of Paro 
have not been compared with a live animal. 


The study was conducted at the Selwyn Heights retirement home, 
in Hillsborough, Auckland, New Zealand, in the hospital and rest 
home areas, which provide 24-hour support 7 days a week. In both 
areas there are a wide range of activities for residents to enjoy, 
organized by the same activities coordinator. Additionally, the activ- 
ities coordinator brings her Jack Russell terrier to work each day and 
the dog is free to visit residents in the hospital and often goes over to 
the rest home. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of 
Auckland Human Participants Ethics Committee and written 
informed consent obtained for all participants. 
In cases where 
participants were unable to provide informed consent, enduring 
power of attorney (EPOA) representatives were contacted asking 
permission for the resident to participate in the study and written 
informed consent was obtained. 

Participants were 40 residents (13 men, age range 55e100 years). 
Twenty residents were randomly assigned to the control group (rest 
home 11, hospital 9) and 20 were assigned to the Paro group (rest 
home 7, hospital 13) using a random list generator. Nineteen partic- 
ipants (48%) scored 6 or lower on the Abbreviated Mental Test, which 
is suggestive of cognitive impairment. There were no signiﬁcant 
differences between the intervention and control groups in cognitive 
impairment. 

Residents in both groups completed baseline measures assessing 
loneliness, depression, and quality of life. Loneliness was assessed 
using the UCLA Loneliness scale (Version 3)37 that has been used in 
previous research to assess loneliness in older people before and after 
interacting with AIBO.34 Depression was measured using the Geriatric 
Depression Scale (GDS).38 This is a short questionnaire composed of 
15 yes or no questions pertaining to depressive symptoms experi- 
enced over the past week. This questionnaire has been used exten- 
sively in older populations and is highly validated.39 Quality of life 
was measured using the Quality of Life for Alzheimer’s Disease (QoL- 
AD).40 This questionnaire has 13 questions that asked participants to 
rate various aspects of their lives on 4-point scale. Staff also 
completed proxy ratings of residents. Again, this measure is highly 
validated in older populations.41 
Paro sessions were scheduled to take place on 2 weekday after- 
noons for 12 weeks, which was incorporated into the activities 
schedule. Residents in the control group went on bus trips around the 
city during this time or an alternative activity, such as crafts, movies, 
or bingo, was organized. During sessions with the robot, discussion 
groups were held and all residents had a chance to interact with the 
robot. If the resident was unable to attend the session because of ill 
health, the resident had the opportunity to interact with the robot 
after the session individually. Observations were conducted over the 
course of the trial to assess residents’ social behaviors when the robot 
was present, compared with when the resident dog was present or 
when neither were present. After the 12-week trial, follow-up 
measures were administered to participants. Figure 1 summarizes 
the design of the study and number of participants. Analyses of 
covariance (ANCOVAs) were performed to compare changes between 



baseline and follow-up measures of each of the primary outcome 
measures (quality-of-life ratings, depression and loneliness scores) 
with corresponding baseline scores entered as covariates. This method 
was chosen because it takes into account each individual’s baseline 
score and helps to control for any differences between groups at 
baseline and regression to the mean.42 To assess how much residents 
interacted with the robot and the resident dog, t-tests or nonpara- 
metric equivalents were used. When social interactions with the dog 
and the seal robot were compared with normal activities Kruskal- 
Wallis tests and 1-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were conduct- 
ed. For all analyses, a 2-tailed alpha level of less than 0.05 was used. 

Paro is an advanced interactive robot developed by the Intelligent 
Systems Research Institute (ISRI),43 a leading Japanese industrial 
automation pioneer (Figure 2). Paro is modeled after a baby Canadian 
harp seal and is covered in white artiﬁcial fur. It weighs approxi- 
mately 2.7 kg. Paro has 4 senses: sight, sound, balance, and touch, 
meaning that Paro responds to contact, as well as to other stimuli in 
its environment by moving or imitating the noises of a baby harp seal. 
Paro operates by using the 3 elements: its internal states, sensory 
information from its sensors, and its own diurnal rhythm to carry out 
various activities during its interaction with people. 

Table 1 shows the main results of this study. After adjusting for 
baseline self-rated quality of life scores and staff-rated quality-of-life 
scores, respectively, ANCOVAs found there were no main effects of 
group on changes in self-rated quality of life or staff-rated quality of 
life between baseline and follow-up. Depressive scores slightly 
decreased in the Paro group from baseline to follow-up, but increased 
in the control group; however, after adjusting for baseline depression 
scores, there were no main effects of group on changes in depression 
between baseline and follow-up. The results show that loneliness 
decreased in the Paro group but increased in the control group. After 
adjusting for baseline loneliness scores, there was a signiﬁcant 
difference between groups in loneliness change over time (P ¼ .033). 



Declined to participate (n=3) 
EPOA declined resident participation 






Died (n=2) 
Moved away (n=1) 



Twelve weeks of alternative organized 
activities 



Table 1 
Primary Psychosocial Outcomes 


F Test for Group X 
Change Since 
Baseline 





33.94 (7.51) 
32.73 (8.24) 
(cid:2)1.33 (5.77) 
33.42 (6.99) 
31.19 (6.26) 
(cid:2)1.88 (4.27) 

Quality of Life 
Baseline (T1) 
Follow-up (T2) 
Change score 

31.15 (6.70) 
Baseline (T1) 
Follow-up (T2) 
26.71 (7.71) 
Change score (T2eT1) (cid:2)5.71 (7.65) 
32.05 (8.83) 
23.94 (5.18) 
(cid:2)7.06 (8.36) 


4.88 (3.58) 
Baseline (T1) 
Follow-up (T2) 
4.15 (2.34) 
Change score (T2eT1) (cid:2).64 (3.89) 
3.33 (3.22) 
4.00 (2.62) 
.40 (2.56) 


36.44 (9.76) 
Baseline (T1) 
Follow-up (T2) 
32.23 (9.92) 
Change score (T2eT1) (cid:2)5.38 (7.58) 
31.71 (9.50) 
33.93 (8.52) 
2.29 (6.19) 

Those in the intervention group decreased in loneliness over time, 
whereas those in the control group increased in loneliness from 
baseline to follow-up. 
Figure 3 shows residents interacting with the robot in one of the 
Paro sessions. Table 2 reports how residents interacted with the 
resident dog in comparison with the seal robot. This shows that 
residents touched and talked to the robot signiﬁcantly more than 
they touched the resident dog, and the number of residents who 
stroked the seal was higher when taking into account the number of 
people present. Residents also talked to each other signiﬁcantly 
more about the robot compared with the dog. Finally, staff did start 
conversation signiﬁcantly more about the robot than the resident 
dog, but they did not talk to the robot signiﬁcantly more than they 
talked to the dog. During normal activities, it was noted how often 
residents talked to each other and how the presence of the seal 
robot or the resident dog altered the social atmosphere. Table 3 
reports these results. 
Overall, there was a signiﬁcant difference in the number of times 
residents talked to each other. Mann-Whitney U tests found that 
residents talked more to each other overall 
in Paro sessions in 
comparison with normal activities, U ¼ 21.00, z ¼ (cid:2)2.35, P ¼ .02, 
r ¼ 0.51. Residents talked more to each other when the dog was 
present compared with normal activities, but this was not signiﬁcant, 
U ¼ 43.50, z ¼ 1.78, P ¼ .08, r ¼ 0.35. Mann-Whitney U tests found 
that a higher percentage of residents talked to each other in the Paro 
group than in normal activities, U ¼ 3.00, z ¼ (cid:2)3.67, P < .001, r ¼ 0.80, 
and also compared with activities when the resident dog was present, 
U ¼ 5.50, z ¼ (cid:2)4.29, P < .001, r ¼ 0.80. When looking at the number of 
times staff made conversation with residents, it was found that there 
were no overall differences between conditions. Similarly, there were 
no differences in the number of times residents talked to staff. 

This study investigated the effects of an intervention program 
incorporating the use of a seal robot primarily as a way to improve 
quality of life, mood, and loneliness for older residents in a nursing 
home facility. This research found that after a 12-week intervention, 
in which residents interacted with a seal robot twice a week, resi- 
dents had decreases in loneliness scores from baseline to follow-up, 
in comparison with a control group. This is an important ﬁnding, as 
although other research with Paro has documented the positive 
effects the robot has on mood and the effect the robot has on the 
social atmosphere, loneliness has not been measured with this robot. 
With the robot dog, AIBO, research in the United States has found that 
loneliness decreased in older people who received 30-minute weekly 
visits from a living dog or from AIBO over 8 weeks in comparison with 
a control group.34 Similarly, another study conducted in Japan44 
found that after 20 activity sessions with AIBO older people in 
a nursing home had improved loneliness scores compared with 
baseline scores. Improvements in loneliness may mean improve- 
ments in other areas of life, as a person feels less socially isolated in 
his or her current living situation. This ﬁnding further supports 
ﬁndings that animals do help to reduce loneliness and indicates that 
a companion robot is an adequate substitute for live animals in 
nursing home facilities. For example, it has been reported that resi- 
dents in a nursing home who had greater levels of interaction with 
a pet experienced less loneliness than those who had lower levels of 
interaction.45,46 Overall, loneliness in rest home settings has been 
related to a number of other issues, 
including depression and 
mortality.47,48 If the presence of a companion robot can help decrease 
loneliness, keep older people company, and comfort people when 
they feel ill or unhappy, then the robot would be useful in elderly care 
to help older people adapt to their environment and age successfully. 
Some older people in this study commented that the robot made 
them feel better when they were sick, feeling down, or feeling lonely 
and care staff also noted the effect the robot had on residents. 
Interestingly, there is a great deal of research looking at how 
companion robots and animals impact the social environment. From 
the research conducted with Paro previously, it has been found that 
Paro is capable of stimulating conversation between residents,49,50 
strengthening social ties between residents,31 and providing an 
“icebreaker” topic for staff and visitors to use when talking to older 
people.51 In this research, it was found that in comparison with the 
resident dog, residents touched and talked to the robot, and talked to 
each other more about the robot, showing how the robot is just as 
easy to interact with as a live animal and in some instances had an 
Table 2 
Observations of Residents With Paro and the Resident Dog 


No. of times stroked* 
No. of times stroked/No. of residents present* 
No. of residents who stroked* 
No. of times talked to/No. of residents present* 
No. of residents who talked to* 

No. of times residents talked to each other about dog/robot 
Percentage of residents who talk to each other about dog/robot* 
No. of times staff member starts conversation about dog/robot* 
No. of times staff talks to dog/robot* 





38 (12e62) 
4 (1.67e6.56) 
6 (3e10) 
2.36 (1.21e5.78) 

30.09 (9.96) 
95.45 (42.86e100) 
19 (2e41) 
4 (1e14) 
2 (0e10) 
.07 (0e.63) 
2 (0e6) 
.24 (0e1.40) 
2 (0e7) 
16.12 (12.57) 
31.58 (21.74e60) 
9 (0e44) 
4 (2e33) 
(cid:2)4.44 
(cid:2)4.43 
(cid:2)3.72 
(cid:2)4.35 
(cid:2)3.30 
3.10 
(cid:2)4.29 
(cid:2)2.57 
(cid:2)0.57 
<.001 
<.001 
<.001 
<.001 
<.001 
.01 
<.01 
.01 
.58 

0.84 
0.84 
0.70 
0.82 
0.75 
0.51 
0.80 
0.49 
0.11 
*Non-parametric - results displayed as median (min-max) and z score reported instead of t value. 
yParametric - results displayed as mean (SD). 



advantage over the dog. Often residents were unable to talk to or 
touch the dog because the dog could choose who it interacted with, 
whereas the robot could be put on the lap of all residents and would 
respond to them. This research also found that Paro was able to 
impact the social environment. Furthermore, no research to date has 
compared how older people socialize in the presence Paro or a live 
animal, although observations have been conducted of children with 
AIBO35 and one study has looked at how AIBO and a live dog affect 
loneliness in older people in a rest home.34 Analyses found that 
a higher percentage of residents talked to each other speciﬁcally 
about the robot compared with instances when the dog was present 
and residents talked to each other speciﬁcally about the dog. Overall 
this shows that the robot has beneﬁts over and above a live dog and 
by impacting the social environment and providing a conversation 
topic for residents and staff. This research found that residents 
socialized just as much when the resident dog was present as during 
activity sessions with the robot when general conversation was taken 
into account. Furthermore, when the dog and the robot were not 
present, the residents were less social, as indicated by the amount 
they talked to each other. The results of this study also show that staff 
make more conversation with residents during normal activities than 
Paro activities. Although this was not signiﬁcant, a reason for these 
results could be that staff ﬁnd it difﬁcult to keep residents engaged in 
conversation and activities and have to make more conversation with 
residents to keep them entertained. In the Paro condition and when 
the dog was present during activities, conversation was easier for 
staff. Of note, the dog was not always in the room for the whole 
duration of activities. Although previous research has not looked at 
how much a robot affects socialization in comparison with other 
activities, research has found that the presence of animals did affect 
the amount residents socialized in comparison with activities, such as 
bingo and crafts.52 Although that study did not use a control group, 
their ﬁndings are similar to the current research, which compared 
social behaviors when the robot and dog were present with activities, 
including bingo, discussions, and crafts. 
This study has a number of strengths in comparison with previous 
research with Paro and other companion robots. This is the ﬁrst 
published randomized controlled trial conducted with Paro. Although 
other research has been conducted in Japan with Paro in quasi- 
experimental settings, no published studies have compared the 
robot activities with a control group. This research is important 
because it means the efﬁcacy of the intervention can be assessed, 
particularly in terms of loneliness, which has not been assessed with 
Paro. This research also aimed to conduct a study with a greater 
number of participants than previous research over a longer period of 
time. Other research has used Paro in short-term studies ranging 
from 4 to 8 weeks, with the exception of one ongoing study that has 
been conducted for 5 years in Japan. These studies have used only 
small sample sizes, ranging from 5 to 26 participants.32 
Like other studies conducted with companion robots and animals, 
this research has a number of limitations. Because of the population 
chosen and the environment, obtaining a large sample is difﬁcult, as 
health problems limit the ability for older people to complete a study 
of this nature and assess the primary outcomes. In this research, 
Table 3 
Observations of Residents’ Social Behavior in Normal Activities, Paro Activities, and Normal Activities With the Resident Dog Present 

Normal Activities (n ¼ 9) 
Mean (SD) 
Activities When Resident 
Dog Is Present (n ¼ 17) 
Mean (SD) 
Paro Activities (n ¼ 12) 
Mean (SD) 



No. of times residents talk to each other overall* 
Percentage of residents who talk to other 
29.44 (27.62) 
36.37 (13.89) 

No. of times staff make conversation with residents 
No. of time residents talk to staff 


89.11 (50.58) 
52.22 (41.24) 
57.00 (49.05) 
36.99 (11.29) 
95.52 (28.42) 
54.41 (21.57) 
57.42 (20.11) 
87.04 (18.58) 
80.83 (27.24) 
55.50 (21.59) 
2 
2 


.05 
<.01 
2, 35 
2, 35 
0.64 
0.38 
.53 
.96 
*Non parametric data. Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed and H is reported instead of F. 
yParametric data. 


a number of residents were not identiﬁed as being appropriate for 
this study because of physical and or mental disabilities. Of those who 
did participate, sickness and disabilities greatly limited participants in 
their attendance of sessions and ability to interact with the robot. 
Some of the residents identiﬁed were not able to complete the entire 
communication difﬁculties. 
baseline questionnaire because of 
Although the research calls for larger sample sizes, realistically large 
samples are difﬁcult to attain because of attrition and declining 
health. To ﬁnd the robot had a positive effect on loneliness in this 
small sample is very encouraging. Future research should strive to 
recruit a greater number of participants to attain greater power. 
Another limitation of this research was the lack of comparison 
groups to control for extraneous variables. For example, research has 
compared Paro in the “on” setting or the “off” setting to when the 
researcher only was present.50 The researchers found that there was 
just as much social activity when the observer was present alone to 
when the robot was on. They concluded that learning about the 
observer was just as interesting as learning about Paro. Although in 
the current trial the robot was left with the activities staff to do what 
they wished in sessions, for the trial to run smoothly, the researcher 
was present to help get residents to the sessions and run the sessions 
when a staff member was sick or unavailable. Hence, the presence of 
the researcher as a visitor may have had an effect on the social 
setting. However, the researcher was also present to conduct obser- 
vations in the control group activity sessions. Another limitation to 
this research is that the robot and the resident dog were not intro- 
duced at the same time. The resident dog had been at the facility 
approximately 3 months before this trial began and residents may 
have been more familiar with the dog, affecting how they interacted 
and discussed it. In this study, it should be noted that activities did 
not center around the dog in a structured manner, like the Paro 
sessions. This structuring may be a critical component to the seal’s 
therapeutic effect. 

Overall, future work needs to address the identiﬁed problems in 
the current research with companion robots. Randomized controlled 
studies with larger sample sizes, with different populations in 
different living situations, and with different cognitive capabilities 
should be conducted to further determine for whom the robot is best 
suited. Overall, this research found that loneliness can be improved 
using companion robots and the robot has an affect comparable to 
a live animal on the social environment. Paro is capable of improving 
loneliness in older people in elder care facilities and should be 
considered in future care plans. 

The authors thank the Selwyn Foundation for their cooperation 
and their support, especially the staff at Selwyn Heights. We also 
thank our colleagues at the University of Auckland HealthBots 
research team for their ongoing support and the Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering for the use of Paro. 

1. United Nations Population Division. World Population Ageing, 2009. Available 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/WPA2009/WPA2009_ 
at: 
WorkingPaper.pdf/. Accessed November 19, 2012. 








6. Mor V, Branco K, Fleishman J, et al. The structure of social engagement among 
nursing home residents. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 1995;50:P1eP8. 
7. Slama CA, Bergman-Evans B. A troubling triangle. An exploration of loneliness, 
helplessness, and boredom of residents of a veterans home. J Psychosoc Nurs 
2000;38:36e43. 
8. Adams KB, Sanders S, Auth EA. Loneliness and depression in independent living 
retirement communities: Risk and resilience factors. Aging Ment Health 2004; 
8:475e485. 


10. Jongenelis K, Pot AM, Eisses AMH, et al. Prevalence and risk indicators of 
depression in elderly nursing home patients: The AGED study. J Affect Disord 
2004;83:135e142. 
11. Teresi J, Abrams R, Holmes D, et al. Prevalence of depression and depression 
recognition in nursing homes. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2001;36: 
613e620. 


13. Tijhuis MA, De Jong-Gierveld J, Feskens EJ, et al. Changes in and factors related 
to loneliness in older men. The Zutphen Elderly Study. Age Ageing 1999;28: 
491e495. 
14. Grayson P, Lubin B, Van Whitlock R. Comparison of depression in the 
community-dwelling and assisted-living elderly. J Clin Psychol 1995;51:19e21. 
15. Lieberman MA. Relationship of mortality rates to entrance to a home for the 



17. Scocco P, Rapattoni M, Fantoni G. Nursing home institutionalization: A source 
of eustress or distress for the elderly? Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006;21: 
281e287. 


19. Raina P, Waltner-Toews D, Bonnett B, et al. Inﬂuence of companion animals on 
the physical and psychological health of older people: An analysis of a one-year 
longitudinal study. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999;47:323e329. 


21. Crowley-Robinson P, Fenwick DC, Blackshaw JK. A long-term study of elderly 
people in nursing homes with visiting and resident dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci 
1996;47:137e148. 
22. Hart LA. Psychosocial beneﬁts of animal companionship. In: Fine AH, editor. 
Handbook on Animal-Assisted Therapy: Theoretical Foundations and Guide- 
lines for Practice. 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2000, pp. 59e78. 
23. Baun M, Johnson R. Human-animal interaction and successful aging. In: Fine A, 
editor. Handbook on Animal-Assisted Therapy. 3rd ed. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press, 2010, pp. 283e299. 




26. Wada K, Shibata T. Living with seal robots in a care housedevaluations of 
social and physiological inﬂuences. Paper presented at: IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems; October 9e15, 2006; Beijing, 
China. 
27. Suga K, Sato M, Yonezawa H, et al. Change in the concentration of salivary IgA 
by contact of elderly subjects with a pet robot. J Anal Bio-Sci 2002;25:251e254. 
Japanese. 
28. Wada K, Shibata T, Musha T, et al. Effects of robot therapy for demented 
patients evaluated by EEG. Paper presented at: 
International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems; August 2e6, 2005; Edmonton, 
Canada. 



30. Wada K, Shibata T, Kawaguchi Y. Long-term robot therapy in a health service 
facility for the ageddA case study for 5 years. Paper presented at: IEEE 11th 
International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics; June 23e26, 2009; Kyoto, 
Japan. 
31. Wada K, Shibata T. Robot therapy in a care housedChange of relationship 
among the residents and seal robot during a 2-month long study. Paper pre- 
sented at: IEEE 16th International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive 
Communication; August 26e29, 2007; Jeju, Korea. 
32. Bemelmans R, Gelderblom GJ, Jonker P, et al. Socially assistive robots in elderly 
care: A systematic review into effects and effectiveness. J Am Med Dir Assoc 
2012;13:114e120. 


34. Banks MR, Willoughby LM, Banks WA. Animal-assisted therapy and loneliness 
in nursing homes: use of robotic versus living dogs. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2008; 
9:173e177. 
35. Ribi FN, Yokoyama A, Turner DC. Comparison of children’s behavior toward 
Sony’s robotic dog AIBO and a real dog: A pilot study. Anthrozoos 2006;21: 
92e99. 


36. Kerepesi A, Kubinyi E, Jonsson GK, et al. Behavioural comparison of human- 
eanimal (dog) and humanerobot (AIBO) interactions. Behavioural Processes 
2008;73:245e256. 


38. Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, et al. Development and validation of a geriatric 
depression screening scale: A preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res 1983;17: 
37e49. 


40. Logsdon RG, Gibbons LE, McCurry SM, et al. Quality of life in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Patient and caregiver reports. J Ment Health Ageing 1999;5:21e32. 
41. Logsdon RG, Gibbons LE, McCurry SM, et al. Assessing quality of life in older 



43. Shibata T, Tanie K. Inﬂuence of a priori knowledge in subjective interpretation 
and evaluation by short-term interaction with mental commit robot. Paper 
presented at: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems; October 31eNovember 5, 2000; Takamatsu, Japan. 
44. Kanamori M, Suzuki M, Tanaka M. Maintenance and improvement of quality of 
life among elderly patients using a pet-type robot. Nippon Ronen Igakkai 
Zasshi 2002;39:214e218. 


46. Banks MR, Banks WA. The effects of group and individual animal-assisted 
therapy on loneliness in residents of long-term care facilities. Anthrozoos 
2005;18:396e408. 
47. Holmen K, Ericsson K, Winblad B. Quality of life among the elderlydState of 
mood and loneliness in two selected groups. Scand J Caring Sci 1999;13:91e95. 
48. Penninx BWJH, van Tilburg T, Kriegsman DMW, et al. Effects of social and 
personal resources on mortality in old age: The Longitudinal Ageing Study, 
Amsterdam. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:510e519. 
49. Kidd CD, Taggart W, Turkle S. A sociable robot to encourage social interaction 
among the elderly. Paper presented at: IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation; May 15e19, 2006; Orlando, FL. 
50. Taggart W, Turkle S, Kidd CD. An interactive robot in a nursing home: 
Preliminary remarks. Paper presented at: Toward Social Mechanisms of 
Android Science; July 25e26, 2005; Stresa, Italy. 
51. Wada K, Shibata T, Saito T, et al. Psychological and social effects of one year 
robot assisted activity on elderly people at a health service facility for the aged. 
Paper presented at: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa- 
tion; April 18e22, 2005; Barcelona, Spain. 
52. Bernstein PL, Freidmann E, Malaspina A. Animal-assisted therapy enhances 
resident social interaction and initiation in long-term care facilities. Anthro- 
zoos 2000;13:213e224. 
