
Effects of psychosocial group rehabilitation on social functioning, 
loneliness and well-being of lonely, older people: randomized 
controlled trial 


Correspondence to P.E. Routasalo: 
e-mail: pirkko.routasalo@helsinki.ﬁ 
Pirkko E. Routasalo PhD RN 
Project Manager 
The Central Union for the Welfare of the 
Aged, Helsinki, Finland 
Reijo S. Tilvis MD PhD 
Professor 
Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Clinics of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, 
Helsinki, Finland 
Hannu Kautiainen PhD 
Statistician 
Medcare Foundation, A¨ a¨ nekoski, Finland 
Kaisu H. Pitkala MD PhD 
Professor 
Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Unit of General Practice, 
Helsinki, Finland 
Effects 
R O U T A S A L O P . E . , T I L V I S R . S . , K A U T I A I N E N H . & P I T K A L A K . H . ( 2 0 0 9 ) 
of psychosocial group rehabilitation on social functioning, loneliness and well-being 
of lonely, older people: randomized controlled trial. Journal of Advanced Nursing 
65(2), 297–305 
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2008.04837.x 
Abstract 
Title. Effects of psychosocial group rehabilitation on social functioning, loneliness 
and well-being of lonely, older people: randomized controlled trial. 
Aim. This paper is a report of a study to explore the effects of psychosocial group 
nursing intervention on older people’s feelings of loneliness, social activity and 
psychological well-being. 
Background. Older people’s loneliness is associated with low quality of life, and 
impaired health, increased use of health and social services and increased mortality. 
Previous intervention studies have achieved quite modest results. 
Method. A randomized controlled trial was conducted between 2003 and 2006 
using a group intervention aimed at empowering older people, and promoting peer 
support and social integration. A total of 235 people (>74 years) suffering from 
loneliness met 12 times with professional leaders in groups. The UCLA Loneliness 
Scale and Lubben’s Social Network Scale were used at entry, after 3 and 6 months. 
Psychological well-being was charted using a six-dimensional questionnaire at 
baseline and 12 months later. 
Findings. A statistically signiﬁcantly larger proportion of intervention group partici- 
pants had found new friends during the follow-up year (45% vs. 32%, P = 0Æ048), and 
40% of intervention group participants continued their group meetings for 1 year. 
However, no differences were found in loneliness or social networks between the groups. 
Psychological well-being score improved statistically signiﬁcantly in the intervention 
groups [+0Æ11, 95% conﬁdence interval (CI): +0Æ04 to +0Æ13], compared with the controls 
(+0Æ01, 95% CI: (cid:2)0Æ05 to +0Æ07, P = 0Æ045). Feeling needed was statistically signiﬁcantly 
more common in the intervention groups (66%) than in controls (49%, P = 0Æ019). 
Conclusion. New sensitive measurements of loneliness and social isolation are needed 
to measure ﬂuctuations in feelings of loneliness and in social isolation. 
Keywords: group rehabilitation, loneliness, older people, psychosocial nursing, ran- 
domized controlled trial, social functioning 






Loneliness is common among older people (Routasalo & 
Pitkala 2003). It is a distressing feeling leading to impaired 
quality of life (Jakobsson & Hallberg 2005), cognitive decline 
(Tilvis et al. 2000, Fratiglioni et al. 2004), poor subjective 
health (Tijhuis et al. 1999), disability (Bisschop et al. 2003), 
increased use of health and social services (Geller et al. 1999, 
Tilvis et al. 2000) and increased mortality (Penninx et al. 
1997, Herlitz et al. 1998, Tilvis et al. 2000). 

Loneliness has been deﬁned as a subjective experience of a 
lack of satisfying human relationships (Andersson 1998). The 
isolation’ are often used 
terms 
interchangeably, although they are distinct but interrelated 
concepts (Routasalo & Pitkala 2003, Routasalo et al. 2006). 
Social isolation relates to the number of contacts and the 
into the surrounding social 
integration of an individual 
environment (Cattan et al. 2005). It has been suggested that 
an older person’s feeling of loneliness is not associated with 
the frequency of contacts but that expectations of and 
satisfaction from these contacts predict loneliness (Routasalo 
et al. 2006). 

Loneliness has 
received little attention in intervention 
research but the results of earlier intervention studies have 
been quite modest (Findley 2003). Some researchers have 
performed randomized controlled intervention studies to 
alleviate older people’s loneliness and/or social 
isolation 
(Arnetz & Theorell 1983, Andersson 1984, 1985, Stevens & 
van Tilburg 2000, Wikstro¨ m 2002). In Sweden, Andersson 
(1984, 1985) aimed to alleviate loneliness by using group 
meetings and discussions about health themes for lonely older 
people. An important problem was the large number of drop- 
outs. In another Swedish study (Wikstro¨ m 2002), art expe- 
riences and discussions were offered to lonely older people. 
Social interaction and physical health improved among those 
who took part 
in the groups. Results have also been 
encouraging in studies in which participants are supported 
to participate in various activities (Arnetz & Theorell 1983, 
Stevens & van Tilburg 2000), and Cattan et al. (2005) found 
that group-based, goal-oriented interventions in which the 
participants are allowed to inﬂuence the content of the 
intervention are the most effective in alleviating loneliness. 
The theoretical framework of our intervention was based 
on the Geriatric Rehabilitation Nursing Model (Routasalo 
in which the aged person and professional 
et al. 2004), 
actively work in a close, equal interaction. The results of the 
interaction depend on the person’s commitment to the goals 
and the professional’s commitment to support the person to 
achieve the goals. 


The aim of the study was to explore the effects of psycho- 
social group nursing intervention on older people’s feelings of 
loneliness, social activity and psychological well-being. We 
hypothesized that, by including the effective elements from 
prior intervention studies (group-based intervention, partic- 
ipants inﬂuencing the contents of the intervention, goal- 
oriented work) psychosocial group rehabilitation could 
alleviate loneliness and improve older people’s psychological 
well-being. 

We performed a randomized controlled trial in 2003–2006 
with 235 older people suffering from loneliness. The inter- 
vention group (n = 117) was offered a 3-month psychosocial 
rehabilitation group intervention. 

Sample size was based on the feasibility of the postal question- 
naire in identifying volunteer participants with an interest in 
the particular group content available in their community. The 
participants were recruited using a postal questionnaire, which 
was sent to randomly selected aged, home-dwelling people 
[n = 5722, response rate 72% (n = 4113)] in six communities 
in Finland. The questionnaire enquired about demographic 
variables, suffering from loneliness, psychological well-being 
and social interaction (Savikko et al. 2005, Routasalo et al. 
2006). To those respondents who reported suffering from 
loneliness at least sometimes (n = 1541, 39%), a second postal 
questionnaire was sent to examine more accurately their 
interests and activities (Savikko 2008). 
The inclusion criteria for the group intervention were age 
‡75 years, subjective feeling of loneliness and willingness to 
participate in the intervention. The exclusion criteria were 
moderate or severe dementia [Mini Mental State Examination 
score <19 points (Folstein et al. 1975) or Clinical Dementia 
Rating Scale score >1 (Hughes et al. 1982)], living perma- 
nently in institutional care, blindness, deafness or inability to 
walk independently. For exercise and discussion groups (see 
below), New York Heart Association Classiﬁcation (Fisher 
1972) classes three and four constituted additional exclusion 
criteria. These exclusion criteria were set to ensure group 




members’ equal participation and to support social activation 
(Savikko 2008). 
Respondents who expressed their willingness to participate 
in the psychosocial group rehabilitation and who met the 
inclusion criteria were contacted and invited to an interview 
with a Registered Nurse. The randomization was performed 
in blocks of 16 people using a computer-generated random 
numbers centre. After interviewing and assessing the partic- 
ipants for one week, the study nurse ended up with a list of 16 
eligible participants in the order they had been assessed. She 
telephoned to the randomization centre and read the names 
from a paper list in the order which they appeared in her list. 
The person at a randomization centre did not know the 
identities of potential participants. Participants were then 
randomly assigned to intervention or control (continuing 
with usual community care). 

The intervention was carried out in seven centres and six 
communities. Each group consisted of 7–8 participants. The 
groups met once a week for 3 months (12 times). The group 
meetings were goal-oriented and closed, so that once the group 
was formed no new member could join even if someone 
dropped out. Each session included breakfast, lunch, coffee 
and group activities, and all this was free of charge for the 
participants. Transport to the group sessions and back was 
organized using minibuses. 
Each group had two professional group leaders (n = 14) 
who had a long experience of working with older people. 
One was a specialist Registered Nurse and the other was an 
occupational therapist or physiotherapist. They were care- 
fully educated about psychosocial group intervention of 
lonely older people (Pitkala et al. 2004a) and were tutored 
alongside the group meetings. 
The principles of psychosocial group intervention were the 
same in all groups, irrespective of the programme content. 
This was ensured by the common training of the group 
leaders, who promoted security and equal communication in 
the groups. By taking advantage of group dynamics and the 
normal maturation of group life, they aimed to empower 
participants and promote friendships, working more as 
facilitators than as active leaders. The idea of the intervention 
was that group participants would share their feelings of 
loneliness with people of their own age who were having 
similar experiences, receive peer support, and develop feel- 
ings of solidarity. This would in turn lead to empowerment, 
better mastery over their own lives, and support for their self- 
respect. The details of intervention are described elsewhere 
(Savikko 2008). 

three types of 
activities, depending on the interests of the participants: art 
and inspiring activities (AIA), group exercise and discussions 
(GED), and therapeutic writing and group therapy (TWGT) 
(Savikko 2008). In the AIA groups, various artists visited the 
meetings, the participants visited cultural events and also 
actively produced their own art. 
In the GED groups, 
participants performed various exercises (senior dancing, 
swimming and walking in the countryside), and discussed the 
health themes that interested them. In the TWGT groups, 
participants wrote about their own past lives, experiences 
and loneliness at home and then discussed their writing in the 
groups. Participants could inﬂuence and modify the group 
programmes according to their interests, which in turn 
supported their empowerment. 

The ﬁrst postal questionnaire consisted of background 
information, such as age, gender, marital status, education 
and living conditions. Loneliness was assessed with the 
question, ‘Do you suffer from loneliness?’ (1 = seldom or 
never, 2 = sometimes, and 3 = often or always). The second 
structured questionnaire was aimed at ﬁnding people who 
would voluntarily participate in the psychological group 
intervention and inquiring about their interests, with the 
purpose of placing them in a group with matching content. 
The survey and recruitment process have been described in 
other papers (Savikko et al. 2005, Savikko 2008). 
At baseline assessment, participant demographics were 
conﬁrmed and health status was assessed. Cognition was 
assessed using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
(Folstein et al. 1975) and depression was evaluated by 
Montgomery–A˚ sberg Depression Scale (Montgomery & 
˚ sberg 1979). 
A 
The study nurse interviewed and assessed participants three 
times, at baseline, 3 and 6 months, using the UCLA Loneliness 
Scale (Russel 1996), and social network with Lubben’s Social 
Network Scale (LSNS) (Lubben 1988). In addition, partici- 
pants were assessed using a postal questionnaire at baseline 
and 12 months. This questionnaire charted psychological 
well-being using six questions used in our previous studies 
since 1989 (Tilvis et al. 2000). These six questions show good 
test-retest reliability (Savikko et al. 2006) and statistically 
signiﬁcant prognostic validity (Pitkala et al. 2004a), and 
inquire about (1) life satisfaction (yes/no), (2) feeling needed 
(yes/no), (3) having plans for the future (yes/no), (4) having zest 
for life (yes/no), (5) feeling depressed (seldom or never/ 
sometimes/often or always) and (6) suffering from loneliness 
(seldom or never/sometimes/often or always). Their content 



validity is good because these questions represent areas 
considered important in psychological well-being (WHO 
2003). We created a well-being score from these questions, 
where each question represented 0 (‘no’ in questions 1–4, 
‘often or always’ in questions 5 or 6), 0Æ5 (‘sometimes’ in 
questions 5 or 6) or 1 (‘yes’ in questions 1–4, ‘seldom or never’ 
in questions 5 or 6) point. The score has shown good 
concurrent validity with the RAND-36 instrument (Huusko 
et al. 2006) and was created by dividing the total score by the 
number of questions the participant had answered. Thus, a 
score of 1 represented the best well-being and 0 the poorest. 
At 1 year, participants received a postal questionnaire, and 
their social activity and psychological well-being were mea- 
sured. Whether they had made new friends during the past 
year, if they had met their group members after the ofﬁcial 
group meetings had ceased, and whether their group had 
continued meetings on their own as a group after the ofﬁcial 
part was over were also assessed by the questionnaire. 

Approval 
appropriate 
obtained from all participants. 
to conduct 
ethics 
the study was obtained from the 
Informed consent was 


For continuous variables, descriptive values were described by 
mean with standard deviations, interquartile range (IQR) and/ 
or range. For variables with a normal (Gaussian) distribution, 
statistical comparison between groups was made using the 
t-test or analysis of covariance with baseline scores used as 
covariates. If the variables had a non-normal distribution or 
were at ordinal level, statistical comparison between groups 
was made using the Mann–Whitney test, permutation test with 
Monte-Carlo P-value and Hodges-Lehmann estimate of 
median difference with 95% conﬁdence interval (CI) to show 
changes in the outcome variables. Measures with a discrete 
distribution were expressed as percentages (%) and analysed 
by chi-square or Fisher’s exact test when appropriate. The most 
important descriptive values were described by 95% CI). 


The intervention and control groups were comparable at 
baseline (Table 1). The participants were old (mean age 
80 years), 
female, widowed, and lived alone, and their 
physical functioning was fairly good. The proportion with 

Intervention 
group, 
n = 117 
Control 
group, 
n = 118 
74Æ4 
80 (75–92) 
72Æ9 
80 (75–90) 

68Æ1 
80Æ2 
85Æ1 


68Æ6 
78Æ8 
82Æ3 




0Æ80 
0Æ38 

0Æ79 
0Æ57 
0Æ64 
0Æ51 










Females, % 
Age, years, 
mean (range) 
Education 
<7 years, % 
Widowed, % 
Living alone, % 
Physical functioning 
good or moderate 
Uses walking aid 
Mean MMSE(cid:2) 
(range) 
Mean score on 
depression 
scale(cid:3) (range) 
UCLA Loneliness 
Scale,§ mean (range) 
Lubben’s Social 
Network 
Scale,– mean (range) 
*Differences between the groups were tested with chi-square test for 
categorical variables and with t-test or Mann–Whitney U-test for 
continuous variables. 
(cid:2)Mini-Mental State Examination (Folstein et al. 1975). 
(cid:3)Montgomery–A˚ sberg Depression Scale (Montgomery & A˚ sberg 
1979). 
§Russel 1996. 
–Lubben 1988. 
impaired cognition (MMSE-score <24) was 11% in both 
groups. LSNS scores were fairly low (25–26), and 67% 
scored <30. On the Loneliness scale all participants scored 
more than 34, 
indicating at least a moderate degree of 
loneliness, and 49% scored 50 or over, indicating a moder- 
ately high or high degree of loneliness. The median baseline 
psychological well-being score (PWS) was 0Æ56 (IQR: 0Æ29, 
0Æ67) in the intervention group and 0Æ56 (IQR: 0Æ33, 0Æ67) in 
the control group. 

Participants in the intervention group had found new friends 
statistically signiﬁcantly more often than the controls (45% 
vs. 32%, chi-square test, P = 0Æ048). Furthermore, 40% of 
the intervention group members continued their group 
meetings at 1 year, and 72% had met the members of their 
own group after the intervention. However, there were no 
differences in the changes in the UCLA-scale between the 
groups at 3 or 6 months (Figure 1). Also no differences were 





encouraging them to continue their group meetings. 
In 
addition, in the previous paper reporting participant feedback 
(Savikko 2008), it is showed that almost all those in the 
intervention group said that 
loneliness had been 
alleviated during the intervention. Active social participation 
and collaboration with people of one’s own age group 
prevent loneliness (Jylha¨ & Aro 1989, Dugan & Kivett 
1994), and peers of the same age group are very important in 
relieving loneliness (Bondevik & Skogstad 1996). Interven- 
tion participants were encouraged to start new friendships 
with their group members and continue their group meetings 
on their own. 
However, the UCLA Loneliness Scale did not show any 
effects. This scale has been shown to be a valid measurement 
tool (Russell 1996) and has been used in several earlier 
intervention studies (Evans & Jaureguy 1982, Arnetz & 
Theorell 1983, Andersson 1985, Tesch-Ro¨ mer 1997, 
McAuley et al. 2000, White et al. 2002). However, in none 
of these studies was it possible to show statistically signiﬁcant 
differences in changes in scores between intervention and 
control groups. The scale may be a good screening measure 
but is probably insensitive to change. 
There may be also other reasons for difﬁculties in showing 
the alleviation of loneliness. First, loneliness is a somewhat 
unstable concept (Jylha¨ 2004). Second, the response to the 
question ‘Do you suffer from loneliness?’ depends on the 
is asked, who is asking and how 
context 
in which it 
(face-to-face or questionnaire) 
(Andersson 1998). Third, 
loneliness is often a shameful thing to expose (Rokach & 
Brock 1997). It may be that after 3 months of discussing 
issues related to loneliness, our participants became familiar 
with it and more willing to acknowledge that they did feel 
lonely. Control group participants did not have this group 
experience, and it is possible that they were more reluctant to 
admit their loneliness. 
Neither was a difference found in median changes on the 
LSNS between the intervention and control groups after the 
intervention. It seems that this scale is also not very sensitive 
to change. Half (ﬁve) of the items in the LSNS inquire about 
aspects that were not expected to change in our intervention, 
such as living alone, relationships with relatives or receiving 
help with activities of daily living. Only the other ﬁve items 
were potentially sensitive to changes as a result of the 
intervention. 
A statistically signiﬁcantly larger proportion of the inter- 
vention than the control group reported feeling needed after 
the intervention. In an earlier study, feelings of being needed 
proved to be a statistically signiﬁcant prognostic factor for 
survival 
in an aged population during 10-year follow-up 
(Pitkala et al. 2004a). Being needed by someone is closely 
Figure 1 Medians and 25% and 75% interquartiles for the UCLA 
Loneliness Scale in the intervention (grey) and control groups (white) 
at baseline, at 3 and 6 months. 
found in the changes of LSNS between intervention group 
[(cid:2)0Æ3 (95% CI: (cid:2)1Æ7 to 1Æ1)] and control group [(cid:2)0Æ3 (95% 
CI: (cid:2)1Æ6 to 0Æ9), ANCOVA 
ANCOVA, P = 0Æ50]. PWS improved in the 
intervention group (+0Æ11, 95% CI: +0Æ04 to +0Æ13) but 
remained virtually unchanged in controls (+0Æ01, 95% CI: 
(cid:2)0Æ05 to +0Æ07, permutation test, P = 0Æ045). Of the six 
dimensions of psychological well-being, feeling needed was 
more common in intervention participants (66%) than in 
controls (49%, chi-square test, P = 0Æ019). 

The psychosocial group intervention affected participants’ 
lives in many ways. Several measurements showed that they 
had become more socially active: 40% continued their 
meetings throughout the year, 45% had found new friends, 
and experiences of feeling needed had increased. However, 
the formal scales indicating loneliness or social isolation did 
not show any changes. Intervention participants’ psycholog- 
ical well-being scale showed improvement at 1 year com- 
pared with the controls. 
The intervention improved participants’ social functioning 
by increasing their initiative to make new friends and 



3 
Time (months) 









connected with intimate relationships and gives meaning to 
life. It may also mean having a meaningful role in life. Our 
intervention supported participants’ mutual relationships and 
thus feeling needed by each other. It also supported mean- 
ingful roles and active agency by giving participants power in 
decision-making and by listening to their wishes. During the 
intervention, participants changed from bystanders to active 
agents in their lives (Savikko 2008). 
Social isolation and feelings of loneliness reduce psycho- 
logical well-being, quality of life and cognition and may lead 
to deteriorating health, increased use of healthcare services 
and mortality (Prince et al. 1997, Ellaway et al. 1999, Tijhuis 
et al. 1999, Savikko et al. 2005). It is difﬁcult to show exactly 
how the intervention affected participants’ 
loneliness or 
social isolation. It is possible that it actually had an impact 
on aspects which work as transmitter mechanisms between 
loneliness and well-being. In other words, empowering older 
people may not be enough to alleviate deep, existential 
loneliness but may be enough to improve mastery over their 
own lives and initiative to break social isolation and improve 
psychological well-being (Figure 2). 
Our results are in line with those of previous intervention 
studies showing the favorable effects of group intervention on 
psychological well-being (Toseland et al. 1989, White et al. 
2002). Other researchers have noted that the key point in 
successful intervention is less its content than the effects of 
group cohesion and peer support 
(Toseland 1990), of 
participants having control over the implementation of the 
group programme (Cattan et al. 2005), and of empowerment 
and enhanced feelings of mastery (Stevens & van Tilburg 
2000). Our intervention principles were in line with these 
earlier ﬁndings. Randomized controlled studies have also 
shown that interventions based on one-to-one contacts or 
visits by professionals have been ineffective (Clarke et al. 
1992, Van Rossum et al. 1993, Cattan et al. 2005). 
The Geriatric Rehabilitation Nursing Model (Routasalo 
et al. 2004) worked well as the theoretical framework. 
According to this, commitment to action and equal interac- 
tion are necessary elements to achieve results. In our study, 
both the older participants and leaders were very committed 
to the intervention and its goals, contrary to earlier studies 
(Andersson 1985, White et al. 2002). The leaders’ commit- 
ment was supported by tutoring them during the whole 
process, and they supported participants’ commitment by 
giving them opportunities to inﬂuence the content and 
progress of group meetings. Both the leaders and participants 
knew the aims of the meetings: to empower participants and 
promote friendships. 
The strength of the study lies in the careful selection of the 
lonely participants, their randomization, and a very carefully 
planned and implemented intervention. The randomization 
succeeded, in that the intervention and control groups were 
very similar at the baseline. The experienced, well-trained 
professionals (Pitkala et al. 2004b) planned and carried out 
the interventions in cooperation with participants. Their 
success in this was seen in the commitment of participants. 
Only 2Æ5% of intervention participants did not complete the 
intervention. Several studies with lonely older people have 
encountered problems with high numbers of drop-outs 
(Andersson 1985, White et al. 2002). 

The limitation of this study is the problematic concept of 
loneliness and its measurements, which did not seem to be 
sensitive enough to show changes. The participants were 
Figure 2 Possible mechanisms behind the positive effects of psychosocial group rehabilitation. Feelings of loneliness and social isolation decrease 
psychological well-being, quality of life, health and increase use of healthcare services and mortality. The transmitting mechanisms are deteriorating 
self-awareness, mastery, increasing feelings of being a passive outsider and not having meaningful roles. Psychosocial group rehabilitation may have 
more effect on these transmitting mechanisms and social isolation and via them on psychological well-being and less on loneliness. 



Feeling of 
loneliness 
Social 
isolation 
Psychological well-being 
Quality of life 
Deteriorating health 
Cognitive decline 
Depression 
Use of health services 
Mortality 
Mastery 
Self-awareness 
Feeling outsider 
Feeling unneeded 
Negative feelings 







• Loneliness has received little attention in intervention 
research, and the results of earlier intervention studies 
have been quite modest. 

• Well-planned and professionally led psychosocial 
lonely, 
group rehabilitation intervention activates 
older people socially. 
• The psychological well-being of older people suffering 
from loneliness can be improved by client-centred 
psychosocial group interventions. 
• New sensitive measurements of loneliness and social 
isolation are needed to measure ﬂuctuations in feelings 
of loneliness and in social isolation. 

• The experience of loneliness among older people is 
life and 
common leading to impaired quality of 
weakening their living at home. 
• With a well-planned client-centered psychosocial 
group intervention it is possible to alleviate loneliness 
and so to improve quality of life of older, home- 
dwelling people. 
• Clinet-centered psychosocial group intervention for 
lonely older people demands well-educated nurses, 
who appreciate older people. 
selected through a process involving many steps, and such a 
long procedure cannot take place in real life. The intervention 
was conducted in ideal circumstances: participants suffered 
from loneliness, they were willing to participate, and the 
group leaders were experienced professionals who were 
trained especially for this intervention. 

With a well-planned and professionally led psychosocial 
group intervention, it is possible to empower and to socially 
activate lonely, older people and to strengthen their well- 
being. By using the key elements (taking advantage of group 
dynamics, goal-oriented working, giving the participants 
power in decision-making and supporting their commitment), 
this intervention could be successfully implemented in vari- 
ous settings. 

RT and KP were responsible for the study conception and 
design. PR and KP performed the data collection. PR, RT, 
HK and KP performed the data analysis. PR, RT, HK and KP 
were responsible for the drafting of the manuscript. PR, RT, 
HK and KP made critical revisions to the paper for important 
intellectual content. HK provided statistical expertise. 

This study was carried out in the Central Union for the 
Welfare of the Aged and as a part of the Geriatric Rehabil- 
itation project. 

Research grants were received from the Finnish Slot Machine 
Association. 

Andersson L. (1984) Intervention against loneliness an a group of 
elderly women: a process evaluation. Human Relations 37, 295– 
310. 
Andersson L. (1985) Intervention against loneliness in a group of 
elderly women – an impact evaluation. Social Science Medicine 58, 
683–695. 


Arnetz B.B. & Theorell T. (1983) Psychological, sociological and 
health behaviour aspects of a long term activation programme 
for institutionalized elderly people. Social Science Medicine 17, 
449–456. 
Bisschop M.I., Kriegsman D.M., van Tilburg T.G., Penninx B.W., 
van Eijk J.T. & Deeg D.J. (2003) The influence of differing 
social ties on decline in physical functioning among older people 
with and without chronic diseases: 
the Longitudinal Ageing 
Study Amsterdam. Ageing Clinical and Experimental Research 
15, 164–173. 
Bondevik M. & Skogstad A. (1996) Loneliness among the oldest old, 
a comparison between residents living in nursing homes and resi- 
dents living in the community. International Journal of Aging & 
Human Development 43, 181–197. 
Cattan M., White M., Bond J. & Learmouth A. (2005) Preventing 
social isolation and loneliness among older people: a systematic 
review of health promotion activities. Aging Society 25, 41–67. 
Clarke M., Clarke S.J. & Jagger C. (1992) Social intervention and the 
elderly: a randomized controlled trial. American Jouranl of Epi- 
demiology 136, 1517–1523. 



Dugan E. & Kivett V.R. (1994) The importance of emotional and 
social isolation to loneliness among very old rural adults. Geron- 
tologist 34, 340–346. 
Ellaway A., Wood S. & Macintyre S. (1999) Someone to talk to? The 
role of loneliness as a factor of the frequency of GP consultations. 
British Journal of General Practice 49, 363–367. 




isolation 
amongst older people: where is the evidence? Aging Society 23, 
647–658. 


Pitkala K.H., Laakkonen M.L., Strandberg T.E. & Tilvis R.S. 
(2004a) Positive life orientation as a predictor of 10-year outcome 
in aged population. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 57, 409–414. 
Pitkala K.H., Blomqvist L., Routasalo R., Karvinen E., Oikarinen U., 
Saarenheimo M. & Mantyranta T. (2004b) Leading groups of 
older people: description and evaluation of education of profes- 
sionals. Educational Gerontology 30, 821–834. 
Prince M.J., Harwood R.H., Blizzard R.A., Thomas A. & Mann A.H. 
(1997) Social support deficits, loneliness and life events as risk 
factors for depression in old age: the Gospel Oak Project VI. 
Psychological Medicine 27, 323–332. 




Folstein M.F., Folstein S.E. & McHugh P.R. (1975) ‘‘Mini-Mental 
state’’: a practical method of grading the cognitive state of 
patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research 12, 189– 
198. 
Fratiglioni L., Paillard-Borg S. & Winblad B. (2004) An active and 
socially integrated lifestyle in late life might protect against 
dementia. Lancet Neurology 3, 343–353. 
Geller J., Janson P., McGovern E. & Valdini A. (1999) Loneliness as 
a predictor of hospital emergency department use. Journal of 
Family Practice 48, 801–804. 
Herlitz J., Wiklund I., Caidahl K., Hartford M., Haflid M., Karlsson 
B.W., Sjoland H. & Karlsson T. (1998) The feeling of loneliness 
prior to coronary artery bypass grafting might be a predictor of 
short- and long-term postoperative mortality. European Journal of 
Vascular and Endovascular Surgery 16, 120–125. 
Hughes C.P., Berg I., Danziger W.L., Coben I.A. & Martin R.L. 
(1982) A new clinical scale for the staging of dementia. British 
Journal of Psychiatry 140, 566–572. 
Huusko T., Strandberg T. & Pitka¨ la¨ K. (eds) (2006) Is it Possible to 
Measure the Quality of Life of Older People? Geriatric Rehabili- 
tation Research and Developing Project (In Finnish). Research 
Report 12. The Central Union for the Welfare of the Aged. 
Gummerus Ltd, Saarija¨ rvi. 
Jakobsson U. & Hallberg I.R. (2005) Loneliness, fear, and quality of 
life among elderly in Sweden: a gender perspective. Ageing Clinical 
and Experimental Research 17, 494–501. 
Jylha¨ M. (2004) Old age and loneliness: cross-sectional and longi- 
tudinal analyses in the Tampere Longitudinal Study on Aging. 
Canadian Journal on Aging 23, 157–168. 
Jylha¨ M. & Aro S. (1989) Social ties and survival among the elderly 
in Tampere, Finland. Internationl Journal of Emidemiolocy 18, 
158–164. 


Routasalo P., Arve S. & Lauri S. (2004) Geriatric rehabilitation 
nursing: Developing a model. International Journal of Nursing 
Practice 10, 207–215. 
Routasalo P., Savikko N., Tilvis R., Strandberg T.E. & Pitka¨ la¨ K.H. 
relationship to loneliness 
(2006) Social contacts and their 
among aged people – a population-based study. Gerontology 52, 
181–187. 
Russell D.W. (1996) UCLA Lonelines Scale (Version 3): reliability, 
validity, and factor structure. Journal of Personality Assessment 
66, 20–40. 
Savikko N. (2008) Loneliness of Older People and Elements of an 
Intervention for its Alleviation. Doctoral dissertation. Annales 
Universitatis Turkuensis, Ser D, Tom 808, Painosalama Oy, Turku. 
Savikko N., Routasalo P., Tilvis R.S., Strandberg T.E. & Pitkala K.H. 
(2005) Predictors and subjective causes of loneliness in an aged 
population. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics 41, 223–233. 
Savikko N., Routasalo P., Tilvis R., Strandberg T. & Pitka¨ la¨ K. 
(2006) Loss of parents in childhood – associations with depression, 
loneliness and attitudes towards life in older Finnish people. 
International Journal of Older People Nursing 16, 17–24. 
Stevens N. & van Tilburg T. (2000) Stimulating friendships in later 
life: a strategy for reducing loneliness among older women. Edu- 
cational Gerontology 26, 15–35. 
Tesch-Ro¨ mer C. (1997) Psychological effect of hearing aid use in 
older adults. Journal of Gerontology. Series B. Psychological Sci- 
ences and Social Sciences 52B, P127–P138. 
Tijhuis M.A., De Jong-Gierveld J., Feskens E.J. & Kromhout D. 
(1999) Changes in and factors related to loneliness in older men. 
The Zutphen Elderly Study. Age and Ageing 28, 491–495. 





McAuley E., Blissmer B., Marquez D.X., Jerome G.J., Kramer A.F. & 
Katula J. (2000) Social relations, physical activity, and well-being 
in older adults. Preventive Medicine 31, 608–617. 
Montgomery S.A. & A˚ sberg M. (1979) A new depression scale to 
be sensitive to change. British Journal of Psychiatry 134, 382– 
389. 
Penninx B.W.J.H., van Tilburg T., Kriegsman D.M.W., Deeg D.J.H., 
Boeke A.J.P. & van Eijk J.Th.M. (1997) Effects of social and 
personal resources on mortality in old age: the longitudinal ageing 
study Amsterdam. American Journal of Epidemiology 146, 510– 
519. 

Toseland R.W., Rossiter C.M. & Labreques M.S. (1989) The effec- 
tiveness of peer-led and professionally lead groups to support 
family caregivers. Gerontologist 29, 465–471. 
Van Rossum E., Frederiks C.M., Philipsen H., Portengen K., 
Wiskerke J. & Knipchild P. (1993) Effects of preventive home visits 
to elderly people. British Medical Journal 307, 27–32. 
White H., McConnell E., Clipp E., Branch L.G., Sloane R., Pieper C. 
& Box T.L. (2002) A randomized controlled trial of the psycho- 
social impact of providing internet training and access to older 
adults. Aging and Mental Health 6, 213–221. 




WHO. (2003) WHOQOL – BREF introduction, administration, 
scoring and generic version of the assessment. Field Trial Version 
December 1996. In Quality of Life Research. A Critical Intro- 
duction (Rapley M., ed.), Sage Publications, London, pp. 229–248. 
Wikstro¨ m B.A. (2002) Social interaction associated with visual art 
discussions: a controlled intervention study. Ageing and Mental 
Health 6, 82–87. 
The Journal of Advanced Nursing (JAN) is an international, peer-reviewed, scientiﬁc journal. JAN contributes to the 
advancement of evidence-based nursing, midwifery and health care by disseminating high quality research and 
scholarship of contemporary relevance and with potential to advance knowledge for practice, education, management 
or policy. JAN publishes research reviews, original research reports and methodological and theoretical papers. 



