

Effectiveness of LISTEN on loneliness, neuroimmunological 
stress response, psychosocial functioning, quality of life, and 
physical health measures of chronic illness 
Laurie A. Theekea,*, Jennifer A. Mallowa, Julia Moorea, Ann McBurneya, Stephanie Rellickb, 
and Reyna VanGilderc 
aDepartment of Adult Health, School of Nursing, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA 



Objectives—Loneliness is a biopsychosocial determinant of health and contributes to physical 
and psychological chronic illnesses, functional decline, and mortality in older adults. This paper 
presents the results of the first randomized trial of LISTEN, which is a new cognitive behavioral 
intervention for loneliness, on loneliness, neuroimmunological stress response, psychosocial 
functioning, quality of life, and measures of physical health. 
Methods—The effectiveness of LISTEN was evaluated in a sample population comprising 27 
lonely, chronically ill, older adults living in Appalachia. Participants were randomized into 
LISTEN or educational attention control groups. Outcome measures included salivary cortisol and 
DHEA, interleukin-6, interleukin-2, depressive symptoms, loneliness, perceived social support, 
functional ability, quality of life, fasting glucose, blood pressure, and body mass index. 
Results—At 12 weeks after the last intervention session, participants of the LISTEN group 
reported reduced loneliness (p = 0.03), enhanced overall social support (p = 0.05), and decreased 
systolic blood pressure (p = 0.02). The attention control group reported decreased functional 
ability (p = 0.10) and reduced quality of life (p = 0.13). 
Conclusions—LISTEN can effectively diminish loneliness and decrease the systolic blood 
pressure in community-dwelling, chronically ill, older adults. Results indicate that this population, 
if left with untreated loneliness, may experience functional impairment over a period as short as 4 
months. Further studies on LISTEN are needed with larger samples, in varied populations, and 
over longer periods of time to assess the long-term effects of diminishing loneliness in multiple 
chronic conditions. 


This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
*Corresponding author. ltheeke@hsc.wvu.edu (L.A. Theeke). 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Int J Nurs Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 25. 



The prevalence rates of loneliness have been reported to be 35% in U.S. adults aged 45 years 
and above [1], 27.9% in older adults in Jerusalem [2], 31.5% in Australian older adults, and 
up to 78% in Chinese older adults [3,4]. Researchers have consistently suggested that 
diminishing loneliness can improve overall health [5]. Loneliness is recognized as a bio- 
psychosocial determinant of health [6] in older adult populations worldwide. Loneliness is 
associated with the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis [7], 
which elicits a physiological response [8] that contributes to the dysregulation of 
inflammatory [9], neuroendocrine [10], and immune systems [11]. Through this mechanism, 
loneliness may contribute to poor control of chronic conditions, including hypertension 
[12,13] and metabolic problems, such as obesity [14]. In addition, loneliness is linked to 
multiple behavioral health problems, including anxiety [15], depression [16], substance 
abuse [1], and suicidal tendency [17]. Over half (56%) of adults in the USA with anxiety 
have reported loneliness [1]. Loneliness contributes to depression [11,18]; hence, 
diminishing loneliness can help prevent depression [16], thereby decreasing expenses in 
healthcare systems [19]. 
At present, healthcare providers do not have access to a recommended clinically effective 
treatment for loneliness. Interventions for loneliness have ranged from overemphasis on 
social reintegration [20–24] to individual cognitive therapies, such as mindfulness [25]. No 
single intervention has been determined as effective for diminishing loneliness and its 
negative health outcomes across age groups or populations. One recent meta-analysis of 
interventions suggested that effectiveness may be enhanced if interventions targeted 
common thought process errors that occur with loneliness [26], such as automatic thinking 
[27] or fears and phobias [28]. In response to this body of knowledge, we developed 
LISTEN, a novel intervention for loneliness. The initial development, feasibility, and 
acceptability of LISTEN have been published [29,30]. 
This initial study on LISTEN was conducted in West Virginia, a state located entirely in 
Appalachia. The Appalachian region is a known area of health disparity [31]. A 
disproportionate segment of the region’s population is rural [32], impoverished, lowly 
educated, and physically ill, all of which are linked to poor mental health outcomes [33]. 
Therefore, more adults in Appalachia may be suffering from loneliness [15] or untreated 
depression [34]. The rural nature of Appalachia coupled with the lack of public 
transportation may limit social contacts. In spite of the stereotypical view of Appalachians 
living rurally with close extended family, other forms of social support may be more 
important than family proximity in predicting mental health outcomes [35]. Particularly for 
women, emotional support from friends has been reported to enhance affect [36]. Knowing 
that adults living rurally may experience a chronic condition with a sense of quiet pride [37] 
makes it even more important that healthcare providers proactively assess and address 
problems such as loneliness and depression. 
Findings from preliminary qualitative studies on lonely older women living in Appalachia 
encouraged the development of LISTEN [29]. Lonely older women suffering from chronic 
illness and living in Appalachia reported that their experience of loneliness is related to 



negative emotions including fear, anger, and worry. They reported that loneliness can lead to 
loss of function or independence [38]. Conversely, these women reported positive emotions 
such as joy when the feeling of loneliness is absent. Participants of the qualitative studies on 
loneliness in Appalachia reported that staying busy and going out were important to the 
management of loneliness [38]. This paper presents the effectiveness of LISTEN, an 
intervention designed to target impaired cognitive processes associated with loneliness, on 
the psychosocial and physiological measures in a sample of lonely, chronically ill adults 
living in the communities of Appalachia. 

A psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) paradigm serves as a theoretical framework for the study 
design [39]. This paradigm enhances understanding about how the experience of a 
psychosocial stressor may lead to other physical or behavioral health problems through the 
physiological response to the stressor. The framework specifically considers how the 
perception of stress in the presence of existing coping can lead to neuroimmunological 
responses that affect functional ability, quality of life, and illness progression over time. Fig. 
1 illustrates the study variables in the model of the PNI paradigm. For the purposes of this 
study, the research team posited that by diminishing loneliness, participants would 
experience a diminished physiological response to the stressor of loneliness and then achieve 
improved health. 


The study design was a prospective, longitudinal, randomized controlled trial with two 
groups: LISTEN intervention group and attention control group. The two following aims 
were accomplished by studying a sample of lonely, rural, and chronically ill adults: (1) to 
evaluate the relative effectiveness of LISTEN for decreasing loneliness and 
neuroimmunological stress response; and (2) to evaluate the relative effectiveness of 
LISTEN in improving psychosocial functioning, quality of life, and physical health. The two 
aims presented two corresponding research questions, as follows. 1) What are the 
differences between the LISTEN group and the attention control group in morning rise in 
salivary cortisol, DHEA levels, interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-2? 2) What are the differences 
between the LISTEN group and the attention control group in terms of depression, 
loneliness, social support, functional ability, quality of life, glucose, blood pressure, and 
body mass index (BMI)? Before the study commenced, a letter of approval was obtained 
from the West Virginia University Institutional Review Board. 
The setting for enrollment in the study was the Clark Sleeth Family Medicine Center, which 
is a primary care center located in the Health Sciences Center of West Virginia University in 
North Central West Virginia. Approximately 5600 geriatric outpatients are in this clinic 
annually. The setting for the delivery of the LISTEN and attention control group sessions 
was a private room in the Health Sciences Center. This room is accessible to persons with 
disabilities and can facilitate audio and video recording. 





The study established a sampling goal of 30 participants, and the enrollment closed when 27 
older adults completed the study. This limitation was necessary because the study required 
three to five participants to hold concurrent group sessions. Therefore, the subjects for the 
study were 27 older adults (24 females) with mean age of 75 years old [(SD 7.50), age 
range: 65–89 years old]. The majority of participants lived alone (70.4%), and the remainder 
lived with either a spouse or daughter. Table 1 presents the baseline sociodemographic 
characteristics (pre-intervention Co-Factors in the PNI model) for both groups. To 
participate in the study, potential participants should meet the following inclusion criteria. 1) 
All patients should be 65 years of age or older. 2) They must have a minimum loneliness 
score of 40 on the revised 20-item UCLA Loneliness scale [40]. 3) Participants should be 
living in the community. 4) They have been diagnosed with at least one chronic illness. 5) 
Each participant must have voluntarily signed an informed consent form prior to enrollment. 
Participants were excluded on the basis of the following criteria. 1) Potential participants 
who had lost their spouse within the last 2 years were excluded to control for grief reaction. 
2) Those who had cognitive impairment with scores less than 23 on the Folstein mini-mental 
status exam did not participate. 3) Those with institutional living were excluded. 4) Those 
with significant psychiatric or developmental problems that prevented their ability to 
independently answer survey questions were also excluded. 

Participants were recruited through advertisement in a family primary care center, which 
was university based and serves as a multi-county area of rural and small urban 
communities. The study team also placed advertisements in local and regional newspapers. 
Potential participants contacted the clinic via phone to volunteer. Prior to enrollment, all 
potential participants completed a screening to assess for meeting the basic inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Participants were then scheduled for the initial enrollment meeting, in 
which they were first given the opportunity to read all informed consent forms and ask 
questions. After the participants signed consent to participate, baseline enrollment data were 
collected, and the participants were randomized into either LISTEN group or educational 
attention control group. Both groups (three to five participants at a time) met weekly for a 
total of five times (2 h each time). Reminder letters and phone calls were used for the 
weekly group sessions. After completing the fifth session, the participants answered survey 
questions by phone at 1 and 6 weeks after the last group session and attended a face-to-face 
meeting at 12 weeks post-intervention for final data collection. 

2.5.1. LISTEN: the intervention—LISTEN was developed using the Medical Research 
Council framework for complex intervention development [41]. The development process of 
LISTEN, including information about the underlying theoretical frameworks, has been 
previously published [29] along with the initial feasibility and acceptability evaluation data 
[30]. The psychophysiological links between loneliness and chronic illness made it logical to 
propose an intervention that targeted this stress mechanism by encouraging rethinking the 
experience of loneliness to enhancing meaning and facilitate moving forward. LISTEN is 



delivered sequentially and weekly, in five 2 h sessions. The content of the sessions was 
derived from the health and social science literature on loneliness, and the sessions are 
designed to be sequential, focusing first on belonging, then relationships, role in community, 
loneliness as a health challenge, and meaning of loneliness. Participants begin each session 
with writing; during weeks 1–4, the participants complete unique homework assignments 
relevant to the content for the upcoming week. 
2.5.2. Attention control group—The attention control group met weekly for 2 h time 
periods each week for a total of 5 weeks. This group received educational information about 
aging, including contents on Common Physical Changes with Aging, Eating for Health, 
Aging and Health, Stroke Prevention, and Preventive Care. The attention control group 
educational sessions were scripted; hence, the content was the same for each small group. 

The LISTEN and attention control groups met on the same days, at the same time, and in 
similar location and room settings; both groups were given the same break with the same 
refreshments. The LISTEN and attention control groups had separate trained interventionists 
to prevent contamination of the intervention. Prior to the intervention study, all team 
members were trained to understand the study protocol, which was reviewed prior to 
enrollment of each cohort of patients. All intervention and control group sessions were audio 
and video recorded to assess for fidelity to LISTEN and to assess for potential contamination 
in the attention control group. Recordings were reviewed by the study team after each 
session to monitor the fidelity to LISTEN. 

2.7.1. Neuroimmunological stress—Salivary cortisol, DHEA, IL-6, and IL-2 levels 
were measured at enrollment and at 12 weeks after the final intervention session as 
indicators of physiological stress response, inflammation, and immunity. The Adrenocortex 
Stress Profile Kit was used as a measure of salivary cortisol. Saliva was collected from the 
participants at four different time points in a 24 h period, and the study team then 
transported the saliva samples to the University Medical Laboratories, where the samples 
were sent out for analysis to Genova Diagnostics [42]. The Adrenocortex Stress Profile 
evaluates cortisol and DHEA levels, both of which are linked to anti-inflammatory response 
and stress resistance. IL-6 and IL-2 were determined from the blood samples processed at 
the University Medical Laboratories [43]. 
2.7.2. Psychosocial functioning—Depression was measured using the five-item 
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) [44]. The current scale was reported as comparable to 
prior versions of GDS in both reliability and validity in populations of older adults. 
Loneliness was measured using the revised UCLA Loneliness Scale [40]. The scale consists 
of 20 items with several items reverse scored, and the possible total scores range from 20 to 
80. This scale has been reported as reliable and valid in varied populations [45]. Loneliness 
was assessed at enrollment and at 1, 6, and 12 weeks after the last intervention session. 
Social support was measured using the MOS Social Support Scale. This scale includes 
subscales of tangible support, emotional support, and affective support and has been widely 



used to assess social support in varied populations [46]. Functional ability was assessed 
using the Katz ADL and IADL instruments [47]. The Katz Activities of Daily Living 
instruments have been used widely in populations of older adults to assess basic and 
instrumental functional ability. All measures of psychosocial functioning were collected at 
enrollment and at 12 weeks after the last intervention session. 
2.7.3. Quality of life—The quality of life was measured using a visual analog scale 
ranging from 0 to 10. This scale has been reported as highly correlating with other measures 
of quality of life [48]. The quality of life was assessed at enrollment and at 1, 6, and 12 
weeks after the last intervention session. 
2.7.4. Physical health measures—Blood pressure was measured by a trained registered 
nurse using an appropriately calibrated sphygmomanometer. Fasting glucose was measured 
after the participants fasted for at least 8 h. The fasting glucose level was measured by a 
trained registered nurse using an appropriately calibrated glucometer. BMI was calculated 
using the measures of height and weight taken in the family medicine center by using a 
calibrated scale and height measure. Physical measures were collected at enrollment and at 
12 weeks after the last intervention session. 

Data were analyzed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences 23.0. Methods for 
analysis included a comprehensive descriptive analysis of all study variables, followed by 
bivariate analysis for significant relationships among the study variables. Mean comparisons 
were conducted using a repeated-measures analysis of variance for the main study outcome 
variables while controlling for baseline depressive symptoms. The level of statistical 
significance was set at p < 0.05. Loneliness and quality of life were the only two variables 
collected at four time points. For these two variables, Mauchly’s test was performed to 
assess the effect size within subjects. 

The LISTEN and attention control groups did not differ significantly on any of the baseline 
demographic characteristics (Table 1). Table 2 provides the mean comparisons between 
baseline measures and those at 12 weeks after the last intervention session for outcome 
variables measured alone at these time points. 

Morning rise in salivary cortisol changed over the course of the study. Both LISTEN and 
control group means decreased between enrollment and 12 weeks post-intervention. DHEA, 
IL-6, and IL-2 were not significant, but both the LISTEN and control groups decreased in 
morning rise in cortisol and DHEA over the course of the study. In addition, mean levels of 
IL-6 increased for both groups. The groups were not equal at baseline on IL-6. This finding 
may be attributed to the different experiences of chronic illnesses, including rheumatoid 
arthritis, and this result may have skewed the Il-6 data. However, even when controlling for 
the chronic illness diagnoses, the IL-6 values were not significantly different from baseline 



to 12 weeks post-intervention. The mean levels of IL-2 decreased for the LISTEN group and 
increased for the attention control group, but the difference was not significant. 

Twelve weeks after the last intervention session, the LISTEN group presented reduced 
depressive symptoms, and this finding was clinically relevant but not statistically significant. 
At completion of the study, the LISTEN group demonstrated significantly less loneliness (p 
= 0.018) than that of the attention control group. Loneliness and quality of life were assessed 
at four time points, and the mean comparisons for these variables are presented in Table 3. 
When loneliness was compared at all four time points for within-subjects effect and while 
controlling for baseline depressive symptoms, Mauchly’s W was 0.725 (p = 0.198). 
Assuming sphericity, the Epsilonb Greenhouse–Geisser value was 0.859, and the four means 
were not equal [F (3, 72) = 3.060, p = 0.034]. Fig. 2 illustrates the mean loneliness scores at 
each time point; as shown in the figure, the loneliness in the LISTEN group continued to 
decline, whereas the attention control group achieved mean loneliness scores that trended 
upward between 6 and 12 weeks after the last session. 
The mean quality-of-life scores are also presented in Table 3. As shown in the table, the 
quality of life increased slightly for the LISTEN group and decreased slightly for the 
attention control group, but the changes were not significant. The total social support scores 
changed with mean scores for the LISTEN group increasing significantly (p = 0.05). The 
subscale with the greatest change was the tangible support subscale, in which the control 
group reported less support, whereas the LISTEN group reported more support (p = 0.01). 
The LISTEN group reported maintenance of basic functional ability, whereas the attention 
control group reported a slight decline in function. 

The LISTEN group demonstrated clinically relevant changes in fasting glucose, but these 
changes were not statistically significant. The mean fasting glucose levels increased in both 
groups at baseline. The LISTEN group achieved <1 mg/dl change in mean fasting glucose, 
whereas the control group, who received lectures on healthy diet, yielded a mean increase of 
10.1 mg/dl in mean fasting glucose. The changes in systolic blood pressure were statistically 
significant (p = 0.018) with mean systolic blood pressures in the LISTEN group dropping 
below 130, which is a clinically relevant finding in an older adult sample. The mean 
diastolic blood pressure and BMI did not differ significantly between the groups after 
intervention. 

This study employed a randomized controlled trial design to identify LISTEN as a potential 
intervention for diminishing loneliness and the poor health outcomes associated with 
loneliness in chronically ill, lonely, older adults. Prior reviews of interventions and one 
meta-analysis of interventions [26] suggested that the most successful intervention for 
loneliness would be one that specifically targets the cognitive mis-perceptions or thinking 
errors that occur during loneliness. 



This study is the first to employ LISTEN as a potential method to reduce feelings of 
loneliness. LISTEN is the first group intervention designed to bring lonely people together 
to offer their narrative of loneliness in a therapeutic environment and in a sequenced way, 
aiming to facilitate cognitive restructuring. The structure of this intervention facilitates a 
change in cognitive perspective; hence, one can view loneliness as an experience that can be 
challenged with individualized actions. 
The findings of this study will provide additional information about the relationship between 
loneliness and depressive symptoms. Primarily, participants of the LISTEN group reported 
diminished depressive symptoms; this result is significant, given the links between 
depression and negative health outcomes, which recently included sensory impairments and 
suicide [49,50]. The findings emphasize that untreated loneliness can lead to an increase in 
depressive symptoms in a relatively short period of time. Previous literature reported that 
loneliness and depression are separate unique constructs [51]; loneliness is predictive of 
depression [16], and this relationship is not reciprocal. Our findings indicating that untreated 
lonely persons may report increased depressive symptoms over a period of only 4 months 
emphasize the need for proactive assessment and treatment of loneliness. Considering that 
depression is negatively associated with poor chronic illness outcomes [15], depression 
should be prevented if possible. Research has posited that treating loneliness prior to the 
development of depressive symptoms can significantly reduce such symptoms, thereby 
greatly saving expenses on the healthcare system [52]. 
An extensive literature on loneliness and social support has detailed how people who 
perceive social support to be low may experience loneliness. Particularly in older adult 
populations worldwide, lonely older adults have reported social isolation [53], lack of 
meaningful connection [54], or diminished social networks [55]. Our findings indicating that 
participants of LISTEN perceived overall enhanced social support were unexpected because 
participating in LISTEN did not provide any enhancement of tangible support. The structure 
of LISTEN may have contributed to this change because participants of LISTEN reported 
that they were beginning to take actions against loneliness by seeking tangible means of 
support, joining exercise courses, and joining community organizations. These actions 
occurred after gaining the opportunity to cognitively process their experience of loneliness. 
LISTEN integrates the key concepts from narrative therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy 
to offer the participants the opportunity to share a narrative of their personal experience of 
loneliness. Narrative therapy has been used to diminish depressive symptoms, and recent 
studies have concluded that both narrative therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy can 
result in diminished depressive symptoms [56]. Being able to share one’s experience of 
loneliness and live the vicarious experience of another who is lonely may have changed the 
perception of social support [57] for participants of the LISTEN group. 
Two national data analyses have identified loneliness as a predictive factor of functional 
decline and mortality in older adult samples [58,59]. The current literature links loneliness to 
the decline of both physical and cognitive functions [60]. Considering that the LISTEN 
group maintained physical functional ability, the diminishing loneliness may result in 
behavioral changes that can facilitate maintenance of function. Given that the untreated 



group diminished slightly in both basic and instrumental activities of daily living, the 
importance of taking on loneliness as a complex health phenomenon is highlighted. 
Longitudinal studies on LISTEN are needed to further determine whether diminishing 
loneliness in chronically ill, lonely, older adults can result in any regained functional ability. 
Lonely older adults may lose function because of their self-isolating behavior or lack of 
activity. Therefore, with the right support or intervention, intrinsic motivation can be altered 
and may lead to increased activity. 
The findings related to salivary cortisol, DHEA, IL-6, and IL-2 are exploratory and have 
created more questions. The diminished rise in salivary cortisol in the control group may 
indicate underlying chronic stress response and flattening of the cortisol rhythm [8]. Given 
that the present study had the inclusion criterion of a minimum UCLA loneliness score of 
40, all the study participants were at least moderately lonely and were likely to demonstrate 
a slightly flattened cortisol rhythm at study enrollment. Although the loneliness of the 
LISTEN participants decreased significantly, the mean scores at 12 weeks were still not 
indicative of the overall absence of loneliness. In addition, the participants presented 
multiple chronic conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, which may have skewed the IL6 
results [61]. Recent studies indicate that lonely older adults showed increased cytokine 
production compared with non-lonely persons; this finding suggests a proinflammatory 
response [62]. 
The findings related to physical health measures are consistent with the literature indicating 
that loneliness is linked to hypertension [63] through the physiological stress response [9]. 
Changes in systolic blood pressure were clinically significant because the mean systolic 
blood pressure of the LISTEN group decreased within the guidelines for management of 
hypertension for older adults [64]. This finding is very important because patients seen 
clinically and are above this goal are frequently prescribed with higher doses of new 
antihypertensive medication, which can lead to other adverse reactions. Previous studies 
indicated that loneliness can increase blood pressure over long periods of time [65], and this 
effect is very problematic given the relationship between high blood pressure, cardiovascular 
illness, and stroke. Thus, diminishing the physiological stress response to loneliness can 
prevent hypertension. One of the potential downstream effects is the prevention of stroke or 
secondary stroke. Our preliminary studies on loneliness of ischemic stroke survivors in 
Appalachia indicate that loneliness is a prevalent problem for stroke survivors, and this 
feeling is linked to multiple domains in this population [66]. 

The main limitation of this study is the relatively small homogeneous sample. The majority 
of female sample limits true generalizability of the findings to older men in Appalachia. The 
participants were all community dwelling; hence, the findings cannot be generalized to older 
adults living in long-term care or other assisted living settings. Moreover, the participants 
were not assessed for being native to Appalachia. Given that Appalachian women identify 
strongly with their kin, this factor is also a limitation. Assessing for birthplace in future 
studies will be important; consequently, logical inferences can be made regarding loneliness 
and Appalachian culture. 




Future steps will be multifaceted and will comprehensively evaluate the potential use of 
LISTEN as a therapeutic strategy for loneliness in varied populations. The study team is 
currently evaluating the feasibility and acceptability of LISTEN as a therapy for loneliness 
in survivors of ischemic stroke (funded by WVCTSI NIGM, U54GM104942). Additional 
studies on the significance of the changes in IL-6 and IL-2 are needed to further determine 
how the treatment of loneliness can affect inflammatory or immune changes that may in turn 
influence chronic conditions. The planned subsequent steps include seeking funding to 
conduct large-scale longitudinal trials of LISTEN to appropriately assess the long-term 
health and health system benefits of diminishing loneliness. Future trials are being designed 
to report on the resources needed to deliver LISTEN, as well as the potential scalability, 
replicability, and costs of such delivery. In summary, LISTEN can effectively diminish 
loneliness and reduce systolic blood pressure, with increased self-reported social support 
compared with the attention control group. The importance of sharing experiences of 
loneliness and gaining the opportunity to find out how others are coping with loneliness was 
described by the participants as the most significant part of their participation in LISTEN. 
Study participants noted that being open to listening to how others coped with loneliness led 
to the adoption of new behavior after completing the study. 





3. Wang G, Zhang X, Wang K, Li Y, Shen Q, Ge X, et al. Loneliness among the rural older people in 
Anhui, China: prevalence and associated factors. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011; 26(11):1162–8. 
[PubMed: 21274905] 




6. Currie, C. Social determinants of health and well-being among young people: Health Behaviour in 
School-Aged Children (HBSC) study: international report from 2009/2010 survey. Copenhagen: 
World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2012. 
7. Hawkley LC, Cole SW, Capitanio JP, Norman GJ, Cacioppo JT. Effects of social isolation on 
glucocorticoid regulation in social mammals. Horm Behav. 2012; 62(3):314–23. [PubMed: 
22663934] 


9. Steptoe A, Owen N, Kunz-Ebrecht SR, Brydon L. Loneliness and neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, 
and inflammatory stress responses in middle-aged men and women. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2004; 29(5):593–611. [PubMed: 15041083] 

inflammatory and neuroendocrine responses in older men and women. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2012; 37(11):1801–9. [PubMed: 22503139] 

depression, and fatigue: loneliness as a longitudinal risk factor. Health Psychol. 2014; 33(9):948– 
57. [PubMed: 23957903] 








loneliness to disordered eating among college students. Eat Weight Disord. 2009; 14(2–3):E144–7. 
[PubMed: 19934629] 


16. Cacioppo JT, Hughes ME, Waite LJ, Hawkley LC, Thisted RA. Loneliness as a specific risk factor 
for depressive symptoms: cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses. Psychol Aging. 2006; 21(1): 
140–51. [PubMed: 16594799] 


18. Theeke LA, Goins RT, Moore J, Campbell H. Loneliness, depression, social support, and quality of 
life in older chronically ill Appalachians. J Psychol. 2012; 146(1–2):155–71. [PubMed: 22303618] 
19. Berto P, D’Ilario D, Ruffo P, Virgilio RD, Rizzo F. Depression: cost-of-illness studies in the 
international literature, a review. J Ment Health Policy Econ. 2000; 3(1):3–10. [PubMed: 
11967432] 






23. Martina CM, Stevens NL. Breaking the cycle of loneliness? Psychological effects of a friendship 
enrichment program for older women. Aging Ment Health. 2006; 10(5):467–75. [PubMed: 
16938682] 


25. Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, Ma J, et al. Mindfulness-based 
stress reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: 
a small randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2012; 26(7):1095–101. [PubMed: 
22820409] 




28. Meltzer H, Bebbington P, Dennis MS, Jenkins R, McManus S, Brugha TS. Feelings of loneliness 
among adults with mental disorder. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2012; 48(1):5–13. 
[PubMed: 22570258] 





Appalachian and non- Appalachian counties in Virginia. J Community Health Nurs. 2011; 36(3): 
348–56. 


33. Halverson, JA., Ma, L., Harner, EJ. An analysis of disparities in health status and access to care in 
the appalachian region. Washington, DC: Appalachian Regional Commission; 2004. www.prb.org/ 
pdf04/householdsfamiliesappalachi.pdf [accessed 02.08.16] 



34. Friedman B, Conwell Y, Delavan RL. Correlates of late-life major depression: a comparison of 
urban and rural primary care patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007; 15(1):28–41. [PubMed: 
17194813] 







loneliness and chronic conditions in Appalachia. Rural Ment Health. 2015; 39(2):61–72. [PubMed: 
26594267] 
39. McCain NL, Gray DP, Walter JM, Robins J. Implementing a comprehensive approach to the study 
of health dynamics using the Psychoneuroimmunology paradigm. ANS Adv Nurs Sci. 2005; 
28(4):320–32. [PubMed: 16292018] 



complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. Int J Nurs Stud. 2013; 50(5): 
587–92. [PubMed: 23159157] 




44. Rinaldi P, Mecocci P, Benedetti C, Ercolani S, Bregnocchi M, Menculini G, et al. Validation of the 
five-item geriatric depression scale in elderly subjects in three different settings. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2003; 51(5):694–8. [PubMed: 12752847] 






48. de Boer AGE, van Lanschot JJB, Stalmeier PFM, van Sandick JW, Hulscher BF, de Haes JCJ, et al. 
Is the single-item visual analogue scale as valid, reliable and responsive as multi-item scales in 
measuring quality of life. Qual Life Res. 2004; 13(2):311–20. [PubMed: 15085903] 

Olfactory dysfunction in older adults is associated with feelings of depression and loneliness. 
Chem Senses. 2016; 41(4):293–9. [PubMed: 26809485] 



lagged analyses of loneliness and depressive symptomatology in the Chicago health, aging, and 
social relations study. Psychol Aging. 2010; 25(2):453–63. [PubMed: 20545429] 
52. VanderWeele TJ, Hawkley LC, Thisted RA, Cacioppo JT. A marginal structural model analysis for 
loneliness: implications for intervention trials and clinical practice. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2011; 
79(2):225–35. [PubMed: 21443322] 

depression, and subjective well-being of older adults: a randomized trial among older migrants in 
Japan. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2012; 55(3):539–47. [PubMed: 22564362] 







56. Lopes RT, Goncalves MM, Machado PP, Sinai D, Bento T, Salgado J. Narrative therapy vs. 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for moderate depression: empirical evidence from a controlled 
clinical trial. Psychother Res. 2014; 24(6):662–74. [PubMed: 24479576] 


58. Luo Y, Hawkley LC, Waite LJ, Cacioppo JT. Loneliness, health, and mortality in old age: a 
national longitudinal study. Soc Sci Med. 2012; 74(6):907–14. [PubMed: 22326307] 

functional decline and death. Arch Intern Med. 2012; 172(14):1078–83. [PubMed: 22710744] 
60. Donovan, NJ., Wu, Q., Rentz, DM., Sperling, RA., Marshall, GA., Glymour, MM. Loneliness, 
depression and cognitive function in older U.S. adults. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2016. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1002/gps.4495 
61. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Preacher KJ, MacCallum RC, Atkinson C, Malarkey WB, Glaser R. Chronic 
stress and age-related increases in the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6. PNAS. 2003; 100(15): 
9090–5. [PubMed: 12840146] 
62. Jaremka LM, Fagundes CP, Peng J, Bennett JM, Glaser R, Malarkey WB, et al. Loneliness 
promotes inflammation during acute stress. Psychol Sci. 2013; 24(7):1089–97. [PubMed: 
23630220] 


64. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, et al. 2014 
Evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report from the 
panel members appointed to the eighth joint national committee (jnc 8). JAMA. 2014; 311(5):507– 
20. [PubMed: 24352797] 
65. Hawkley LC, Thisted RA, Masi CM, Cacioppo JT. Loneliness predicts increased blood pressure: 5- 
year cross-lagged analyses in middle-aged and older adults. Psychol Aging. 2010; 25(1):132–41. 
[PubMed: 20230134] 





Fig. 1. 
Study variables illustrated in the psychoneuroimmunology paradigm. 



Fig. 2. 
Changes in mean loneliness scores from baseline to 12 weeks post intervention. 










 = 0.9, p = 0.93 
t 















































 = 0.47, p = 0.64 
t 























 = −0.13, p = 0.90 
t 
 = −0.01, p = 0.99 
t 
 = −0.47, p = 0.64 
t 
 = 1.53, p = 0.14 
t 


The t and chi-square symbols were italicized to indicate the statistical test and the N was italicized as it is an abbreviation for sample size of each 
group. 





















