


Effectiveness of telemonitoring integrated into existing 
clinical services on hospital admission for exacerbation 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: researcher 
blind, multicentre, randomised controlled trial 



Hilary Pinnock reader 1 
manager 3 
medical statistics 5 
, William MacNee professor of respiratory and environmental medicine 8 
economics 7 
professor of primary care research and development and directorHarkness fellow in healthcare 
policy and practice 1 9 
McKinstry professor of primary care ehealth 3 








1Allergy and Respiratory Research Group, Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK; 2School of 
Nursing, Midwifery and Social Care, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK; 3eHealth Research Group, Centre for Population Health Sciences, 
Edinburgh, UK; 4Edinburgh Clinical Trials Unit, University of Edinburgh, UK; 5Centre for Population Health Sciences, Edinburgh, UK; 6Health Services 
Research Unit, University of Edinburgh, UK; 7Health Economics Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; 8Centre for Inflammation 
Research, University of Edinburgh, UK; 9Division of General Internal Medicine and Primary Care, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA 

Objective To test the effectiveness of telemonitoring integrated into 
existing clinical services such that intervention and control groups have 
access to the same clinical care. 


Participants Adults with at least one admission for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) in the year before randomisation. We 
excluded people who had other significant lung disease, who were unable 
to provide informed consent or complete the study, or who had other 
significant social or clinical problems. 
Interventions Participants were recruited between 21 May 2009 and 
28 March 2011, and centrally randomised to receive telemonitoring or 
conventional self monitoring. Using a touch screen, telemonitoring 
participants recorded a daily questionnaire about symptoms and 
treatment use, and monitored oxygen saturation using linked instruments. 
Algorithms, based on the symptom score, generated alerts if readings 
were omitted or breached thresholds. Both groups received similar care 
from existing clinical services. 
Main outcome measures The primary outcome was time to hospital 
admission due to COPD exacerbation up to one year after randomisation. 
Other outcomes included number and duration of admissions, and 
validated questionnaire assessments of health related quality of life 
(using St George’s respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ)), anxiety or 
depression (or both), self efficacy, knowledge, and adherence to 
treatment. Analysis was intention to treat. 
Results Of 256 patients completing the study, 128 patients were 
randomised to telemonitoring and 128 to usual care; baseline 
characteristics of each group were similar. The number of days to 
admission did not differ significantly between groups (adjusted hazard 
ratio 0.98, 95% confidence interval 0.66 to 1.44). Over one year, the 
mean number of COPD admissions was similar in both groups 
(telemonitoring 1.2 admissions per person (standard deviation 1.9) v 
control 1.1 (1.6); P=0.59). Mean duration of COPD admissions over one 
year was also similar between groups (9.5 days per person (standard 
deviation 19.1) v 8.8 days (15.9); P=0.88). The intervention had no 
significant effect on SGRQ scores between groups (68.2 (standard 
deviation 16.3) v 67.3 (17.3); adjusted mean difference 1.39 (95% 
confidence interval −1.57 to 4.35)), or on other questionnaire outcomes. 









Conclusions In participants with a history of admission for exacerbations 
of COPD, telemonitoring was not effective in postponing admissions 
and did not improve quality of life. The positive effect of telemonitoring 
seen in previous trials could be due to enhancement of the underpinning 
clinical service rather than the telemonitoring communication. 

Funding: The trial was funded by an NHS applied research programme 
grant from the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish government 
(ARPG/07/03). The funder had no role in study design and the collection, 
analysis, and interpretation of data and the writing of the article and the 
decision to submit it for publication. NHS Lothian supported the 
telemonitoring service and the clinical services. 

Potentially affecting one in four adults by the age of 80 years,1 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is already a 
leading cause of death and disability in high, middle, and low 
income countries.2 3 Telemonitoring has attracted interest as a 
potential solution to the global challenge of providing care for 
ageing populations living with long term conditions such as 
COPD,4 leading to its enthusiastic promotion by policy makers.5 6 
The recent UK Whole Systems Demonstrator (WSD) evaluation 
analysed a cohort of patients with conditions including COPD, 
diabetes, and heart failure.7 The study’s findings lend some 
support to the assertion that a service redesign that included 
telemonitoring can reduce admissions and mortality in people 
with long term conditions, although not cost effectively.8 
Despite calls for robust effectiveness trials of telemonitoring in 
COPD,9 five systematic reviews have reported inconclusive 
results.10-14 Patients’ attitudes and receptiveness towards this 
approach are “promising,”13 but the evidence is insufficient to 
draw firm conclusions about clinical effectiveness10 12 13 or cost 
effectiveness.13 The heterogeneity of interventions that use 
telemonitoring contributes to the difficulty in interpreting 
outcomes—ranging from “simple” telephone follow-up to daily 
telemonitoring of physiological or symptom scores or to more 
complex telemonitoring interventions with greatly enhanced 
clinical support.10 14 This heterogeneity has led to calls for further 
research to clarify the specific role of telemonitoring (as opposed 
to the additional clinical services created to support it) in 
managing people with COPD.10 
To inform the ongoing debate, we designed a study in which 
telemonitoring was integrated into existing clinical services, 
such that monitoring was provided by clinical teams who already 
had (or were about to assume) clinical responsibility for the 
patients. Both intervention and control groups had access to the 
same clinical care: the only difference between the groups was 
the use of telemonitoring.15 

We conducted a 12 month, researcher blinded, randomised 
controlled trial in primary care in the United Kingdom, which 
recruited participants between 21 May 2009 and 28 March 2011. 
A detailed protocol has been published.15 We did not make any 
substantive changes to the trial procedures, but after pilot work,16 
we made some minor procedural changes to enhance recruitment 
and to streamline the collection of data from participants’ 
healthcare records. A detailed statistical analysis plan was 
submitted to the trial sponsor before completion of data 
collection. 

We recruited adults registered with Lothian general practices 
who had been admitted to hospital with an exacerbation of 
COPD in the previous year and who were thus at risk of future 
admissions.17 Our eligibility criteria were as inclusive as 
possible, including patients of all ages and with a range of 
comorbidities.18 Thus, we only excluded people with other 
significant lung disease; who were unable to provide informed 
consent, use the technology, or complete the questionnaires; or, 
on the advice of their general practitioner (GP), for other 
significant social or clinical problems. 

We used three strategies to identify potentially eligible 
participants. Community respiratory and nursing teams screened 
their caseloads. Respiratory consultants identified and contacted 
potentially eligible patents from hospital admission data from 
the Information Services Division (www.isdscotland.org/). 
Finally, supported by the Scottish Primary Care Research 
Network, 96 primary care practices searched for patients in their 
databases. With GP agreement, the responsible clinician sent 
trial information to all eligible patients inviting them to express 
interest in participating in the trial. 
Potentially interested participants were invited, with one 
reminder, to a baseline assessment with a research nurse in their 
home at least six weeks after the most recent exacerbation 
(whether an admission or managed at home). The research nurse 
provided further information about the trial and obtained 
consent. Diagnosis of COPD was confirmed by the presence of 
chronic airflow limitation on spirometry normally performed 
at the baseline assessment by the research nurse trained in 
spirometry. COPD was confirmed if the post-bronchodilator 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) divided by the 
forced vital capacity was less than 0.7.19 Recordings undertaken 
by a specialist respiratory service within the previous three 
months were accepted if spirometry at the baseline assessment 
was not possible or declined. All consenting participants meeting 
the eligibility criteria were enrolled into the trial. 

The primary aim of the intervention was to reduce the frequency 
of admissions. Therefore, our primary outcome measure was 
the time to first hospital admission with a primary diagnosis of 
an exacerbation of COPD up to one calendar year after 
randomisation. We defined an exacerbation as a sustained 
worsening of the participant’s symptoms from their usual stable 
state that was beyond normal day-to-day variations, was acute 
in onset, and necessitated a change in treatment.20 An 
exacerbation was considered the “primary diagnosis” if the 
presenting symptoms were consistent with and the participant 
was treated for an acute exacerbation of COPD, and if no other 
disease was treated as a priority. 

Full details of the secondary outcome measures are in the 
published protocol.15 Briefly, we measured the difference of the 
items listed in the box at one year after randomisation. 

We undertook a baseline assessment comprising current smoking 
status, UK Medical Research Council dyspnoea score,26 history 
of COPD, presence of comorbidity, and baseline questionnaires. 






Existing clinical care varied in intensity and organisation 
throughout the four regions of Lothian. Therefore, consenting 
participants were stratified by the clinical service providing 
their existing COPD care (see below for clinical care 
arrangements) and centrally randomised to either control or 
intervention with a 1:1 allocation using randomised blocks of 
two or four. This process was managed by the telephone 
randomisation service of the Edinburgh Clinical Trials Unit, 
ensuring concealment until the treatment was assigned. The 
research nurse phoned the randomisation service, informed the 
participant of the allocation, and referred intervention 
participants for installation of the telemonitoring equipment. 
The research nurse responsible for follow-up assessments was 
different to the nurse who performed randomisation, and data 
entry was undertaken by trial administrators blinded to 
allocation. All primary outcome assessors were blind to the 
allocation. 

Figure 1⇓ illustrates the model of telemonitoring. The 
telemonitoring equipment and secure broadband link was 
installed in the homes of intervention participants. The clinical 
team responsible for their care then visited the participant at 
home to explain how to use the technology and provide self 
management education. Participants had access to technological 
advice and support throughout the trial. 
Using the touch screen telemonitoring equipment, the participant 
recorded and transmitted a daily questionnaire about symptoms 
and use of treatment (web appendix 1), and monitored oxygen 
saturation using linked validated instruments. The symptom 
score was based on validated diary cards,28 and the patient was 
asked to assess if their dyspnoea, sputum purulence and volume, 
cough, wheeze had increased or if they had developed an upper 
respiratory tract infection or had a fever. The responses were 
weighted as described in the validation studies: positive answers 
to cardinal symptoms of an exacerbation of COPD scored 2, 
the remaining questions scored 1.28 
This information was sent by a secure internet connection to a 
password protected server at the UK’s health service, which 
was accessible to the supporting clinical team. The supporting 
clinical team (a specialist respiratory team in Edinburgh, a nurse 
specialist in long term conditions in Midlothian, or a trained 
call handler working with general practices for patients living 
in East or West Lothian) monitored the daily online data. 
Algorithms, based on the symptom score, alerted the clinical 
monitoring team if daily readings had not been submitted or if 
a score of 4 or 5 had been recorded (web appendix 2).15 
The action taken was the responsibility of the monitoring 
clinician who normally knew the patient and was able to 
interpret the monitoring data in the light of the patient’s history.29 
Typically, this involved contacting the patient by telephone 
(although the system could support a video link) and undertaking 
a further clinical assessment to enable a decision about further 
management (for example, commencing rescue treatment, a 
home visit, immediate admission, or reviewing the following 
day). Although a video link was available, poor reception meant 
that it was only used on two occasions. Pulse oximetry data 
were available to inform the clinical assessment, and clinicians 
were able to define an “oxygen saturation” alert on an individual 
patient basis. 

To ensure that our trial specifically tested the effect of the 
telemonitoring technology, intervention and control groups were 
provided with the same clinical care (including self management 
advice) according to the region in which they lived (see below). 
The only difference between the intervention and control groups 
was the provision of the telemonitoring service. 

Clinical care in both groups was in accordance with the Lothian 
protocols, which were based on national and international 
guideline recommendations.19 20 Education on self management 
of exacerbations was provided for all participants, reinforced 
by a copy of the British Lung Foundation’s booklet about living 
with COPD,30 which includes a written management plan, and 
an emergency supply of antibiotics and steroids were made 
available. 
Different service models operated in the four regions of Lothian. 
A dedicated respiratory physiotherapy service was available 
seven days a week for participants in the city of Edinburgh. 





Number and duration of hospital admissions with an exacerbation of COPD; number and duration of admissions in which COPD was a 
factor (for example, listed as a significant comorbidity, or as an overnight admission for minor surgery that might otherwise have been 
a day case) 


Number of exacerbations self reported by participants on quarterly questionnaires. This included all exacerbations treated with steroids 
or antibiotics, whether commenced by the patient, primary care, or secondary care including during an admission. 
Questionnaire assessment of health related quality of life, anxiety and depression, participant knowledge, and self efficacy 
and adherence with treatment 
St George’s respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ)21 (both mean difference and proportion of participants with scores improving by the 
minimum clinically important difference (defined as four units)) 









Nurse specialists in long term conditions provided a weekday 
service for participants in the mixed urban and rural population 
of Midlothian. In East and West Lothian, care was provided by 
the participants’ registered GP: telemonitoring data were 
monitored by a trained administrative assistant who referred 
participants to their GP according to the algorithm used in our 
pilot study (web appendix 2).16 Randomisation was stratified 
by these different services to allow for the possibility that 
outcomes might not be comparable in the different areas. 

Data on admissions were extracted from the hospital records at 
the end of the trial. The number of admissions identified was 
cross referenced with the admissions reported by the patients 
to ensure that we captured events occurring away from the 
patients’ usual hospital. The cause of the admission (and thus 
whether the event counted as a primary outcome) was assessed 
independently from the hospital discharge summary by HP and 
BM with disagreements resolved by discussion (with WM 
arbitrating, if necessary). Questionnaires were administered by 
a research nurse at a home visit arranged within two weeks of 
the calendar year during which the participant was in the trial. 
Healthcare resource use was collected by questionnaire posted 
to the participants three, six, and nine months (one reminder) 
and by the research nurse at baseline and the 12 month 
assessment. Healthcare resource use included consultations with 
GPs and nurses, respiratory and nursing teams, out of hours 
services, emergency services, telephone calls to the NHS 24 
health information and self care advice service, and courses of 
oral steroids and antibiotics. The respiratory physiotherapy 
service in Edinburgh and the nurses in Midlothian maintained 
detailed timesheets of all patient contacts. All data were entered 
manually onto the trial database, with 10% checked for accuracy 
by an external assessor. 

We estimated that 125 participants in each arm would allow us 
to detect a difference in the primary outcome of time to 
admission from a median of 200 days in the control group to 
300 days in the intervention group, with 80% power, using a 
significance level of 5% (log rank test). This estimate was based 
on data from the largest study of telemonitoring available at the 
time (n=155), which showed an increase in the time to admission 
from a median of about 200 days to 400 days.31 Because 
effectiveness in that trial varied between centres, we opted for 
a conservative estimate of effect size. To allow for 10% 
withdrawal from follow-up and 7% of deaths occurring before 
admission to hospital with COPD, we increased our target 
recruitment to 150 per arm. We monitored withdrawals and 
deaths before admission with an exacerbation of COPD, which 
proved considerably lower than our estimates, enabling us to 
stop recruitment at 128 participants in each group. 

All participants who were randomised were followed up and 
included in the analysis in their allocated treatment groups 
regardless of the treatment actually received (intention to treat 
analysis). Survival data were presented using Kaplan-Meier 
curves,32 analysed using Cox proportional hazards models33 
adjusting for potentially important confounders. These 
confounders were service (stratification variable), age, sex, 
severity (post-bronchodilator FEV1% predicted), current 
smoking status, presence of comorbidity, SGRQ score, HADS 
score, social class (based on postcode and the Scottish Index of 
Multiple Deprivation), and number of previous admissions. 
Binary outcomes were analysed using logistic regression and 
continuous outcomes were analysed using generalised linear 
models. However, for the majority of the analyses on number 
and duration of hospital admissions, a Poisson distribution 
function was used owing to the data being heavily skewed, 
adjusting for the stratification variable and potential 
confounders. Unadjusted analyses were also performed. Where 
appropriate, adjustments were made for baseline measurements 
using analysis of covariance. 
Because the primary outcome and majority of the secondary 
outcomes were analysed using survival analysis, any missing 
data were censored at the point when the data became missing. 
Participants who died without having had an admission with a 
primary diagnosis of COPD were censored in the final analysis. 
For other analyses, participants with missing data were omitted 
as necessary. 

For the primary outcome, planned subgroup analyses were 
performed based on age, sex severity, presence of any 
comorbidity, and SGRQ and HAD scores, because these could 
be hypothesised to affect the impact of the intervention.34 
Subgroup analyses were performed by adding the interaction 
between these factors and treatment into the survival analysis 
model and by observing whether the change in the model log 
likelihood was statistically significant. All analyses were agreed 
a priori. We did not plan or undertake any interim analysis. 
Results 
Recruitment 
Figure 2⇓ details the flow of participants through the trial. Of 
422 patients identified by clinical services, the GP refused 
permission to approach three patients for significant clinical or 
social reasons, leaving 419 who were potentially eligible and 
were sent an invitation letter by the clinical team. Of these, 314 
patients expressed an interest in participating and 258 provided 
informed consent. Two patients withdrew consent (for personal 
reasons) before randomisation, so that 256 were randomised 
equally between the two groups. Two participants withdrew 
their consent during the course of the trial (one in each group). 

Demographic characteristics of participants, social deprivation, 
markers of disease severity (including admissions in the previous 
year), presence of comorbidities, smoking status, and baseline 
questionnaire scores were similar in both groups. However, 
slightly fewer patients in the intervention group than in the 
control group had one or more comorbid conditions (61% v 
71%; table 1⇓). The demographic profile of the participants 
(mean age 69.4 (standard deviation 8.6) years; 45% male) was 
similar to that of the population referred by their clinician as 
potentially eligible and willing for their contact details to be 
passed to the research team (69.8 (9.1) years; 43%). 
Hospital admission with an exacerbation of 
COPD 
The median time to the first hospital admission with an 
exacerbation of COPD was 362 days (interquartile range 131 
to >365) in the telemonitoring group and 361 days (113 to >365; 
fig 3⇓) in the control group. There was no significant difference 
in the hazard ratio for admission in the telemonitoring group 
compared with the control group (adjusted hazard ratio 0.98 





(95% confidence interval 0.66 to 1.44)). Similarly, there was 
no significant difference in the number of admissions with an 
exacerbation of COPD, or the total number of days spent in 
hospital (table 2⇓). Unadjusted results (data not shown) were 
similar to the adjusted analyses. 
Four deaths occurred before admission to hospital with COPD 
(one in the telemonitoring group) and were censored in the 
primary analysis. Using a composite outcome of time to first 
COPD admission or all cause death, the adjusted hazard ratio 
for admission in the telemonitoring group was 0.87 (95% 
confidence interval 0.61 to 1.26) compared with the control 
group. 
Self reported COPD exacerbations, all cause 
admissions, and deaths 
The telemonitoring group showed a non-significant increase in 
the number of self reported exacerbations per patient during the 
calendar year compared with controls (mean 15.0 (standard 
deviation 12.7) v 12.8 (11.8); adjusted mean difference 2.29 
(95% confidence interval −0.78 to 5.37)). A self reported 
exacerbation was defined as a patient report of an episode of 
taking antibiotics or steroids. The number and duration of 
admissions for which an exacerbation was not the primary cause 
were similar in both groups (table 2). The number of deaths did 
not differ significantly between the telemonitoring and control 
groups (16 v 21; adjusted odds ratio 0.66 (95% confidence 
interval 0.29 to 1.48)). 

There was no significant difference between the groups in any 
of the questionnaire scores, and no differences from baseline to 
one year in either group. The intervention made no significant 
difference to health related quality of life the telemonitoring 
and control groups (mean SGRQ score at one year, 68.2 
(standard deviation 16.3) v 67.3 (17.3); adjusted mean difference 
1.39 (95% confidence interval −1.57 to 4.35)), anxiety or 
depression, self efficacy, knowledge, or adherence to treatment 
(table 3⇓). The proportion of participants whose SGRQ20 score 
improved by more than four units (the minimum clinically 
important difference) was 25% in the telemonitoring arm and 
25% in the control group. 
Installation of telemonitoring equipment, 
training, and withdrawals 
Table 4⇓ details the logistics of installing and training 
participants to use the equipment and reasons for withdrawals. 
The mean time from randomisation to commencing monitoring 
was 79 days (standard deviation 48 days), with nearly three 
quarters of the delay related to the installation of a dedicated 
broadband line and setting up of the telemonitoring equipment. 
Of 128 participants allocated to telemonitoring, 113 had the 
equipment successfully installed and 109 completed training. 
Eight participants withdrew from telemonitoring during the 
trial, mostly because of changes in clinical circumstances. 

Table 5⇓ details the contacts with healthcare monitoring services 
for the 189 patients under the care of the Edinburgh Community 
Respiratory Team and the Midlothian nurses. Data for East and 
West Lothian services were incomplete because care was 
provided by a number of general practices and contacts were 
not recorded consistently. The community teams dealt with 
2441 telemonitoring alerts from the 97 telemonitored patients 
under their care, 113 of which required home visits. This 
represented an average of 25 contacts per patient over the year 
of the trial—about one contact every two weeks, in addition to 
the 510 telephone calls and 821 home visits to telemonitored 
patients that were not directly associated with alerts. The 92 
patients in the control group received fewer telephone calls and 
home visits than those in the telemonitoring group (353 and 
681, respectively). 

Figure 4⇓ shows the subgroup analyses. The only significant 
result was that the intervention was less effective for participants 
with mild or moderate COPD than for those with severe or very 
severe COPD. Although this was an a priori analysis, severity 
was one of seven subgroups tested and was based on a small 
number of patients in the mild or moderate group; therefore, it 
is subject to considerable uncertainty. 

In participants with a recent history of admission for 
exacerbations of COPD, telemonitoring over one year did not 
have a significant benefit on time to a hospital admission, 
duration of admissions, or health related quality of life when 
both intervention and control groups had access to the same 
clinical care. Furthermore, telemonitoring was associated with 
a large increase in the number of telephone consultations and 
home visits, and a non-significant increase in participant 
reported exacerbations. Telemonitoring thus did not represent 
an effective use of NHS resources. 

Our researcher blinded pragmatic trial, which built on relevant 
conceptual and systematic review work,10 15 reports clinical 
effectiveness and workload implications of telemonitoring for 
COPD. We obtained the primary outcome data from the clinical 
records of all but two participants, and thus achieved our target 
sample size. There was some attrition of questionnaire 
completion, principally because of deaths during the trial year, 
and because several participants felt it was too burdensome 
given their state of health at the time. 
The confidence intervals for our primary outcome were wide 
(0.66 to 1.44) and we cannot be confident of ruling out a 
clinically meaningful difference that was smaller than the one 
we were powered to study. Our admission related secondary 
outcomes, however, similarly showed no significant effect. Our 
sample size was based on a study conducted a decade ago.31 
However, in the intervening years, there has been a considerable 
drive to reduce the number and duration of admissions 
(including the development of community respiratory teams 
who provided clinical care for the majority of our participants), 
thus limiting the potential for further reduction. 
We ensured that both groups had access to the same clinical 
care, which in our UK setting was facilitated by the availability 
of established community specialist respiratory teams, specialist 
nurses for long term conditions, or primary care teams. The 
clinical services into which the telemonitoring was integrated 
varied between the four Lothian regions, which may have 
influenced the effect of the intervention and the potential for 
improvement; we therefore stratified randomisation by service 
model. Most participants lived within 10 miles of secondary 
care facilities: outcomes might have been different in rural areas 
where telemonitoring might have had a greater effect on 
enhancing access to care. 





Blinding of participants and treating clinicians was not possible, 
but central randomisation ensured concealment and the primary 
outcome was assessed by two clinicians unaware of allocation. 
To achieve blinding of data collection, outcome data were 
collected by a different member of the research team from the 
nurse who had randomised the patients, but we acknowledge 
that participants could have mentioned telemonitoring, or 
equipment might have been visible during the home visit for 
data collection, making it impossible to maintain blinding in all 
cases. 

Our findings highlight the importance of defining the nature of 
usual care delivered to a control group when evaluating a 
complex intervention. Previous studies that have introduced an 
enhanced clinical service to support the telemonitoring arm of 
a trial have achieved improved outcomes compared with the 
usual care available to people with COPD.10 12 For example, 
telemonitoring in the context of an integrated care 
service31—incorporating case management35 or providing 
additional home visits36—reduced hospital admissions. Similarly, 
in the recently published WSD trial, telemonitoring supported 
by specialist community care, case management, or specific 
arrangements with general practices according to local service 
preferences was compared with usual care (that is, without the 
specific services or arrangements developed to support the 
telemonitoring).7 In this context, telemonitoring for participants 
with diabetes, COPD, or heart failure was associated with lower 
rates of emergency admissions, although the authors noted that 
the difference was due to a short term increase in emergency 
admissions in the control group.7 In our trial, the same clinical 
service was available to participants in both groups (albeit 
accessed considerably more frequently as a result of the 
telemonitoring) and showed no difference in any outcomes. The 
WSD trial with 3230 participants showed a significant reduction 
in mortality,7 by contrast with Takahashi and colleagues, who 
found a substantial increase in deaths.37 Our trial, however, was 
not powered for this outcome and our estimate of mortality is 
thus imprecise and cannot contribute to the debate. 
Our nested qualitative study suggested that patients were very 
positive about the benefits of telemonitoring,16 27 29 but this was 
not reflected by an improvement in respiratory-related quality 
of life. Similarly, the lack of change in the HADS score 
suggested that the intervention neither relieved nor exacerbated 
overall levels of anxiety or depression. Our theoretical 
framework for the telemonitoring intervention emphasised the 
importance of empowering self management, improving 
confidence of professionals by providing ongoing monitoring 
data, and improving access to clinical services.15 Our nested 
qualitative data suggested that continuity of care,29 facilitating 
access to care,29 and supporting self management27 were all 
perceived to be important facets of the intervention. However, 
this did not translate into a difference in measured self efficacy 
(a mediator of self management). 
Our data did not allow us to distinguish telemonitoring alerts 
triggered by clinically confirmed exacerbations requiring 
treatment from false alarms that needed no additional 
intervention. We observed a non-significant increase in the 
number of self reported, treated exacerbations in the 
telemonitoring group, although it is not clear whether this 
finding was due to improved recognition of early exacerbations 
or over treatment of “bad” days. Our results challenge previous 
findings from a cohort study concluding that early recognition 
and treatment improved exacerbation recovery, reduced risk of 
admission, and was associated with a better health related quality 
of life.38 Despite frequent prompt responses to changes in 
symptom scores, and a trend to increased treatment of 
exacerbations, we found no benefit in any of these clinical 
outcomes. 
A key factor that could increase the number of false alerts and 
limit the effectiveness of telemonitoring in COPD is the lack 
of clear early predictors of an exacerbation.39 Physiological 
parameters have not proved to be sufficiently predictive. This 
is because they either change late in the course of the 
exacerbation (for example, FEV1, oxygen saturation, heart rate, 
temperature)39 or cannot be measured reliably (for example, 
respiratory rate). Developing predictive algorithms with 
clinically useful levels of sensitivity and specificity is thus a 
priority for the future development of telemonitoring of COPD. 
The substantial workload generated by the telemonitoring alerts 
underlines the importance of piloting and assessing workforce 
implications for both technological and clinical support services 
during the planning and implementation phase of 
reconfiguration. Crucial decisions about economies of scale and 
the relative importance of continuity of care will be needed and 
their effect monitored.29 
Logistical issues with installation bedevilled the early months 
of the intervention and will potentially have reduced any 
effectiveness of our intervention. For telemonitoring to become 
mainstream, the technology needs to adapt seamlessly to 
variations in local connectivity as well as provide flexibility in 
monitoring capability to meet individual clinical need. Use in 
more specific contexts (such as to support early discharge until 
the risk of readmission has receded40) could then be possible. 

Integration of telemonitoring into existing clinical 
services—such that both intervention and control groups had 
access to the same clinical care—had no effect on delaying time 
to a hospital admission, and had a substantial impact on 
workload. The positive effect of telemonitoring seen in previous 
trials could thus be due to enhancement of the underpinning 
clinical service rather than the telemonitoring communication. 
Specific developments that could improve the performance of 
telemonitoring in COPD in the future include the validation of 
measures and algorithms that can predict potentially serious 
exacerbations more reliably, and an understanding of clinical 
contexts in which telemonitoring is most effective. In the 
meantime, long term telemonitoring of people with COPD is 
unlikely to reduce admissions unless it is a means of enhancing 
clinical services. 
We thank Lewis Ritchie, Anne-Louise Kinmonth, and Chris Griffiths for 
serving on the independent trial steering committee; Wisia Wedzicha 
and Josep Roca for their advice as collaborators; all the professionals 
in Lothian who provided the clinical service, especially Angela Lindsay 
(long term conditions and telehealthcare lead) and Clair Sparrius from 
the community respiratory team; Erinn Hade and Gordon Murray for 
providing additional statistical support; the Wellcome Trust Clinical 
Research Facility for providing community research nursing; the Scottish 
Primary Care Research Network for assistance with participant 
identification; the Edinburgh Clinical Trials Unit for designing the trial 
database and providing the randomisation service; Susan Buckingham 
for undertaking quality assurance checks; and Jennifer Holmes for 
providing administrative support. 
TELESCOT programme group: Brian McKinstry, Hilary Pinnock, Janet 
Hanley, Stephanie Lewis, Aziz Sheikh, William MacNee, Claudia Pagliari, 
Christine McClusky, Jim Forrest, John McKnight, Paul Padfield, Cathie 
Sudlow, and Sarah Wild. 





Contributors: BM initiated the idea for the study, and with HP, led the 
development of the protocol, securing of funding, study administration, 
data analysis, interpretation of results, and writing of the paper. JH, SL, 
ASh, WM, and CP were grant holders who contributed to development 
of the protocol, securing of funding, study administration, data analysis, 
interpretation of results, and writing of the paper. AT undertook the data 
collection. LM provided liaison between the research and clinical teams, 
and provided the regulatory oversight for the trial. SL and AK were the 
trial statisticians. MvdP and ASt undertook the health economic analysis. 
All authors had full access to all the data, and were involved in 
interpretation of the data. HP and BM wrote the initial draft of the paper, 
to which all the authors contributed. HP and BM are study guarantors. 
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform 
disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on 
request from the corresponding author) and declare: support from the 
Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish government and NHS Lothian for 
the submitted work; HP is supported by a primary care research career 
award from the Chief Scientist’s Office of the Scottish government; BM 
and JH are supported via NHS Lothian through the Edinburgh Health 
Services Research Unit; AS is supported by the Commonwealth Fund, 
a private independent foundation based in New York City; no other 
relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the 
submitted work. 
Ethical approval: Ethical approval was granted by the Lothian research 
ethics committee (reference 08/S1101/60), and NHS management 
approval was provided by NHS Lothian, Scotland. 

HP and BM are study guarantors and affirm that the manuscript is an 
honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; 
that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any 
discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) 
have been explained. 








Gershon AS, Warner L, Cascagnette P, Victor JC, To T. Lifetime risk of developing chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a longitudinal population study. Lancet 2011;378:991-6. 
Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, Lim S, Shibuya K, Aboyans V, et al. Global and regional 
mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012;380:2095-128. 
Vos T, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, Lozano R, Michaud C, Ezzati M, et al. Years lived with 
disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012;380:2163-96. 
World Health Organization. 2008-2013 action plan for the global strategy for the prevention 
and control of noncommunicable diseases. WHO, 2008. 
Stroetmann K, Kubitschke L, Robinson S, Stroetmann V, Cullen K, McDaid D. EU policy 
brief 13. How can telehealth help in the provision of integrated care? World Health 
Organization, 2010. 
Liddell A, Adshead S, Burgess E. Technology in the NHS: transforming the patient’s 
experience of care. The King’s Fund, 2008. 
Steventon A, Bardsley M, Billings J, Dixon J, Doll H, Hirani S, et al; for the Whole System 
Demonstrator Evaluation Team. Effect of telehealth on use of secondary care and mortality: 
findings from the Whole System Demonstrator cluster randomised trial. BMJ 
2012;344:e3874. 
Henderson C, Knapp M, Fernández J-L, Beecham J, Hirani SP, Cartwright M, et al. Cost 
effectiveness of telehealth for patients with long term conditions (Whole Systems 
Demonstrator telehealth questionnaire study): nested economic evaluation in a pragmatic, 
cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2013;346:f1035. 

McKinstry B, Pinnock H, Sheikh A. Telemedicine for management of patients with COPD? 
Lancet 2009;374:672-3. 


10 McLean S, Nurmatov U, Liu JLY, Pagliari C, Car J, Sheikh A. Telehealthcare for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;7:CD007718. 
Polisena J, Tran K, Cimon K, Hutton B, McGill S, Palmer K, et al. Home telehealth for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Telemed 
Telecare 2010;16:120-7. 
Bolton CE, Waters CS, Peirce S, Elwyn G, on behalf of EPSRC and MRC Grand Challenge 
Team. Insufficient evidence of benefit: a systematic review of home telemonitoring for 
COPD. J Evaluation Clin Pract 2011;17:1216-22. 
Jaana M, Pare G, Sicotte C, Home telemonitoring for respiratory conditions: a systematic 
review. Am J Manag Care 2009;15:313-20. 
Bartoli L. Zanaboni P. Masella C. Ursini N. Systematic review of telemedicine services 
for patients affected by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Telemed J E 
Health 2009;15:877-83. 
Pinnock H, Hanley J, Lewis S, MacNee W, Pagliari C, van der Pol M, et al. The impact 
of a telemetric chronic obstructive pulmonary disease monitoring service: randomised 
controlled trial with economic evaluation and nested qualitative study. Prim Care Respir 
J 2009;18:233-5. 




tele-monitoring in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a mixed methods exploration 
of issues in design and implementation. Prim Care Respir J 2011;21:57-64. 
17 Hurst JR, Vestbo J, Anzueto A, Locantore N, Müllerova H, Tal-Singer R, et al. Susceptibility 
to exacerbation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 2010;36:1128-38. 
Barnett K, Mercer SW, Norbury M, Watt G, Wyke S, Guthrie B. Epidemiology of 
multimorbidity and implications for health care, research, and medical education: a 
cross-sectional study. Lancet 2012;380:37-43. 


management and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 2013. www. 
goldcopd.com. 

obstructive pulmonary disease in adults primary and secondary care. Thorax 2004;59 
(suppl 1):S1-232. 
Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM, Littlejohns P. A self-complete measure for chronic 
airflow limitation - the St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1992;145:1321-7. 
Zigmund AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavia 1983;67:361-70. 
Lorig KR, Sobel, DS, Ritter PL, Laurent D, Hobbs M. Effect of a self-management program 
for patients with chronic disease. Effective Clin Pract 2001;4:256-62. 










of illness perceptions and treatment beliefs in explaining non-adherence to preventer 
medication. Psychology Health 2002;17:17-32. 
Brooks R, Rabin R, de Charro F, eds. The measurement and valuation of health status 
using EQ-5D: a European perspective: evidence from the EuroQol BIO MED research 
programme. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003. 
Fairbrother P, Pinnock H, Hanley J, McCloughan L, Sheikh A, Pagliari C, et al. Exploring 
telemonitoring and self-management by patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a qualitative study embedded in a randomized controlled trial. Pat Ed Counsel 
2013, doi:10.1016/j.pec.2013.04.003. 
Seemungal TAR, Donaldson GC, Bhowmik A, Jeffries DJ, Wedzicha JA. Time course 
and recovery of exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:1608-13. 
Fairbrother P, Pinnock H, Hanley J, McCloughan L, Sheikh A, Pagliari C, et al; on behalf 
of the TELESCOT programme group. Continuity, but at what cost? The impact of 
telemonitoring COPD on continuities of care: a qualitative study. Prim Care Respir J 
2012;21:322-8. 
British Lung Foundation. Living with COPD. 2013. www.blf.org.uk. 
30 
31 Casas A, Troosters T, Garcia-Aymerich J, Roca J, Hernandez C, Alonso A, et al. Integrated 
care prevents hospitalisations for exacerbations in COPD patients. Eur Respir J 
2006;28:1-8. 
Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J Am Statist 
Assn 1958;53:457-81. 

33 Cox DR. Regression models and life-tables. J R Statist Soc B 1972;34:187-220. 
34 Gudmundsson G, Gislason T, Janson C, Lindberg E, Hallin R, Ulrik CS, et al. Risk factors 
for rehospitalisation in COPD: role of health status, anxiety and depression. Eur Respir 
J 2005;26:414-9. 
Trappenburg JCA, Niesink A, de Weert-van Oene GH, van der Zeijden H, van Snippenburg 
R, Peters A, et al. Effects of telemonitoring in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Telemed J E Health 2008;14:138-46. 




Telemonitoring has attracted interest as a potential solution to the global challenge of providing care for ageing populations living with 
long term conditions such as COPD 
A Cochrane systematic review of telemonitoring in COPD reported a reduction in hospital admissions over 12 months, although 
telemonitoring in these trials had been supported by enhanced clinical care which could reduce admissions in its own right 
The specific role of telemonitoring in managing people with COPD, as opposed to the additional clinical services created to support it, 
needs to be clarified 

Integration of telemonitoring into existing clinical services—such that both intervention and control groups had access to the same clinical 
care—did not delay time to a hospital admission, and had a substantial effect on workload 
The positive effect of telemonitoring seen in previous trials could be due to enhancement of the underpinning clinical service rather than 
the telemonitoring communication 






Vontetsianos T, Giovas P, Katsaras T, Rigopoulou A, Mpirmpa G, Giaboudakis P, et al. 
Telemedicine-assisted home support for patients with advanced chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: preliminary results after nine-month follow-up. J Telemed Telecare 
2005;11 (suppl 1):86-8. 
Takahashi PY, Pecina JL, Upatising B, Chaudhry R, Shah ND, Van Houten H, et al. A 
randomized controlled trial of telemonitoring in older adults with multiple health issues to 
prevent hospitalizations and emergency department visits. Arch Intern Med 
2012;172:773-9. 

improves outcomes of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2004;169:1298-303. 


National COPD Resources and Outcomes Project. 2008. www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/delivery- 
of-respiratory-care/national-copd-resources-and-outcomes-project.aspx. 





pulse-oximetry at exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: prospective 
pilot study BMC Pulm Med 2010;10:52-8. 
on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is 
non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/. 





















































































































Admission in which COPD was the primary reason or a factor 
in the admission 













Admission in which COPD was the primary reason or a factor 
in the admission 




































































































Reasons for non-installation of equipment: moved to nursing home, residential care, or staying with relatives (n=3); participant 
declined (n=6; four participants were unhappy with equipment or installation process); died before equipment was installed (n=2); 
participant was too ill when equipment was due to be installed (n=2); installation was unsuccessful or too expensive to install broadband 
(n=2) 

Reasons for no training: participant declined training and equipment was withdrawn (n=2), participants was too ill when training was 
scheduled (n=2), training was unsuccessful and equipment was withdrawn (n=1) 

Reasons for withdrawal: repeated malfunctioning of equipment (n=1); participant felt restricted by the home based equipment (n=1); 
on advice of clinician because of inconsistent readings, increasing anxiety (n=3); additional health problems made use of telemonitoring 
impossible or inappropriate (n=4) 



















Table 5| Contacts with the telemonitoring services for patients under the care of the Edinburgh Community Respiratory Team and Midlothian 
nurses 






























































































Fig 2 Flow of participants through the trial. *Intention to treat analysis censored patients who died or withdrew before a 
COPD admission 









