


Mobile Phone-Based Telemonitoring for Heart Failure 
Management: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
Emily Seto1,2, PhD, PEng; Kevin J Leonard1,2, PhD, MBA; Joseph A Cafazzo1,2,3, PhD, PEng; Jan Barnsley2, PhD; 
Caterina Masino1, MA; Heather J Ross4,5, MD, MHSc, FRCPC 
1Centre for Global eHealth Innovation, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada 
2Department of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 
3Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 
4Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 
5Divisions of Cardiology and Transplant, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada 
Corresponding Author: 
Emily Seto, PhD, PEng 
Centre for Global eHealth Innovation 
University Health Network 
TGH/RFE Bldg, 4th Fl. 
190 Elizabeth St. 
Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4 
Canada 
Phone: 1 416 340 4800 ext 6409 
Fax: 1 416 340 3595 
Email: emily.seto@uhn.on.ca 

Background: Previous trials of telemonitoring for heart failure management have reported inconsistent results, largely due to 
diverse intervention and study designs. Mobile phones are becoming ubiquitous and economical, but the feasibility and efficacy 
of a mobile phone-based telemonitoring system have not been determined. 
Objective: The objective of this trial was to investigate the effects of a mobile phone-based telemonitoring system on heart 
failure management and outcomes. 
Methods: One hundred patients were recruited from a heart function clinic and randomized into telemonitoring and control 
groups. The telemonitoring group (N = 50) took daily weight and blood pressure readings and weekly single-lead ECGs, and 
answered daily symptom questions on a mobile phone over 6 months. Readings were automatically transmitted wirelessly to the 
mobile phone and then to data servers. Instructions were sent to the patients’ mobile phones and alerts to a cardiologist’s mobile 
phone as required. 
Results: Baseline questionnaires were completed and returned by 94 patients, and 84 patients returned post-study questionnaires. 
About 70% of telemonitoring patients completed at least 80% of their possible daily readings. The change in quality of life from 
baseline to post-study, as measured with the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire, was significantly greater for 
the telemonitoring group compared to the control group (P = .05). A between-group analysis also found greater post-study self-care 
maintenance (measured with the Self-Care of Heart Failure Index) for the telemonitoring group (P = .03). Brain natriuretic peptide 
(BNP) levels, self-care management, and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) improved significantly for both groups from 
baseline to post-study, but did not show a between-group difference. However, a subgroup within-group analysis using the data 
from the 63 patients who had attended the heart function clinic for more than 6 months revealed the telemonitoring group had 
significant improvements from baseline to post-study in BNP (decreased by 150 pg/mL, P = .02), LVEF (increased by 7.4%, P 
= .005) and self-care maintenance (increased by 7 points, P = .05) and management (increased by 14 points, P = .03), while the 
control group did not. No differences were found between the telemonitoring and control groups in terms of hospitalization, 
mortality, or emergency department visits, but the trial was underpowered to detect differences in these metrics. 
Conclusions: Our findings provide evidence of improved quality of life through improved self-care and clinical management 
from a mobile phone-based telemonitoring system. The use of the mobile phone-based system had high adherence and was feasible 
for patients, including the elderly and those with no experience with mobile phones. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 1 
(page number not for citation purposes) 







The demand for health care resources to manage heart failure 
is increasing with the aging population. Innovative methods to 
help alleviate this burden and to improve the poor outcomes 
from heart failure are required. Previous studies on traditional 
telemonitoring of heart failure patients (ie, using dedicated 
hardware as an information and transmission hub) have 
determined telemonitoring has the potential to reduce mortality, 
hospitalizations, and costs as well as improve quality of life, 
self-care, and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class [1-4]. 
However, the results of telemonitoring trials have been 
inconsistent largely due to diverse study interventions and 
variations in study design. 
Little is known about the feasibility and effects of mobile 
phone-based telemonitoring systems. Investigating mobile 
systems is a logical next step because they enable greater 
scalability of telemonitoring due to their relatively low cost 
compared to traditional systems, and because they provide more 
freedom for the patient due to their portability. Two recent 
randomized controlled 
trials of mobile phone-based 
telemonitoring for heart failure management have been reported 
in literature [5,6]. The Telemedical Interventional Monitoring 
in Heart Failure (TIM-HF) trial by Koehler et al (2011) found 
no reductions in hospitalizations or mortality [5]. The authors 
concluded their study does not rule out the potential benefits of 
telemonitoring, but instead that there is a need to identify the 
heart failure population that could benefit from telemonitoring 
[5]. The trial by Scherr et al (2009), which required patients to 
enter readings using a mobile phone’s Internet browser, 
highlighted the importance of system design on the success of 
the telemonitoring system [6]. Many patients found using the 
Internet browser to be too difficult, resulting in 12 out of the 
54 patients in the intervention group being “never beginners.” 
The objective of our randomized controlled trial was to perform 
an in-depth investigation of the effects of a highly automated 
and user-centered mobile phone-based telemonitoring system 
on self-care and clinical management, with the aim of improving 
heart failure outcomes (Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov 
NCT00778986). We used an extensive user-centered design 
process to develop the telemonitoring system in order to ensure 
it was as easy to use as possible and to meet the needs of the 
clinicians and patients. User-centered design refers to a 
philosophy that bases the design on information about and input 
from the people who will be using the product. The 
user-centered design process will be discussed in a separate 
publication. 

Study Participants 
One hundred participants were recruited from the University 
Health Network (UHN) Heart Function Clinic in Toronto, 
Ontario, between September 2009 and February 2010 (Figure 
1). The UHN Research Ethics Board approved the trial prior to 
commencement. The primary intent of the trial was to pilot the 
telemonitoring system in order to determine the impact of the 
system on self-care and clinical management. A sample size 
calculation was based on the Self-Care of Heart Failure Index 
(SCHFI), using a population standard deviation of 20 and an 
effect size of 10 (effect size represents a clinically significant 
change of more than half a standard deviation) as determined 
in previous studies (alpha = 0.05, power = 0.8) [7,8]. We 
calculated the required sample size per group to be 34, and 
recruited 50 participants for the intervention group and 50 for 
the control group to compensate for the patients estimated as 
lost to follow-up, including due to mortality, over the six-month 
trial. 
Eligible participants were ambulatory patients diagnosed with 
heart failure. Other eligibility criteria included 18 years of age 
or older, ability to speak and read in English, not on the heart 
transplantation list, an expected survival of greater than one 
year, and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) less than 
40%. During their Heart Function Clinic visit, patients who met 
the inclusion criteria (as deemed by their cardiologist), were 
invited to speak to the study coordinator (ES) regarding 
participation in the study. Each participant provided informed 
consent and received Can $24 as reimbursement for travel and 
parking expenses. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 2 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



Study Protocol 
The 100 participants were randomized into the telemonitoring 
(TM) group and standard care (SC) group using stratified 
four-block randomization. Stratification was based on NYHA 
classification (NYHA class II-III and NYHA class IV). There 
I. An online 
were no participants 
computer-generated randomization tool, Research Randomizer 
[9], was used to determine the order of participants in the 
telemonitoring and standard care groups. The study coordinator 
was blinded to which group the patient would be assigned until 
each patient consented to participate in the trial. 

Each patient received a questionnaire to complete at home. The 
questionnaire included demographic and clinical characteristic 
questions, and the SCHFI and the Minnesota Living with Heart 
Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ), which are validated tools for 
measuring self-care and quality of life, respectively [10-12]. 
The SCHFI is made up of three subscales: self-care maintenance 
(choice of behaviors used to maintain physiological stability), 
self-care management (response to symptoms when they occur), 
and self-care confidence. The maintenance, management, and 
confidence subscales consist of 5, 6, and 4 Likert questions, 
respectively. A higher score on the SCHFI indicates improved 
self-care. The MLHFQ consists of 21 questions that use a 
6-point Likert scale. The physical dimension score for the 
MLHFQ is the summation of 8 questions (eg, Did your heart 
failure make you sit or lie down to rest during the day?), while 
the emotional dimension score is the summation of 5 other 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 3 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


questions (eg, Did your heart failure make you worry?). A lower 
score on the MLHFQ indicates higher quality of life. 
The standard care group received standard care at the UHN 
Heart Function Clinic, which includes visiting the clinic between 
once every 2 weeks to once every 3 to 6 months, depending on 
the severity of the patient’s heart failure condition and the need 
for optimizing their medication. Standard care also includes 
heart failure education during preliminary visits at the Heart 
Function Clinic and the ability to telephone the clinic as 
necessary. Participants in the standard care group were not 
contacted again regarding the study until the end of the trial. 
The participants in the telemonitoring group received the 
telemonitoring system in addition to standard care. They were 
asked to use the telemonitoring system for 6 months to take 
daily morning weight and blood pressure readings as well as 
weekly single-lead electrocardiograms (ECGs) if provided with 
an ECG recorder. They were also asked to answer daily morning 
symptom questions on a mobile phone. Only the 17 patients 
who did not have an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) 
were provided with an ECG recorder because the recorder was 
not certified for use with ICDs. Patients were also told to report 
their symptoms through the mobile phone if they did not feel 
well during the day. The patients in the telemonitoring group 
were given an individual training session on how to use the 
system during the recruitment session, and were provided with 
technical support by telephone throughout the study. The daily 
measurements took about 5 minutes each morning. 
Six months after recruitment, all participants were mailed a 
post-study questionnaire. Semi-structured interviews were 
conducted with participants in the telemonitoring group to 
determine their experiences with the system. Twenty-two 
patients were interviewed, at which point saturation was 
achieved (ie, no new themes were identified). The individual 
interviews lasted between 15 and 60 minutes and took place in 
a private consultation room at the Heart Function Clinic. 
The five clinicians (three cardiologists and two nurse 
practitioners) from the Heart Function Clinic who managed the 
alerts and/or used the data from the telemonitoring system during 
the trial were also interviewed post-study. Each semi-structured 
interview lasted between 15 and 45 minutes. All patient and 
clinician interviews were audio-recorded and later transcribed. 
Telemonitoring System Overview 
The weight and blood pressure readings (UA UC-321PBT 
weight scale and UA-767PBT blood pressure monitor, A&D 
Medical, USA) and ECG recordings (SelfCheck ECG PMP4, 
CardGuard, Israel) were automatically sent wirelessly via 
Bluetooth to a mobile phone (BlackBerry Pearl 8130, Research 
in Motion, Canada) and then to the data repository at the 
hospital. Patients also answered symptom questions (mainly 
yes/no) through the mobile phones. The measurements sent to 
the data repository included a study identifier. No patient names 
were transmitted and no identifying information was stored on 
the mobile phone. The mobile phone displayed an instruction 
on what to do after taking each measurement. A final message 
or alert based on the physiological and symptom information 
was sent to the mobile phone (Figure 2). Clinicians were able 
to modify any necessary physiological target ranges per patient 
through a secure website. The alerts ranged from low priority 
ones (eg, to retake the measurements if the patient feels worse) 
to high priority alerts (eg, to go to the local emergency 
department or call 911). The patients and the clinicians were 
able to view the physiological data on a secure website in tabular 
and graphic formats. All the data were also stored and accessible 
on the mobile phone. If a patient did not take all the required 
measurements by 10 am each morning, an automated adherence 
reminder phone call was sent to their home telephone. 
If measurements were outside of the target range or if the patient 
reported symptoms, alerts were emailed to the cardiologist’s 
mobile phone. The email alerts included the patient’s contact 
information, medication list, symptom and physiological 
information (including the ECG recording as an attachment, if 
available), latest serum creatinine and potassium, and the alert 
message sent to the patient. If the cardiologist determined 
contacting the patient was warranted, they were able to call the 
patient by selecting their phone number in the email. The patient 
alert message also instructed them to contact the Heart Function 
Clinic if they felt they should. During the trial, the cardiologist 
usually called the patient within a few minutes of receiving the 
alert. The cardiologist emailed the study coordinator specifying 
the action resulting from each alert (eg, calling the patient, 
modificaton of medications, etc) by replying to the original 
email alert. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 4 
(page number not for citation purposes) 



Outcome Measures 
The primary outcomes of this study included a surrogate for 
heart failure prognosis, specifically brain natriuretic peptide 
(BNP), self-care as measured by the SCHFI, and quality of life 
as measured by the MLHFQ. Hospital readmissions, number 
of nights in hospital, and mortality were secondary outcome 
measures because the study was underpowered to detect 
differences between groups for these metrics. Other secondary 
outcome measures included number of emergency department 
visits and number of Heart Function Clinic visits. In addition, 
LVEF, NYHA class, medication prescriptions, and blood test 
results (specifically creatinine, sodium, potassium, hemoglobin, 
and urate values) were also subsequently analyzed. 
Data Analysis 
The normality of the data for each outcome measure was 
determined through Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk 
tests of normality. Data that were normally distributed were 
MLHFQ, SCHFI maintenance, SCHFI management, sodium, 
potassium, hemoglobin, urate, and LVEF values. All other 
parameters were analyzed with non-parametric tests. 
Between-group analyses using independent Student t tests and 
Mann–Whitney tests (for normally and not normally distributed 
data, respectively) were first performed to compare the 
telemonitoring group and standard care group post-study data. 
Between-group analyses were also performed to compare the 
change scores. Paired Student t tests and Wilcoxon signed rank 
tests were then performed to compare baseline and post-study 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 5 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


data within the telemonitoring and standard care groups. The 
statistical analyses were performed using the statistical software 
application SPSS 17.0 (IBM Corporation, USA). Statistical 
significance was considered at P < .05 unless otherwise 
specified. All test results reported are 2-tailed. 
Interview data were analyzed using a conventional content 
analysis approach [13]. Two researchers (ES and CM) analyzed 
the transcripts independently and coded the transcripts with the 
software program NVivo version 7 (QSR International, 
Doncaster, Victoria, Australia). The researchers then discussed 
the themes and issues that emerged until a consensus was 
reached. The qualitative results are presented in detail in an 
accompanying paper [14]. 

Twelve out of 112 patients approached to participate in this 
study declined. One patient felt overwhelmed by the idea of 
participating in the trial, two did not want to take measurements 
every day, one said he did not have the time, and one thought 
as a result of a stroke he would not be able to understand how 
to perform the monitoring. The remainder did not provide 
specific reasons for declining. The three patients from the 
telemonitoring group who withdrew from the study included a 
patient who became incapacitated during the trial due to a fall, 
and two participants who decided to withdraw from the study 
when they had technical difficulties with the telemonitoring 
equipment. No patients in the standard care group officially 
withdrew from the study (Figure 1). 
Baseline Patient Data 
Table 1 shows the baseline demographic and clinical 
characteristics of the 100 patients who participated in the trial. 
The profiles of the telemonitoring and standard care groups 
were similar and representative of the patient population 
attending the UHN Heart Function Clinic. A comparison of 
baseline study parameters showed no statistical differences 
between telemonitoring and standard care groups for any 
outcome measures. Baseline questionnaires were completed 
and returned by 94 patients (46 from the telemonitoring group 
and 48 from the standard care group) and 84 patients returned 
post-study questionnaires (39 from the telemonitoring group 
and 45 from the standard care group), while 82 patients returned 
both baseline and post-study questionnaires. 

Patient Adherence 
Patients completed their required measurements on average 
between 5 to 6 days per week throughout the six-month trial 
(Figure 3). Adherence decreased only slightly from the 
beginning of the trial to the end. Adherence during the first 
week was relatively low because some patients had to travel for 
a number of days to get home before using the system, and some 
patients required technical telephone support before properly 
using the system. About 42, 33, and 16 out of the 50 
telemonitoring group patients (84%, 66%, and 32%) completed 
at least 91 (50%), 146 (80%), and 173 (95%) of possible daily 
readings over 
respectively. Missed 
six months, 
measurements were sometimes due to technical issues with the 
telemonitoring system or else because of patients going on 
vacation without bringing the monitoring equipment with them. 

The adherence data presented are an underestimate of the true 
adherence because they are based on the adherence phone calls 
sent at 10 am if patients had not yet completed their daily 
measurements. Occasionally, patients would 
their 
measurements after 10 am when the adherence reminder was 
already sent because they had woken after 10 am. 

Clinical Utilization of the System 
Table 2 summarizes the clinical utilization of the system and 
the actions the clinicians performed based on the alerts. One 
cardiologist received the majority (1367) of the email alerts. 
Another cardiologist received alerts (311 alerts) when covering 
for the primary cardiologist for a three-week period. Low 
priority alerts were more frequently generated than the more 
urgent alerts. The cardiologists (and occasionally a nurse 
practitioner) called patients 480 times over the 6 months, often 
to provide instructions or to educate. The most common clinical 
action was an instruction or change in medication (105 times). 
Other actions included ordering additional blood work, moving 
the patient’s clinic visit forward, or instructing the patient to 
see their family physician or to go to the emergency department. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 6 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
























Living with partner or fami- 
ly 





























Disability due to heart fail- 
ure 


















































































XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 7 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


































BNP, NYHA Class, LVEF, SCHFI, and MLHFQ 
Results 
Table 3 shows the results from the statistical analysis. BNP 
values for both the telemonitoring and standard care groups 
decreased post-study (P = .001, P = .002, respectively). 
Similarly, NYHA class, LVEF, self-care maintenance, and 
self-care management improved for both groups. However, 
quality of life as measured with the MLHFQ significantly 
improved only for the telemonitoring group (P = .02), including 
the physical (P = .02) and emotional dimensions (P = .03). 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 8 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


A comparison of the post-study data between groups found only 
a statistically significant difference in SCHFI maintenance 
scores, indicating the telemonitoring group had greater self-care 
maintenance (ie, a higher SCHFI maintenance score) (P = .03). 
A comparison of the change scores between groups found only 
a statistically significant difference in the overall MLHFQ 
scores, indicating that the telemonitoring group had greater 
improvement in quality of life (ie, a larger difference from 
baseline to post-study MLHFQ scores) (P = .05). 







Post-study 
mean (SD) 


Baseline 
mean (SD) 
Post-study 
mean (SD) 

Between- 
group post- 
study data 
P v alue 
Between- 
group 
change 
scores 
P v alue 



Self-care mainte- 
nance (SCHFI) 
Self-care manage- 
ment (SCHFI) 
Self-care confidence 
(SCHFI) 
Quality of life (ML- 
HFQ) 
Quality of life – 
physical (MLHFQ) 
Quality of life – 
emotional (MLHFQ) 


























































































As with previous studies of multidisciplinary heart function 
clinics, it was hypothesized being enrolled in the Heart Function 
Clinic would improve outcomes particularly for those patients 
new to the clinic. To test if there was a clinic effect on the 
outcome measures showing improvements in both groups, the 
changes in outcome measures were compared for patients who 
were new to the clinic (< 6 months, N = 37) versus those who 
were long-term patients (> 6 months, N = 63). We chose six 
months as the cut-off point because patients newly referred to 
the clinic usually require three months to up-titrate medication 
and a further three months to reach clinical stability. In the 
telemonitoring group, 18 patients were new to the clinic versus 
19 in the standard care group. Patients who were new to the 
clinic improved more than those who were long-term with 
respect to BNP and LVEF (Table 4). Self-care maintenance of 
the new patients also improved more, but the difference was 
not statistically significant. 







































To minimize the clinic effect, the statistical analysis was 
repeated post-hoc removing the data from the 37 patients new 
to clinic. Table 5 shows the subgroup statistical results for the 
parameters that improved for both groups. For long-term 
patients, the BNP (P = .02), LVEF (P = .005), self-care 
maintenance (P = .05), and self-care management (P = .03) 
significantly improved only for the telemonitoring group. A 
comparison of the post-study data and change scores between 
groups found only a statistically significant difference in 
post-study MLHFQ emotional dimension scores, indicating the 
telemonitoring group had better post-study quality of life 
(emotional dimension) compared to the standard care group (P 
= .05). 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 9 
(page number not for citation purposes) 






Baseline mean 
(SD) 
Post-study 
mean (SD) 


Baseline 
mean (SD) 
Post-study 
mean (SD) 









Self-care mainte- 
nance (SCHFI) 
Self-care manage- 
ment (SCHFI) 









































Between- 
group post- 
study data 
P v alue 
Between- 
group 
change 
scores 
P v alue 





Mortality Results 
During the trial, three patients from the telemonitoring group 
died and none died from the standard care group. One patient 
died from newly diagnosed cancer, the second was suspected 
to have died from sepsis due to a leg ulcer, and the third died 
from post-heart transplantation complications (transplant 
performed prior to study enrollment). 
Health Care Resource Utilization Results 
Table 6 shows the results from the Mann–Whitney tests 
comparing the health care resource utilization by the 

telemonitoring and standard care groups during the trial. No 
differences were found between the groups for number of 
hospitalizations (P = .1), number of nights in hospital (P = .2), 
or number of visits to the emergency room (P = .6). However, 
the telemonitoring group visited the Heart Function Clinic 
during the six months more often than the standard care group 
(P = .04) because the cardiologist managing the alerts asked 
several patients to come into clinic when their health appeared 
to be deteriorating, as alerted by the telemonitoring system. 

































Medication and Blood Test Results 
the number of patients prescribed 
Table 7 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor and/or 
angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB), beta-blocker, diuretic, 
statin, aldosterone antagonist, digoxin, and antiarrhythmic 
medication at baseline and post-study for the telemonitoring 
and standard care groups. Using McNemar’s test, no statistical 
differences were found between the frequency of medication 
prescribed at baseline compared to the frequency of medication 

prescribed post-study for either of the groups, except more of 
the patients in the telemonitoring group were prescribed 
aldosterone antagonist post-study (P = .02). Seven patients in 
the telemonitoring group started to take aldosterone antagonist 
during the six-month trial. No significant statistical differences 
were found comparing the post-study frequency of medication 
between groups using Fisher’s exact test. No significant 
differences were found between baseline and post-study 
creatinine, sodium, potassium, hemoglobin, and urate blood test 
results. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 10 
(page number not for citation purposes) 












Pre- 
scribed 
Not pre- 
scribed 
Pre- 
scribed 
Not pre- 
scribed 
Pre- 
scribed 
Not pre- 
scribed 
Pre- 
scribed 
Not pre- 
scribed 
Between- 
group post- 
study data 
P v alue 







ACE-inhibitor 
and/or ARB 



Aldosterone antago- 
nist 









































































A randomized controlled trial was performed to evaluate a 
user-centered, mobile phone-based telemonitoring system. 
Although the trial was underpowered to detect its impact on 
hospitalization and mortality, the results suggest quality of life 
improved with the use of the system through increased self-care 
and improved clinical management. BNP, LVEF, and NYHA 
class all improved over the course of the trial for both the 
telemonitoring and standard care groups. A subgroup analysis 
using only the participants who had attended the clinic for more 
than 6 months showed only the telemonitoring group had 
significant improvements in BNP and LVEF from baseline to 
post-study. It is possible a trial with a larger sample size would 
find a reduction in hospitalization and mortality in the 
telemonitoring group. 
One of the most significant changes in clinical management 
with the telemonitoring system was the ability to optimize a 
patient’s medication regimen. For example, there was a 
statistically significant increase in the number of patients in the 
telemonitoring group who were prescribed aldosterone 
antagonist compared to the standard care group. Previous studies 
have found less than a third of eligible patients receive heart 
failure guideline-recommended aldosterone antagonist therapy 
[15]. The benefits of aldosterone antagonist, in terms of 
reductions in mortality and hospitalizations, have been well 
documented. However, patients are often not prescribed this 
therapy partially because of the need to closely monitor serum 
potassium levels due to the risk of hyperkalemia [16]. It is 
possible the increase in use of aldosterone antagonist in the 
telemonitoring group can be attributed to the close monitoring 
of the patients enabled by the telemonitoring system. 
In terms of self-care, the telemonitoring system provided 
immediate automated 
instructions and enabled clinical 
intervention at the most appropriate time (“teachable moments”) 
to help patients modify their lifestyle behaviors. For example, 
many patients found their weight and blood pressure increased 
after a high sodium meal. By reducing their salt intake for the 
next few meals, their weight and blood pressure would return 
to within their normal range. Some patients also received 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
automated reminders to take extra diuretic medication after a 
weight gain, which confirmed taking the extra medication was 
the correct course of action. Even though this group of patients 
received prior instruction from their cardiologist to take extra 
diuretic medication in this situation, they were still often hesitant 
to take the extra medication without prior confirmation. 



A 
trial, 
Telemonitoring to Improve Heart Failure Outcomes (Tele-HF), 
was conducted using as a primary outcome measure a composite 
of readmission for any reason or death from any cause within 
180 days of enrollment [17]. That trial found no reduction in 
the use of a 
mortality or hospital admissions from 
telephone-based interactive voice-response system to record 
heart failure symptoms and weight data. One of the possible 
reasons no differences were found between groups is the 
Tele-HF trial attempted to engage patients in self-care only in 
terms of performing the daily reporting of symptoms and weight. 
Real-time automated self-care advice and instructions (taking 
extra diuretic medication, following salt and fluid restrictions, 
etc) based on the reported symptoms and weight—as 
implemented in our study—might have had a significant positive 
impact. In addition, site coordinators reviewed the patient 
information daily on weekdays for the Tele-HF trial and should 
have contacted the patient as required. It is possible the 
necessary real-time response by clinicians was not provided. 
Finally, 14% of the Tele-HF patients randomized into the 
intervention group never used the system, and only 55% of the 
patients were using the system at least 3 times per week by the 
final week. The Tele-HF trial lasted 180 days, which was similar 
to our trial. However, by the final week of our trial, 89% of our 
patients were taking their measurements at least 3 times per 
week (excluding the 3 patients who had died). Our high rate of 
adherence may be due to the perceived benefit, ongoing positive 
reinforcement, and ease of use of our system even among the 
very elderly (the oldest patient in the telemonitoring group was 
aged 88 years). The trial by Scherr et al (2009) also found low 
adherence rates due to patients having difficulty in manually 
entering and sending their daily blood pressure, heart rate, body 
weight, and dosage of heart failure medication through a mobile 
phone’s Internet browser [6]. The differences in adherence rates 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 11 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


between these trials underscore the importance of system design 
on the successful implementation of telemonitoring systems. 
The TIM-HF trial investigated the effects of wireless medical 
devices with a personal digital assistant (PDA) on health 
outcomes of 710 heart failure patients randomized into 
intervention and control groups. Similar to the Tele-HF trial, 
this trial found no statistically significant differences between 
the groups with respect to mortality, number of hospitalizations, 
or days in hospital [5]. However, an exploratory subgroup 
analysis suggested the efficacy of telemonitoring to improve 
heart failure outcomes could be dependent on the characteristics 
of the patient population. The investigators concluded further 
trials were required to explore the effects of telemonitoring in 
defined patient subgroups. 
In our study, being newly enrolled into the Heart Function Clinic 
overshadowed improvements from the telemonitoring system 
in terms of the within-group analysis. In addition, many of our 
participants had stable heart failure, and had not been admitted 
to hospital for many years. Bowles et al (2009) also suggested 
targeting higher risk patients with greater probability of being 
rehospitalized in order to demonstrate the most effective 
outcomes from telemonitoring [18]. Eligibility criteria for study 
participation that included admission to hospital within the 
previous year and being part of the Heart Function Clinic for 
at least 6 months may have resulted in more significant 
improvements in health outcomes. 
Although the clinicians viewed the ECG recordings that were 
available, the benefits of the ECG recordings compared to the 
costs of the devices were not conclusive. Feedback from the 
clinicians indicated they thought the ECG recordings were of 
some use, but the inability to provide the devices to participants 
with ICDs was a significant drawback. 
Limitations 
A confounder to our study was the clinic effect that caused 
improvements in outcomes in both the telemonitoring and 
standard care groups, as described above. Future studies should 
consider recruitment of stable clinic patients. Secondly, patients 
were enrolled in the winter and completed the trial in the 
summer when heart failure patients are often healthier due to 
reductions in respiratory illnesses. This seasonal effect may 
have also contributed to the observed improvements in both the 

telemonitoring and standard care groups. A third limitation was 
the small sample size that did not provide adequate power to 
detect the effects of the telemonitoring on mortality and 
hospitalization outcomes. A future trial with a larger sample 
size would help further determine 
the 
telemonitoring system on health service utilization and its health 
economic impact. In addition, the proportionate benefit of 
self-care versus clinical management changes on health 
outcomes could not be definitively determined. For example, 
the improvements observed in the telemonitoring group may 
be largely attributed to the increased prescription of aldosterone 
antagonist. Furthermore, about a third of the patients in the 
telemonitoring group used the telemonitoring system for a 
number of weeks prior to completing the baseline questionnaire. 
Although 
the 
questionnaire based on information before they used the 
telemonitoring system, it was clear many patients were basing 
their answers on information associated with system use because 
their questionnaire responses sometimes did not match the 
information provided during their recruitment interviews. This 
minimized the measured impact of the telemonitoring system. 
Limitations to the questionnaire data also include potential recall 
bias and self-reporting. Finally, the telemonitoring system was 
only available in English, which limited the participant 
population to patients who were able to read rudimentary 
English. 



Conclusions 
The results from our trial suggest mobile phone-based 
telemonitoring improves quality of life through improved 
self-care and clinical management. A subgroup analysis using 
only the participants who had attended clinic for more than 6 
months showed only the telemonitoring group had significant 
improvements in BNP and LVEF from baseline to post-study. 
An important component to successful telemonitoring for heart 
failure appears to be immediate feedback to the patients to 
address any potential decompensation either through automated 
messages and/or advice from a clinician who is familiar with 
patients’ histories. In addition, in order for patients to be willing 
to integrate telemonitoring into their daily lives, the system 
must be easy and quick to use. Further research with an 
appropriate heart failure patient population and larger sample 
size is required to determine the extent of the benefits of such 
a telemonitoring system on heart failure outcomes. 
Acknowledgments 
Funding for this work was in part provided by the Toronto General Hospital Foundation and the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council of Canada Strategic Research Network Grant entitled Healthcare Support through Information Technology 
Enhancements (hSITE). 
Conflicts of Interest 
None 


Inglis SC, Clark RA, McAlister FA, Ball J, Lewinter C, Cullington D, et al. Structured telephone support or telemonitoring 
programmes for patients with chronic heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010(8):CD007228. [doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD007228.pub2] [Medline: 20687083] 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 12 
(page number not for citation purposes) 










Clark RA, Inglis SC, McAlister FA, Cleland JG, Stewart S. Telemonitoring or structured telephone support programmes 
for patients with chronic heart failure: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2007 May 5;334(7600):942 [FREE Full 
text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.39156.536968.55] [Medline: 17426062] 
Polisena J, Tran K, Cimon K, Hutton B, McGill S, Palmer K, et al. Home telemonitoring for congestive heart failure: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Telemed Telecare 2010;16(2):68-76. [doi: 10.1258/jtt.2009.090406] [Medline: 
20008054] 
Klersy C, De Silvestri A, Gabutti G, Regoli F, Auricchio A. A meta-analysis of remote monitoring of heart failure patients. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2009 Oct 27;54(18):1683-1694. [doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.08.017] [Medline: 19850208] 
Koehler F, Winkler S, Schieber M, Sechtem U, Stangl K, Böhm M, Telemedical Interventional Monitoring in Heart Failure 
Investigators. Impact of remote telemedical management on mortality and hospitalizations in ambulatory patients with 
chronic heart failure: the telemedical interventional monitoring in heart failure study. Circulation 2011 May 
3;123(17):1873-1880. [doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.018473] [Medline: 21444883] 
Scherr D, Kastner P, Kollmann A, Hallas A, Auer J, Krappinger H, MOBITEL Investigators. Effect of home-based 
telemonitoring using mobile phone technology on the outcome of heart failure patients after an episode of acute 
decompensation: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2009;11(3):e34 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.1252] 
[Medline: 19687005] 
Riegel B, Vaughan Dickson V, Goldberg LR, Deatrick JA. Factors associated with the development of expertise in heart 
failure self-care. Nurs Res 2007 Jul;56(4):235-243. [doi: 10.1097/01.NNR.0000280615.75447.f7] [Medline: 17625462] 
Riegel B, Lee CS, Dickson VV, Carlson B. An update on the self-care of heart failure index. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2009 
Dec;24(6):485-497. [doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e3181b4baa0] [Medline: 19786884] 
Urbaniak GC, Plous S. Research Randomizer. URL: http://www.randomizer.org/ [accessed 2011-11-16] [WebCite Cache 
ID 63FKn7qtR] 

Questionnaire: sensitivity to differences and responsiveness to intervention intensity in a clinical population. Nurs Res 2002 
Aug;51(4):209-218. [Medline: 12131233] 


12. Rector TS, Cohn JN. Minnesota Living With Heart Failure Questionnaire. URL: http://www.license.umn.edu/Products/ 
Minnesota-Living-With-Heart-Failure-Questionnaire__Z94019.aspx [accessed 2011-08-08] [WebCite Cache ID 
60nHNOGV7] 


[doi: 10.1177/1049732305276687] [Medline: 16204405] 
Seto E, Leonard KJ, Cafazzo JA, Barnsley J, Masino C, Ross HJ. Perceptions and Experiences of Heart Failure Patients 
and Clinicians on the Use of Mobile Phone-Based Telemonitoring. J Med Internet Res 2012 Oct 21;14(1):e25-e65 [FREE 
Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.1912] 



patients with systolic heart failure and mild symptoms. N Engl J Med 2011 Jan 6;364(1):11-21 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1009492] [Medline: 21073363] 


18. Bowles KH, Holland DE, Horowitz DA. A comparison of in-person home care, home care with telephone contact and home 
care with telemonitoring for disease management. J Telemed Telecare 2009;15(7):344-350. [doi: 10.1258/jtt.2009.090118] 
[Medline: 19815903] 

ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme 
ARB: angiotensin receptor blocker 
BNP: brain natriuretic peptide 
ECG: electrocardiograms 
ICD: implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
LVEF: left ventricular ejection fraction 
MLHFQ: Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire 
NYHA: New York Heart Association 
RCT: randomized controlled trial 
SC: standard care 
SCHFI: Self-Care of Heart Failure Index 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 13 
(page number not for citation purposes) 


SD: standard deviation 
Tele-HF: Telemonitoring to Improve Heart Failure Outcomes 
TIM-HF: Telemedical Interventional Monitoring in Heart Failure 
telemonitoring: telemonitoring 
UHN: University Health Network 
Edited by H Potts; submitted 09.08.11; peer-reviewed by J Polisena, A Kollmann; comments to author 19.09.11; revised version 
received 04.12.11; accepted 12.12.11; published 16.02.12 
Please cite as: 
Seto E, Leonard KJ, Cafazzo JA, Barnsley J, Masino C, Ross HJ 
Mobile Phone-Based Telemonitoring for Heart Failure Management: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
J Med Internet Res 2012;14(1):e31 
URL: http://www.jmir.org/2012/1/e31/ 
doi: 10.2196/jmir.1909 
PMID: 22356799 
©Emily Seto, Kevin J Leonard, Joseph A Cafazzo, Jan Barnsley, Caterina Masino, Heather J Ross. Originally published in the 
Journal of Medical Internet Research (http://www.jmir.org), 16.02.2012. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://www.jmir.org/, 
as well as this copyright and license information must be included. 

XSL•FO 
RenderX 
J Med Internet Res 2012 | vol. 14 | iss. 1 | e31 | p. 14 
(page number not for citation purposes) 
