497832
2013 AUT18810.1177/1362361313497832AutismKuo et al.
Article
Autism
Media use among adolescents with 2014, Vol. 18(8) 914 –923
© The Author(s) 2013
autism spectrum disorder Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1362361313497832
aut.sagepub.com
Melissa H Kuo1, Gael I Orsmond2, Wendy J Coster2 and
Ellen S Cohn2
Abstract
This study explores how adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) use media, and the factors associated with
their media use. A total of 91 adolescents with ASD and their parents completed mail-based surveys. In all, 78% of the
adolescents with ASD watched television (approximately 2 h/day), and 98% used computers (approximately 5 h/day)
on any given day. They most frequently watched cartoons, played computer or video games that involved shooting, and
visited websites that contained information on video games. Adolescents with ASD who watched television with parents
reported more positive parent–child relationships. Adolescents with ASD who visited social networking websites or
received emails from friends reported more positive friendships. The findings help us understand media-use habits of
adolescents with ASD and suggest areas for future research.
Keywords
adolescent, autism spectrum disorder, media use, personal relationships
Adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have media, and the factors associated with their media use.
been reported to have difficulties with peer relationships Specifically, we examined the television shows they
and participation in social and recreational activities, watched and what they were doing when using a
spending much of their free time engaging in solitary activ- computer.
ities and less time doing social activities (Orsmond et al., Research shows that television can be educational and
2004; Orsmond and Kuo, 2011). Previous research found can positively change attitudes and perceptions of individu-
that watching television and using a computer were the two als (Larson and Verma, 1999). Moreover, the increased
most frequent free-time activities of adolescents with ASD variety of communication features available through the
(Orsmond and Kuo, 2011). Researchers also found that Internet (e.g. instant messaging programs, emails, social
adolescents with ASD had a significantly high prevalence networking websites, and chat rooms) and the interaction
of television viewing and computer usage compared with possibilities within computer games provide enriched
adolescents with speech/language impairment and con- learning opportunities for children and adolescents. These
firmed those with learning disabilities (Mazurek et al., same features can also pose risks, such as violent behaviors
2012). Given the frequency with which adolescents with and social isolation (Anderson et al., 2001). Thus, engaging
ASD engage in television viewing and use computers, and in various forms of media use could have both positive and
the lack of research in this area, it is important to under- negative consequences.
stand the factors associated with engagement in these activ- A relatively large body of research has documented the
ities. Media-use patterns and their developmental associations between media usage, behavioral outcomes,
consequences have been well documented for typically and social competences of typically developing youth. For
developing adolescents (e.g. Blais et al., 2008; Rideout et
al., 2010; Roberts et al., 2004). The first step to understand- 1University of Alberta, Canada
ing the developmental sequelae of media use in adolescents 2Boston University, USA
with ASD is to better describe their patterns, and to begin to
Corresponding author:
understand the concurrent associations between media use
Melissa H Kuo, University of Alberta, 2-64 Corbett Hall, Edmonton, AB
and characteristics of the adolescent. In this study, we
T6G 2G4, Canada.
examined how adolescents with ASD spent time using Email: melissa.kuo@ualberta.ca
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
Kuo et al. 915
example, watching violent programs is associated with associations between media use and ASD will add to our
increased aggression, viewing educational programs is knowledge about which youth might be vulnerable to
associated with higher grades and less aggressive behavior, engaging in excessive or negative types of media use, and
and viewing sports television is associated with higher ath- will have implications for intervention, either through mon-
letic participation (Anderson et al., 2001; Shields and itoring of children’s behavior or through using media to
Behrman, 2000). Individuals who engage in high levels of improve social and communication skills.
violent first-person shooter video game (a video game cen- The emerging literature on media use by youth with
tered on gun and weapon-based combat through a first-per- ASD indicates that these youth spend more time engaging
son perspective) have been reported to have more aggressive in television and movie viewing than any other leisure
behavior (Barlett et al., 2007). Similarly, adolescents who activity, and animated programs were highly preferred by
use video games that are suitable for ages over 17 years those who engaged in those activities (Shane and Albert,
show more aggressive behavior (Olson et al., 2009). We 2005). These findings were based on parents’ or caregivers’
know very little about the types of television programs and reports. However, parents or caregivers who are not view-
computer activities in which adolescents with ASD engage. ing media together with their children may not be able to
Given the fact that engaging in different contents of media accurately account for their children’s media use.
may have different influences on development, it is impor- Furthermore, Shane and Albert’s (2005) sample included a
tant to begin to understand what content and types of media wide age range of both children and adolescents with ASD,
they are engaging in. which may not represent the media-use patterns in different
The social context of media use is important in adoles- developmental stages. Thus, the present study focused on
cents. Children who watch television with their parents tend adolescents with ASD and gathered information directly
to report more enjoyment of programs than those who do not from adolescents.
watch television with their parents (Nathanson, 1999). Youth In view of the lack of knowledge of how adolescents
who watch television with their parents tend to have similar with ASD use media in terms of patterns and companions,
viewing habits as their parents (Nathanson, 2002). Watching and the need to understand the possible associations
television with a parent may have a negative effect, however, between media usage and the factors such as social skills,
if aggressive content is viewed together and parents do not behavior problems, and personal relationships, the aims of
appropriately discuss the content (Nathanson, 1999). the current study were to (a) describe how adolescents with
Research also suggests that the effects of computer use ASD use media, in terms of the frequency, amount of time,
on the development of social relationships depend partly on and media content; (b) identify the companions with whom
whether the online social contacts are with family members they spent time using media; (c) examine the factors (e.g.
and friends, or with strangers and acquaintances (Blais et demographics and severity of autism symptoms) associated
al., 2008; Valkenburg and Peter, 2007). Adolescents who with their media use; and (d) examine the associations
interact with family members and friends on the Internet between media use and parent–child relationships and
develop better social relationships than those interacting friendships.
with strangers and acquaintances because offline relation-
ships with family and friends provide more social support
than strangers and acquaintances. Therefore, in this study, Methods
we also examined the companions with whom adolescents
Procedures
with ASD use media.
Research with typically developing adolescents indi- Participants were recruited through local practitioners or
cates that media usage can impact personal relationships. private school teachers working with adolescents with
Using instant messaging is positively associated with posi- ASD, and advertisements posted on autism-related Web
tive friendships, whereas visiting chat rooms and playing pages, forums, or through e-newsletters. Participants were
video game are associated with less positive friendships also recruited with the assistance of the Interactive Autism
(Blais et al., 2008). Higher frequency of Internet use has Network (IAN) Research Database at the Kennedy Krieger
been reported to be associated with less positive parent– Institute and Johns Hopkins Medicine—Baltimore, spon-
child relationships (Willoughby, 2008) and a decrease in sored by the Autism Speaks Foundation.
adolescents’ size of social networks (Kraut et al., 1998). Prior to participation in the study, a short phone inter-
Given that adolescents with ASD have difficulties with view with parents was conducted to assure that the adoles-
social skills and communication (American Psychological cents: (1) had a reading level at the 5th grade or higher, so
Association (APA), 2000), it is important to examine the that the adolescents could complete the measures indepen-
associations between autism symptoms and media usage. dently; (2) had been previously diagnosed with ASD by a
If we find an association between social and/or communi- licensed professional; and (3) had a score of 15 or higher
cation skills and media use, we might be able to use media on the Lifetime Form of the Social Communication
to positively impact these skills. Thus, understanding the Questionnaire (SCQ; Rutter et al., 2003), which was
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
916 Autism 18(8)
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of adolescents with ASD Table 2. Demographic characteristics of parents (N = 91).
(N = 91).
Variable Parent
Variable Adolescents with ASD
Age (in years)
Age (in years) Mean ± SD 46.7 ± 6.0
Mean ± SD 14.8 ± 1.9 Range 31.4 − 59.9
Range 12.0 − 18.0 Relationship to adolescent (n, %)
Gender (n, %) Biological mother 80 (88%)
Male 74 (81%) Biological father 7 (8%)
Female 17 (19%) Adoptive mother 3 (3%)
Education level (n, %) Stepmother 1 (1%)
Grade 6–Grade 9 58 (64%) Ethnicity (n, %)
Grade 10–Grade 12 25 (28%) White non-Hispanic 90 (99%)
High school graduate 7 (7%) African American 1 (1%)
Ungraded special education 1 (1%) Marital status (n, %)
Reading level Married 75%
> Grade level 39 (43%) Divorced 18%
< Grade level 30 (33%) Other 7%
= Grade level 22 (24%) Number of children in family
Primary diagnosis (n, %) Mean ± SD 2.5 ± 1.26
Asperger syndrome 58 (64%) Range 1 − 7
Autistic disorder 17 (19%) Education status (n, %)
PDD-NOS 16 (18%) High school graduate 3 (3%)
Comorbidity (n, %) 1–3 years of college or associate degree 23 (25%)
ADHD 44 (48%) Bachelor’s degree 21 (23%)
Anxiety 27 (30%) Post BA/BS but no graduate degree 18 (20%)
Obsessive-compulsive disorder 19 (21%) Graduate degree (master’s or doctoral degree) 26 (29%)
Depression 15 (17%) Employment status (n, %)
Intellectual disability 6 (7%) Unemployed 22 (24%)
Other 28 (31%) Full-time 40 (30%)
Speaking skills (n, %) Part-time 57 (44%))
Speaks in full sentences 86 (95%) Seasonally/temporarily 2 (2%)
Speaks in phrases of several words 5 (5%) Household income in 2008
US regions (n, %) $10,000–$49,999 22%
Northeast 45 (49.5%) $50,000–$89,999 30%
South 18 (19.8%) $90,000–$159,999 32%
Midwest 15 (16.5%) ⩾ $160,000 17%
West 13 (14.3%) Median $85,000
Note: PDD-NOS: pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise
specified; ADHD: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Measures
administered during the screening phone interview. After Data were collected from adolescents and their parents
the adolescents and their parents completed the question- through mailed questionnaires.
naires and returned them to the research office, the adoles-
cents were sent a gift card as a token of appreciation for Background information. During the phone screen, parents
their participation. reported their child’s age, gender, and primary ASD diag-
nosis. By filling out the questionnaires, parents provided
information on adolescent characteristics, such as current
Participants
autism symptoms, speaking skills, and comorbidity of
Screening phone interviews were conducted with 119 par- intellectual disability. They were also asked about family
ents, and 113 adolescents qualified for the study. A total of characteristics, such as household income, parental educa-
91 adolescents and their parents completed and returned tion level, and parental employment status.
mailed surveys. The data were collected during the summer
months in the United States (May 2009 to August 2009). Past and present autism symptoms. Parents completed the
Tables 1 and 2 show the demographic characteristics of the Lifetime Form and Current Forms of the Social Communi-
adolescents with ASD and their parents, respectively. cation Questionnaire (SCQ; Rutter et al., 2003). The SCQ
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
Kuo et al. 917
contains 40 items in three domains (social interaction, com- their mother, father, sibling(s), other relative, peer(s) or
munication, and repetitive, stereotyped patterns of behav- friend(s), professional staff, or someone else. Adolescents
ior). A score of 1 is given for the presence of an abnormal who used instant messaging programs or emails were asked
behavior. A cutoff score of 15 on the Lifetime Form indi- to report the companions with whom they exchanged
cates likely ASD. Good reliability and convergent validity instant messages or emails. Adolescents were allowed to
have been reported (Chandler et al., 2007; Witwer and choose more than one companion.
Lecavalier, 2008). In the present study, alpha reliability of
the Lifetime Form and the Current Form were .77 and .80,
respectively. Results
Frequency and amount of time
Parent–child relationships. Adolescents completed the Inven-
tory of Parent and Peer Attachment–Revised (IPPA-R; Gul- Table 3 shows the frequency and the amount of time that
lone and Robinson, 2005). The IPPA-R has 28 items for adolescents watched television and used a computer. We
mother–child relationships and 28 items for father–child present the frequency of adolescents who watched televi-
relationships rated on a 3-point scale from 1 (never true) to sion or used a computer on either the weekday or weekend
3 (always true), with a higher total score indicating more day or on both days. We calculated the average daily hours
positive parent–child relationships. The IPPA-R has good spent watching television and using a computer over one
internal consistency reliability and convergent validity week by multiplying the weekday hours of each activity
(Gullone and Robinson, 2005). Alpha reliabilities were .76 by 5 and multiplying the weekend hours of each activity
and .87 for mother–child relationships and father–child by 2, and then dividing the sum of these two calculations
relationships, respectively. by 7. Thus, the average time shown in Table 3 is not
merely an average of the weekday and weekend hours but
Friendship qualities. Adolescents completed the Friendship is weighted to reflect more weekday than weekend days in
Qualities Scale (FQS; Bukowski et al., 1994), which meas- a week.
ures the adolescents’ friendship qualities with their best On any given day, 78% of adolescents watched televi-
friend. The FQS has 23 items rated on a 5-point scale from sion for an average of 2.3 h. Almost all adolescents (98%)
1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), and it contains used a computer on any given day for an average of 4.9 h.
five dimensions of friendships, namely, companionship, To examine weekday and weekend differences in media
conflict, helpfulness, security, and closeness, which are use, we used matched-pairs t-tests for continuous data and
measured. The total scores are calculated using the mean McNemar tests (the matched-pairs equivalent of a chi-
score in each dimension, with high scores reflecting friend- square test) for categorical data (Sheskin, 2007). We report
ships perceived to be high in the named dimension. Good the McNemar test statistic (z) because of small cell sizes.
psychometric properties have been reported (Bukowski et The frequency of weekday and weekend television viewing
al., 1994). In this study, alpha reliability was .87. was not significantly different (66% versus 73%; z = 1.5, p
= .210). Similarly, the amount of time spent watching tele-
Media use. Adolescents completed activity reports for one vision between weekdays and weekend days was not sig-
weekday and one weekend day at the end of the day. Ado- nificantly different (2.6 h vs 2.7 h; t(70) = −1.24, p = .221).
lescents reported on time spent watching television and Similar to television viewing, there were no significant dif-
engaging in computer activities, which included playing ferences between weekday and weekend use in the fre-
video games on the computer as well as on a video game quency of computer use (92% vs 91%; z = 0.30, p = 1.000),
console. Other computer activities queried included brows- or the amount of time spent using a computer (4.8 h vs 5.0
ing websites, receiving/sending emails, visiting chat rooms, h; t (90) = −.45, p = .651).
using social networking programs, and using instant mes- Regarding specific computer activities (video gaming,
saging programs. visiting websites, emailing, visiting chat rooms, using
If the adolescent indicated that he or she used media on social networking programs, or using instant messaging
a given day, they were asked to indicate the total amount of programs), exploring websites and playing video games
time they spent using each type of media, such as “How (including both video games on personal computers and on
much time did you spend watching TV today?” They were video-game consoles) were the most common (see Table 3).
also asked to write in the name of the television programs On average, adolescents spent over 2 h surfing websites
watched, games played, and websites visited. For video and 2 h playing video games per day. A small number of
games, adolescents did not need to specify the format adolescents used computers for emailing, social network-
(computer, console, or tablet), but rather reported on the ing, chatting, instant messaging, and doing other activities
total number of hours spent playing video games, and the (instrumental use, e.g. working on a school project or
specific games that they played. For each activity, they also downloading software). Although they less frequently used
reported whether they engaged in the activity alone or with instant messaging programs or visited chat rooms, they
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
918 Autism 18(8)
Table 3. Amount of time spent watching television and engaging in computer activities on any given day.
Variable N % of all Meana (h) SD (h) Range (h) Meanb (h)
adolescents
Television 71 78% 2.25 1.94 0.12–11.02 1.76
Computer 89 98% 4.91 3.91 0.10–18.76 4.88
Types of Computer Activities
Website 76 84% 2.15 1.83 0.01–8.36 1.80
Video gamec 71 78% 2.40 2.51 0.14–16.14 1.88
Instrumental used 41 45% 1.05 1.12 0.04–4.07 1.29
Email 27 30% 0.39 0.61 0.02–2.86 0.11
Social networking program 21 23% 0.81 0.67 0.06–2.14 0.19
Instant messaging program 20 22% 1.00 1.01 0.05–3.07 0.22
Chat room 12 13% 1.03 1.53 0.02–5.71 0.14
aMean value represents average time for adolescents who engaged in that specific activity, excluding the zero values for those who did not engage in
the activity. The mean values were weighted for weekday and weekend values.
bMean value represents average time for all adolescents, including the zero values if no time was spent engaged in that specific activity. The mean
values were weighted for weekday and weekend values.
cVideo games include games played on computers, consoles, and any other formats such as tablets and smart phones.
dExamples of instrumental use include doing homework, downloading, and using software.
spent a relatively long duration of time when they engaged Television programs. Cartoons were the most popular televi-
in these two activities. The range of time spent in these sion genre, and accounted for 37% of television programs
activities was large, which suggests that some adolescents reported by adolescents (see Figure 1). Frequently listed car-
with ASD spent large amounts of time on these activities, toons included SpongeBob SquarePants, Fairly Odd Parents,
and many did not do these activities. No significant differ- Total Drama Action, The Penguins of Madagascar, Family
ences were found in the frequency and the amount of time Guy, and The Simpsons. Comedy (including situational com-
spent on each of the computer activities between weekdays edy) was the second most popular television genre, account-
and weekend days. ing for 15%. Each of the remainder of the television genres
accounted for less than 10% of reported television programs.
Content preferences
Video games. Action games accounted for slightly less
We further examined the contents of television pro- than half of reported video games (46%) (see Figure 2).
grams, video games, and websites that adolescents with Action games typically challenge the player’s physical skills
ASD most frequently reported. A total of 359 television and coordination. As shown in Figure 2, shooting games
programs (including movies played on television), 240 were the most frequently reported games in the action
video games, and 439 websites were listed by adoles- genre. Simulation games and role-playing games repre-
cents. All reported media content was coded by the first sented about 10%–20% of reported games. Adolescents less
author and a graduate student (who was blind to the frequently played classic games (including board games,
study purpose). The genres of television programs and card games, puzzles, gambling, word games, and game
video games were adapted from Roberts et al.’s (2004) shows), racing games, and adventure games, with each of
media activity coding scheme, and the definitions of the them accounting for less than 5% of reported games.
genres were based on Newcomb (2004) and Adams
(2009), respectively. The genres of websites were cre- Websites. Websites used for information and research
ated by the first author. The genres of television pro- accounted for the majority of reported websites, with those
grams, video games, and websites are available from the containing information on video games as the most com-
author upon request. mon sites and those containing information on anime as the
Inter-rater reliability analysis using the Kappa statistic second most frequently reported sites (see Figure 3). Ado-
was performed to determine consistency between the two lescents also visited sites for entertainment (e.g. watching
coders. The inter-rater reliability Kappa was .925 (p < .001) online anime, reading online comics, and sharing and view-
for television program, .918 (p < .001) for video games, and ing video clips), sites for either maintaining or establishing
.765 (p < .001) for websites. For discrepancies, the first and relationships (e.g. friendships and intimate relationships),
the second authors made a consensus decision about which and sites for playing games. The remainder of the reported
genre was the most appropriate. websites accounted for less than 10%, and included search
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
Kuo et al. 919
Figure 1. Percentage and number of television program types (N = 359).
Figure 2. Percentage and number of video game categories (N = 240).
engine websites, shopping sites, online news, and family/ with their mothers, followed by siblings and then fathers.
children sites. They less frequently watched television with peers and
other companions. Companions for television viewing
did not differ significantly between weekdays and week-
Companions
end days.
Table 4 shows the frequency with which adolescents Regarding video games, more than a half of adolescents
with ASD used various media with different compan- played video games alone, and about one-fourth with peers.
ions. About half of adolescents who watched television Peers were the companions with whom adolescents most
did it either alone or with family members on any given frequently used instant messaging programs, and either
day. Adolescents most frequently watched television sent or received emails.
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
920 Autism 18(8)
Figure 3. Percentage and number of types of websites (N = 493).
Table 4. Companions with whom adolescents with ASD used media on any given day (N, % of all adolescentsa).
Companion Watching television Playing video Sending emails to Receiving emails from Using instant messaging
games programs
Alone 38 (42%) 59 (65%) N/A N/A N/A
Mother 34 (37%) 1 (1%) 4 (4%) 6 (7%) 2 (2%)
Father 27 (30%) 2 (2%) 5 (5%) 4 (4%) 0 (0%)
Sibling(s) 32 (35%) 13 (14%) 3 (3%) 2 (2%) 3 (3%)
Peer(s) 12 (13%) 22 (24%) 13 (14%) 16 (18%) 18 (20%)
Professional staff 0 (0%) 1 (1%) 4 (4%) 5 (5%) 0 (0%)
Relatives 6 (7%) 4 (4%) 6 (7%) 5 (5%) 3 (3%)
Other 2 (2%) 6 (7%) 4 (4%) 11 (12%) 1 (1%)
aThe values were based on adolescents’ activity reports on both weekday and weekend day. The percentiles represented the number of adolescents
who did it on either weekday or weekend day.
Factors associated with media use score) were associated with the types of television pro-
grams they watched. Females were more likely to watch
We used chi-square and t-tests to examine factors associ- reality TV shows than males (30% vs 7%; χ2(1) = 7.25, p =
ated with how adolescents with ASD used media. Because .007). Adolescents with more autism symptoms were more
of the non-normal distribution of variables, and the many likely to watch news programs (t(89) = 2.32, p = .023) than
adolescents who did not engage in specific computer activi- those with fewer autism symptoms.
ties (e.g. instant messaging and using chat rooms), we used Age, gender, and household income were significantly
a dichotomous variable to indicate whether adolescents associated with adolescents’ computer use. Adolescents who
participated in each discretionary activity on any given day used social networking programs were older than those who
(0 = no, 1 = yes). Dichotomous factors examined included did not (15.6 years old vs 14.6 years old; t(89) = −2.21, p =
gender, comorbidity of intellectual disability (0 = without .030). Males were more likely to play video games than
ID, 1 = with ID), parental education level (1 = lower than females (68% vs 11%; χ2 (1) = 4.49, p = .034). More males
bachelor’s degree and 2 = bachelor’s degree or higher), and than females played action games (53% vs 12%; χ2(1) = 9.36,
parental employment status (1 = unemployed and 2 = p = .002) and sport or competitive games (24% vs 0%; χ2(1)
employed). Other factors were continuous (e.g. age and = 5.16, p = .023). More females than males visited websites
autism symptoms). devoted to shopping (29% vs 11%; χ2(1) = 3.91, p = .048).
None of the factors were significantly associated with Adolescents in families with higher household incomes were
whether adolescents watched television or not, but gender more likely to spend time using a computer than those in fam-
and the severity of autism symptoms (current total SCQ ilies with lower household incomes (t(89) = −2.05, p = .043).
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
Kuo et al. 921
Associations between media use and method they utilize to socialize with peers or friends. Future
important personal relationships research directly comparing the media use between adoles-
cents with ASD and typically developing adolescents is
Adolescents who watched television with their mothers or
needed to verify our indirect comparison.
fathers reported more positive mother–child relationships
Adolescents with ASD most frequently watched car-
(t(89) = 2.11, p = .039) and more positive father–child rela-
toons, some of which are targeted toward younger children.
tionships (t(89) = 2.22, p = .029), than those who did not
These types of television programs usually contain less
watch television with mothers or fathers.
suggestive dialog, humor, and coarse language, and might
In terms of friendships, adolescents who received email
be easier for adolescents with ASD to comprehend.
from friends reported greater security in their friendships
Regarding video games, adolescents with ASD fre-
(t(89) = 2.14, p = .036). Similarly, adolescents who used
quently played video games that involved shooting or kill-
social networking programs reported greater security in
ing. Shooting games require the player to focus attention on
their friendships (t(89) = 2.11, p = .039). Adolescents who
and identify specific targets within a complex background
visited websites for establishing or maintaining relation-
(Adams, 2009). Individuals with ASD often show unusual
ships reported more positive overall friendships than those
attention to details and preoccupation with parts of objects
who did not (t(89) = 2.19, p = .031).
instead of the whole object (O’Riordan et al., 2001). They
have strengths in visual search tasks and feature discrimina-
tion, which require the ability to pick out a small stimulus
Discussion
from a surrounding background (O’Riordan and Plaisted,
This study helps us understand how adolescents with ASD 2001). Adolescents with ASD may have the capacity to per-
use media. A large number of adolescents with ASD in this form well in shooting games, and at the same time, they
sample engaged in media activities. Cartoons were the tel- might be able to have successful experiences in these kinds
evision programs that they watched most frequently. When of games. Although we did not find associations between
using a computer, they tended to visit websites that con- shooting games and stereotyped, restricted behaviors in our
tained information about video games and anime, and play sample, prior research has found that playing shooting
video games that involved killing and shooting. Age, gen- games is associated with aggressive behavior in young
der, and severity of autism symptoms were associated with adults (Barlett et al., 2007). Given that a large number of the
whether adolescents with ASD engaged in media activities adolescents in our sample frequently played shooting game,
and their media content preferences. Engaging in specific it is important for future researchers to explore whether
activities with specific companions was associated with there is a similar association between shooting games and
adolescents’ relationships with those companions. problem behaviors in adolescents with ASD.
Because our study did not include typically developing In terms of website preferences, adolescents with ASD
comparison, we can only compare our findings to those of most frequently explored websites containing information
previous published studies on typically developing adoles- about video games and anime. One of the autism symptoms,
cents (Rideout et al., 2010; Roberts et al., 2004). This pro- stereotyped interests, may explain the website preferences
vides us with some indication of the possible differences of of adolescents with ASD (APA, 2000). Winter-Messiers
the media-use patterns between adolescents with ASD and (2007) interviewed children and adolescents with Asperger’s
typically developing adolescents. In comparison to the syndrome about their special interests and found that video
research on typically developing adolescents who spent an games and arts (including anime) were two of the main
average of 4.7 h watching television on a typical day interest themes. Our data support this finding.
(Rideout et al., 2010), adolescents with ASD in our sample It was interesting to find that autism symptoms were
spent half the amount of time watching television and twice associated with adolescents’ media content preferences.
the amount of time using computers (including playing Adolescents with ASD with more autism symptoms were
games). This finding also differs from Shane and Albert’s more likely to watch news programs than those with fewer
(2008) in which youth with ASD spent considerable time autism symptoms. News programs primarily report current
watching television. Because Shane and Albert’s sample events. The content is usually straightforward, rarely
included both children and adolescents with ASD, their requiring viewers to interpret the emotions and intentions
findings may not represent the media use patterns in ado- or others, or to understand meanings of metaphors.
lescence. One key difference in our study was that adoles- Therefore, news programs may be relatively easy to under-
cents with ASD frequently watched television with their stand. It is also possible that teens were passively watching
mothers, whereas typically developing adolescents tend to the television programs that their parents preferred.
watch television with friends rather than parents (Roberts et We found that adolescents with ASD who used comput-
al., 2004). Watching television, videos, or movies with ers for social purposes reported more positive friendships
peers could be one method through which typically devel- than those who used computers for other purposes. Notably,
oping adolescents socialize (Roberts et al., 2004). For ado- peers were the companions with whom adolescents with
lescents with ASD, watching television may not be the ASD most frequently engaged in these computer activities.
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
922 Autism 18(8)
Research on typically developing adolescents suggests that bias. To solve these limitations, future studies could collect
adolescents may have better social relationships if they data in real time via an electronic device (e.g. PDA) to
spend more time communicating online with family and record the start and end time of each media activity. These
friends than with strangers or acquaintances because offline methods, however, may be burdensome to adolescents.
relationships with family and friends may provide more Fourth, we conducted a number of bivariate compari-
social support than strangers and acquaintances. Our data sons to examine the factors that may be associated with the
support this assertion. adolescents’ media use, which could have increased the
We also found that adolescents with ASD who watched possibility of a Type 1 error. Due to the small sample size,
television with their parents reported more positive parent– we did not adopt a more stringent p level. Readers should
child relationships than those who did not watch television interpret our findings with caution, and replication of our
with their parents. Watching television with children not findings with larger samples is warranted.
only provides opportunities for parents to gain knowledge Another limitation of this study was that all data were
of their children’s preferences and reactions to the televi- collected during the summer months. It is possible that ado-
sion content but also allows parents to clarify, explain, or lescents with ASD were more likely to spend time using
discuss the television content (Dorr et al., 1989). When media during the summer months than during the school
watching television together, parents and adolescents share year because they have more free time. We do not know
the same experience, and the television content may pro- how adolescents with ASD use media during the academic
vide a concrete subject for conversation (Sang et al., 1993). year, and we do not know if adolescents’ use of media is
Moreover, watching television with parents may also pro- similar between summer months and other months.
vide children a sense of security (Dorr et al., 1989). Finally, we did not collect data from typically develop-
However, we do not know the causal relationship between ing adolescents for direct comparison. There is considera-
watching television together and parent–child relation- ble data on patterns of media use by typically developing
ships. Longitudinal research is needed. adolescents, but this information also becomes outdated
Our study had several limitations, which should be noted fairly quickly. Future studies that collect data from both
in interpreting the findings. First, the findings from our study populations will facilitate a better understanding of the use
should be generalized with caution. All participating families of media by adolescents with ASD compared with their
were from the United States. Adolescent participants were peers without ASD.
almost exclusively Caucasian, and almost all had at least The present study is the first study investigating how
phrase speech. Two-thirds had a parent-reported diagnosis of adolescents with ASD use media, focusing on watching tel-
Asperger’s syndrome. Through conducting a mail-based sur- evision and using a computer. In addition to describing
vey, we were able to gain regional representativeness across media use patterns in adolescents with ASD, we identified
the United States, but most participant families were well factors that are associated with adolescents’ media use. We
educated and many came from middle to upper socio-eco- collected data directly from adolescents rather than prox-
nomic status. Thus, this sample may represent adolescents ies (e.g., parents, caregivers, and teachers), which pro-
who are more skilled and have greater access to media than vided the adolescents an active role in research, and also
the broader population of adolescents with ASD. yielded detailed media use information. Although we can-
Second, we did not know whether parents set rules on not compare adolescents’ media use between summer
adolescents’ use of media, such as what types of television months and academic years, one advantage of collecting
programs adolescents could watch, how long adolescents data during summer months is that adolescents had more
were allowed to play video games, and whether adolescents free time in summer months and thus they had more
were allowed to have an account on the social networking opportunities to engage in these activities. Therefore, we
websites. Rates of use may be influenced by household were able to gain more information on their television
rules. Moreover, adolescents might have engaged in more viewing and computer use.
than one activity simultaneously. For example, they may Management of media use has been reported to be a
have surfed websites and sent instant messages to friends at major issue for parents of children and adolescents with
the same time. Thus, our findings my represent an under- ASD and has caused stress within their family (Nally et al.,
reporting of media use by these adolescents. 2000). A better understanding of how adolescents with
Third, most measures were self-report by the adoles- ASD use media may help parents be less worried about
cents with ASD. Although we view this as a methodologi- their adolescents’ frequent media use and help them moni-
cal strength, it also comes with some limitations. The data tor their adolescents’ exposure to media. Additional
we gathered represents the adolescents’ perceptions and research is needed to better understand if the social skills
memories. We do not know the accuracy of their reported applied to or learned from online interactions as well as the
media use, and we do not know whether the days on which relationships established online could be generalized to real
adolescents completed the activity reports were representa- lives. Moreover, longitudinal studies are needed to investi-
tive of their typical days. Moreover, completing the activity gate the developmental consequences of media use for this
reports at the end of the day may have resulted in recall population.
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
Kuo et al. 923
Acknowledgements Nally B, Houlton B and Ralph S (2000) Researches in brief: the
management of television and video by parents of children
We thank teachers, therapists, and ASD-related organiza-
with autism. Autism 4: 331–337.
tions and support groups for their assistance with partici-
Nathanson AI (1999) Identifying and explaining the relation-
pant recruitment. We are grateful for the participation of the
ship between parental mediation and children’s aggression.
adolescents and their parents in our research. This research
Communication Research 26: 124–164.
was completed in partial fulfillment of the requirements for Nathanson AI (2002) The unintended effects of parental mediation
Dr Kuo’s Doctor of Science degree in Rehabilitation of television on adolescents. Media Psychology 4: 207–230.
Sciences from Sargent at Boston University, College of Newcomb H (2004) Encyclopedia of television. New York:
Health and Rehabilitation Sciences. Fitzroy Dearborn.
Olson CK, Kutner LA, Baer L, et al. (2009) M-rated video games
and aggressive or problem behavior among young adoles-
Funding
cents. Applied Developmental Science 13: 188–198.
This study was funded in part by the Boston University Dudley
O’Riordan M and Plaisted K (2001) Enhanced discrimination in
Allen Sargent Research Fund and by the American Occupational
autism. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A:
Therapy Foundation Dissertation Research Grant to the first author.
Human Experimental Psychology 54A: 961–979.
O’Riordan MA, Plaisted KC, Driver J, et al. (2001) Superior
visual search in autism. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
References
Human Perception and Performance 27: 719–730.
Adams E (2009) Fundamentals of Game Design. Berkeley, CA: Orsmond GI and Kuo H (2011) The daily lives of adolescents
New Riders Press. with an autism spectrum disorder: discretionary time use and
American Psychological Association (APA) (2000) Diagnostic activity partners. Autism 15: 1–21.
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR). Orsmond GI, Krauss MW and Seltzer MM (2004) Peer relation-
4th ed., text rev. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric ships and social and recreational activities among adolescents
Association. and adults with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Anderson DR, Huston AC, Schmitt KL, et al. (2001) Early child- Disorders 34: 245–256.
hood television viewing and adolescent behavior: the recon- Rideout VJ, Foehr UG and Roberts DF (2010) Generation M2:
tact study. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Media in the Lives of 8- to 18-Year-Olds. Menlo Park, CA:
Development 66: 1–154. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Barlett CP, Harris RJ and Baldassaro R (2007) Longer you Roberts DF, Foehr UG, Rideout VJ, et al. (2004) Kids and Media
play, the more hostile you feel: examination of first person in America. New York: Cambridge University Press.
shooter video games and aggression during video game play. Rutter M, Bailey A and Lord C (2003) SCQ: Social Communication
Aggressive Behavior 33: 486–497. Questionnaire. Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological
Blais JJ, Craig WM, Pepler D, et al. (2008) Adolescents online: Services.
the importance of Internet activity choices to salient relation- Sang F, Schmitz B and Tasche K (1993) Developmental trends in
ships. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 37: 522–536. television coviewing of parent-child dyads. Journal of Youth
Bukowski WM, Hoza B and Boivin M (1994) Measuring friend- and Adolescence 22: 531–542.
ship quality during pre- and early adolescence: the development Shane HC and Albert PD (2008) Electronic screen media for persons
and psychometric properties of the Friendship Qualities Scale. with autism spectrum disorders: results of a survey. Journal of
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 11: 471–484. Autism and Developmental Disorders 38: 1499–1508.
Chandler S, Charman T, Baird G, et al. (2007) Validation of the Sheskin DJ (2007) Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric
Social Communication Questionnaire in a population cohort of Statistical Procedures. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/
children with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of American CRC.
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 46: 1324–1332. Shields MK and Behrman RE (2000) Children and computer
Dorr A, Kovaric P and Doubleday C (1989) Parent-child coview- technology: Analysis and recommendations. The Future of
ing of television. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media Children 10: 4–30.
33: 35–51. Valkenburg PM and Peter J (2007) Preadolescents’ and adoles-
Gullone E and Robinson K (2005) The Inventory of Parent and cents’ online communication and their closeness to friends.
Peer Attachment-Revised (IPPA-R) for children: a psycho- Developmental Psychology 43: 267–277.
metric investigation. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy Willoughby T (2008) A short-term longitudinal study of Internet
12: 67–79. and computer game use by adolescent boys and girls:
Kraut R, Patterson M, Lundmark V, et al. (1998) Internet para- prevalence, frequency of use, and psychosocial predictors.
dox: A social technology that reduces social involvement Developmental Psychology 44: 195–204.
and psychological well-being? American Psychologist 53: Winter-Messiers MA (2007) From tarantulas to toilet brushes:
1017–1031. understanding the special interest areas of children and youth
Larson R and Verma S (1999) How children and adolescents with Asperger syndrome. Remedial and Special Education
spend time across the world: work, play, and developmental 28: 140–152.
opportunities. Psychological Bulletin 125: 701–736. Witwer AN and Lecavalier L (2008) Autism screening tools: An
Mazurek MO, Shattuck PT, Wagner M, et al. (2012) Prevalence evaluation of the Social Communication Questionnaire and
and correlates of screen-based media use among youths the Developmental Behaviour Checklist-Autism Screening
with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Algorithm. Journal of Intellectual & Developmental Disability
Developmental Disorders 42: 1757–1767. 32: 179–187.
Downloaded from aut.sagepub.com at UNIV OF CONNECTICUT on January 14, 2015
