fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #1
ORIGINALRESEARCH
published:23February2022
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2022.767446
Why iPlay: The Relationships of
Autistic and Schizotypal Traits With
Patterns of Video Game Use
NancyYang1*,PeteL.Hurd2andBernardJ.Crespi1
1DepartmentofBiologicalSciences,SimonFraserUniversity,Burnaby,BC,Canada,2DepartmentofPsychology,
NeuroscienceandMentalHealthInstitute,UniversityofAlberta,Edmonton,AB,Canada
Video games are popular and ubiquitous aspects of human culture, but their
relationships to psychological and neurophysiological traits have yet to be analyzed in
social-evolutionary frameworks. We examined the relationships of video game usage,
motivations, and preferences with autistic and schizotypal traits and two aspects of
neurophysiology, reaction time and targeting time. Participants completed the Autism
Quotient, Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire, a Video Game Usage Questionnaire,
and two neurophysiological tasks. We tested in particular the hypotheses, motivated
by theory and previous work, that: (1) participants with higher autism scores would
play video games more, and participants with higher schizotypy scores would play
video games less; and (2) autism and positive schizotypy would be associated with
opposite patterns of video game use, preferences and motivations. Females, but not
Editedby:
JohnAnthonyJohnson, males, with higher autism scores played more video games, and exhibited evidence
ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity
of relatively male-typical video game genre preferences and motivations. By contrast,
(PSU),UnitedStates
positive schizotypy was associated with reduced video game use in both genders, for
Reviewedby:
ElizabethA.Boyle, several measures of game use frequency. In line with previous findings, males played
UniversityoftheWestofScotland, videogamemorethanfemalesdidoverall,preferredactionvideogames,andexhibited
UnitedKingdom
faster reaction and targeting times. Females preferred Puzzle and Social Simulation
MicahMazurek,
UniversityofVirginia,UnitedStates games.Fasterreactionandtargetingtimeswereassociatedwithgamingmotivesrelated
*Correspondence: to skill development and building behavior. These findings show that gaming use and
NancyYang
patterns reflect aspects of psychology, and gender, related to social cognition and
nancy_yang_2@sfu.ca
imagination, as well as aspects of neurophysiology. More generally, the results suggest
Specialtysection: that video game use is notably affected by levels of autistic and schizotypal traits, and
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
that video games may provide an evolutionarily novel medium for imaginative play in
TheoreticalandPhilosophical
Psychology, whichimmersiveplayexperiencescanbedecoupledfromsocialinteraction.
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinPsychology Keywords: autism, schizotypy, video games (psychology), play, imagination, evolution, social cognition,
technology
Received:30August2021
Accepted:10January2022
Published:23February2022
INTRODUCTION
Citation:
YangN,HurdPLandCrespiBJ Whydopeopleplay?Playisanearlyuniversalbehavioramongmammals(Burghardt,2005),but
(2022)WhyiPlay:TheRelationships
onlyhumanshavethecapacityforcomplexandsocialpretendplay,andfordevelopingthemultiple
ofAutisticandSchizotypalTraitsWith
ordersofintentionalitynecessaryfornarrativeproduction,theory-of-mind,andabstractthinking
PatternsofVideoGameUse.
Front.Psychol.13:767446. (Nowell,2016).Playhasalsobeenpostulatedasafundamentalpreparatoryadaptationforhigher-
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2022.767446 orderadultsocialbehaviorssuchascompetition,reciprocity,andmoraldevelopment(Bekoff,2001;
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 1 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #2
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Bateson, 2005). There is also evidence that play may be DelhoveandGreitemeyer,2020).Forexample,self-perceivedin-
considered a form of proto-creativity, which may underlie game aggression in the First Person Shooter game Overwatch
higher-order social cognitive processes including imagination, ispositivelyassociatedwithtraitaggression,DarkTetradtraits,
theory-of-mind, and abstract problem-solving (Vygotsky, 1967; and negatively with empathy and agreeableness in players
Leslie, 1987). For example, in both object and pretend play, (DelhoveandGreitemeyer,2020).Multiplelinesofevidencealso
thereisatransitiveprocesswherechildrenspontaneouslyextract suggest Big Five personality traits have a measurable impact
or conjure abstract properties of objects, manipulate or “play” in individual patterns of video game usage (Tabacchi et al.,
withsuchconstructs,thenprojectthemontootherentities.The 2017; Wang et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). For example,
transitiveprocessofspontaneouslyconjuringabstractproperties extraversion has been positively associated with preference
and manipulating them among unrelated objects is a hallmark for party, music, and casual games, and negatively with
ofimagination,creativity,anddivergentthinking.Physicalplay, fantasy role-playing, MMORPGs (massively multiplayer online
such as rough-and-tumble play, has also been implicated in role playing games), action role-playing, and strategy games
the development of social behaviors, such as dominance and (Peever et al., 2012). Similarly, conscientiousness has been
cooperation (Smith and Boulton, 1990). Thus, play appears to associated with preferences for sport, racing, flight simulation,
be a key ontogenetic developmental phase in human social and fighting games (Peever et al., 2012), which suggests
cognitivedevelopment. that athletic and action video game genres involve clear and
How,then,doesthecurrentdigitalizationofthesocialworld identifiablegoalsandimmediatereinforcementofachievements,
affect how people play? Given increased virtualization of the andconscientiousnessisassociatedwithgreatergoalorientation
socialworld,videogameshavecometoincreasinglypredominate (Colquitt and Simmering, 1998). Openness to experience,
the“iGen”(i.e.,thegenerationofindividualsbornbetween1995 a personality trait linked with creativity and imagination
and 2011, who grew up with smartphones and social media) (McCrae, 1987), has been associated with preferences for
play space (Twenge, 2017). As of 2021, there are nearly 227 action-adventure and platformer games (Peever et al., 2012),
million video game players in the U.S., with the median age at both of which usually involve open exploration of virtual
31yearsold(EntertainmentSoftwareAssociation[ESA],2021), environments and creative puzzle-solving (e.g., Legend of
making video games one of the most popular pastimes enjoyed Zelda, Super Mario). Indeed, openness to experience has
by people from all age groups. Annual video game sales in the also been associated with greater motivation to play video
U.S. have also grown from $25 billion in 2016 to $35 billion in games for immersive experiences (Johnson and Gardner,
2018(EntertainmentSoftwareAssociation[ESA],2019),making 2010). Individuals with higher social orientation tend to play
itoneofthemostlucrativeandfastestgrowingindustriesinthe competitiveormultiplayergamessuchasCallofDutyorWorld
entertainmentsector.Theincreasingaccessibilityandubiquityof of Warcraft and individuals with high goal orientation prefer
digitaltechnology,suchasmobilephonesandtablets,havemade exploratory, intrinsically rewarding games such as Minecraft
it possible for most of the population to access games at their (TondelloandNacke,2019).
fingertips.Theincreasinglyaccessibilityofvideogameshasalso How, then, does the development of diverse social-
madeitpossibleforgamestobeincorporatedintoadiverserange psychological phenotypes correlate with general video usage?
of day-to-day activities, including but not limited to education, From the pattern described above, different typologies of video
entertainment,rehabilitation,andtherapy. game players may be elucidated further, based on differential
Despite the growing importance and popularity of video developmentinsocio-cognitivetraitsandusageprofiles.
games in modern life, the relationships of video game culture Emerging evidence indicates that video games usage
with social and cognitive phenotypes remain little understood. may reflect not only users’ psychological traits, but also
To date, most research on video games had focused on specific neurophysiologicalskillssuchasreactiontime(Dyeetal.,2009;
aspects of neuropsychological traits to video game use, such as Deleuzeetal.,2017;GorbetandSergio,2018;Kowaletal.,2018;
the relationship between aggression and violent video games Torner et al., 2019), spatial visualization (Dorval and Pepin,
(Scott, 1995), the use of video games in training faster reaction 1986), multiple object tracking (Green and Bavelier, 2006),
times (Dye et al., 2009), and the effects of Big Five personality bettercognitiveflexibilityintask-switching(Lietal.,2020)and
traitsonvideogamepreferences(Peeveretal.,2012).Suchwork probabilisticinferencesonvisualperceptualtask(i.e.,beingable
is useful for elucidating the proximate mechanisms underlying to quickly discriminate whether a display of randomly moving
videogameusebutdoesnotcapturetheoverarchingquestionsof dots are moving toward the left or right) that are generalizable
how and why video game usage is involved in the larger socio- acrossmodalities(Greenetal.,2010).Furthermore,videogame
evolutionary framework of play, social cognitive development, usersalsoexhibitbetterhand-eyecoordinationskillsthannon-
and imaginative culture. In other words, why do people play users (Griffith et al., 1983), but the question of whether video
videogames?Whyissuchplayimportant?Whatsocial-cognitive, game usage improves hand-eye coordination times, or whether
psychological, and neurophysiological traits are associated with userswithbetterhand-eyecoordinationplaymorevideogames
video game usage, preferences, and motivations? And how do (orboth),isnotyetresolved.
video games factor into the evolutionary functions of play in Considered together, these results support the view that
general? video game usage patterns are associated with variation in
Current evidence suggests that video game usage patterns some psychological traits and neurophysiological phenotypes.
are consistent with psychological profiles and behaviors that However, most studies have focused on action games, and no
mirror real life motivations and preferences (Wangetal.,2019; previous work has analyzed subclinical autistic and schizotypal
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 2 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #3
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
traits (i.e., traits related to social cognition, neurodevelopment, Furthermore,autistictraitshavebeenassociatedwithhigher
andotherphenotypes)togetherinrelationtovideogameusage video game usage (Mazurek and Engelhardt, 2013b), and
and preferences and their neurophysiological correlates. Such problematic video game usage (i.e., symptoms of clinical
studies are important given the important roles of video games addiction to video games) (Liu et al., 2017; Coutelle et al.,
of diverse genres in human imaginative culture, and given 2021; Craig et al., 2021; Murray et al., 2021). Compared to
that individuals with autismor schizotypy show some evidence neurotypicals, boys and male adolescents with ASD also play
of high rates of video game usage (Mazurek and Engelhardt, video games for longer times, prefer to play alone, and play
2013a,b;Schimmentietal.,2017;Choietal.,2020;Menearand less frequently in multiplayer mode (Paulus et al., 2019). Taken
Ernest, 2020; Coutelle et al., 2021). This study thus analyzes together,autistictraitsmaythusinvolvehighervideogameusage,
howvideogameusagepatterns,genrepreferences,motivations, as well as increased preferences for puzzle, action, platformer,
andreactiontimesareassociatedwithmeasuresofnon-clinical strategy,racing,sports,idle,andconstructionandmanagement
autismandschizotypy. simulationgames.Giventhepositiveassociationofactionvideo
Two studies suggest that psychological variations related to games with autistic traits, we also expect that autistic traits in
theautismspectrumandtheschizophreniaspectrum,including non-clinical individuals may also be positively associated with
positiveschizotypy,maymediateaspectsofvideogameuse.First, increased neurophysiological skills such as faster reaction and
Wendt et al. (2019) reported a positive genetic correlation of hand-eyecoordinationtimes.
computer game use with autism risk, and a negative genetic Incontrasttoautism,positiveschizotypycanbecharacterized
correlationofcomputergameusewithschizophreniarisk.These by hyper-mentalistic traits such as fantasy-proneness, ideas of
findings suggest that autism and schizophrenia or schizotypy reference (i.e., illusory social references to self), paranoia (e.g.,
may show opposite patterns of association with video game illusoryeyecontactandfear),andincreasedimagination(Crespi
use in non-clinical populations, for reasons that have yet to and Badcock, 2008; Crespi et al., 2016). All of these traits may
beinvestigated. beexpectedtoincreasepreferencesforfantasyorfantasy-based
Second, according to the diametric model of social brain role-playing video games that are extensions of pretend play.
disorders (Crespi and Badcock, 2008; Crespi and Go, 2015; In contrast to autism, which is known for its singular focus on
Crespi, 2016, 2019, 2020), autism and psychosis can be select topics of special interests (Casey et al., 1993), schizotypy
conceptualizedaspolarendsofacontinuumofsocialcognition is associated with information processing impairments such as
development, with normality at its center. Thus, autism is poor sustained attention (Lenzenweger et al., 1991), deficits in
characterized by low mentalistic thought (i.e., social cognition) sensorimotorgating(i.e.,inabilitytofilteroutirrelevantstimuli
and high mechanistic thought (i.e., non-social cognition), fromtheenvironment)(Cadenheadetal.,2000;Parketal.,2015),
and psychotic-affective conditions, such as schizotypy, are anddeficitsinsmootheyepursuits(LenzenwegerandO’Driscoll,
characterized by high mentalistic and low mechanistic thought 2006)—all traits that may make video games challenging, as
(Crespi and Badcock, 2008). Given that childhood play can be theycommonlyinvolvedetectingandtrackingsuddenandfast-
categorizedinnon-social(i.e.,object)andsocial(i.e.,pretendor moving objects and distractors while multi-tasking (Hubert-
imaginary)domains,videogameusagepatternsmaybeexpected Wallanderetal.,2011).
toco-varyaccordingtothesocio-cognitivetraitsinautisticand Positiveschizotypaltraits,inparticular,havebeenassociated
schizotypalspectra. with slower reaction time during conditions of high perceptual
Mechanistic thought is characterized by a cognitive style load (Lenzenweger, 2001) and deficits in predicting targeting
specialized for recognizing patterns in rule-based systems (i.e., hand movements (Asai et al., 2008), both of which would
“if p, then q”) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009). In autism, a impede video gameplay, particular action genres, as a large
systemizing cognitive style is applicable to a broad swath of componentofgameplayinvolvefastdecision-makingandquick
domainssuchascollectibles(i.e.,distinguishingbetweentypesof executions of hand-eye movements via controller use. Thus,
objects and collecting them), motoric (i.e., throwing a Frisbee), positiveschizotypaltraitsmaybeassociatedwithdecreasedvideo
mechanical (i.e., taking apart objects and reassembling them), gameusage,aswellasapreferenceforfantasyorfantasy-based
spatial (i.e., fixed interests with routes), action sequences (i.e., role-playing video games, which tend to be slower-paced and
analyzing dance techniques), and numerical traits (i.e., solving emphasizeuser-directedexploratorybehaviorratherthantime-
math or logical problems) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009)—all of intensivetasks.
whichareconduciveforpuzzles,action,platformer,sports,and Genderdifferencesinplayhavebeenwell-documentedinthe
construction simulation types of video games where extensive literature,extendingintovideogameusageandpreferences.Male
strategizing of rule-based systems is involved. Indeed, previous playismorephysicallyaggressive(OstrovandKeating,2004)and
studies have found that individuals with autism prefer gaming “thing-oriented,”withincreasedinterestsinobjectsandfunctions
genres such as Action, Platformer, and Shooter (Mazurek and ofobjectssuchasconstructionandtransportation(Servinetal.,
Engelhardt, 2013b; Kuo et al., 2014), all of which challenge the 1999). In comparison, female play tends to be more socially
player’scoordination,andspeedinrule-basedgameplay.Astrong directedandinvolvefantasy-roleplaying,suchasplayparenting
systemizing style can also involve especially high attention to (i.e., doll playing), a sex difference that has been observed in
details and fast sensory processing (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009), primates(Pryce,1995),andpretendplay(i.e.,toytea-sets)(Servin
which may facilitate higher video game usage by enhancing et al., 1999). Preliminary lines of evidence suggest that sex
attentionalfocus,reactiontimes,andhand-eyecoordination. differences in childhood play may also extend to video game
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 3 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #4
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
usage. For example, college-aged males prefer more physical targetingtimes,twomeasuresofneurophysiologicalperformance
aggressive video game genres such as action, racing, and sports thatmayberelatedtovideogameuseandperformance.
(Greenberg et al., 2010). In contrast, females prefer to prefer
more “traditional” games such as puzzles, cards, classic arcade
MATERIALS AND METHODS
games, or board games (Greenberg et al., 2010), all of which
arelessphysicallyaggressive.Thus,sexdifferencesinpatternsof
Participants
videogameusage,genrepreferences,andmotivationsmightbe
expectedtoreflectgeneralsexdifferencesinchildhoodplay. A total of 351 participants (207 females, 144 males, mean
Basedonthereasonsoutlinedabove,thefollowingpredictions age = 20.20 ± 3.04 years old) were included in the study.
canbemade: Theparticipantswererecruitedfromvariouselectronicmailing
lists (i.e., university student lists and newsletters) and the
Hypothesis 1: Gender differences in video game usage,
Simon Fraser University Undergraduate Psychology Research
genre preferences, and motivations will vary in the
Pool. The following study description was circulated as the
following ways: (1) Males will report greater video game
recruitment email: “Do you play video games? Or do you not
usage than females, (2) Males will prefer mechanistic-
play video games? Either way, we want to hear from you!
orientedvideogamessuchasAction,Platformer,Strategy,
We are doing an online study on the relationship between
Racing, Sports, RPG, and Construction and Management
psychological traits and video game usage. You will receive a
Simulation games while females will prefer Puzzle and
$10 gift card for participation. For more info please contact
SocialSimulationvideogames,(3)Maleswillreportgreater
nancy_yang_2@sfu.ca.”Participantswerereimbursedwitheither
motivation for Skill Development and Customization
a course credit or a $10 electronic gift card for their time.
gamesandfemaleswillreportgreatermotivationsofSocial
Allparticipantsprovidedinformedconsentbeforeparticipating
Interaction,aWaytoFantasize,andaWaytoEscapeonthe
in this study. Data collection took place during the Spring
VideoGameUsageQuestionnaireusedhere.
2021 semester (January–April 2021). The study was approved
Hypothesis 2: Autistic traits will be associated with by the Simon Fraser University Research Ethics Board (Study
increasedvideogameusage.Totalandpositiveschizotypal Permit2020s0503).
traits, as quantified by total score on the SPQ-BR and
Psychological Questionnaires
scores on the SPQ Cognitive-Perceptual subscale, will be
negativelyassociatedwithfrequencyofvideogameusage. The Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) was used to assess
individualvariationsinautistictraits(Baron-Cohenetal.,2001).
Hypothesis 3: Autistic traits will be positively associated
TheAQcomprises50questionsassessingfivedifferentdomains:
with preferences for relatively rule-based video game
(i) social skills, (ii) attention switching, (iii) attention to detail,
genres including Puzzle, Action, Platformer, Strategy,
(iv)communication,(v)imagination.Responseswerescoredina
Racing, Sports, Idle, and Construction and Management
4-pointLikert-scaleformatfrom“definitelyagree”to“definitely
Simulationgames.Totalandpositiveschizotypaltraitswill
disagree.” Participants score one point when they report a trait
bepositivelyassociatedwithpreferencesforFantasy,Role
that is consistent with the autism spectrum, for a possible
Playing,andSocialSimulationvideogames.
scoring range of 0–50. Higher scores on the Social Skills and
Imagination subscale represent lower social skills and lower
Hypothesis 4: Autistic traits will be positively associated
socialimagination.
with mechanistic motivations such as Skill Development
SchizotypaltraitswerequantifiedwithSchizotypalPersonality
and Customization on the Video Game Usage
Questionnaire-BriefRevised(SPQ-BR)(Cohenetal.,2010).The
Questionnaire. Total and positive schizotypal traits
SPQ-BR includes 32 items in a 5-point Likert scale format
will be positively associated with mentalistic motivations
with response choices ranging from “strongly disagree” to
such as Social Interaction, Way to Fantasize, and Way to
“strongly agree.” Possible scores range from 0 to 160, with
EscapeontheVideoGameUsageQuestionnaireusedhere.
higher scores indicative of higher levels of schizotypy. The
Hypothesis 5: Autistic traits will be associated with SPQ-BRisclusteredintothreesuperordinatefactors:Cognitive-
increasedneurophysiologicalskills,suchasfasterreaction Perceptual, Interpersonal, and Disorganized schizotypy—which
timeandhand-eyecoordinationtime.Conversely,totaland map onto the positive, negative, and disorganized dimensions
positive schizotypal traits will be associated with slower of schizophrenia, respectively (Andreasen et al., 1995). The
reactionandhand-eyecoordinationtimes. Cognitive-Perceptual (positive) schizotypy scale (referred to
here as SPQ-CogPer) consists of three subscales: Magical
Hypothesis 6: Increased total video game usage will be
Thinking, Unusual Perceptions, and Ideas of Reference. The
predicted by higher reaction and hand-eye coordination
Interpersonal schizotypy factor includes Social Anxiety and
time. In turn, slower reaction and hand-eye coordination
Constricted Affect, and the Disorganized factor includes
timewillpredictlowervideogameusage.
EccentricBehaviorandOddSpeech.
Thepredictionsofthesehypothesesweretestedusingdataon A Video Game Usage Questionnaire was adapted from the
measuresofautismspectrumandschizotypyspectrumcognition Gaming Attitudes, Motives, and Experiences Scales (GAMES)
in a non-clinical population, and data on reaction times and (Hilgardetal.,2013).Thequestionnairehassixmainsectionsto
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 4 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #5
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
assesspatternsofvideogameusage,aswellashortdemographic to quantify reaction time. Both computer tasks were
sectionthatasksparticipantstoreporttheirageandgender(ex: administered via https://www.psytoolkit.org/ (Stoet,
male, female, other, prefer not to answer). First, participants 2010, 2017), a toolkit for online cognitive-psychological
were asked the amount of weekday and weekend hours spent experiments and surveys1. The questionnaires were
onvideogames,aswellasself-evaluationsofvideogameusage. administered via SurveyMonkey2. The computer tasks are
Participants are also asked the titles of the video games that describedbelow.
theyplay,preferredtypesofvideogamegenres,motivationsfor Fitts’ Law Task (20 Trials in total) (Fitts, 1954): There were
gaming(i.e.,SocialInteractions,StressRelief,SkillDevelopment, 20 trials in total. On each trial, the participant was presented
Adrenaline Rush, A Place to Escape, A Way to Fantasize, with a yellow square on the left upper side of a black screen.
Customization),self-evaluationsofvideogameperformance,as Theparticipantwasinstructedtoclickontheyellowsquarewith
wellaspreferredtypeofdeviceforplayingvideogames.Forgame theirmousecursor.Aftertheyellowsquarewasclickedon,ared
titles, participants were given a list of popular video games to rectangle,ofarandomizedsize,appearedonarandomplaceon
choose from, as well as write their own response in an open- the screen. The participant was then instructed to move their
ended“Other”answerbox.Forvideogamegenres,participants mouse cursor to the red rectangle as quickly as possible, for a
were given the following list to choose from, as well as brief total of 20 times. When participant completed the Fitts’s Law
examples of what each genre entails. The list of video game Task,theywerepresentedwithafeedbackscreenthatsaid:“Great
genreswasasfollow:Puzzlegames(candycrush,portal),Action job!Pressthespacebartocontinue.”Thentheparticipantswere
games(first-personshooterlikeDoom,CallofDuty),Platformer presented with a short summary of the task objectives: “Fitts’s
games (side scrolling games like Mario, Sonic), RPG (action- Law.Thetimeittakesyoutomovethecursorontheredrectangle
basedrole-playinggames,DarkestDungeon,Skyrim,Kingdom- depends on the size and the distance. Press space bar to exit.”
come: Deliverance), Strategy (turn based or real time—Xcom, After completion of the Fitts’ Law Task, the participant moved
Civilization, Total Warhammer), Sports games (tennis, golf), ontotheSimpleChoiceTask.
Construction and management simulation (Minecraft), Social SimpleChoiceTask(8TrainingTrials,20ExperimentalTrials)
Simulation (Animal Crossing), Idle games (Cookie click, idle (Dearyetal.,2011):Forthistasktherewere28trialsintotal,with
heros), and Other (open ended response where participants 8practiceand20experimentaltrials.Oneachtrial,ablackcross
could write their own). Given that most video games overlap appearedonawhitesquareonthecomputerscreen.Participants
somewhatintheirgenres,weherebydifferentiateaction-oriented wereinstructedtopressthespacebarassoonaspossiblewhen
role-playing games and fantasy-based role-playing games by theyseeablackcrossappearinginthewhitebox.Thetimewhen
categorizingtheformeras“RPG,”asperpopularusage(Rehbein thecrossappearedinthewhiteboxvariedfromtrialtotrial.No
et al., 2016), and the latter as “Social Simulation” to better feedbackonperformancewasgivenforeithercomputertasks.
emphasize differences between these two genres. We excluded
responsesenteredinthe“Other”videogamegenrequestionitem Analyses
astheresponsesweretoofewtoreachstatisticalpower. Analyses were conducted in R (v4.0.5) (R Core Team, 2021)
The frequency of video game usage was quantified via usingfunctionsinthebasestatisticalpackage.Linearregressions
participant self-evaluations on this questionnaire. There were wereconductedusingthelm()functionwhilelogisticregressions
fivequestionspertainingtovideogameusage.First,participants wereconductedusingtheglm()functionwithbinomialresponse
were asked on the following: (1) Self report usage: “What is family. Stepwise elimination of independent variables, for
your video game usage like?” on a 5-point Likert scale where 1 stepwiseregressions,wasaccomplishedusingthestep()function.
was “Very Often” and 5 was “Very rarely or not at all,” (2) Self Two extreme outliers were removed from the reaction time
reportfrequency:“Howfrequentdoyouplayvideogames?Check analysis,duetothembeingovereightstandarddeviationsfrom
one.” Participants had the option of selecting from “Daily,” “2– theotherreactiontimescores.Toassesstherelationshipbetween
3timesaweek,”“weekly,”“2–3timesamonth,”“monthly,”“less the frequency of video game use and the thirteen AQ and SPQ
than monthly,” and “never,” (3) Self report spare time: “What subscalesweconductedmultipleregressionsforeachofthefive
proportionofyoursparetimeisspentonvideogames?”ona5- measuresofvideogameuse.Wealsoconductedseparateanalyses
pointLikertscalewhere1was“Almostallofnoneofmyspare ofcovariance(ANCOVAs)foreachofthesedependentvariables,
time” and 5 “Almost all of my spare time.” For self-reported using each of the AQ and SPQ subscale scores as independent
frequency,responseswerescoredas“1”ifparticipantsanswered variables, and gender as a cofactor. To assess the relationship
“Never” and “7” for “Daily.” Participants were also asked to between the frequency of video game use and the composite,
enterthenumberofhoursspentonvideogamesforanaverage we conducted ANCOVAs as for the subscales and included
weekdayandweekendday. interaction terms along with the gender cofactor. Correlations
betweenreactiontimeandtargetingscorewereassessedusinga
Experimental Procedures
linear model analysis of covariance using the targeting score as
Participants were first given the battery of questionnaires theoutcomevariableandreactiontimeasindependentvariable,
to complete, in the following order: Video Game Usage withgenderasacovariate.
Questionnaire, AQ, and SPQ-BR. Afterward, participants
completed two computer tasks (1) Fitts Law Task to 1https://www.psytoolkit.org/
quantify targeting time, and (2) Simple Choice Task 2www.surveymonkey.com
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 5 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #6
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Effects of reaction time and targeting scores on each of the Males scored higher than females on all the variables that
fivemeasuresofvideogameusewereanalyzedwithANCOVAs quantifiedvideogameusage(SupplementaryTables1,2).Males
using each of the game use variables as an outcome and either also demonstrated faster reaction and targeting time on the
reactiontimeortargetingtimescoreastheindependentvariable, SimpleChoiceTaskandFitts’LawTaskthanfemales,respectively
and gender included as a covariate, and without an interaction (SupplementaryTables1,2).
term. To analyze the effects of the AQ and SPQ subscales, we Females preferred Puzzle and Social Simulation games more
performedbackwardstepwiseregressionsstartingwitheachallof than males did. By contrast, males preferred Action, RPG,
theAQandSPQsubscalesandgenderasindependentvariables Strategy,andSportsgames(SupplementaryTables1,2).Males
for each of the five use measure outcome variables. The least were more motivated by Social Interaction, Skill Development,
informative independent variable was iteratively dropped from Adrenaline Rush, and Fantasy reasons compared to females.
themodeluntildroppingavariableledtoalessefficientmodel, No gender differences were detected for the motivations
asassessedusingtheAkaikeinformationcriterion. Stress Relief or Escape. Females were more motivated by
Tests for association between reaction time, and targeting Customizationthanmales.
scores,onthetypeofgamesplayedwereconductedusinglogistic
regressions.Eachofthegametypeswasmodeledwithaseparate Patterns of Video Game Use in Relation
analysis, with type of game played as a Boolean outcome; the
to Autism Spectrum Quotient-Total,
independent variables were either reaction time, or targeting
Schizotypal Personality
score,eachofwhichalsoincludedgenderasacovariate,without
interactionterms.Testsfortheassociationbetweenreactiontime Questionnaire-Total, and Schizotypal
andtargetingscoresandeachofthedifferenttypesofmotivation Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
to play games were conducted in the same manner, with one
By product-moment correlations, higher AQ-total scores
logisticregressionofthemotivationaltypeasaBooleanoutcome
were significantly associated with higher video game use for
variable against either reaction time or targeting with gender
the following usage measures: weekend hours, self-reported
includedasacovariate.
frequency, and self-reported usage, in females only (Table 1).
TotestforassociationsofAQandSPQscaleswiththetypeof
Higher SPQ-CogPer scores were associated with reduced
gamesplayed,logisticregressionswereconductedusinggeneral
weekday and weekend hours, as well as decreased self-reported
linearmodelswithbinomialresponsefamilies.Eachofthegame
frequency and self-reported spare time spent on video games,
types was modeled with a separate analysis, with type of game
when both genders were pooled together. In females only,
played as a Boolean outcome, and all subscales were entered
higher SPQ-CogPer scores were also associated with decreased
as independent variables along with gender. No interaction
self-reported spare time video games usage. No statistically
terms were entered. A backward stepwise method was used to
significant relationships were found for SPQ-Total. Higher
successively drop the least informative independent variable,
untildroppingavariableledtoalessefficientmodel,asassessed
using the Akaike information criterion. Tests for association
TABLE1|PearsonCorrelationsofAQ-total,SPQ-total,andSPQ-CogPerscores
between the AQ and SPQ subscales and the motivations to
withMeasuresofVideoGameUsage.
play games were conducted in the same manner, with a
separatestepwiseeliminationofsubscalesuntilreachingthemost Videogameusage
efficientmodelforeachofthedifferentmotivationtypes.Simple
Weekday Weekend Self- Self- Self-
bivariate analyses (e.g., t-tests, product-moment correlations)
time(h) time(h) report report report
wereconductedforsomeanalyses,inadditiontoANCOVAsand frequency usage sparetime
multiple regression analyses, for representation and depiction
Females(N=207)
of the results for each relevant test, since these analyses make
AQ:Total 0.13 0.21** 0.17** −0.20** 0.11
fewerassumptions.
SPQ:CogPer −0.05 −0.06 −0.12 −0.04 −0.17*
SPQ:Total −0.02 0.05 −0.01 −0.10 −0.03
Males(N=144)
RESULTS
AQ:Total −0.02 0.04 −0.03 0.07 0.05
SPQ:CogPer −0.04 −0.03 −0.10 0.02 −0.04
Gender Differences in Autism Spectrum
SPQ:Total 0.03 0.06 −0.02 −0.10 0.11
Quotient, Schizotypal Personality
BothGenders
Questionnaire, and Patterns of Video (N=351)
Game Usage AQ:Total 0.02 0.08 0.04 −0.06 0.04
SPQ:CogPer −0.13** −0.14** −0.20*** 0.06 −0.18***
Females scored higher than males on SPQ-Ideas of Reference,
SPQ:Total −0.05 −0.02 −0.09 −0.04 −0.04
SPQ-Social Anxiety, SPQ-Magical Thinking, SPQ-Odd Speech,
SPQ-Cognitive-Perceptual, SPQ-Disorganized, and SPQ-Total Note that the scale for “Self report usage” is directionally opposite to the
otherscales.*Denotessignificanceat<0.05.**Denotessignificanceat<0.01.
(Supplementary Tables 1, 2). There were no outliers in the ***Denotessignificanceat<0.001.Boldfacevaluesindicatethatrelationshipswere
AQ-totalorSPQ-totalscores(SupplementaryFigures1,2). statisticallysignificant.
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 6 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #7
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Infemalesonly,higherSPQ-MagicalThinkingwasassociated
with decreased self-reported spare time, while SPQ-Social
Anxiety and SPQ-Disorganization were associated with greater
weekend time on video games. In females only, SPQ-Eccentric
Behavior scores were also positively associated with greater
weekend time and self-report spare time on video games, with
therelationshipmarginallynon-significant(p=0.06).
In males only, higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated
with greater self-reported usage and spare time spent on video
games. Higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior was associated with
greater self-reported usage and spare time on video games.
In males, higher SPQ-Disorganization was marginally non-
significantly associated with greater weekend time (p = 0.06),
andsignificantlyassociatedwithgreaterself-reportedusage,and
self-reportsparetimeonvideogames.
When both genders were pooled together, higher SPQ-
Magical Thinking was associated with decreased weekday,
weekend, self-reported frequency, self-reported usage, and self-
reported spare time on video games. Higher SPQ-Ideas of
FIGURE1|Relationshipbetweenself-reportedfrequencyandAQscoresfor
Reference scores were associated with decreased self-reported
females(red)andmales(blue).
frequency on video games. Higher SPQ-Unusual Perception
was associated with decreased weekday hours on video games.
AQ-Total scores were positively associated with higher self- Higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior scores were associated with
reported frequency of video game usage in females, while male greater weekend time, self-reported usage, and self-reported
video game usage was relatively high across the entire range of sparetimeonvideogames.
AQ-Totalscores(Figure1). ByANCOVAs,higherSPQ-EccentricscoresandSPQ-Magical
ANCOVAsrevealedthathigherAQ-totalwasassociatedwith Thinking were associated with higher and lower self-report
greaterweekendtime,higherself-reportedfrequency,andhigher spare time spent on video games, respectively (Supplementary
self-reported usage of video game usage with an interaction Table5).Thecombinedresultsfrombothanalysisrevealedthat
effect indicating that the effects were restricted to females higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with lower self-
(SupplementaryTable3andFigure1).HigherscoresonSPQ- reported spare time spent on video games in females, in males,
CogPer were associated with lower self-reported frequency and and in both genders combined. Higher SPQ-Eccentric was also
lowerself-reportedsparetime,withnogenderinteractioneffect associated with greater self-reported spare time spent on video
(SupplementaryTable3). gamesinmalesonly,andinbothgenderscombined.
Both forms of analyses showed that higher AQ-total scores
were associated with greater weekend time, self-reported
Video Game Genre Preferences in
frequency,andself-reportedusage,infemalesonly.Higherscores
Relation to Autism Spectrum
on SPQ-CogPer were also associated with lower self-reported
sparetimeinfemalesonlyandinbothgenderspooledtogether. Quotient-Total, Schizotypal Personality
Higher scores on SPQ-CogPer were also associated with lower Questionnaire-Total and Schizotypal
self-reportedfrequencyscoresinbothgenderstogether.
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
Scores
Patterns of Video Game Use in Relation
By t-tests, higher AQ scores were associated with increased
to Autism Spectrum Quotient and
preference for Construction type games and higher SPQ scores
Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire
were associated with preferences for Social Simulation, when
Subscales both genders were pooled together (Supplementary Table 6).
By product-moment correlations, in females only, scores on Higher AQ-total scores were also associated with decreased
AQ-Attention to Detail were associated with greater weekday preference for Sports, and higher SPQ-total scores were also
hoursspentonvideogames(SupplementaryTable4).AQ-total associated with preference for Puzzle and Racing. Higher SPQ-
was not associated with any of the video game usage variables CogPer scores were associated with increased preference for
whenmaleswereanalyzedseparatelyorwiththegenderspooled PuzzleandRacinggames,anddecreasedpreferencesforRPGand
together.Infemalesonly,AQ-SocialSkillsscoreswerepositively Constructiontypegames.
associated with greater weekend time, self-reported frequency, Whenmaleswereanalyzedseparately,higherAQ-totalscores
and self-reported usage spent on video games. In females only, were associated with decreased preference for Platformer and
scores on AQ-Imagination scores were associated with greater Sport games. Higher SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer scores were
weekendtimeandself-reportedfrequencyspentonvideogames. associated with increased preference for Racing games in
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 7 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #8
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
males. When females were analyzed separately, higher AQ- Fantasy, Customization, and Stress Relief. Higher SPQ-Total
total scores were associated with increased preference for RPG scoreswerealsoassociatedwiththemotivationofStressRelief.
and Construction games. Higher SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer By multiple regression analyses, Social Interaction was
scores were associated with increased preference for Puzzle associated with decreased AQ-Social Skills, increased AQ-
gamesinfemales. Attention to Detail, increased SPQ-Social Anxiety, and
Backward stepwise regression, conducted to test the effects decreased SPQ-Magical Thinking (Supplementary Table 9).
of AQ-total, SPQ-total, and SPQ-CogPer on each video game Stress Relief was associated with increased AQ-Social Skills
genre while taking account of gender differences, showed that and increased SPQ-Unusual Perception. Skill Development
malesreportedhigherpreferenceforActionandStrategygames was associated with increased AQ-Attention to Detail,
(Supplementary Table 7). Preferences for Action and Strategy increased SPQ-Idea of Reference, and increased SPQ-Social
video games were not associated with AQ-total, SPQ-total, Anxiety. Adrenaline Rush was associated with lower AQ-
or SPQ-CogPer. Higher AQ-total scores were associated with Attention Switch, higher AQ-Attention to Detail, higher
preferenceforRPGandConstructiongamesinfemales.Higher AQ-Communication, and higher AQ-Imagination. Escape was
SPQ-CogPer scoresand higherSPQ-Total wereassociated with marginally associated with higher SPQ-Constricted Affect,
higherpreferenceforPuzzlegames.Bothsetsofresultsindicated higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior, and marginally associated
that females with higher AQ-total scores reported a higher with SPQ-Magical Thinking. Fantasy was associated with
preferenceforRPGandConstructiongames. higher AQ-Social Skills and higher SPQ-Magical Thinking.
Customization was associated with higher AQ-Attention to
Detail and higher AQ-Communication. Higher AQ-Total was
Video Game Genre Preferences in
associated with greater motivations of Stress Relief, Fantasy,
Relation to Autism Spectrum Quotient
andmarginallywithCustomization.Nosignificantrelationships
and Schizotypal Personality were observed between SPQ-Total, SPQ-CogPer, and any of
Questionnaire Subscales themotivations.
Preference for Puzzle games was associated with higher AQ-
Reaction and Targeting Times in Relation
Imagination, higher SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors, and in females.
to Autism Spectrum Quotient -Total,
Preference for Action games was associated with higher
SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors in males (Supplementary Table 7). Schizotypal Personality
Preference for Platformer was associated with higher SPQ- Questionnaire-Total, Schizotypal
Eccentric Behaviors. Preference for RPG was associated with
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer, and
higher AQ-Social Skills, lower SPQ-Ideas of Reference, and
Gender
higher SPQ-Eccentric, and in males. Preference for Strategy
was associated with higher SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors and in Byproduct-momentcorrelations,infemalesonly,fasterreaction
males. Preference for Sports was associated with lower AQ- times were associated with higher AQ-Total and SPQ-Total
Communication and in males. Preference for Construction scores (Supplementary Table 10). There was also a marginally
was associated with higher AQ-Social Skills, marginally with non-significant trend of association of higher AQ-Total scores
lowerSPQ-IdeasofReference,lowerSPQ-MagicalThinking,and with faster targeting time in females (p = 0.06). No other
higher SPQ-Odd Speech. Preference for Social Simulation was statisticallysignificantrelationshipsweredetectedinmalesorin
detected in females, but no relationship to either AQ or SPQ bothgenderspooledtogether.
subscales. Preference for Idle games was marginally associated
Reaction and Targeting Times in Relation
withAQ-AttentionSwitch.
to Autism Spectrum Quotient and
Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire
Video Game Motivations in Relation to
Subscale Scores, and Gender
Autism Spectrum Quotient -Total,
FasterreactiontimeswereassociatedwithhigherSPQ-Eccentric
Schizotypal Personality
Behaviorscoresinbothgenderspooledtogetherandinfemales.
Questionnaire-Total and Schizotypal
Infemalesonly,fasterreactiontimeswereassociatedwithhigher
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
SPQ-SocialAnxiety,SPQ-DisorganizationAQ-SocialSkills,and
Byt-tests,femaleswithhigherAQ-Totalscoresweremotivated AQ-Attention to Detail. Higher SPQ-Magical Thinking scores
by Stress Relief, Fantasy, and Customization (Supplementary wereassociatedwithslowerreactiontimeinbothgenderspooled
Table8).MaleswithhigherSPQ-CogPerscoresweremotivated togetherandinmalesonly(SupplementaryTable10).
byStressReliefandSkillDevelopment.MaleswithhigherSPQ- HigherAQ-SocialSkillsandSPQ-SocialAnxietyscoreswere
totalscoresweremotivatedbyEscapeandCustomization.Males associated with faster targeting times in females. Higher SPQ-
withhigherAQ-Totalscoresweremoremotivatedtoplayvideo Magical Thinking scores were associated with slower targeting
gamesforCustomization. timesinbothgenderspooledtogether,inmales,andinfemales.
When both genders were pooled together, higher AQ-Total Higher SPQ-Unusual Perception scores were associated with
scores were associated with motivations of Skill Development, slower targeting times in both genders pooled together. Faster
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 8 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #9
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
targeting time associated SPQ-Interpersonal in males. Higher Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
SPQ-CogPerscoreswereassociatedwithslowertargetingtimein Times With Video Game Genre
bothgendersandinmales.
Preferences
By multiple regression analyses, reaction times were
By t-tests, faster reaction times were associated with preference
significantly positively correlated with targeting times, with
for Action video games in both genders pooled together and
males being faster for both relative to females. No AQ or SPQ
marginallynon-significantlyinmales(p=0.07)(Supplementary
subscales were significantly associated with faster reaction
Table 15). Faster reaction times were also associated with
times. Higher SPQ-Magical Thinking scores were associated
preferenceforRPGinbothgenderspooledtogether,infemales,
with slower targeting times. These results are summarized in
and in males. Strategy was also associated with faster reaction
Supplementary Table 11. By both forms of analyses, males
times in both genders pooled together and marginally non-
exhibited faster reaction and targeting times than females,
significantly in females (p = 0.06). Construction was associated
and higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with slower
withfasterreactiontimeswithbothgenderspooledtogetherand
targetingtimes.
infemales.Idlegameusewasassociatedwithfasterreactiontime
inbothgendersandinmalesonly.
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting Preferences for Action and Idle game genres was associated
Times With Video Game Usage, with faster targeting time in both genders pooled together,
Preferences and Motivations and in females. Preferences for Role Playing Games (RPG),
Strategy Games, and Construction Games were associated with
By product-moment correlations, faster targeting times were
faster targeting time in both genders, in females, and in
associated with increased self-reported spare time, weekend
males. Preferences for Social Simulation were associated with
hours, weekday hours, greater self-reported video game usage
faster targeting time in females and males when they were
andfrequencyinbothgenderspooledtogether,malesonly,and
analyzedseparately.
females only (Supplementary Table 12). Faster reaction times
ANCOVA was also conducted to analyze the separate
were also associated with greater self-reported of spare time,
relationships of reaction times, targeting times, to each of the
weekendhours,weekdayhours,greaterself-reportedusage,and
10videogamegenres(SupplementaryTable16).Fasterreaction
greater self-reported frequency of video game usage in both
timeswereassociatedwithpreferenceforAction,RPG,Strategy
genderspooledtogetherandinmales(SupplementaryTable8).
ininmales.Fasterreactiontimesshowedamarginalassociation
By stepwise regression analyses, higher self-reported video
with preference for Construction (p = 0.066). Females reported
game usage was associated with higher AQ-Attention to
greater preference for Puzzle and Social Simulation, but no
Detail, higher SPQ-Eccentric, faster targeting times, and
significantrelationshipswerefoundbetweenreactiontimesand
being male. Higher self-report frequency of video game
thesetwogenres.
usage was associated with faster targeting times, and being
Faster targeting times were associated with preference for
male. Higher weekday time was marginally associated with
Action, RPG, Strategy, and Sports games in males. Faster
higher AQ-Attention to Detail (p = 0.058), SPQ-Odd Speech,
targetingtimeswereassociatedwithpreferenceforConstruction
faster targeting times, and being male. Higher weekend
and Idle, but no gender differences were detected. Females
time was marginally associated with AQ-Communication,
reported greater preference for Puzzle, but there were no
SPQ-Odd speech, faster targeting times, and being male.
significant differences in preference for Puzzle games and
Higher self-report spare time was associated with higher
targetingtimes.PreferenceforSocialSimulationwereassociated
SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors, lower SPQ-Magical Thinking, faster
with faster targeting times in females. Results are presented in
targeting time, and being male. No statistically significant
SupplementaryTable16.
relationships were detected for reaction times and any of the
Bybothtypesofanalyses,preferenceforAction,RPG,Strategy
time use variables. Results are summarized in Supplementary
were associated with faster reaction and targeting times in
Table13.
males. Faster reaction and targeting times were associated with
preferenceforConstructioninbothgenderstogether.Preference
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting for Social Simulation was associated with faster targeting times
Times With Video Game Usage in females. Females reported greater preference for Puzzle
but Puzzle was not associated with either faster reaction or
ANCOVAs were also conducted to analyze the relationships of
targetingtimes.
neurophysiologicalindices(i.e.,reactionandtargetingtimes)and
the five video game usage variables. Gender was significantly
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
associatedwithallusagevariables(SupplementaryTable14).In
Times With Video Game Motivations
thecaseofself-reportedfrequency,malesreportedhighbaselines
of video game use frequencies; a potential positive relationship By t-tests, faster reaction times were associated with the
between self-reported frequency and faster reaction time may motivations Social Interaction, Skill Development, and
have gone undetected due to a ceiling effect of general usage. Customization, in both genders pooled together and in males
In females, a strong positive relationship between self-reported (SupplementaryTable17).Fastertargetingtimeswereassociated
videogameusefrequencyandfastertargetingtimeswasdetected. with Social Interaction, Stress Relief, Skill Development,
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 9 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #10
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Adrenaline Rush, Escape, Fantasy, and Customization in both Why do males play video games more than females? One
genderspooledtogether,malesonly,andfemalesonly. possibilitymaybethatmostvideogamesaredesignedtosimulate
By logistic regression analyses, Social Interaction was male-male individual or coalitional competition (Mendenhall
marginally non-significantly (p = 0.067) associated with faster et al., 2010), which are intrinsically rewarding and enjoyable to
reaction times in males (Supplementary Table 18). Skill males (Chou and Tsai, 2007; Olson et al., 2007). For example,
Developmentwasassociatedwithfasterreactiontimesinmales. most first-person shooter (FPS) video games, such as Call of
MalesreportedagreaterpreferenceforAdrenalineRush,butno Duty,involveplayingfromthefirst-personviewofasoldier.FPS
significantrelationshipsweredetectedbetweenAdrenalineRush gameplaymostlyinvolvesthreemainthemes:(1)masteringthe
and faster reaction times. Customization was associated with deploymentofvariousweaponstodestroytargetsandenemies,
faster reaction times. Social Interaction and Skill Development (2) collaborating with other soldiers to accomplish missions,
were associated with faster targeting time in males. Stress (3) rising through status hierarchies via achieving goals or
Relief was marginally non-significantly associated with faster collecting rewards and gear. In line with our results, previous
targeting times (p = 0.051). Males reported greater preference studies on first-person shooter games have identified that they
forAdrenalineRush,butnorelationshipweredetectedbetween are mostly played by young males, who spend an average of
AdrenalineRushandtargetingtimes.FantasyandCustomization 2.6hadayongaming,andreportsocialinteraction,competition,
wereassociatedwithfastertargetingtimes. and challenge as their main motives for gaming (Jansz and
By both types of analyses, Social Interaction and Skill Tanis, 2007). Likewise, MMORPGs, such as World of Warcraft
Developmentwereassociatedwithfasterreactionandtargeting (reported to consist of 85% of male user-base (Ducheneaut
time in males. Customization was associated with both faster etal.,2006)aredesignedtopromoteinter-factionalwarfare,the
targeting and reaction time. Stress Relief and Fantasy were collectionofrareandconspicuousavatarequipment(i.e.,status
associatedwithfastertargetingtimes. signaling) and collaborative practices that simulate conditions
of hunting (Mendenhall et al., 2010). Altogether, the greater
representation of male video game players appears to reflect
the male-typical competitive environments of most video game
DISCUSSION
genres,whichseektorecreateorsimulatesettingsofcooperative
huntingandwarfare.
The principal aims of this study were to investigate the
The findings reported here are also consistent with prior
relationshipsofautisticandschizotypaltraits,gender,andselect
research indicating that females prefer classic puzzle or board
neurophysiological traits, with video game usage, preferences,
games (Greenberg et al., 2010) and life simulation games
and motivations. Table 2 summarizes the main results in the
(Nepomuceno etal., 2010; Yee, 2017), thelatter of which tends
context of the predictions described in the Introduction. The
to be more exploratory in nature and with a greater emphasis
most important findings are threefold. First, our results are
onsocialrelationshipsthancompetition.Interestingly,although
largelyconsistentwithpriorfindingsthatdifferencesinpatterns
females generally reported a preference for Social Simulation
ofvideogameusagemirrorgenderdifferencesinchildhoodplay,
games, they did not cite Social Interaction as a motivation for
with some notable differences in females with higher autistic
using video games. Contrary to the hypothesis posited here,
traits.Second,wehaveobservedamale-typicalpatternofvideo
females reported Customization as their primary motivation.
game usage, motivation, and genre preferences in females with
Two possibilities may be at play here. First, given that females
higher autistic traits, which is in support of the Extreme Male
withhigherautistictraitsplaymorevideogames(asdiscussedin
Brain theory of autism (Baron-Cohen, 2002). Third, the results
moredetailbelow),thefemalepatternofvideogamemotivation
partiallysupportCrespiandBadcock’s(2008)diametricalmodel
mayreflectthehighermechanistic(i.e.,non-social)preferences
of social brain disorders, in that some video game variables
of the autistic phenotype. That is, given that autistic traits have
showoppositepatternsbetweenautismandpositiveschizotypy.
beenassociatedwithgreaterpreferenceforbuildingactivitiesand
We expand on each main result in turn, and then discuss the
solitary play (Holmes and Willoughby, 2005), the identification
evolutionarypsychologicalimplicationsofvirtualplayonhuman
of Customization, rather than Social Interaction, as the main
socialbehaviors.
gaming motive, may reflect the systemizing bias of autism.
Secondly, given that females are more likely to be casual video
Gender Differences in Patterns of Video
game players than males, and casual video game players tend
Game Usage
torankhigher onextraversion(Potard etal.,2019),females (at
First,differencesinvideogameusagepatterns,genrepreferences, least ones with lower AQ scores) may have other social outlets
and motivations are largely consistent with prior findings that for meeting interpersonal needs outside video games, and thus
males played more video games than females, preferred action belesslikelytoidentifySocialMotivationasamainmotivefor
type video games, and exhibited both faster reaction times videogameusage.
(Greenbergetal.,2010)andenhancedtargetingabilities(Watson Females with higher levels of autistic traits also preferred
andKimura,1991;CookandSaucier,2010).Ourstudyhasfound male-typical video game preferences, including RPG and
thatfemalesreportedgreatergamingmotivesofCustomization; Construction,relativetogeneralfemale-typicalgenrepreferences
by contrast, Hartmann and Klimmt (2006) found that females such as Puzzle and Social Simulation. A preference for
generallyenjoyvideogamesfortheirsociallyinteractiveaspects. Construction type games was not detected among males,
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 10 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #11
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
TABLE2|Studyfindingsinrelationtothemainpredictions.
Predictions Supported? Findings
(1.1)Maleswillreportgreatervideogameusagethanfemales. Yes Malesreportedhighervideogameusageacrossalltimeusevariables.
(1.2)Maleswillprefermechanistic-orientedvideogames(Action, Partially MalesreportedgreaterpreferenceforAction,Strategy,Sports,and
Platformer,Strategy,Racing,Sports,RPG,Construction)whilefemales RPGgames.FemalesreportedgreaterpreferenceforPuzzleandSocial
willpreferPuzzleandSocialSimulationvideogames. Simulationgames.
(1.3)MaleswillreportgreatermotivationofSkillDevelopmentand Partially MalesreportedgreatermotivationsofSocialInteractionandSkill
CustomizationandfemaleswillreportgreatermotivationsofSocial Development.FemaleswithhigherAQreportedgreatermotivationsof
Interaction,Fantasy,andawaytoEscape. Fantasy,StressRelief,andCustomization.
(2):Autistictraitswillbeassociatedwithincreasedvideogameusage Partially Higherautistictraitswereassociatedwithgreatervideogameusagein
acrossalltimeusevariables.SPQ-totalandSPQ-CogPerwillbe females.HigherSPQ-CogPerscoreswereassociatedwithlowervideo
associatedwithdecreasedvideogameusageacrossalltimeuse gameusageinbothgenderspooledtogetherHigherautistictraitswere
variables. notassociatedwithgreatervideogameusageinmales.
(3):Autistictraitswillbepositivelyassociatedwithpreferencesfor Partially FemaleswithhigherAQ-TotalpreferredConstructionandRPGgames.
Puzzle,Action,Platformer,Strategy,Racing,Sports,Idle,and HigherSPQ-CogPerscoresandhigherSPQ-Totalscoreswere
Construction.SPQ-totalandSPQ-CogPerwillbepositivelyassociated associatedwithgreaterpreferenceforPuzzlegames.
withpreferencesforfantasy,RPG,andsocialsimulationvideogames.
(4):Autistictraitswillbepositivelyassociatedwithgreatermechanistic Partially HigherAQ-TotalwasassociatedwithgreatermotivationsofStress
motivations.SPQ-TotalandSPQ-CogPerwillbepositivelyassociated Relief,Fantasy,andCustomization.Noassociationswerefoundfor
withmentalisticmotivations. SPQ-TotalorSPQ-CogPer.
(5):Autistictraitswillbeassociatedwithfasterreactiontimesand Partially. HigherSPQ-MagicalThinkingwasassociatedwithslowertargeting
targetingtimes.SPQ-TotalandSPQ-CogPerwillbeassociatedwith times.
slowerreactionandtargetingtimes.
(6):Increasedtotalvideogameusagewillbepredictedbyhigher Yes Fasterreactionandtargetingtimeswereassociatedwithgreatervideo
reactionandtargetingtimes.Inturn,slowerreactionandtargeting gameusage.
timeswillpredictlowervideogameusage.
although previous studies have documented male preferences blocks, gameplay is centered around manipulating objects in
for constructive toys (Blakemore and Centers, 2005). As for systematic ways to construct buildings, mazes, and even entire
males with higher AQ, females with higher AQ also identified cities.Parallelingplaybehaviorsinchildrenwithautism,building
the mechanistic preference Customization as one of their activities in Minecraft are usually solitary, detail-oriented, and
maingamingmotives. reality-based.Forexample,“making”abookinMinecraft,aswith
real life, requires arranging virtual pieces of paper with virtual
leatherinaparticularorderfortheobjecttoberealized.Given
Extreme Male Brain Theory of Autism
that people with autism are disproportionately represented in
and Patterns of Video Game Usage the engineering field (Baron-Cohen et al., 1997; Baron-Cohen,
Our second hypothesis predicted that autistic traits will be 1998)andchildrenwithautismtendtofocusonfunctionalplay
associatedwithincreasedvideogameusage.Interestingly,higher (i.e., play with an object for its function) and constructive play
autistictraitswereassociatedwithgreatervideogameusage,but (i.e., building sand castles), preference for parallel (i.e., playing
only in females and not in males. The pattern of females with alongsideothersbutnottogether)orsolitaryplay(Holmesand
highertotalautismscoresplayingvideogamesmorefrequently Willoughby, 2005), the patterns of video game usage described
isofnotableinterest,asitfitswithBaron-Cohen’s(2002)extreme aboveappeartobeanextensionofautisticplaybehaviorstoina
male brain theory of autism, and partially with the predictions virtual,computerizedmedium.
fromCrespiandBadcock(2008)andWendtetal.(2019).Thus, Femaleswithhighertotalautismscoresalsoreportedgreater
females with higher AQ-total scores were “more male” in their gamingmotivationsofStressRelief,Fantasy,andCustomization;
patternofhighervideogameusage.AnalysisoftheAQsubscales the first two motivations may be categorized under social
revealed that that decreased social skills, higher attention to fulfillment via virtual play, and the latter may represent an
detail, and lower social imagination showed evidence of being autism-related preference for rule-based, solitary mechanistic
related to greater video game usage in females with higher interestsuchasbuildingobjects(e.g.,Minecraft).Takentogether,
autistictraits.Takentogether,theclusterofautistictraitsoutlined these patterns suggest that higher autistic traits may be related
above suggest that higher video game usage in females may to greater video game usage via a decreased capacity for, or
be attributable to a more systemizing cognitive style (Baron- interestin,socialandpretendplay.Inotherwords,becausemost
Cohen, 2010). Indeed, the association between higher autistic videogamesenvironmentsinvolvepre-programmedcharacters,
traits in females and greater motives of Customization and narratives, and behaviors, they may appeal to individuals with
preference for Construction-type games is consistent with such higher autistic traits who prefer predictable environments that
view. For example, one popular Construction game, Minecraft, can be navigated with pre-defined action patterns. In this
focuses predominately on the mechanistic drive of building light, video games may also function specifically for their self-
objects.Asthevirtualenvironmentisliterallymadeofpixelated contained immersive experiences that provide the illusion of
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 11 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #12
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
sharing a social world without partaking in one. Furthermore, fromexecutingparticularactionpatternsnecessaryforeffective
the relative anonymity and use of virtual avatars in video console/controller use. Indeed, a positive relationship was
games offer an additional layer of interpersonal distance that detected between SPQ-CogPer and Puzzle games, but Puzzle
can be conceptualized as the virtual extensions of parallel play was not associated with faster reaction or targeting times.
behaviorscommonlyobservedinchildrenwithautism(Holmes Furthermore,althoughbothPuzzleandSocialSimulationgames
and Willoughby, 2005). Users are thus playing “together” but are generally designed to be played at leisure, the latter was
remain alone. Moreover, the pattern of autistic game play associatedwithfastertargetingtimesbutnottheformer,further
pattern described here can be differentiated from general play providing support that variation in neurophysiological indices
differences in two important ways: (1) although females with maybecontributingtotheoveralllowervideogameusage.
higherautistictraitsreportmale-typicalpreferencessuchasRPG Why would individuals higher in positive schizotypal traits
and Customization, they do not share the other male-typical playvideogameslessfrequently?Asoutlinedabove,mostvideo
preferences that were more socially collaborative in nature, games appear to offer immersive but ultimately solitary play
such as Sports, or Action and Strategy genres that involve experiencesthatmaynotfulfillthementalisticinterestsofmany
extensive teamwork (ex: military group-collaborations in Call schizotypal individuals. Historically, most video games were
of Duty); and (2) the identification of Fantasy as a motivation developed as single-player ventures; lack of historical internet
was not associated with the concurrent motivation of Social accessmeantthatmostgamesweredevelopedtobeenjoyedwith
Interaction, which suggest that solitary play was the common only a limited number of players. For examples, the popularity
denominatordescribedhere. of PC-based games in the 1990s meant that most games were
Why was there no evidence of a positive correlation of AQ designed to be self-contained, with clearly defined objectives,
score with video game use among males? One possibility is a and catering to single players. In this light, given that the
“ceilingeffect,”wherebymaleswouldexhibittoolittlevariationin Crespi and Badcock (2008) model predicts that autistic and
videogameusescoresforapositiverelationshiptobedetected. schizotypal traits would vary in opposite directions in socio-
However, males do exhibit comparable levels of variability cognitivedevelopment—whatwouldbethetheoreticalequivalent
(as measured by standard deviations) to females across the ofautismandvideogamesforpositiveschizotypy?
variousmeasuresofvideogameusage,andpositivecorrelations An opposite medium (as opposed to different games per se)
restricted to females were found for multiple video game use wouldtheoreticallycontainthefollowingcharacteristicsofhigh
frequency measures, which appears to render major influences positive schizotypy: (1) rely on a short and fractured attention
from ceiling effects relatively unlikely. Alternatively, because spanonawidevarietyofinter-changeabletopicsinsteadofone
most video games are designed with male-typical preferences highly concentrated focus on a restricted set of clearly defined
suchascompetition(JanszandTanis,2007)andphysicalviolence objectives, (2) verbally based, (3) high social connectivity, (4)
(Jansz,2005),andfemalesaremorelikelytoprefernon-violent virtualelementsofhighsocialmonitoringintermsofdetectable
entertainmentventures(Slater,2003)andmaybelesscompetitive socialfeedbacksignals(i.e.,likes,followers)thatmimicin-person
thanmales(Deaner,2013),videogameusageamongfemaleswith cues of joint attention and/or eye contact. In short, the logical
higher total AQ scores may be more pronounced, compared to equivalent of autism-video games appears to be schizotypy-
males, with high-AQ females demonstrating more male-typical Twitter or TikTok. Although we did not explicitly test for the
cognitivephenotypesrelativetothegeneralfemalepopulation. relationshipbetweenschizotypyandsocialmediaplatformshere,
the association between positive schizotypy and Puzzle games
suggestthatsuchpreferencescouldtheoreticallybeextrapolated
The Diametrical Model of Social Brain
to social media platforms. Like most Puzzle games, most social
Disorders and Patterns of Video Game
media applications are designed to be used leisurely, with less
Usage
cognitively taxing actions, and with no penalties if the user has
Our second hypothesis also predicted that patterns of video lessthanaccuratetargetingmovements.
game usage would vary in opposite patterns along the autism- Several explanations have been proposed for gender
schizotypalaxis,withautistictraitsassociatedwithgreatervideo differences in reaction and targeting time. First, given that
game usage and positive schizotypal traits (i.e., SPQ-Total and playingactionvideogamescanimprovereactiontime(Chandra
SPQ-CogPer)withlowervideogameusage. et al., 2016), the gender differences may stem from the strong
Evidence of negative relationships of SPQ-CogPer and SPQ- malepreferencetowardaction-orientedvideogamesthatrequire
Magical Thinking with video game usage was detected from fast decision-making and projectile analysis in a simulated
several analyses. These findings partially support predictions 3-D space. Our data support the training effects of video game
of the Crespi and Badcock (2008) model, in that autistic and usageinthatinbothgenders,reactionandtargetingtimeswere
positive schizotypy traits predicted greater and lower video positively associated with greater video game usage. Second,
game usage, respectively (though with gender-limited effects males also reported greater motivation for using video games
for autism that were not predicted by the model). Given for Skill Development, another factor that could contribute to
that SPQ-Magical Thinking was also associated with slower the development of faster reaction and targeting time due to
targeting times, lower video game usage of individuals with greater intrinsic motivation for improvement. Alternatively,
high levels of this psychological trait may stem, in part, from the gender differences in reaction and targeting time may stem
general hand-eye motor speed and coordination difficulties from evolved physiology in sexual divisions of labor; that is,
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 12 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #13
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
males may have evolved faster reaction and targeting times as Candy Crush, tend to less time-intensive, more casual, and
than females due to greater neurophysiological demands of designed to be played at leisure with no penalties if the user
hunting and competition that have characterized the human stops at random intervals. Second, the most popular current
hunter-gatherer past (Cherney and Poss, 2008). Finally, given Social Simulation franchise, such as Animal Crossing, involve
thatSPQ-MagicalThinkingwasassociatedwithslowertargeting considerable components of customization (e.g., building and
timesandthatfemalesscoredhigheronSPQ-MagicalThinking furnishinghouses,gathering,andcollectingitems)whichmaybe
than did males, the gender differences in targeting time may more mechanistically inclined and less appealing to individuals
be linked with general gender differences in levels of this withhigherschizotypaltraits.
schizotypal trait. Indeed, the association of higher Magical Lastly, patterns of video game motivations described here
Thinkingwithslowertargetingtimeisconsistentwithprevious partially support the Crespi and Badcock (2008) model that
literature showing that higher positive schizotypy is associated autistic traits predict mechanistic motivations for playing video
with higher prediction error rates on hand-eye coordination games (i.e., Customization). Interestingly, AQ-total was also
tasks (Asai et al., 2008) and increased dyscontrol in fine motor associatedwithFantasy,butnotSocialInteraction,motivations.
movements (Roché et al., 2015). These findings may, more Thepatterndescribedhereissuggestivethatvideogamesprovide
generally, reflect the higher levels of sensory and sensorimotor anevolutionarilynovelplayenvironmentwherefantasyplaycan
deficitsfoundamongindividualsontheschizophreniaspectrum bedecoupledfromsocialinteractions.Inotherwords,although
(JavittandFreedman,2015). autistic traits were associated with motivations for utilizing
Second, in accordance with the Crespi and Badcock (2008) video games for Stress Relief and Fantasy motives, it was not
model,autistictraitsweregenerallyassociatedwithmechanistic associated with motivations for socially interacting with others,
genre preferences such as Construction and RPG. However, which suggests that although, on the surface, most role-playing
contrary to the predictions made here, higher SPQ-CogPer games involve multiplayer modes and opportunities for social
scoresandhigherSPQ-Totalscoreswereassociatedwithgreater interactions, individuals with autistic traits seem to partake in
preference for Puzzle games. Theoretically, puzzle games could them for the immersive experience but not the social aspect.
be considered a mechanistic-typical genre as most traditional Thus,utilizingvideogamesforfantasyplayappearstodifferfrom
puzzles involve deducing or reverse-engineering a set of given real-lifefantasyplayintheimportantaspectthattheimaginative
patterns to arrive at the correct solution. What would explain component could be dissociated from its corresponding social
thisfinding?Onepossibilityisthatmostvirtualizedpuzzlegames component, which are intricately linked together most real-life,
do not involve the same depth or rigor of algorithmic thinking in-personchildhoodpretendplay.
asitwouldintraditionalpuzzlegames.Forexample,oneofthe
Limitations
most popular app-based puzzle games, Candy Crush, involves
detectingapatternofthreeormoreidenticalshapesandswiping Our study is constrained by several limitations. First, the data
themawaywithones’fingers;gameplayislargelyeasyandsimple were collected during a school semester; thus, general video
pattern-detectionina2-Dspace.Incontrast,atraditionalpuzzle game usage patterns may have been under-reported due to
game might be solving the Magic Cube, a task that involves greater time demands of the typical school semester. Future
simultaneous operations of 3-D mental rotation, mathematical studiesmayaccountforpotentialdifferencesinvideogameusage
operations, and mental simulation of object transformations patterns due to classwork demands by incorporating a non-
in horizontal/vertical space. Thus, although both physical and typical school semester in its time span of data collection for
virtual “puzzle” games may appear similar, the constraints of comparison. Second, given that we primarily recruited through
representinggamesinavirtual2-Dspacemayremoveorimbueit a psychology student pool as well as university email lists,
withdifferentfunctionsthatmayrenderitconsiderablydifferent most of participants may have come from the undergraduate
fromitsoriginalcounterpart. population;thus,thefindingscannotbeextrapolatedtoclinical
The association of positive schizotypal traits with Puzzle populations, children, the elderly, or professional gamers who
type games is consistent with previous findings that patients may demonstrate psychological traits atypical of our sample.
with schizophrenia rated puzzle-type games as one of their Third, given that autistic and schizotypal traits were assessed
top three preferred game genres (i.e., board/card games) (Choi via self-reports, results may be limited in that higher autistic
et al., 2020). Surprisingly, contrary to the predictions made and schizotypal traits may, paradoxically, be associated with
here, positive schizotypal traits were not related to more lowercognitiveinsightsandthusunder-reportoftraits.Fourth,
socially oriented or fantasy-based genres such as RPG or Social giventheheterogeneousnatureofmostvideogames(ex:Legend
Simulation. Two possible explanations may help to account for of Zelda is classified as Action on most commercial video
this result. First, most popular role-playing video game games, game websites, but it also involves considerable role-playing
such as World of Warcraft, are cognitively demanding and and puzzle-solving), findings from this study may be limited
involve juggling of multiple simultaneous tasks (i.e., switching due to blending of mechanistic vs. mentalistic gameplay that
betweenweapons,buildingandmaintainingmultiplecoalitions, characterize some video games. Future research could address
tracking and shooting at multiple targets), which may be such limitations by adding an open-feedback answer item as to
challenging given that schizotypy has been associated with betterdisentanglenuancesinusers’motivationsforgamingand
attentionalimpairmentsundersituationsofhighperceptualload gamingpreferences.Finally,giventhatweadministeredreaction
(Stotesburyetal.,2018).Incomparison,Puzzle-typegames,such timeandtargetingtimetasksonline,variabilityinreactionand
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 13 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #14
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
targeting time data may be confounded by participants’ choice lieu of the latter. In this light, as Crespi and Badcock (2008)
of electronic device to complete the tasks (ex: computer with postulated autism and psychosis as two ends of a continuum
mouse,laptop,iPadoranotherhand-helddevicewithtouchpad). of social cognitive development, so there may exist a similar
Although the computer tasks were designed to accommodate a virtual gradient of play behaviors that may be expressed in two
wide variety of electronic devices, variability in reaction time oppositesbutrelatedmedia.Whatcouldbeontheotherendof
and targeting time data may be influenced by participants’ use thespectrum?Giventhatmostsocialmediaplatformsarehighly
of a mouse vs. touchpad, which we did not control for. Some sociallyoriented,verballybased,andperformative,futurestudies
studieshaveshownthatindividualswereslowerandtendtomake couldinvestigatepotentialrelationshipsofsocialmediauseand
moreerrorswhenusingatouchpadthanmousetomakepointing positiveschizotypygiventheformer’smentalisticbias.
actions(HertzumandHornbæk,2010),andthatusingthemouse
was faster than touchpads or MultiTouch devices in cursor
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
positioning(ShanisandHedge,2003).Giventhatourstudywas
conducted remotely and thus we could not verify what sort of
hardwareparticipantsused,futureresearchcouldcollectdataon The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
thetypeofdeviceusedtocontrolforanypotentialconfounds. madeavailablebytheauthors,withoutunduereservation.
Since the COVID pandemic began, more and more
recreational platforms have been moving to the virtual world.
ETHICS STATEMENT
What will become of iGen 2030? The patterns described above
suggestthatthereplacementofin-personplaywithvirtualmedia
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
mayhaveimportantimplicationsfortheevolutionofimaginative
and approved by the Simon Fraser University Department
culture. First, the patterns in autistic play behaviors and video
of Research Ethics. The participants provided their written
gameusagedescribedinthisstudysuggestthatvideogamesmay
informedconsenttoparticipateinthisstudy.
be a proverbial “new and reinvented” version of fantasy play.
That is, unlike a traditional fantasy game where people must
spontaneously imagine a shared mental space and participate
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
accordingly, video games offer a pre-programmed imaginative
space where anyone can join without having to spontaneously
Allauthorslistedhavemadeasubstantial,direct,andintellectual
imagine entities into existence. Moreover, for the first time in
contributiontothework,andapproveditforpublication.
humanhistory,peoplearenolongerboundedbythetemporal-
spatiallimitationsofotherplayerstostartandmaintainagame.
Almosteveryonenowcanplayavideogametogether—andalone. FUNDING
Finally,althoughwehavefoundsomeevidenceofdecreased
video game usage in association with positive schizotypy, we The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
did not observe statistically significant patterns for greater Canada, Discovery Grant 2019-04208, funded this work, and
mentalistic preferences in positive schizotypy as we did for playednoroleinthedesignorexecutionoftheresearch.
mechanism and autism. Why would this be? One possibility is
that video games only represent one end of the spectrum of
virtualplaybehaviorsthathasnowsubstitutedformuchofreal- SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
life play. The patterns of video game usage, preferences, and
motivationsdescribedabovesuggestthatimaginativeandsocial The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
aspects could be dissociated in video games; individuals with online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.
higher autistic traits appear to partake more in the former in 2022.767446/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES Baron-Cohen,S.(2010).Empathizing,systemizing,andtheextrememalebrain
theory of autism. Prog. Brain Res. 186, 167–175. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-
Andreasen,N.C.,Arndt,S.,DelMiller,D.,Flaum,M.,andNapoulos,P.(1995). 53630-3.00011-7
CorrelationalstudiesoftheScalefortheAssessmentofNegativeSymptomsand Baron-Cohen,S.,Ashwin,E.,Ashwin,C.,Tavassoli,T.,andChakrabarti,B.(2009).
theScalefortheAssessmentofPositiveSymptoms:anoverviewandupdate. Talent in autism: hyper-systemizing, hyper-attention to detail and sensory
Psychopathology28,7–17.doi:10.1159/000284894 hypersensitivity.Philos.Trans.R.Soc.Lond.B.Biol.Sci.364,1377–1383.doi:
Asai,T.,Sugimori,E.,andTanno,Y.(2008).Schizotypalpersonalitytraitsand 10.1098/rstb.2008.0337
predictionofone’sownmovementsinmotorcontrol:whatcausesanabnormal Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., and Clubley, E.
senseofagency?ConsciousCogn.17,1131–1142.doi:10.1016/j.concog.2008.04. (2001). The autism-spectrum quotient (AQ): evidence from asperger
004 syndrome/high-functioning autism, males and females, scientists and
Baron-Cohen, S. (1998). Does autism occur more often in families of mathematicians.Rev.J.AutismDev.Disord.31,5–17.doi:10.1023/A:100565341
physicists,engineers,andmathematicians?Autism2,296–301.doi:10.1177/ 1471
1362361398023008 Baron-Cohen,S.,Wheelwright,S.,Stott,C.,Bolton,P.,andGoodyer,I.(1997).Is
Baron-Cohen,S.(2002).Theextrememalebraintheoryofautism.TrendsCogn. therealinkbetweenengineeringandautism?Autism1,101–109.doi:10.1177/
Sci.6,248–254.doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01904-6 1362361397011010
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 14 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #15
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Bateson,P.(2005).“Theroleofplayintheevolutionofgreatapesandhumans,” Deary,I.J.,Liewald,D.,andNissan,J.(2011).Afree,easy-to-use,computer-based
inTheNatureofPlay:GreatApesandHumans,edsA.D.PellegriniandP.K. simpleandfour-choicereactiontimeprogramme:theDeary-Liewaldreaction
Smith(NewYork:theGuildfordPress),13–24. timetask.Behav.Res.Methods43,258–268.doi:10.3758/s13428-010-0024-1
Bekoff, M. (2001). Social play behaviour. Cooperation, fairness, trust, and the Deleuze,J.,Christiaens,M.,Nuyens,F.,andBillieux,J.(2017).Shootatfirstsight!
evolutionofmorality.J.Conscious.Stud.8,81–90. Firstpersonshooterplayersdisplayreducedreactiontimeandcompromised
Blakemore,J.E.O.,andCenters,R.E.(2005).Characteristicsofboys’andgirls’ inhibitorycontrolincomparisontoothervideogameplayers.Comput.Hum.
toys.SexRoles53,619–633.doi:10.1007/s11199-005-7729-0 Behav.72,570–576.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.027
Burghardt, G. M. (2005). The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the Limits. Delhove,M.,andGreitemeyer,T.(2020).Therelationshipbetweenvideogame
Cambridge:MITpress. characterpreferencesandaggressiveandprosocialpersonalitytraits.Psychol.
Cadenhead,K.S.,Light,G.A.,Geyer,M.A.,andBraff,D.L.(2000).Sensorygating Pop.MediaCult.9,96–104.doi:10.1037/ppm0000211
deficitsassessedbytheP50event-relatedpotentialinsubjectswithschizotypal Dorval,M.,andPepin,M.(1986).Effectofplayingavideogameonameasureof
personalitydisorder.Am.J.Psychiatry157,55–59.doi:10.1176/ajp.157.1.55 spatialvisualization.Percept.Mot.Skills62,159–162.doi:10.2466/pms.1986.62.
Casey, B. J., Gordon, C. T., Mannheim, G. B., and Rumsey, J. M. (1993). 1.159
Dysfunctional attention in autistic savants. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 15, Ducheneaut,N.,Yee,N.,Nickell,E.,andMoore,R.J.(2006).BuildinganMMO
933–946.doi:10.1080/01688639308402609 withmassappeal:alookatgameplayinWorldofWarcraft.GamesCult.1,
Chandra,S.,Sharma,G.,Salam,A.A.,Jha,D.,andMittal,A.P.(2016).Playing 281–317.doi:10.1177/1555412006292613
actionvideogamesakeytocognitiveenhancement.ProcediaComput.Sci.84, Dye,M.W.,Green,C.S.,andBavelier,D.(2009).Increasingspeedofprocessing
115–122.doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.04.074 withactionvideogames.Curr.Dir.Psychol.Sci.18,321–326.doi:10.1111/j.
Cherney, I. D., and Poss, J. L. (2008). Sex differences in Nintendo WiiTM 1467-8721.2009.01660.x
performance as expected from hunter-gatherer selection. Psychol. Rep. 102, Entertainment Software Association [ESA] (2019). ESA Essential Facts
745–754.doi:10.2466/pr0.102.3.745-754 2019. Available Online at: www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/
Choi,W.T.,Dan,K.S.,Wong,T.,Lantta,T.,Yang,M.,andVälimäki,M.(2020). ESA_Essential_facts_2019_final.pdf.(accessedAug6,2021).
Habitsandattitudesofvideogamingandinformationtechnologyuseinpeople EntertainmentSoftwareAssociation[ESA](2021).IndustryFacts.AvailableOnline
with schizophrenia: cross-sectional survey. J. Med. Internet Res. 22:e14865. at:http://www.theesa.com/facts/index.(accessedAug6,2021).
doi:10.2196/14865 Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor system in
Chou,C.,andTsai,M.J.(2007).GenderdifferencesinTaiwanhighschoolstudents’ controllingtheamplitudeofmovement.J.Exp.Psychol.47,381–391.doi:10.
computergameplaying.J.Med.InternetRes.23,812–824.doi:10.1016/j.chb. 1037/h0055392
2004.11.011 Gorbet,D.J.,andSergio,L.E.(2018).Movefaster,thinklater:womenwhoplay
Cohen,A.S.,Matthews,R.A.,Najolia,G.M.,andBrown,L.A.(2010).Towarda action video games have quicker visually-guided responses with later onset
morepsychometricallysoundbriefmeasureofschizotypaltraits:introducing visuomotor-relatedbrainactivity.PLoSOne13:e0189110.doi:10.1371/journal.
theSPQ-BriefRevised.J.Pers.Disord.24,516–537.doi:10.1521/pedi.2010.24. pone.0189110
4.516 Green,C.S.,andBavelier,D.(2006).Enumerationversusmultipleobjecttracking:
Colquitt,J.A.,andSimmering,M.J.(1998).Conscientiousness,goalorientation, thecaseofactionvideogameplayers.Cognition101,217–245.doi:10.1016/j.
and motivation to learn during the learning process: a longitudinal study. cognition.2005.10.004
J.Appl.Psychol.8,654–665.doi:10.1037/0021-9010.83.4.654 Green,C.S.,Pouget,A.,andBavelier,D.(2010).Improvedprobabilisticinference
Cook, C. M., and Saucier, D. M. (2010). Mental rotation, targeting ability as a general learning mechanism with action video games. Curr. Biol. 20,
andBaron-Cohen’sempathizing–systemizingtheoryofsexdifferences.Pers. 1573–1579.doi:10.1016/j.cub.2010.07.040
Individ.Dif.49,712–716.doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.06.010 Greenberg,B.S.,Sherry,J.,Lachlan,K.,Lucas,K.,andHolmstrom,A.(2010).
Coutelle,R.,Weiner,L.,Paasche,C.,Pottelette,J.,Bertschy,G.,Schröder,C.M., Orientationstovideogamesamonggenderandagegroups.Simul.Gaming41,
etal.(2021).Autismspectrumdisorderandvideogames:restrictedinterestsor 238–259.doi:10.1177/1046878108319930
addiction?Int.J.Ment.HealthAddict.1–22.doi:10.1007/s11469-021-00511-4 Griffith,J.L.,Voloschin,P.,Gibb,G.D.,andBailey,J.R.(1983).Differencesin
Craig, F., Tenuta, F., De Giacomo, A., Trabacca, A., and Costabile, A. (2021). eye-handmotorcoordinationofvideo-gameusersandnon-users.Percept.Mot.
A systematic review of problematic video-game use in people with Autism Skills57,155–158.doi:10.2466/pms.1983.57.1.155
SpectrumDisorders.Res.AutismSpectr.Disord.82:101726.doi:10.1016/j.rasd. Hartmann,T.,andKlimmt,C.(2006).Genderandcomputergames:exploring
2021.101726 females’ dislikes. J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 11, 910–931. doi: 10.1111/j.
Crespi, B. (2020). How is quantification of social deficits useful for studying 1083-6101.2006.00301.x
autism and schizophrenia? Psychol. Med. 50, 523–525. doi: 10.1017/ Hertzum,M.,andHornbæk,K.(2010).Howageaffectspointingwithmouseand
S0033291719003180 touchpad:acomparisonofyoung,adult,andelderlyusers.Int.J.Hum.Comput.
Crespi,B.,andBadcock,C.(2008).Psychosisandautismasdiametricaldisordersof Interact.26,703–734.doi:10.1080/10447318.2010.487198
thesocialbrain.Behav.Brain.Sci.3,241–261.doi:10.1017/S0140525X08004214 Hilgard,J.,Engelhardt,C.R.,andBartholow,B.D.(2013).Individualdifferences
Crespi, B., Leach, E., Dinsdale, N., Mokkonen, M., and Hurd, P. (2016). inmotives,preferences,andpathologyinvideogames:thegamingattitudes,
Imagination in human social cognition, autism, and psychotic-affective motives,andexperiencesscales(GAMES).Front.Psychol.4:608.doi:10.3389/
conditions.Cognition150,181–199.doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2016.02.001 fpsyg.2013.00608
Crespi,B.J.(2016).“Theevolutionaryetiologiesofautismspectrumandpsychotic Holmes,E.,andWilloughby,T.(2005).Playbehaviourofchildrenwithautism
affectivespectrumdisorders,”inEvolutionaryThinkinginMedicine.Advancesin spectrum disorders. J. Intellect. Dev. Disabil. 30, 156–164. doi: 10.1080/
theEvolutionaryAnalysisofHumanBehaviour,edsA.Alvergne,C.Jenkinson, 13668250500204034
andC.Faurie(Cham:Springer),299–327.doi:10.1007/978-3-319-29716-3_20 Hubert-Wallander,B.,Green,C.S.,andBavelier,D.(2011).Stretchingthelimits
Crespi,B.J.(2019).Comparativepsychopharmacologyofautismandpsychotic- ofvisualattention:thecaseofactionvideogames.WileyInterdiscip.Rev.Cogn.
affectivedisorderssuggestsnewtargetsfortreatment.Evol.Med.PublicHealth Sci.2,222–230.doi:10.1002/wcs.116
2019,149–168.doi:10.1093/emph/eoz022 Jansz,J.(2005).Theemotionalappealofviolentvideogamesforadolescentmales.
Crespi, B. J., and Go, M. C. (2015). Diametrical diseases reflect evolutionary- Commun.Theory15,219–241.doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2005.tb00334.x
genetictradeoffs:evidencefrompsychiatry,neurology,rheumatology,oncology Jansz,J.,andTanis,M.(2007).Appealofplayingonlinefirstpersonshootergames.
andimmunology.Evol.Med.PublicHealth2015,216–253.doi:10.1093/emph/ Cyberpsychol.Behav.10,133–136.doi:10.1089/cpb.2006.9981
eov021 Javitt, D. C., and Freedman, R. (2015). Sensory processing dysfunction
Deaner, R. O. (2013). Distance running as an ideal domain for showing a sex in the personal experience and neuronal machinery of schizophrenia.
difference in competitiveness. Arch. Sex Behav. 42, 413–428. doi: 10.1007/ Am. J. Psychiatry 172, 17–31. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.1312
s10508-012-9965-z 1691
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 15 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #16
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Johnson,D.,andGardner,J.(2010).“Personality,motivationandvideogames,”in Paulus, F. W., Sander, C. S., Nitze, M., Kramatschek-Pfahler, A. R., Voran,
Proceedingsofthe22ndConferenceoftheComputer-HumanInteractionSpecial A., and von Gontard, A. (2019). Gaming disorder and computer-mediated
InterestGroupofAustraliaonComputer-HumanInteraction,ed.M.Brereton communicationinchildrenandadolescentswithautismspectrumdisorder.
(NewYork:AssociationforComputingMachinery),276–279.doi:10.1145/ Z.KinderJugendpsychiatr.Psychother.48,113–122.doi:10.1024/1422-4917/
1952222.1952281 a000674
Kowal,M.,Toth,A.J.,Exton,C.,andCampbell,M.J.(2018).Differentcognitive Peever,N.,Johnson,D.,andGardner,J.(2012).“Personalityandvideogamegenre
abilities displayed by action video gamers and non-gamers. Comput. Hum. preferences,”inProceedingsofthe8thAustralasianConferenceonInteractive
Behav.88,255–262.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2018.07.010 Entertainment:PlayingtheSystem,edsC.T.Tan,C.Walker,andD.Cermak-
Kuo,M.H.,Orsmond,G.I.,Coster,W.J.,andCohn,E.S.(2014).Mediause Sassenrath(NewYork:AssociationforComputingMachinery),1–3.doi:10.
amongadolescentswithautismspectrumdisorder.Autism18,914–923.doi: 1145/2336727.2336747
10.1177/1362361313497832 Potard,C.,Henry,A.,Boudoukha,A.H.,Courtois,R.,Laurent,A.,andLignier,B.
Lenzenweger,M.F.(2001).Reactiontimeslowingduringhigh-load,sustained- (2019).Videogameplayers’personalitytraits:anexploratoryclusterapproach
attention task performance in relation to psychometrically identified toidentifyinggamingpreferences.Psychol.Pop.MediaCult.9,499–512.doi:
schizotypy.J.Abnorm.Psychol.110,290–6.doi:10.1037/0021-843X.110.2.290 10.1037/ppm0000245
Lenzenweger, M. F., Cornblatt, B. A., and Putnick, M. (1991). Schizotypy and Pryce, C. R. (1995). “Determinants of motherhood in human and nonhuman
sustainedattention.J.Abnorm.Psychol.100,84–9.doi:10.1037/0021-843X.100. primates: a biosocial model,” in Motherhood in Human and Nonhuman
1.84 Primates:BiosocialDeterminants,edsC.R.Pryce,R.D.Martin,andD.Skuse
Lenzenweger,M.F.,andO’Driscoll,G.A.(2006).Smoothpursuiteyemovement (Basel:Karger),1–15.doi:10.1159/000424482
andschizotypyinthecommunity.J.Abnorm.Psychol.115,779–86.doi:10. RCoreTeam(2021).R:ALanguageandEnvironmentforStatisticalComputing.
1037/0021-843X.115.4.779 Vienna:RFoundationforStatisticalComputing.
Leslie,A.M.(1987).Pretenseandrepresentation:theoriginsof"theoryofmind". Rehbein,F.,Staudt,A.,Hanslmaier,M.,andKliem,S.(2016).Videogameplaying
Psychol.Rev.94,412–426.doi:10.1037/0033-295X.94.4.412 inthegeneraladultpopulationofGermany:canhighergamingtimeofmales
Li,X.,Huang,L.,Li,B.,Wang,H.,andHan,C.(2020).Timeforatruedisplayof beexplainedbygenderspecificgenrepreferences?Comput.Hum.Behav.55,
skill:topplayersinleagueoflegendshavebetterexecutivecontrol.ActaPsychol. 729–735.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.10.016
204:103007.doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2020.103007 Roché, M. W., Fowler, M. L., and Lenzenweger, M. F. (2015). Deeper into
Liu,S.,Yu,C.,Conner,B.T.,Wang,S.,Lai,W.,andZhang,W.(2017).Autistic schizotypyandmotorperformance:investigatingthenatureofmotorcontrol
traitsandinternetgamingaddictioninChinesechildren:themediatingeffect inanon-psychiatricsample.PsychiatryRes.228,20–25.doi:10.1016/j.psychres.
ofemotionregulationandschoolconnectedness.Res.Dev.Disabil.68,122–130. 2015.03.016
doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2017.07.011 Schimmenti, A., Infanti, A., Badoud, D., Laloyaux, J., and Billieux, J. (2017).
Mazurek,M.O.,andEngelhardt,C.R.(2013a).Videogameuseinboyswithautism Schizotypal personality traits and problematic use of massively-multiplayer
spectrumdisorder,ADHD,ortypicaldevelopment.Pediatrics132,260–266. onlinerole-playinggames(MMORPGs).Comput.Hum.Behav.Rep.74,286–
doi:10.1542/peds.2012-3956 293.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.04.048
Mazurek,M.O.,andEngelhardt,C.R.(2013b).Videogameuseandproblem Scott,D.(1995).Theeffectofvideogamesonfeelingsofaggression.J.Psychol.129,
behaviorsinboyswithautismspectrumdisorders.Res.AutismSpectr.Disord. 121–132.doi:10.1080/00223980.1995.9914952
7,316–324.doi:10.1016/j.rasd.2012.09.008 Servin, A., Bohlin, G., and Berlin, L. (1999). Sex differences in 1−, 3−, and
McCrae,R.R.(1987).Creativity,divergentthinking,andopennesstoexperience. 5−year−olds’toy−choiceinastructuredplay−session.Scand.J.Psychol.40,
J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.52,1258–1265.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009818 43–48.doi:10.1111/1467-9450.00096
Mendenhall,Z.,Saad,G.,andNepomuceno,M.V.(2010).“Homovirtualensis: Shanis, J. M., and Hedge, A. (2003). Comparison of mouse, touchpad and
evolutionarypsychologyasatoolforstudyingvideogames,”inEvolutionary multitouchinputtechnologies.Proc.Hum.FactorsErgon.Soc.Annu.Meet.47,
PsychologyandInformationSystemsResearch.IntegratedSeriesinInformation 746–750.doi:10.1177/154193120304700418
Systems, ed. N. Kock (Boston: Springer), 24. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6139- Slater,M.D.(2003).Alienation,aggression,andsensationseekingaspredictorsof
6_14 adolescentuseofviolentfilm,computer,andwebsitecontent.J.Commun.53,
Menear,K.S.,andErnest,J.M.(2020).Comparisonofphysicalactivity,TV/video 105–121.doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2003.tb03008.x
watching/gaming,andusageofaportableelectronicdevicesbychildrenwith Smith, P. K., and Boulton, M. (1990). Rough-and-tumble play, aggression and
andwithoutautismspectrumdisorder.Matern.ChildHealthJ.24,1464–1472. dominance:perceptionandbehaviourinchildren’sencounters.Hum.Dev.33,
doi:10.1007/s10995-020-03013-2 271–282.doi:10.1159/000276524
Murray,A.,Mannion,A.,Chen,J.L.,andLeader,G.(2021).Gamingdisorderin Stoet,G.(2010).PsyToolkit-Asoftwarepackageforprogrammingpsychological
adultswithautismspectrumdisorder.J.AutismDev.Disord.1–8.doi:10.1007/ experimentsusingLinux.Behav.Res.Methods.42,1096–1104.doi:10.3758/
s10803-021-05138-x BRM.42.4.1096
Nepomuceno,M.V.,Saad,G.,Stenstrom,E.,andMendenhall,Z.(2010).“Finger Stoet, G. (2017). PsyToolkit: a novel web-based method for running online
lengthratioandattitudestowardseveralproductcategories,”inNA-Advances questionnairesandreaction-timeexperiments.Teach.Psychol.44,24–31.doi:
inConsumerResearch,Vol.37,edsM.C.Campell,J.Inman,andR.Pieters 10.1177/0098628316677643
(Minnesota:AssociationforConsumerResearch),872–872. Stotesbury,H.,Gaigg,S.B.,Kirhan,S.,andHaenschel,C.(2018).Theinfluenceof
Nowell, A. (2016). “Childhood, play and the evolution of cultural capacity in schizotypaltraitsonattentionunderhighperceptualload.Schizophr.Res.Cogn.
Neanderthals and modern humans,” in The Nature of Culture. Vertebrate 11,6–10.doi:10.1016/j.scog.2017.10.002
PaleobiologyandPaleoanthropology,edsM.Haidle,N.Conard,andM.Bolus Tabacchi, M. E., Caci, B., Cardaci, M., and Perticone, V. (2017). Early usage
(Dordrecht:Springer),doi:10.1007/978-94-017-7426-0_9 of Pokémon Go and its personality correlates. Comput. Human. Behav. 72,
Olson,C.K.,Kutner,L.A.,Warner,D.E.,Almerigi,J.B.,Baer,L.,Nicholi,A.M. 163–169.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.047
II.,etal.(2007).Factorscorrelatedwithviolentvideogameusebyadolescent Tondello,G.F.,andNacke,L.E.(2019).Playercharacteristicsandvideogame
boysandgirls.J.Adolesc.Health41,77–83.doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.01. preferences.Proc.Annu.Symp.Comput.Hum.Interact.Play2019,365–378.
001 doi:10.1145/3311350.3347185
Ostrov,J.M.,andKeating,C.F.(2004).Genderdifferencesinpreschoolaggression Torner,H.P.,Carbonell,X.,andCastejón,M.(2019).Acomparativeanalysisof
duringfreeplayandstructuredinteractions:anobservationalstudy.Soc.Dev. theprocessingspeedbetweenvideogameplayersandnon-players.AlomaRev.
13,255–277.doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.000266.x Psicol.Ciènciesdel’Educacióidel’Esport37,13–20.doi:10.51698/aloma.2019.
Park,H.R.,Lim,V.K.,Kirk,I.J.,andWaldie,K.E.(2015).P50sensorygating 37.1.13-20
deficitsinschizotypy.Pers.Individ.Dif.82,142–147.doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015. Twenge,J.M.(2017).iGen:WhyToday’sSuper-ConnectedKidsAreGrowingUp
03.025 LessRebellious,MoreTolerant,LessHappy–AndCompletelyUnpreparedFor
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 16 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
fpsyg-13-767446 February17,2022 Time:16:19 #17
Yangetal. Autism,Schizotypy,andVideoGames
Adulthood–AndWhatThatMeansForTheRestOfUs.NewYork:Simonand Yee, N. (2017). Genre-Gender Averages. Available Online at: https:
Schuster. //quanticfoundry.com/2017/01/19/female-gamers-by-genre/genre-gender-
Vygotsky,L.S.(1967).Playanditsroleinthementaldevelopmentofthechild. averages/#iLightbox[postimages]/0(accessedDec18,2021).
SovietPsychol.5,6–18.doi:10.2753/RPO1061-040505036
Wang, Z., Sapienza, A., Culotta, A., and Ferrara, E. (2019). “Personality ConflictofInterest:Theauthorsdeclarethattheresearchwasconductedinthe
and behavior in role-based online games,” in In 2019 IEEE Conference absenceofanycommercialorfinancialrelationshipsthatcouldbeconstruedasa
on Games (CoG), (Piscataway: IEEE), 1–8. doi: 10.1109/CIG.2019.884 potentialconflictofinterest.
8027
Watson, N. V., and Kimura, D. (1991). Nontrivial sex differences in Publisher’sNote:Allclaimsexpressedinthisarticlearesolelythoseoftheauthors
throwing and intercepting: relation to psychometrically-defined spatial anddonotnecessarilyrepresentthoseoftheiraffiliatedorganizations,orthoseof
functions. Pers. Individ. Dif. 12, 375–385. doi: 10.1016/0191-8869(91)900 thepublisher,theeditorsandthereviewers.Anyproductthatmaybeevaluatedin
53-E thisarticle,orclaimthatmaybemadebyitsmanufacturer,isnotguaranteedor
Wendt,F.R.,MunizCarvalho,C.,Pathak,G.A.,Gelernter,J.,andPolimanti,R. endorsedbythepublisher.
(2019).Decipheringthebiologicalmechanismsunderlyingthegenome-wide
associationsbetweencomputerizeddeviceuseandpsychiatricdisorders.J.Clin. Copyright©2022Yang,HurdandCrespi.Thisisanopen-accessarticledistributed
Med.8:2040.doi:10.3390/jcm8122040 underthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).Theuse,
Yang, W., Huang, T., Zeng, J., Chen, L., Mishra, S., and Liu, Y. E. (2020). distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
“Correlation between personality and social interactions in online strategy author(s)andthecopyrightowner(s)arecreditedandthattheoriginalpublication
games,”in2020IEEEConferenceonGames(CoG),(Piscataway:IEEE),756–759. in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
doi:10.1109/CoG47356.2020.9231956 distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms.
FrontiersinPsychology|www.frontiersin.org 17 February2022|Volume13|Article767446
