Maternal Depression, Paternal Psychopathology,
and Adolescent Diagnostic Outcomes
Patricia A. Brennan
Emory University
Constance Hammen
University of California, Los Angeles
Anna R. Katz
Emory University
Robyne M. Le Brocque
University of Queensland
The authors examined the relationship between maternal depression, paternal psychopathology, and
adolescent diagnostic outcomes in a community sample of 522 Australian families. They also examined
whether chronic family stress, father’s expressed emotion, and parents’ marital satisfaction mediated the
relationship between parental psychopathology and adolescent outcomes. Mother’s education, child’s
gender, and family income were covaried in all analyses. Results revealed that maternal depression and
paternal depression had an additive effect on youth externalizing disorders. In addition, maternal
depression interacted with both paternal depression and paternal substance abuse in predicting youth
depression but not youth nondepressive disorders. Chronic family stress and father’s expressed emotion
appeared to mediate the relationship between parental psychopathology and youth depression.
There is a large body of research documenting an association
between maternal depression and the presence of behavior prob-
lems in offspring. In particular, children of depressed parents have
been found to be more likely to be depressed themselves (Downey
& Coyne, 1990; Orvaschel, Walsh-Allis, & Ye, 1988; Weissman,
Warner, Wickramaratne, Moreau, & Olfson, 1997). Children
whose mothers are depressed also have been found to be at a
greater risk for developing a wide range of behavior problems and
psychopathology (Beardslee, Versage, & Gladstone, 1998; Cum-
mings & Davies, 1994; Hammen, Burge, Burney, & Adrian, 1990;
Orvaschel et al., 1988).
One area of crucial importance that has been overlooked in
much of the literature on maternal depression and child psycho-
pathology is the role fathers play in the development of behavior
problems in these high-risk groups (e.g., Phares & Compas,
1992)—both in terms of paternal disorders and quality of father–
child relationships. Recently, research on the father’s role in fam-
ily functioning has increased significantly. However, much of the
research on the father has focused on the father’s contributions to
normal child development and has ignored the possible relation-
ship between paternal psychopathology and child behavior out-
comes. A review by Phares and Compas (1992) found that between
1984 and 1991 only 26% of 577 empirical studies on psychopa-
thology in parents and the effects on their children examined both
maternal and paternal influences on psychopathology. Only a few
studies of maternal depression have included specific reports of
father psychopathology as well (e.g., Atkinson & Rickel, 1984;
Beardslee, Schultz, & Selman, 1987; Merikangas, Prusoff, &
Weissman, 1988).
Goodman and Gotlib (1999) distinguished among several ways
in which fathers may contribute to the development of behavior
problems in children with depressed mothers. One possibility is
that a child’s warm, consistent relationship with the father may
serve as a protective factor for some of the negative effects of
maternal depression. Previous studies have found support for this
buffering role of the father in families with depressed mothers
(Tannenbaum & Forehand, 1994; Thomas, Forehand, & Neigh-
bors, 1995).
Another possibility is that paternal psychopathology increases
the negative effect of maternal depression, such that children with
depressed mothers and psychiatrically ill fathers would display
more behavior problems than would children with depressed moth-
ers and psychiatrically normal fathers. In support of this hypoth-
esis, studies of offspring of two affected parents have found that
these children may be at a significantly greater risk for the devel-
opment of problems than are offspring who have only one or no
affected parents (Dierker, Merikangas, & Szatmari, 1999; Meri-
Patricia A. Brennan and Anna R. Katz, Department of Psychology,
Emory University; Constance Hammen, Department of Psychology, Uni-
versity of California, Los Angeles; Robyne M. Le Brocque, Department of
Anthropology
and
Sociology,
University
of
Queensland,
Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.
This article was completed during Patricia A. Brennan’s fellowship year
at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford,
California, with financial support provided by Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation Grant 034 248 and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant
BCS 960 1236. This study was also supported by funds from the National
Health and Medical Research Council in Australia; the Mater Misericor-
diae Mother’s Hospital in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and NIH Grant
R01 MH52239.
We are grateful to the Brisbane project interviewers: Cheri Dalton,
Barbara Mann, Eileen Tone, Sandra Fergusson, Molly Robbins, and Lisa
Manning. We also thank Margaret Andersen, Bill Bor, Jake Najman,
Michael O’Callaghan, and Gail Williams for their contributions to the
longitudinal study of the Mater University of Queensland Study of Preg-
nancy birth cohort.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Patricia
A. Brennan, Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, Geor-
gia 30322. E-mail: pbren01@emory.edu
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
2002, Vol. 70, No. 5, 1075–1085
0022-006X/02/$5.00
DOI: 10.1037//0022-006X.70.5.1075
1075
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

kangas, Dierker, & Szamari, 1998; Weissman et al., 1984). How-
ever, as Merikangas et al. (1998) noted, remarkably few high-risk
studies have considered the role of the coparent in the connection
between parental and child psychopathology.
The role of the father’s diagnosis in predicting behavior prob-
lems in children becomes increasingly complex when one consid-
ers the relationship between depressed mothers and their spouses.
According to the concept of assortative mating, depressed people
tend to choose mates who also have a psychiatric illness or
disorder or a family history of disorder and illness (Merikangas,
1984). Hence, children with depressed mothers may be at a greater
risk for developing behavior problems both through a direct mech-
anism of transmission of maternal depression and, more indirectly,
through psychopathology in the father, who may be more likely to
have a disorder if the mother is depressed.
The interaction between maternal depression and the particular
paternal diagnosis of depression may be important to consider
when examining the outcome of depressive diagnoses in offspring.
It has been noted that concordance for depression in married
couples is quite high (Merikangas, Weissman, Prusoff, & John,
1988). In cases where both parents are depressed, there is some
evidence for increased risk of offspring depressive outcomes. For
example, in 1982 Goodwin found that whereas 15% of children
who had one depressed parent evidenced depression themselves,
this figure rose to 40% in cases where both parents were depressed.
More recent studies that have examined youth outcomes in relation
to the interaction of maternal and paternal depression have yielded
mixed results. For example, whereas postpartum depression in
mothers and fathers was found in one study to interact in the
prediction of internalizing problems in young children (Carro,
Grant, Gotlib, & Compas, 1993), in another study parental con-
cordance for anxiety and affective disorders did not significantly
increase rates of anxiety and affective disorders beyond that which
was found in families with only one affected parent (Dierker et al.,
1999). Additional research is necessary to gain more conclusive
findings on how the presence of depression in both parents may be
related to risk for depression in offspring.
Substance abuse is the second type of paternal disorder that may
be of particular importance to consider in interaction with maternal
depression. Again, depression in wives is associated with this
particular disorder in husbands. In fact, Dierker et al. (1999) found
the combination of maternal depression and anxiety and paternal
substance abuse to be the most commonly occurring assortative
mating pattern in their sample. In a recent meta-analysis of the
contributions of maternal and paternal psychopathology to behav-
ior problems in offspring, Connell and Goodman (2001) high-
lighted the relative infrequency of studies that consider such an
interaction, and they suggested the importance of examining pa-
ternal substance abuse in particular. Results of the meta-analysis
suggested that maternal depression is a stronger predictor than
paternal depression and paternal substance abuse is a stronger
predictor than maternal substance abuse of behavior problems in
offspring. The contribution of the interaction of maternal depres-
sion and paternal substance abuse to this pattern of findings
remains unknown. Connell and Goodman suggested that when
studies have reported on the behavior problems seen in offspring
with depressed mothers or substance-abusing fathers, they may in
fact have been reporting on the same subpopulation, which may be
exposed to a unique set of risk factors due to their dually affected
parents. These reviewers concluded that future studies should look
more closely at the interaction between maternal depression and
paternal
substance
abuse
in
relation
to
problematic
youth
outcomes.
It is important to examine both additive and interactive effects in
the relationship between maternal depression, paternal psychopa-
thology, and adolescent outcomes. In assessing for additive effects,
one examines whether paternal psychopathology adds to the risk
for negative outcomes above and beyond the effect of maternal
depression on its own. In assessing for interactive effects, one
examines whether the effect of maternal depression on adolescent
outcome differs depending on the presence or absence of paternal
psychopathology.
As stated earlier, children of depressed mothers are at risk not
only for depressive outcomes but also for developing a wide range
of internalizing and externalizing disorders (Downey & Coyne,
1990). In addition, whereas internalizing outcomes may be more
tied to maternal psychopathology than to paternal psychopathol-
ogy, externalizing outcomes appear to be related to both maternal
and paternal diagnostic status (Connell & Goodman, 2001). For
these reasons, it is important to examine the effects of maternal and
paternal psychopathology on nondepressive internalizing and ex-
ternalizing outcomes as well as on the specific diagnostic outcome
of youth depression.
Given the paucity of research in this area, it is useful to examine
whether maternal depression and paternal psychopathology have
additive or interactive effects in relation to youth diagnostic out-
comes. If such effects are noted, an important secondary question
is how (or through what mechanisms) might this combination of
parental disorders affect these youth outcomes? Clearly one pos-
sible mechanism is through genetic transmission. In addition,
social or contextual mechanisms may help to explain how the
combination of maternal depression and paternal psychiatric ill-
ness increases risk for negative youth outcomes. For example, the
quality of the father–child interaction might be disrupted in cases
where the father suffers from depression or substance abuse and
the mother also suffers from depression. This disrupted father–
child relationship might explain increased risk for youth diagnostic
outcomes in these families. In a similar manner, the quality of the
parents’ marital relationship might be disrupted in cases of mother
depression and concomitant father psychopathology. The negative
marital interactions might be responsible for the increased risk of
youth problems in these families. A family environment in which
both parents suffer from a psychiatric disorder would likely be an
extremely stressful environment for the child. General levels of
family environment stress might be the mechanism through which
maternal and paternal psychopathology increase the likelihood of
youth diagnostic disorders. Previous research has found that dis-
rupted parent–child relations (Cox, Puckering, Pound, & Mills,
1987; Harnish, Dodge, & Valente, 1995), marital conflict (Emery,
Weintraub, & Neale, 1982; Fergusson, Horwood, & Lynskey,
1995), and family stress (Billings & Moos, 1983; Fendrich,
Warner, & Weissman, 1990; Hammen, Burge, & Adrian, 1991) all
act as mediators in the maternal depression and child outcome
relationship. To date, no one has extended the examination of these
potential mediators to the specific cases of families in which the
father also suffers from a psychiatric disorder.
The present study sought to examine further the role of the
father in the relationship between maternal depression and adoles-
1076
BRENNAN, HAMMEN, KATZ, AND LE BROCQUE
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

cent diagnostic outcomes. In addition to examining the overall
question of whether paternal depression or substance abuse has an
additive or moderating effect on maternal depression in the pre-
diction of youth outcomes, we also explored several potential
mediators for this effect. Specifically, we tested whether (a) moth-
ers with depression would be more likely to partner with men who
had a history of depression or substance abuse disorders; (b)
maternal depression and paternal psychiatric history would have
additive and/or interactive effects on adolescent diagnostic out-
comes, such that youths with both a depressed mother and a
depressed or substance-abusing father would be more likely than
the other youths in the sample to evidence depressive or other
psychiatric disorders; (c) levels of family stress and marital con-
flict would be higher and the quality of the father–child relation-
ship would be lower for those youths who had both a depressed
mother and a depressed or substance-abusing father than it would
be for other youths in the sample; (d) family stress, marital
conflict, and father–child relations would act as mediators in the
relationship between parental psychopathology and youth diagnos-
tic outcomes.
Method
Participants
Participants were 522 families with children born between 1981 and
1984 at Mater Misericordiae Mother’s Hospital in Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia. The sample for the present study was drawn from a larger birth
cohort (N  7,775) established in the context of the Mater University of
Queensland Study of Pregnancy (MUSP; Keeping et al., 1989). The pur-
pose of MUSP was to examine children’s physical, cognitive, and psycho-
logical health as a function of pregnancy and obstetric conditions and
psychosocial history. The MUSP cohort was predominantly Caucasian
(92%), lower middle or working socioeconomic status. Mothers in the
MUSP study completed interviews and questionnaires about themselves
and their children at five different times: during pregnancy, 3 to 4 days
after the birth of their child, 6 months after the birth of the child, when the
child was 5 years old, and when the child was 14 years old.
Sample Selection
In the context of MUSP, the mothers in the cohort completed self-report
depression questionnaires during their pregnancy, 3 to 4 days after the birth
of the child, when the child was 6 months old, and when the child was 5
years old. Data from these questionnaires were used to select a sample that
included a large number of women with a history of depressive symptoms
(varying in chronicity and severity) and a comparison sample of women
who had no or few depressive symptoms. Further details concerning the
selection of this high-risk sample were provided in Hammen and Brennan
(2001).
High-risk and comparison families were contacted and asked to partic-
ipate in a follow-up when their children were 15 years of age. They were
informed that the purpose of the study was an examination of the relation-
ship between maternal psychological and emotional functioning and youth
behavioral and mental health outcomes. Families were included in the
study if the mother and the child agreed to the interview; fathers and
stepfathers were included where available, including a small number of
cases of divorced parents in which the father had substantial contact with
the youth (parental divorce status was unrelated to youth diagnostic status).
All biological fathers who currently lived in the area were invited to
participate in the interview, as were stepfathers who had lived with the
child for 5 years or longer.
From the sample still available for follow-up (5,277, or 68% of the
original MUSP sample), 991 families were targeted for inclusion in the
present study. Of the 991, 816 consented and were included (82%): 68
families could not be located, 103 declined to participate in this phase, 3
included a child with a hearing or visual impairment that precluded
participation, and 1 child had died. Children in the high-risk subsample
(n  816) were not significantly different from the original birth cohort in
terms of gender, 2(1, N  7,775)  0.53, p  .48; income,
t(7147)  0.81, p  .42; or mother’s education, t(7612)  1.70, p  .09.
Of the 816 youth in the age 15 follow-up, 522 participated with both
their mother and father in the in-home interview. These 522 youth and their
parents composed the sample for the present study. Families in which only
the mother and the youth were interviewed were excluded from the study
because they lacked father self-reported psychiatric background, marital
satisfaction, and expressed emotion. Excluded families were not signifi-
cantly different from the high-risk subsample in terms of child gender,
2(1, N  816)  0.17, p  .68, or mother’s education, t(809)  0.52, p 
.60. Excluded families did have lower family incomes, t(765)  5.48, p 
.01, and higher rates of maternal depression (70% vs. 56%), 2(1, N 
814)  18.18, p  .01, than those families included in the final sample in
this study. It is possible then that our results may reflect an underestimate
of the effect of maternal depression and lower family income on adolescent
diagnostic outcomes.
Sample Characteristics
There were 262 boys and 260 girls, with a mean age of 15 years, 2
months (SD  0.27). The overall sample was 92% Caucasian, median
family income was AU$35,000–$45,000, median mothers’ education was
Grade 10 (approximately equivalent to a U.S. high school graduate), and
the mothers’ mean age at the time of the youth’s birth was 25.58 years
(SD  5.03). Of the 522 fathers who were interviewed, 454 (87%) were the
biological parents of the youth, 483 (93%) lived in the home with both the
mother and the youth, and 501 (96%) reported that the youth lived with
them at least some of the time.
Procedure
Interviews were conducted in the homes of the families. Interviewers
were blind to the mother’s depression status or history, and a team of two
interviewers conducted the parent and child interviews separately and
privately. Between interviews, the participants also completed a battery of
questionnaires. The mother, child, and father gave written informed con-
sent (assent) and were paid for their participation, which lasted approxi-
mately 3.5 hr.
Diagnostic Measures
Maternal and paternal depression.
Mothers and fathers were classified
as depressed if they qualified for a lifetime diagnosis of major depression
or dysthymia on the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM–IV (SCID;
First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1995). In the 522 families, 200 mothers
and 133 fathers were classified as depressed.
Paternal substance abuse.
Fathers were classified as having a history
of substance abuse if they qualified for alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence,
drug abuse, or drug dependence diagnoses on the SCID. In the 522
families, 94 fathers were classified as such.
Paternal diagnostic comorbidity.
A total of 37 fathers obtained criteria
for diagnoses of both substance abuse and depression during their lifetime.
Secondary analyses applying statistical controls for father diagnostic co-
morbidity yielded highly similar results to those presented.
Timing of parental diagnosis.
In the majority of the cases of parental
diagnoses (75% of the fathers’ diagnoses and 93% of the mothers’ diag-
noses) the disorder was ongoing during the life of the child. Secondary
1077
FATHER’S ROLE IN MATERNAL DEPRESSION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

analyses examining only the effect of parental diagnoses occurring during
the child’s lifetime yielded highly similar results to those presented here.
Youth depression.
Youths were classified as depressed if they met
criteria for a lifetime diagnosis of major depression or dysthymia on the
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Chil-
dren—Revised for DSM–IV (K-SADS-E; Orvaschel, 1995). The instru-
ment is a semistructured interview administered by trained clinical inter-
viewers covering current and lifetime disorders. It is administered
separately to the parent and the child; diagnostic decisions were reviewed
by the clinical rating team with judgments made on the basis of all
available information. Of the 522 youths in the study, 69 were classified as
depressed.
Youth nondepressive disorders.
Youths were classified as having a
nondepressive externalizing disorder if they met criteria for attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (n  38), conduct disorder (n  10),
oppositional–defiant disorder (n  15), or substance use disorder (n  7).
They were classified as having a nondepressive internalizing disorder if
they met criteria for anxiety disorders exclusive of specific and social
phobia (n  51) or for eating disorders (n  6). Children may have had
more than one diagnosis. There were 59 children classified as having
nondepressive externalizing disorders; 24% of these youths had a diagnosis
of depression as well. There were 40 children classified as having a
nondepressive internalizing disorder; 45% of these youths were diagnosed
with a depressive disorder as well.
Reliability of diagnoses.
To determine interrater reliability for diag-
noses, we randomly selected approximately 10% of the audiotaped SCID
and K-SADS-E interviews to be scored by another clinician, who was blind
to participants’ diagnoses. Kappa coefficients for the SCID were .84 for
maternal depression, .91 for paternal depression, and .92 for paternal
substance abuse.
On the K-SADS-E the weighted kappa for youth depression was .73.
Kappas for anxiety disorders, substance use disorders, disruptive disorders
(conduct disorder or oppositional–defiant disorder), and disorders classi-
fied as other (primarily eating disorders) ranged from .72 to 1.0, with a
mean of .81.
Family Functioning Measures
Chronic family stress (youth report).
To evaluate adolescents’ experi-
ence of stress in the family, Hammen and colleagues developed a semi-
structured interview for adolescents from earlier versions of chronic strain–
functioning measures for children (e.g., Hammen, 1991) and adults (e.g.,
Hammen et al., 1987). The adolescent version used in the age 15 follow-up
consisted of six domains: social life, close friendship, romantic relation-
ships, academic performance, school behavior, and relations with family
members (the domain of focus in the present study). Interviewers probed
each area with the youth, using standard general probes and follow-up
queries where needed. Each domain was scaled on a 5-point scale with
behaviorally specific anchors of 1 (superior functioning) an d5 (severe
difficulties). Reliabilities were based on independent judges’ ratings of
audiotaped interviews, with sample sizes between 88 and 96 for individual
items. The intraclass correlation for youth chronic stress experienced in
their relationship with family members was .84.
Father’s expressed emotion.
In the course of the in-home interview,
fathers completed the Five-Minute-Speech Sample (FMSS; Magana et al.,
1986), which provides a measure of parental attitudes toward the child that
may be represented as high or low expressed emotion (EE). In the FMSS,
fathers were seated in front of an audiotape recorder and asked to speak
unprompted and without interruption for 5 min about their adolescent child
and how they get along together. The great majority of the fathers com-
pleted this task without a need for any prompts from the interviewer. Seven
percent of the fathers were silent for a period and required prompts to
continue speaking; however, rates of silence and prompts did not differ by
paternal diagnostic group.
FMSS recordings were then coded by raters blind to all other informa-
tion about the parents and their children as reflecting either low or high EE
on the basis of criteria developed and validated by Magana et al. (1986). A
categorical rating of high EE is based on a clear presence of either criticism
or emotional overinvolvement in the content of the father’s speech. Ap-
proximately 12% of the fathers were rated as high EE in this sample.
Raters for the study were trained by the group that developed the FMSS
procedure. Interrater reliability of the raters with an expert from that group
yielded EE criticism kappas ranging from .63 to .82 and EE emotional
overinvolvement kappas ranging from .86 to 1.00 across raters. In this
sample, FMSS data were not available for 39 fathers because of technical
difficulties or inadequate sound quality.
Marital conflict.
The Satisfaction subscale of the Dyadic Adjustment
Scale (DAS; Spanier, 1976) was administered. Low satisfaction represents
high frequency of quarrels, discussions of separation, and negative inter-
actions. This subscale has been found to have high levels of reliability and
validity and is useful as a measure of overall relationship quality (Kurdek,
1992). The scale was administered to both the mother and father, and these
two reports were highly correlated (r  .93, p  .01). The mean score on
these reports was used as the measure of parental marital satisfaction in this
study.
Results
Mother’s education, child’s gender, and family income were
included as statistical controls in all analyses. These particular
controls were applied as they are commonly noted potential con-
founds in the literature on maternal depression and child outcome.
Paternal Psychopathology and Maternal Depression
Logistic regression analyses revealed that maternal depression
was significantly related to paternal depression, 2(1, N 
522)  4.47, p  .03, but not to paternal substance abuse, 2(1,
N  522)  0.06, p  .81. Depressed mothers were more likely
than nondepressed mothers to have a partner with a history of
depression (31% vs. 22%), but they were not more likely to have
a partner with a history of substance abuse (19% vs. 18%).
Main Effects of Maternal Depression and Paternal
Psychopathology
Table 1 presents the results of preliminary logistic regression
analyses examining the main effects of maternal depression, pa-
ternal depression, and paternal substance abuse disorders on youth
diagnostic outcomes. As can be seen in the table, maternal depres-
sion was related to all types of youth diagnostic outcomes; how-
ever, paternal depression was only related to youth externalizing
disorders, and paternal substance abuse was not significantly re-
lated to any youth diagnostic outcomes.
Additive and Interactive Effects of Maternal Depression
and Paternal Psychopathology
Logistic regression analyses were also used to examine potential
additive and interactive effects of maternal depression and paternal
psychopathology in relation to youth diagnostic outcomes. Three
types of youth diagnostic outcomes were examined—youth de-
pression, youth nondepressive externalizing disorders, and youth
nondepressive internalizing disorders. In these analyses, statistical
controls, maternal depression, and paternal psychiatric status were
1078
BRENNAN, HAMMEN, KATZ, AND LE BROCQUE
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

entered as a block in the first step (to assess for additive effects),
and the significance of Maternal Depression  Paternal Psychiat-
ric Status was assessed in the second and final step.
Youth depression.
Table 2 presents the logistic regression re-
sults for the outcome of youth depressive disorders. As can be seen
in the table, there were no additive effects of maternal depression
and paternal psychopathology on youth depression. However, ma-
ternal depression did interact with father depression in the predic-
tion of youth depression. The percentage of youths with a depres-
sion diagnoses in each comparison group is presented in the top of
Figure 1. Contrary to our hypotheses, post hoc chi-square analyses
revealed that in cases where the father was not depressed, maternal
depression was significantly related to youth depression, 2(1, N 
389)  12.50, p  .01, whereas in cases where the father was
depressed, the relationship between maternal depression and youth
depression was nonsignificant, 2(1, N  133)  0.14, p  .71.
Maternal depression was also found to interact with father
substance abuse in the prediction of youth depression. As can be
seen in the bottom half of Figure 1, the hypothesized pattern of
results was noted. Post hoc chi-square analyses revealed that in
cases where the father had no diagnosis of substance abuse, the
relationship between maternal depression and youth depression
was nonsignificant, 2(1, N  428)  1.74, p  .19, whereas in
cases where the father had a diagnosis of substance abuse, mater-
nal depression was significantly related to youth depression, 2(1,
N  94)  11.20, p  .01.
Youth nondepressive externalizing diagnoses.
Table 3 pre-
sents the logistic regression results for youth nondepressive exter-
nalizing disorders. As can be seen, paternal depression and mater-
nal depression had an additive effect on youth nondepressive
externalizing disorders (as displayed in Figure 2); however, no
other additive or interactive effects were significant.
Youth nondepressive internalizing diagnoses.
Table 4 presents
the results of logistic regression analyses examining the potential
additive and interactive effects of maternal depression and paternal
psychopathology on youth nondepressive internalizing disorders.
As can be seen from the table, there were no significant additive or
interactive effects of parental psychopathology on these youth
diagnostic outcomes.
Approximately one third of the youth with nondepressive ex-
ternalizing disorders and one half of the youth with nondepressive
internalizing disorders also had a diagnosis of depression. Reanal-
ysis of the parental psychopathology and youth nondepressive
disorder relationship excluding these cases of youth comorbidity
yielded similar results.
Because paternal psychopathology did not have an additive or a
moderating effect on maternal depression in the prediction of
youth nondepressive internalizing disorders, further analyses of
mediator effects in relation to youth nondepressive internalizing
disorders were unnecessary.
Table 1
Parental Psychopathology and Youth Diagnostic Outcomes
Youth and parent diagnosis
Youth diagnosis
Logistic regression results
Parental disorder (%)
No parental disorder (%)
2(1, N  522)
p
Youth depression
Maternal depression
19
10
7.50
.01
Paternal depression
16
12
0.40
.53
Paternal substance abuse
18
12
2.45
.12
Youth nondepressive externalizing disorders
Maternal depression
19
7
15.82
.01
Paternal depression
20
8
13.34
.01
Paternal substance abuse
15
11
0.66
.42
Youth nondepressive internalizing disorders
Maternal depression
12
5
5.55
.05
Paternal depression
11
7
1.33
.25
Paternal substance abuse
13
7
2.94
.09
Note.
The comparison group ns were as follows: 200 for maternal depression and 322 for no maternal depression, 133 for paternal depression and 389
for no paternal depression, and 94 for paternal substance abuse and 428 for no paternal substance abuse.
Table 2
Maternal Depression, Paternal Psychopathology, and Youth
Depressive Disorders
Paternal diagnosis

Wald
p
Depression
Block 1
Mother education
0.12
0.99
.32
Gender
1.16
15.68
.01
Family income
0.06
0.18
.67
Maternal depression
0.72
7.23
.01
Paternal depression
0.12
0.16
.69
Block 2
Interaction term
1.19
4.01
.05
Substance abuse
Block 1
Mother education
0.11
0.83
.36
Gender
1.18
15.97
.01
Family income
0.03
0.05
.83
Maternal depression
0.73
7.35
.01
Paternal substance abuse
0.51
2.43
.12
Block 2
Interaction term
1.48
4.38
.05
1079
FATHER’S ROLE IN MATERNAL DEPRESSION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Maternal Depression, Paternal Psychopathology, and the
Social–Familial Context
Next, we tested the hypothesis that levels of family stress and
marital conflict would be higher and the quality of the father–child
relationship would be lower for those youths who had both a
depressed mother and a depressed or substance-abusing father than
it would be for other youths in the sample.
Chronic family stress.
Analyses of variance procedures re-
vealed that paternal depression and maternal depression did not
interact to predict chronic family stress, F(1, 522)  0.18, p  .67.
However, paternal substance abuse and maternal depression did
interact
to
predict
this
family-functioning
variable,
F(1,
522)  7.12, p  .01. Post hoc Duncan’s analyses revealed that the
families with both a depressed mother and a substance-abusing
father had a significantly higher rating of chronic family stress
(M  2.76) than did those families with only a depressed mother
(M  2.30), only a substance-abusing father (M  2.29), or neither
(M  2.19).
Father’s EE.
Logistic regression analyses also revealed that
Paternal Depression  Maternal Depression significantly pre-
dicted father’s EE, 2(1, N  483)  4.85, p  .03. The top half
of Figure 3 displays the percentages of children in each compar-
ison group who were coded as having high levels of father’s EE.
Figure 1.
Parental psychopathology and youth depression.
Table 3
Maternal Depression, Paternal Psychopathology, and Youth
Nondepressive Externalizing Disorders
Paternal diagnosis

Wald
p
Depression
Block 1
Mother education
0.07
0.26
.61
Gender
1.63
21.82
.01
Family income
0.18
1.40
.24
Maternal depression
1.09
12.99
.01
Paternal depression
1.03
11.25
.01
Block 2
Interaction term
0.34
0.32
.57
Substance abuse
Block 1
Mother education
0.06
0.20
.66
Gender
1.58
20.92
.01
Family income
0.22
2.18
.14
Maternal depression
1.16
15.18
.01
Paternal substance abuse
0.29
0.65
.42
Block 2
Interaction term
0.10
0.02
.88
Figure 2.
Parental depression and youth nondepressive externalizing
disorders.
1080
BRENNAN, HAMMEN, KATZ, AND LE BROCQUE
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

As can be seen from the figure, youths who had both a depressed
mother and a depressed father had higher rates of father’s EE than
the other three comparison groups. This pattern is not the same as
the pattern noted in rates of youth depression in these comparison
groups (top of Figure 1). Logistic regression analyses also revealed
that paternal substance abuse and maternal depression interacted in
the prediction of father’s EE, 2(1, N  483)  3.88, p  .05. The
bottom half of Figure 3 displays the percentage of children in each
comparison group who were coded as having high levels of fa-
ther’s EE. As revealed in the figure, youths with both a substance-
abusing father and a depressed mother had higher rates of father’s
EE than the youth in the other comparison groups. This pattern of
results is very similar to that noted for the effect of paternal
substance abuse and maternal depression on the outcome of youth
depression (bottom of Figure 1).
Marital conflict.
Contrary to our hypothesis, the results of
analyses of variance tests revealed that neither Paternal Depres-
sion  Maternal Depression, F(1, 519)  0.80, p  .37, nor
Paternal
Substance
Abuse

Maternal
Depression,
F(1,
519)  0.96, p  .33, significantly predicted marital conflict.
Family Functioning as Mediator in Predicting Youth
Depression
Maternal Depression  Paternal Depression and Maternal De-
pression  Paternal Substance Abuse were both significant in
predicting youth depression. Next, we examined whether disrupted
family functioning might help to explain the mechanism for this
effect. Specifically, we followed the methods proposed by Baron
and Kenny (1986) to assess whether family stress, father’s EE, and
marital conflict acted as mediators in the relationship between
parental psychopathology and youth depression.
Baron and Kenny (1986) set forth the following criteria as
necessary for a variable to qualify as a mediator: Criterion 1. The
independent variable (in this case the interaction between maternal
depression and paternal depression or substance abuse) must pre-
dict the potential mediator variable; Criterion 2. The potential
mediator variable must significantly predict the dependent variable
(with the independent variable included in the model); and Crite-
rion 3. Statistical control of the potential mediator variable must
reduce or eliminate the previously significant relationship between
the independent variable and the dependent variable.
Criterion 1.
As presented above, father’s EE satisfied the first
criterion as a mediator between the independent variable Paternal
Depression  Maternal Depression and the dependent variable of
youth depression. That is, paternal depression and maternal de-
pression interacted to predict father’s EE. Both chronic family
Figure 3.
Parental psychopathology and father’s expressed emotion (EE).
Table 4
Maternal Depression, Paternal Psychopathology, and Youth
Nondepressive Internalizing Disorders
Paternal diagnosis

Wald
p
Depression
Block 1
Mother education
0.13
0.73
.39
Gender
0.79
4.99
.05
Family income
0.21
1.66
.20
Maternal depression
0.76
5.05
.05
Paternal depression
0.34
0.92
.34
Block 2
Interaction term
0.51
0.51
.48
Substance abuse
Block 1
Mother education
0.11
0.56
.46
Gender
0.81
5.19
.05
Family income
0.19
1.23
.27
Maternal depression
0.78
5.37
.05
Paternal substance abuse
0.66
3.01
.08
Block 2
Interaction term
0.50
0.43
.51
1081
FATHER’S ROLE IN MATERNAL DEPRESSION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

stress and father’s EE also satisfied Criterion 1 as a potential
mediator in the relationship between the independent variable
Paternal Substance Abuse  Maternal Depression and the depen-
dent variable of youth depression. That is, paternal substance
abuse and maternal depression interacted to predict both chronic
family stress and father’s EE. Marital conflict did not satisfy
Criterion 1 for a mediator and so no further analyses were under-
taken with this variable.
Criterion 2.
For those variables that met the first criterion for
a mediator, chronic family stress and father’s EE, we next tested
whether they met Criterion 2. Specifically, we examined whether
each of these family-functioning variables (potential mediators)
was related to youth depression (the dependent variable), while
controlling for the effects of parent psychopathology (the indepen-
dent variable). Logistic regression analyses controlling for the
main effects and interaction of maternal depression and paternal
depression revealed that father’s EE significantly predicted youth
depression, 2(1, N  522)  11.88, p  .01. Further logistic
regression analyses controlling for the main effects and interaction
of maternal depression and paternal substance abuse revealed that
both chronic family stress, 2(1, N  522)  16.74, p  .01, and
father’s EE, 2(1, N  483)  8.59, p  .01, were significant
predictors of youth depression. Therefore, both chronic family
stress and father’s EE satisfied the second criterion for mediators.
Criterion 3.
We next completed the final step in the test for a
mediator effect of father’s EE. We completed a logistic regression
analysis in which demographic controls and main effects were
entered in the first block, along with the father’s EE, and the
interaction term of maternal depression and paternal diagnosis was
entered in the second step. Logistic regression analyses revealed
that the inclusion of a statistical control for father’s EE did not
decrease the effect of Maternal Depression  Paternal Depression
on the outcome of youth depression, 2(1, N  483)  5.71, p 
.02. The inclusion of father’s EE as a statistical control did,
however, render the Paternal Substance Abuse  Maternal De-
pression term nonsignificant in its prediction of youth depression,
2(1, N  483)  2.42, p  .12. Father’s EE, therefore, appears
to mediate the relationship between paternal substance abuse,
maternal depression, and youth depression but not the relationship
between paternal depression, maternal depression, and youth
depression.
Because chronic family stress was related to youth depression
and was also significantly predicted by Maternal Depression 
Paternal Substance Abuse, we tested whether it satisfied the final
criterion for a mediator in the parental psychopathology and youth
depression relationship. Results of this analysis revealed that pa-
ternal substance abuse and maternal depression no longer signifi-
cantly interacted to predict youth depression once chronic family
stress was controlled, 2(1, N  522)  3.33, p  .07. Chronic
family stress, therefore, does appear to mediate the relationship
between maternal depression, paternal substance abuse, and youth
depression.
Family Functioning as Mediator in Predicting Youth
Depression
Maternal depression and paternal depression had an additive
effect on the outcome of youth nondepressive externalizing disor-
ders. In a final set of logistic regression analyses, we examined
whether family functioning might also mediate this parent psycho-
pathology effect.
Both chronic family stress, 2(1, N  522)  23.71, p  .01,
and father’s EE, 2(1, N  522)  3.59, p  .05, were signifi-
cantly related to youth nondepressive externalizing diagnoses
when both maternal depression and paternal depression were con-
trolled. Marital conflict, 2(1, N  522)  2.97, p  .09, was not
significantly related to youth nondepressive externalizing diag-
noses. Therefore we tested whether either chronic family stress or
father’s EE might mediate the effects of maternal and paternal
depression on youth externalizing disorders. Table 5 presents the
results of these logistic regression analyses. As can be seen from
the table, the addition of these family-functioning variables as
statistical controls did not eliminate the significant additive effects
of maternal and paternal depression on youth externalizing diag-
nostic outcomes.
Discussion
The results suggest that fathers play an important role in deter-
mining whether maternal depression is related to youth depressive
disorder outcomes. Paternal depression and paternal substance
abuse both acted as moderators between maternal depression and
youth diagnoses of depression. The specific moderator effect,
however, differed according to the type of paternal psychopathol-
ogy. In the case of paternal depression, maternal depression was
only significantly related to youth depression in cases where the
father did not exhibit the disorder. In this case, it seems that the
independent presence of maternal depression or paternal depres-
sion increased the risk for youth depressive disorders to the same
extent as the dual presence of these parental disorders. In contrast,
in the case of substance abuse, the co-occurrence of maternal
depression and paternal substance abuse had a potent effect on the
risk for youth depression. Adolescents who had a depressed
mother and a substance-abusing father evidenced significantly
higher rates of depression than adolescents with only a depressed
mother, only a substance-abusing father, or neither a depressed
mother nor a substance-abusing father.
Maternal depression and paternal depression were found to be
significantly related to one another in our study. In contrast,
depressed women were no more likely than nondepressed women
to have a partner with a diagnosis of substance abuse. This result
Table 5
Mediator Analyses of the Maternal Depression, Paternal
Depression, and Youth Nondepressive Externalizing
Disorders Relationship
Variable

Wald
p 
Without mediators
Maternal depression
1.09
12.99
.01
Paternal depression
1.03
11.25
.01
Controlling for father’s EE
Maternal depression
1.02
10.48
.01
Paternal depression
0.75
5.32
.05
Controlling for chronic family stress
Maternal depression
1.05
10.61
.01
Paternal depression
1.01
9.65
.01
Note.
EE  expressed emotion.
1082
BRENNAN, HAMMEN, KATZ, AND LE BROCQUE
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

contradicts findings in the research on assortative mating in which
women with depression have been found to be more likely to mate
with substance-abusing men (Dierker et al., 1999). The reason for
our contradictory result may be due in part to sample selection.
Families were only included in this study if both the mother and
the father agreed to be directly interviewed and the father had
substantial contact with the youth. At the youth age of 15,
substance-abusing husbands were likely lost to the sample because
of these criteria. Moreover, it seems plausible that there would be
higher rates of depression among the wives or ex-wives of
substance-abusing fathers who did not participate in the study. In
support of this supposition, family history data obtained from the
mothers in the larger high-risk sample reveal a significant rela-
tionship between maternal depression and biological father sub-
stance abuse. Our sample selection therefore appears to have
reduced cases of assortative mating for depressed women and
substance-abusing men.
We found additive effects for maternal depression and paternal
depression on youth nondepressive externalizing disorders. This
result is consistent with the finding that paternal psychopathology
is strongly associated with externalizing outcomes in youth (Con-
nell & Goodman, 2001). Our results also suggested that chronic
family stress and father’s EE did not act as potent mediators for
these additive parental psychopathology effects. It may be that
other family-functioning variables, such as parental monitoring
and discipline, act as the mechanisms through which maternal and
paternal depression contribute to the increased likelihood of ex-
ternalizing disorder outcomes in youth. Our data analyses did not
assess for direction of effect between parental and youth diag-
noses. Therefore it is also possible that youth externalizing disor-
ders lead to parental depression rather than the other way around.
We did not find that paternal psychopathology moderated the
relationship between maternal depression and youth nondepressive
internalizing or externalizing disorders. In other words, our mod-
erator findings appeared to be specific to the risk for youth de-
pression. This finding stands somewhat in contrast to those of
Merikangas, Prusoff, et al. (1988), who did not find any combi-
nation of maternal and paternal diagnoses that interacted to spe-
cifically predict youth depression. It should be noted, however,
that Merikangas and her colleagues examined cases of “pure”
youth depression, whereas our study did not exclude cases in
which depressed youth also evidenced other disorders. Our finding
that the results were specific to youth depression might suggest
some genetic basis for our results; however, given the type of
sample it is not possible for us to test for genetic effects.
Our study suggests that impairments in family functioning
might be one of the mechanisms through which maternal depres-
sion and paternal substance abuse result in increased risk for youth
depression. Specifically, the youth with substance-abusing fathers
and depressed mothers experienced higher levels of chronic family
stress and father’s EE. These deficits in family functioning in turn
were related to increased youth depression. In addition, these
family-functioning deficits accounted at least in part for the Ma-
ternal Depression  Paternal Substance Abuse effect on youth
depression. These findings have direct implications for therapeutic
intervention with families. They suggest that interventions targeted
at reducing family stress and improving the father–child relation-
ship in these types of families may be especially helpful in alle-
viating youth depression.
The combination of maternal depression and paternal depression
was also related to higher levels of father’s EE in our sample.
Nevertheless, this family-functioning dynamic did not act as the
mediating mechanism for the interactive effect of parental depres-
sion on youth depression. Risk for depression was similarly in-
creased in children with either a depressed mother or a depressed
father or both. It is possible that high levels of father’s EE explain
the increased risk for children who had both a depressed mother
and a depressed father but that some other factors worked to
increase risk for youth depression when only the mother or the
father was depressed.
Marital conflict has been found to be an important mediator in
the relationship between maternal depression and youth outcome
(Cox et al., 1987; Emery et al., 1982; Fergusson et al., 1995). Our
findings do not necessarily contradict the past research in this area,
but they do suggest that marital conflict may not be an important
mechanism whereby paternal psychopathology and maternal de-
pression (together) lead to increased risk for youth depression. It
should be noted, however, that our sampling method is likely to
have resulted in conservative estimates of the potential mediating
role of marital conflict. Simply stated, in cases of high marital
conflict, fathers might have been less likely to participate in the
interview. Further examination of the potential mediator effects of
marital conflict in the parental psychopathology and youth depres-
sion relationship appear to be warranted, particularly in more
heterogeneous samples.
Our hypotheses and conceptualization of the relationship
between parental psychopathology, family stress and function-
ing, and youth diagnostic outcomes assume a specific direction
of effects. That is, we surmise that parental psychopathology
disrupts family functioning, which in turn leads to deleterious
child outcomes. It is important to note, however, that we did not
complete longitudinal analyses to confirm this direction of
effect. It is also possible, for example, that the relationships that
we found between parental psychopathology, family stress and
functioning, and child outcome instead reflect the effect of child
psychopathology on family and parental outcomes. In terms of
clinical utility, knowledge that particular patterns of parental
disorders, family interaction patterns, and youth outcomes tend
to co-occur is still valuable and informative in the context of
therapeutic intervention.
Because our sample consisted primarily of intact families or of
cases where the youth had substantial contact with the father, our
results may not be generalizable to the overall population of
depressed mothers. In the Age 15 follow-up of the MUSP cohort,
rates of maternal depression were higher in families where the
father did not participate than they were in families where the
father did (the sample for the present study). In addition, it is not
clear whether our sampling method would overestimate or under-
estimate the moderating effects of paternal psychopathology in the
relationship between maternal depression and youth outcomes.
Perhaps paternal psychopathology has a greater effect on youth
outcomes in cases of intact families or in cases where the father
and the youth have substantial contact with one another. On the
other hand, paternal psychopathology may have an equal or more
potent effect on youth outcomes in cases where contact with the
youth is more limited. The mechanism for the effect noted in our
sample may or may not be the same mechanism that increases risk
1083
FATHER’S ROLE IN MATERNAL DEPRESSION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

for psychopathology when the father has less of a presence in the
life of the child.
Our study presents results from a large community sample that
contained adequate numbers of participants to examine the rela-
tionship between maternal depression, paternal psychopathology,
and youth diagnostic outcomes. In addition, our measures of parent
and youth diagnoses are based on extensive clinical interviews,
and our measures of family functioning were gathered from mul-
tiple informants. Our high-risk sampling method using maternal
self-reports of depression from early in the child’s life suggests
that maternal depression likely preceded youth depression tempo-
rally. Nevertheless, we did not specifically examine age of onset
for parental and youth diagnostic conditions. Furthermore, our
study is not an experiment, and therefore, we are not able to make
causal inferences from our results. What does appear to be evident
from our findings is that the father plays an important role in the
relationship between maternal depression and youth diagnostic
outcomes. In particular, the combination of paternal substance
abuse and maternal depression is strongly related to high levels of
youth depression. Moreover, chronic family stress and high levels
of father’s EE appear to be two mechanisms through which pa-
rental psychopathology is related to youth depression. These find-
ings might be particularly valuable in the therapeutic context of
family intervention and in prevention programs targeting high-risk
youth.
References
Atkinson, A. K., & Rickel, A. U. (1984). Postpartum depression in pri-
miparous parents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93, 115–119.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 51, 1173–1182.
Beardslee, W. R., Schultz, L. H., & Selman, R. L. (1987). Level of
social–cognitive development, adaptive functioning, and DSM–III diag-
noses in adolescent offspring of parents with affective disorders: Impli-
cations of the development of the capacity for mutuality. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 807–815.
Beardslee, W. R., Versage, E. M., & Gladstone, T. R. G. (1998). Children
of affectively ill parents: A review of the past 10 years. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 1134–1141.
Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1983). Comparisons of children of
depressed and nondepressed parents: A social–environmental perspec-
tive. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 11, 463–485.
Carro, M. G., Grant, K. E., Gotlib, I. H., & Compas, B. E. (1993).
Postpartum depression and child development: An investigation of
mothers and fathers as sources of risk and resilience. Development &
Psychopathology, 5, 567–579.
Connell, A., & Goodman, S. (2001). The association between psychopa-
thology in fathers versus mothers and children’s externalizing behavior
problems: A meta-analysis. Unpublished manuscript.
Cox, A. D., Puckering, C., Pound, A., & Mills, M. (1987). The impact of
maternal depression in young children. Journal of Child Psychology &
Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 28, 917–928.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1994). Maternal depression and child
development. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Dis-
ciplines, 35, 73–112.
Dierker, L. C., Merikangas, K. R., & Szatmari, P. (1999). Influence of
parental concordance for psychiatric disorders on psychopathology in
offspring. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 38, 280–288.
Downey, G., & Coyne, J. C. (1990). Children of depressed parents: An
integrative review. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 50–76.
Emery, R. E., Weintraub, S., & Neale, J. M. (1982). Effects of marital
discord on the school behavior of children with schizophrenic, affec-
tively disordered, and normal parents. Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 10, 215–228.
Fendrich, M., Warner, V., & Weissman, M. M. (1990). Family risk factors,
parental depression, and psychopathology in offspring. Developmental
Psychology, 26, 40–50.
Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Lynskey, M. T. (1995). Maternal
depressive symptoms and depressive symptoms in adolescents. Journal
of Child Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 36, 1161–1178.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1995).
Structured clinical interview for DSM–IV Axis I disorders. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Goodman, S. H., & Gotlib, I. H. (1999). Risk for psychopathology in the
children of depressed mothers: A developmental model for understand-
ing mechanisms of transmission. Psychological Review, 106, 458–490.
Goodwin, F. (1982). Depression and manic depressive illness. Bethesda,
MD: National Institutes of Health.
Hammen, C. (1991). Depression runs in families: The social context of risk
and resilience in children of depressed mothers. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Hammen, C., Adrian, C., Gordon, D., Burge, D., Jaenicke, C., & Hiroto, D.
(1987). Children of depressed mothers: Maternal strain and symptom
predictors of dysfunction. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 190–
198.
Hammen, C., & Brennan, P. A. (2001). Depressed adolescents of depressed
and nondepressed mothers: Tests of an interpersonal impairment hy-
pothesis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 284–294.
Hammen, C., Burge, D., & Adrian, C. (1991). Timing of mother and child
depression in a longitudinal study of children at risk. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 341–345.
Hammen, C., Burge, D., Burney, E., & Adrian, C. (1990). Longitudinal
study of diagnoses in children of women with unipolar and biplolar
affective disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 47, 1112–1117.
Harnish, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Valente, E. (1995). Mother–child inter-
action quality as a partial mediator of the roles of maternal depressive
symptomatology and socioeconomic status in the development of child
behavior problems. Child Development, 66, 739–753.
Keeping, J. D., Najman, J. M., Morrison, J., Western, J. S., Andersen,
M. J., & Williams, G. M. (1989). A prospective longitudinal study of
social, psychological, and obstetrical factors in pregnancy: Response
rates and demographic characteristics of the 8,556 respondents. British
Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 96, 289–297.
Kurdek, L. (1992). Dimensionality of the Dyadic Adjustment Scale: Evi-
dence from heterosexual and homosexual couples. Journal of Family
Psychology, 6, 22–35.
Magana, A. B., Goldstein, M. J., Karno, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Jenkins, J.,
& Falloon, I. R. (1986). A brief method for assessing expressed emotion
in relatives of psychiatric patients. Psychiatry Research, 17, 203–212.
Merikangas, K. R. (1984). Divorce and assortative mating among de-
pressed patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 74–76.
Merikangas, K. R., Dierker, L. C., & Szamari, P. (1998). Psychopathology
among offspring of parents with substance abuse and/or anxiety disor-
ders: A high risk study. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry &
Allied Disciplines, 39, 711–720.
Merikangas, K. R., Prusoff, B. A., & Weissman, M. M. (1988). Parental
concordance for affective disorders: Psychopathology in offspring. Jour-
nal of Affective Disorders, 15, 279–290.
Merikangas, K. R., Weissman, M. M., Prusoff, B. A., & John, K. (1988).
Assortative mating and affective disorders: Psychopathology in off-
spring. Psychiatry, 51, 48–57.
Orvaschel, H. (1995). Schedule for Affective Disorder and Schizophrenia
1084
BRENNAN, HAMMEN, KATZ, AND LE BROCQUE
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

for School-Age Children—Epidemiologic Version 5. Ft. Lauderdale, FL:
Center for Psychological Studies, Nova Southeastern University.
Orvaschel, H., Walsh-Allis, G., & Ye, W. (1988). Psychopathology in
children of parents with recurrent depression. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 16, 17–28.
Phares, V., & Compas, B. E. (1992). The role of fathers in child and
adolescent psychopathology: Make room for daddy. Psychological Bul-
letin, 111, 387–412.
Spanier, G. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 38, 15–28.
Tannenbaum, L., & Forehand, R. (1994). Maternal depressive mood: The
role of the father in preventing adolescent problem behaviors. Behaviour
Research & Therapy, 32, 321–325.
Thomas, A. M., Forehand, R., & Neighbors, B. (1995). Change in maternal
depressive mood: Unique contributions to adolescent functioning over
time. Adolescence, 30, 43–52.
Weissman, M. M., Prusoff, B. A., Gammon, G. D., Merikangas, K. R.,
Leckman, J. F., & Kidd, K. K. (1984). Psychopathology in the children
(ages 6–18) of depressed and normal parents. Journal of the American
Academy of Child Psychiatry, 23, 78–84.
Weissman, M. M., Warner, V., Wickramaratne, P., Moreau, D., & Olfson,
M. (1997). Offspring of depressed parents: 10 years later. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 54, 932–940.
Received February 7, 2001
Revision received December 18, 2001
Accepted December 28, 2001 
1085
FATHER’S ROLE IN MATERNAL DEPRESSION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

