Article 
Smartphone App with an Accelerometer Enhances 
Patients’ Physical Activity Following Elective 
Orthopedic Surgery: A Pilot Study 
Hanneke C. van Dijk-Huisman 1,2,* 
Antoine F. Lenssen 1,2 and Rob A. de Bie 2,4 



2 CAPHRI School for Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University, 
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands; ra.debie@maastrichtuniversity.nl 






Abstract: Low physical activity (PA) levels are common in hospitalized patients. Digital health tools 
could be valuable in preventing the negative eﬀects of inactivity. We therefore developed Hospital 
Fit; which is a smartphone application with an accelerometer, designed for hospitalized patients. 
It enables objective activity monitoring and provides patients with insights into their recovery progress 
and oﬀers a tailored exercise program. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of 
Hospital Fit to enhance PA levels and functional recovery following orthopedic surgery. PA was 
measured with an accelerometer postoperatively until discharge. The control group received standard 
physiotherapy, while the intervention group used Hospital Fit in addition to physiotherapy. The time 
spent active and functional recovery (modiﬁed Iowa Level of Assistance Scale) on postoperative day 
one (POD1) were measured. Ninety-seven patients undergoing total knee or hip arthroplasty were 
recruited. Hospital Fit use, corrected for age, resulted in patients standing and walking on POD1 for 
an average increase of 28.43 min (95% conﬁdence interval (CI): 5.55–51.32). The odds of achieving 
functional recovery on POD1, corrected for the American Society of Anesthesiologists classiﬁcation, 
were 3.08 times higher (95% CI: 1.14–8.31) with Hospital Fit use. A smartphone app combined with 
an accelerometer demonstrates the potential to enhance patients’ PA levels and functional recovery 
during hospitalization. 
Keywords: activity monitoring; physical activity; functional recovery; hospitalization; mHealth; 
wearable sensors; arthroplasty; physiotherapy 

Elective joint replacement is an eﬀective and successful intervention in patients suﬀering from 
end-stage osteoarthritis [1–4]. Due to the rising prevalence of osteoarthritis, the number of total knee 
arthroplasty (TKA) and total hip arthroplasty (THA) procedures performed annually is increasing 
steadily. The American Joint Replacement Registry (AJJR) shows that 139,582 primary TKA procedures 
and 93,122 primary THA procedures were undertaken in the United States of America in 2018 [5]. 
The perioperative care process around TKA and THA procedures has greatly improved in recent 
years due to advances in surgical techniques and the introduction of clinical care pathways [6–8]. 



(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1) 
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) 


Clinical care pathways are directed at preparing the patient for discharge as soon as possible after 
surgery, without compromising outcomes [3,8,9]. Postoperative mobilization on the day of surgery 
within a pathway-controlled fast-track program is associated with a reduced length of stay (LOS), 
enhanced functional recovery, reduced pain, and lower mortality rates [8,10,11]. 
Although the beneﬁcial eﬀects of physical activity (PA) during hospitalization are well documented, 
patients continue to spend between 92% and 96% of their time lying or sitting [12–14]. Therefore, 
strategies aimed at increasing the amount of time spent standing and walking are needed [15]. 
Postoperative physiotherapy is aimed at enhancing PA levels and functional recovery of activities 
of daily living which are essential in order to function independently at home [9,16–18]. However, 
physiotherapists lack objective insight into the amount of time patients are active. In order to advise 
patients eﬀectively on their PA behavior, continuous PA monitoring with real-time feedback should be 
implemented in standard care. 
mHealth could provide a solution to this issue [19]. mHealth has been deﬁned by the WHO as 
“medical and public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as smartphones, tablets or 
wireless patient-monitoring sensors” [19,20]. mHealth has been developed for many diﬀerent purposes. 
It has been applied for the management of blood pressure, management of glucose levels, fall detection, 
mental health, medication management and PA monitoring [19,21]. PA can be monitored by connecting 
external wearable devices such as accelerometers, gyroscopes or pedometers, to a smartphone or tablet 
via Bluetooth [21,22]. Wearable sensors can also be embedded in a smartphone or smartwatch [21,23]. 
These remote measurement technologies enable continuous PA monitoring and have the advantage 
of providing patients and healthcare providers real-time feedback. Prior studies have demonstrated 
that smartphone applications combined with an activity tracker are able to increase the amount of 
PA of the user [24,25]. Depending on the intended use, additional functionalities such as educational 
material, exercise programs or capturing patient reported outcomes (PROMs), could also be added to 
mHealth tools to enhance the possibilities. 
mHealth tools support the prevention and treatment of low levels of PA as well as stimulate 
functional recovery. They have the potential to increase patient awareness, support personalized care, 
and stimulate self-management. Furthermore, they can motivate patients in the absence of healthcare 
providers and make them more active and eﬀective managers of their recovery [24,26,27]. 
Within the orthopedic rehabilitation pathway, mHealth tools are being used to monitor PA in 
support of outpatient physiotherapy [28–30]. The use of mHealth to monitor PA has also been shown 
to be beneﬁcial to other areas of research. mHealth tools have demonstrated their ability to stimulate 
the PA of patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) [23,31], chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) [26], type II diabetes [26] and can motivate the elderly to undertake PAs when implemented in 
a care home [19]. 
So far, no mHealth tool is available that oﬀers hospitalized patients and their physiotherapists 
essential strategies to enhance their PA levels and support their recovery process. Most accelerometry- 
based activity monitors are validated in healthy adults and lack the sensitivity to measure slow 
gait [32,33]. Due to the frequent use of walking aids as well as slow and impaired gait, the algorithm of 
most of the available activity monitors is not validated in terms of being used in hospitalized patients. 
Therefore, the Department of Physiotherapy of Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC+) 
and Maastricht Instruments B.V. developed Hospital Fit (HFITAPP0, Maastricht Instruments B.V., 
the Netherlands). Hospital Fit is designed to be used in hospitalized patients and consists of a 
smartphone application connected to an accelerometer. The algorithm of the accelerometer has been 
validated to diﬀerentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking in hospitalized patients [34–36]. 
It provides patients and physiotherapists feedback on the number of minutes spent standing and 
walking per day. Additionally, it provides patients insight into their own recovery progress, and a 
tailored exercise program supported by videos. Hospital Fit has been implemented in the standard 
physiotherapy treatment of patients following TKA and THA in Maastricht University Medical Center 
since February 2019. 


The primary aim of this pilot study was to get a ﬁrst impression of whether introducing Hospital 
Fit as part of standard physiotherapy treatments has led to a change in the amount of PA of hospitalized 
patients who had undergone elective TKA or THA. The secondary aim was to explore whether Hospital 
Fit has led to a change in the time until functional recovery is achieved in this population. 


This single center pilot study, with a non-randomized quasi-experimental design, was conducted 
at Maastricht University Medical Center in Maastricht, the Netherlands, between January 2017 and 
May 2019. 

Patients scheduled for an elective TKA or THA at the orthopedic ward of Maastricht University 
Medical Center were invited to participate. Patients scheduled for surgery between January 2017 
and December 2018 were recruited for the control group. During this period, Hospital Fit was 
being developed. Due to the limited number of accelerometers available, only one patient per week 
was recruited. In December 2018, the development of Hospital Fit was completed. A one-month 
implementation phase followed in January 2019, during which no patients were enrolled. Patients 
scheduled for surgery between February 2019 and May 2019 were recruited for the intervention 
group. After the implementation phase, suﬃcient accelerometers had become available, enabling the 
recruitment of consecutive patients in the intervention group. No other changes were made in the 
clinical care pathway during the study period. 
Patients received verbal and written information about the study at preoperative physiotherapy 
screenings, scheduled six weeks before surgery. A research physiotherapist contacted the patients 
again on the day of their surgery, and written informed consent was obtained before study initiation. 
The conﬁdential processing of data and anonymity were guaranteed. 
Patients were eligible if they met the following inclusion criteria: receiving physiotherapy after 
elective TKA or THA, able to walk independently two weeks prior to surgery as scored on the 
functional ambulation categories (FAC > 3) [37], they were expected to be discharged to their own 
home, aged 18 years and older, and had a suﬃcient understanding of the Dutch language. Exclusion 
criteria were: the presence of contraindications to walking or wearing an accelerometer on the upper 
leg, admission to the intensive care unit, impaired cognition (delirium/dementia) as reported by the 
attending doctor, a life expectancy of less than three months, and previous participation in this study. 
This study was performed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the 
Medical Ethics Committee of the University Hospital Maastricht and Maastricht University (METC 
azM/UM), registration number 2017-0175. 

Patients were enrolled after signing informed consent. All patients followed a standardized 
clinical care pathway for TKA or THA. Preoperatively, paracetamol, gabapentin, naproxen and a 
gastric protector were administered. Surgery was performed under spinal or general anesthesia in 
combination with a local inﬁltration analgesia (ropivacaine, morphine-sulphate, adrenaline). In TKA 
procedures, a medial parapatellar approach was used with a posterior stabilized implant. In THA 
procedures, a posterior approach of the hip joint was used. Pain medication was continued until 
discharge—with the addition of oxycodone. Postoperative physiotherapy was administered to all 
participating patients, starting within four hours after surgery. The physiotherapy treatment was 
aimed at increasing PA levels and enhancing functional recovery. Patients received physiotherapy 
twice daily (30 min per session) until functional recovery was achieved, as measured with the modiﬁed 
Iowa Level of Assistance Scale (mILAS) [38]. Patients in the control group received postoperative 

physiotherapy and had their PA levels monitored with an accelerometer without receiving feedback. 
Patients in the intervention group received the same physiotherapy treatment, but Hospital Fit was 
used in addition. 

The PA levels were assessed with the MOX activity monitor (MOX; Maastricht Instruments 
B.V., the Netherlands (Figure 1)). The device contained a tri-axial accelerometer sensor (ADXL362; 
Analog Devices, Norwood, MA, USA) in a small waterproof housing (35 × 35 × 10 mm, 11 g). Raw 
acceleration data (±8 g) were measured in three orthogonal sensor axes (X, Y and Z) at a 25 Hz sampling 
rate. The accelerometer was factory calibrated against gravity for each axis. The raw acceleration 
data were converted to a PA classiﬁcation using a previously described embedded algorithm [34]. 
After sensor noise reduction, the data were segmented in to one-second long windows using a ﬁxed 
non-overlapping sliding window. Based on the amount of activity, each window was classiﬁed as 
dynamic or static. For the static windows, the sensor orientation was assessed. Based on a cut-oﬀ value 
of 0.8 g the static windows were classiﬁed as standing or sedentary. Each minute the classiﬁed results 
were sent to the Hospital Fit smartphone application via a Bluetooth protocol. 
noise reduction, the data were segmented in to one-second long windows using a fixed non- 


Hospital Fit consists of a smartphone-based app which is connected to the MOX Activity 
Monitor via Bluetooth. It contains a separate interface for patients and physiotherapists, enabling 
extensive options for physiotherapists. During the ﬁrst treatment, the physiotherapist applied the 
accelerometer and installed the app on the patients’ smartphone. The physiotherapist subsequently 
initiated a connection between the accelerometer and the app by starting a new measurement in the 
physiotherapist interface. 
The PA overview provides patients and their physiotherapists real-time feedback on the number 
of minutes spent standing and walking per day. An overview was provided per day (Figure 2A), 
with the possibility to look back at the PA levels of previous days. Additionally, a weekly overview 
was provided to enable the monitoring of the progress in PA levels over time (Figure 2B). 

receiving feedback. Patients in the intervention group received the same physiotherapy treatment, 
but Hospital Fit was used in addition. 

The PA levels were assessed with the MOX activity monitor (MOX; Maastricht Instruments B.V., 
the Netherlands (Figure 1)). The device contained a tri-axial accelerometer sensor (ADXL362; Analog 
Devices, Norwood, MA, USA) in a small waterproof housing (35 × 35 × 10 mm, 11 g). Raw acceleration 
data (±8 g) were measured in three orthogonal sensor axes (X, Y and Z) at a 25 Hz sampling rate. The 
accelerometer was factory calibrated against gravity for each axis. The raw acceleration data were 
converted to a PA classification using a previously described embedded algorithm [34]. After sensor 
overlapping sliding window. Based on the amount of activity, each window was classified as 
dynamic or static. For the static windows, the sensor orientation was assessed. Based on a cut-off 
value of 0.8 g the static windows were classified as standing or sedentary. Each minute the classified 
results were sent to the Hospital Fit smartphone application via a Bluetooth protocol. 












 
 



Figure 2. Overview of the total number of minutes spent standing and walking per day (A) and per 
week (B). 

The recovery assessment gave patients the option of gaining insight into their own recovery 
progress. The extent of functional recovery can be evaluated by the physiotherapist during every 
treatment. The ability of patients to perform the activities of daily living was scored on the 
physiotherapist interface based on the mILAS (Figure 3A). The mILAS assesses the ability of patients 
to perform several activities of daily living (transfer from the supine position to sitting and vice versa, 
sit-to-stand, walking, and stair climbing) and rates the amount of assistance and type of walking aid 
needed. The degree of assistance needed to perform each task safely was scored (0–6 points score 
per item). The total scores range from 0 to 30, with zero reﬂecting independence for all items. Stair 
climbing was only assessed if the patient needed to climb stairs at home; otherwise this item was 
scored as zero [38]. Because accelerometers are not able to measure the amount of assistance or the 
type of walking aid needed during PA, scoring the extent of functional recovery had to be performed 
by the physiotherapist. If necessary, the extent of functional recovery could be adapted multiple times 
per day. 
The mILAS-score was transformed into a percentage score in the app, with 100% indicating 
complete independency. The percentage scores were provided per activity, showing which activities 
need improvement in order to reach functional recovery. The percentage scores are supported by a 
graph, showing progress in functional recovery over time (Figure 3B). More detailed information on the 
amount of assistance needed is provided per activity, supported by a graph showing the progress over 
time per activity (Figure 3C). The physiotherapist interface enables the extent of functional recovery to 
be scored as well as providing an overview. The patient interface only provides an overview of the 
extent of functional recovery. 























 




 
 

Figure 3. Recovery assessment with the option of scoring the extent of functional recovery based on 
the modiﬁed Iowa Level of Assistance Scale (A); an overview of the extent of functional recovery (B); 
the amount of assistance needed and progress over time per activity (C). 
Furthermore, the physiotherapist interface contains the option of creating a patient-speciﬁc exercise 
program supported by videos. Hospital Fit contains a database of 25 videos aimed at enhancing 
functional recovery, upper and lower leg strength, and physical ﬁtness (Figure 4). The videos 
supporting functional recovery were designed especially for hospitalized patients and show patients 
how to transfer from the supine position to sitting and vice versa, sit-to-stand, walk, and climb 
stairs with diﬀerent types of walking aids. The videos supported the physiotherapy treatment and 
were aimed at stimulating self-management. After each treatment, the physiotherapist selected 
appropriate videos, thereby creating a personalized exercise program. If preferred, a note containing 
personalized information on the number of repetitions or intensity of the exercise could be added 
as well. The physiotherapist could adapt the exercise program as often as necessary. The patient 
interface enabled the patient to view the videos as often as they preferred. During each treatment 
session, the physiotherapist and patient evaluated the amount of PA, extent of functional recovery and 
the exercise program. 

















 





 
 
 




The primary outcome measure was the time spent physically active (total number of minutes 
standing and walking) per day. The time spent standing and walking was considered the most 
important outcome since hospitalized patients spend large amounts of time lying and sitting. The MOX 
activity monitor has been validated to diﬀerentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking in 
hospitalized patients. It has a high validity to estimate the time spent on the activities and postures in 
a controlled laboratory setting and in free-living conditions [35,36]. 
in a controlled laboratory setting and in free-living conditions [35,36]. 
During the ﬁrst treatment session, the accelerometer was attached to the upper leg with a 
hypoallergenic patch (ten centimeters proximal to the patella, on the non-operated leg). The position 
of the accelerometer is visualized in Figure 5. 

of the accelerometer is visualized in Figure 5. 
Figure 5. Lateral view (A) and frontal view (B) of the placement of the MOX activity monitor with the 
patient in a seated position. Arrows indicate the location of the hypoallergenic patch and sensor on the 
upper leg, which is 10 cm proximal to the patella. 


PA was monitored 24 h per day. Days with ≥20 h of wear time were considered valid measurement 
days and were included in the analysis. After the last treatment session, the accelerometer was removed 
and the raw tri-axial accelerometer data (Figure 6) were uploaded to a computer. 


















 
 
 
 



 






The primary outcome measure was the time spent physically active (total number of minutes 
standing and walking) per day. The time spent standing and walking was considered the most 
important outcome since hospitalized patients spend large amounts of time lying and sitting. The 
MOX activity monitor has been validated to differentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking 
in hospitalized patients. It has a high validity to estimate the time spent on the activities and postures 

During the first treatment session, the accelerometer was attached to the upper leg with a 
hypoallergenic patch (ten centimeters proximal to the patella, on the non-operated leg). The position 







 
 
 

Figure 6. Example of the raw tri-axial accelerometer data of one subject for one measurement day. 
One measurement day (24 h) is represented on the x-axis. G-forces per sensor axes (X, Y and Z) are 
represented on the y-axis. 
MATLAB (version 9.5 (R2018b) Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.: Natick, MA, 
USA; 2018) was used to calculate the total number of minutes spent standing and walking per day. 
A schematic overview of the data processing is shown in Figure 7. 
Figure 7. Data processing—a schematic overview of the physical activity classiﬁcation algorithm for 
the accelerometer worn on the upper leg location. 


The secondary outcome measure was the achievement of functional recovery on postoperative day 
one (POD1). Functional recovery was assessed by the physiotherapist during each treatment session 
using the mILAS and was reported in the electronic health record. In the intervention group, it was also 
reported in the app. The achievement of functional recovery on POD1 was deﬁned as having reached a 
total mILAS-score of zero on or before POD1, using a dichotomized outcome (0 = mILAS = 0 > POD1; 
1 = mILAS = 0 ≤ POD1). The mILAS shows a high reliability, validity and responsiveness when used 
to measure functional recovery in the acute phase after TKA or THA [38]. 



















 
 




Figure 6. Example of the raw tri-axial accelerometer data of one subject for one measurement day. 
One measurement day (24 h) is represented on the x-axis. G-forces per sensor axes (X, Y and Z) are 
represented on the y-axis. 
MATLAB (version 9.5 (R2018b) Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.: Natick, MA, USA; 
2018) was used to calculate the total number of minutes spent standing and walking per day. A 
schematic overview of the data processing is shown in Figure 7. 











 
 
 
 


The independent variables measured were: Hospital Fit use (control versus the intervention 
group), age, sex, body mass index (BMI), type of surgery (TKA or THA), and comorbidities assessed by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classiﬁcation (ASA-class ≤ 2 versus ASA-class = 3; 
a higher score indicates being less ﬁt for surgery). The medical and demographic data measured 
were the type of walking aid used and LOS, with the day of surgery being deﬁned as day one. 
All measurements were extracted from the electronic health record. 

Based on a signiﬁcance level of 0.05, a power of 0.80, an eﬀect size of 0.20, and ﬁve determinants, 
a sample size of n = 75 was needed. Due to a lack of representable data available to determine the eﬀect 
size, it was determined based on Cohen’s rule of thumb, indicating a medium to large eﬀect size [39]. 
Accounting for a 20% drop-out rate, we aimed to enroll n = 94 patients in this study. The ratio between 
patients included in the control and intervention group was set at 2:1, respectively. The data analysis 
was performed according to the intention-to-treat principle. Missing values were not substituted and 
drop-outs were not replaced. 

Descriptive statistics are presented as means, and standard deviations (SD) or 95% conﬁdence 
intervals (CI) for continuous variables. The median and interquartile ranges (IQR) were used to present 
not normally distributed data. The frequencies and percentages were used to present categorical 
variables. A multiple linear regression analysis was performed to determine the association between the 
time spent physically active per day and Hospital Fit use, corrected for potential confounding factors 
(age, sex, BMI, ASA-class, and type of surgery). A univariate regression analysis was performed to 
determine the association between the time spent physically active per day and Hospital Fit use. Next, 
potential confounding variables were added (enter method) to explore the association between Hospital 
Fit use and the time spent physically active per day, corrected for confounding variables. Variables that 
resulted in a ≥10% change in the regression coeﬃcient of the main determinant (Hospital Fit use) were 
eligible for inclusion in the model. The variable contributing the most was included in the multiple 
regression model ﬁrst, followed by the next variable leading to the highest percentage (≥10%) of 
change in the main regression coeﬃcient. This process was repeated until there were no more potential 
confounding factors, resulting in the ﬁnal model [40]. A multiple logistic regression analysis was 
performed additionally, to determine the association between the achievement of functional recovery 
on POD1 and Hospital Fit use, corrected for potential confounding factors. The same procedure was 
performed as in the linear regression analysis and the same potential confounding variables were 
explored. Assumptions were checked for both regression analyses by residual plots and statistics. 
For all statistical analyses, the level of signiﬁcance was set at p < 0.05. All statistical analyses were 
performed using SPSS (version 23.0.0.2; IBM Corporation Armonk, NY, USA). 

In total, 97 patients were willing and able to participate. The baseline characteristics of both 
groups are listed in Table 1. Of these patients, nine (9.3%) were excluded because of missing data 
(no valid measurement day of ≥20 h of wear time due to a delayed postoperative ﬁxation of the 
accelerometer (n = 5) or discharge on POD1 (n = 1)), and accelerometer malfunctioning (n = 3). 





Age, years (median, IQR) 
Sex (n, %) 
Female 
Male 
BMI, kg/m2 (median, IQR) 

24 (38) 
40 (63) 
27.73 (4.72) 

18 (55) 
15 (45) 
27.47 (4.70) 
15 (45) 
18 (55) 
49 (77) 
15 (23) 
Type of surgery (n, %): 
Total knee arthroplasty 
Total hip arthroplasty 
ASA-class (n, %): 
ASA 1–2 
ASA 3 
Walking aid (n, %): 
53 (83) 
Two crutches 
1 (2) 
One crutch 
5 (8) 
Walking frame 
5 (8) 
Walker 
3.00 (1) 
LOS, days (median, IQR) 
IQR = interquartile range, BMI = body mass index, ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists, LOS = length of 
stay in hospital, with the day of surgery being deﬁned as day one. 
31 (94) 
- 
1 (3) 
1 (3) 
3.00 (0) 
53 (83) 
11 (17) 
26 (79) 
7 (21) 
This left 88 cases (90.7%) for analysis, 61 (69%) in the control group and 27 (31%) in the intervention 
group. In the control group, the median age (interquartile range (IQR)) was 67.19 (11.35) years and 46 
patients (72%) had undergone TKA. The control group consisted of 23 women (38%) and 38 men (62%). 
Fifty patients had an ASA-class of 1 to 2 (82%) and 11 patients (18%) had an ASA-class of 3. The median 
(IQR) LOS was 3.00 (1) days. In the intervention group, the median age (IQR) was 63.73 (16.62) years 
and 14 patients (52%) had undergone TKA. The intervention group consisted of 16 women (59%) and 
11 men (41%). Nineteen patients had an ASA-class of 1 to 2 (70%) and eight patients (30%) had an 
ASA-class of 3. The median (IQR) LOS was 3.00 (0) days. The missing values were negligible; data 
on the achievement of functional recovery on POD1 (n = 4) were missing. Diﬀerences in the baseline 
characteristics were accounted for in the regression analyses. 
A median (IQR) number of 1.00 (0) valid measurement days (≥20 h wear time) was collected. 
PA data for 84 patients (95%) was available on POD1 (n = 61 control group, n = 23 intervention 
group). On postoperative day two (POD2), the majority of patients were discharged (n = 61, 69%), 
and data for only 23 patients (26%) were available (n = 17 control group, n = 6 intervention group). 
From postoperative day three until day seven, data of the valid measurement days were available for 
just one patient (intervention group). Due to the large reduction in valid measurement days from 
POD2 onwards, data of these days were not included in the analysis. 
The results of the univariate linear regression analysis are shown in Table 2. The results show that 
Hospital Fit use led to an increase of 32.10 (95% CI: 9.35–54.84) minutes standing and walking on POD1. 
Patients who did not use Hospital Fit stood and walked on average 70.89 (95% CI: 59.00–82.80) minutes 
on POD1 compared to 102.99 (95% CI: 82.77–123.21) minutes in patients who used Hospital Fit. 
Table 2. Univariate linear regression analysis—the association between the time spent physically active 
on postoperative day one (POD1) and Hospital Fit use. 






Constant 
Hospital Fit use 
70.89 
32.10 
5.98 
11.43 
0.000 
0.006 
59.00 
9.35 
82.80 
54.84 



To correct for the inﬂuence of potential confounders (age, sex, BMI, ASA-class, and type of 
surgery), the association between Hospital Fit use and the time spent physically active per day was 
explored. The addition of age resulted in a 11.41% change in the regression coeﬃcient of the main 
determinant (Hospital Fit use) and was therefore added to the model. The remaining variables were 
then added to the model corrected for age, but each resulted in a <10% change in the regression 
coeﬃcient of the main determinant and were therefore not included. The results of the multiple linear 
regression analysis are shown in Table 3. The results show that, corrected for age, patients who used 
Hospital Fit stood and walked on average 28.43 min (95% CI: 5.55–51.32) more on POD1 than patients 
who did not use Hospital Fit. The model shows that an increase in age led to a decrease in the number 
of minutes standing and walking on POD1. 
Table 3. Multiple linear regression analysis—the association between the time spent physically active 
on POD1 and Hospital Fit use, corrected for age. 






Constant 
Hospital Fit use 
Age 
124.25 
28.43 
−0.81 
31.80 
11.50 
0.48 
0.000 
0.016 
0.092 
60.98 
5.55 
−1.76 
187.52 
51.32 
0.13 

The results of the univariate logistic regression analysis (Table 4) show that the odds of achieving 
functional recovery on POD1 were 2.72 times higher (95% CI: 1.05–7.049) for patients who used Hospital 
Fit than for patients who did not use Hospital Fit. 
Table 4. Univariate logistic regression analysis—the association between the achievement of functional 
recovery on POD1 and Hospital Fit use. 

−0.31 
1.00 
Std. 
Error 
0.26 
0.49 

0.243 
0.039 
Odds 
Ratio 
0.735 
2.720 



- 
1.050 
- 
7.049 
Constant 
Hospital Fit use 

The influence of potential confounders on the association between the Hospital Fit use and time 
spent physically active per day was explored. Addition of ASA-class resulted in the largest change 
of 12.38% in the regression coefficient of the main determinant (Hospital Fit use) and was added to 
the model. The remaining variables were then added to the model corrected for ASA-class, but each 
resulted in a < 10% change in the regression coefficient of the main determinant and were therefore 
not included. The results of the multiple logistic regression analysis (Table 5) show that, corrected for 
ASA-class, the odds of achieving functional recovery on POD1 were 3.08 times higher (95% CI: 1.14–8.31) 
for patients who used Hospital Fit than for patients who did not use Hospital Fit. Including ASA-class 
in the model shows that a lower ASA-class increased the odds ratio for a functional recovery on POD1. 
Table 5. Multiple logistic regression analysis—the association between the achievement of functional 
recovery on POD1 and Hospital Fit use, corrected for ASA-class. 
Constant 
Hospital Fit use 
ASA-class 

−0.91 
1.13 
0.71 
Std. 
Error 
0.58 
0.51 
0.59 

0.112 
0.026 
0.228 
Odds 
Ratio 
0.401 
3.080 
2.03 



- 
1.14 
0.64 
- 
8.31 
6.39 




In this pilot study we aimed to gain a ﬁrst impression of whether Hospital Fit has the potential 
to improve the amount of PA and time until functional recovery is achieved in hospitalized patients 
following orthopedic surgery. The results show an increase in the time spent standing and walking, 
as well as higher odds of functional recovery on POD1 from the introduction of Hospital Fit. Although 
the guidelines on the recommended amount of PA during hospitalization do not yet exist, an average 
improvement of 28 min (39%) standing and walking on POD1 can be considered a clinically relevant 
contribution to prevent the negative eﬀects of inactivity. 
The relatively large conﬁdence intervals indicate a large variation in PA levels during 
hospitalization. These large diﬀerences in the PA levels of hospitalized patients are seen in many other 
studies as well [13,14,41,42]. PA levels can be inﬂuenced by many diﬀerent factors such as symptoms, 
the motivation of the patient, awareness of the importance of PA, the availability of healthcare staﬀ to 
assist patients during walking, or the availability of adequate walking aids [15,43,44]. These factors 
are expected to result in large diﬀerences in PA levels between patients. 
Wearable technology is increasingly being used in TKA and THA research, with the assessment of 
PA, functional parameters, and gait analysis as primary modes of investigation. No standard outcome 
measure or testing methodology has been established in wearable-based PA monitoring following 
TKA or THA [45]. Technology, testing protocol and sensor-based outcome variables may vary and 
may aﬀect the quality and reliability of the data being collected [46–49]. 
Limited research has been conducted on monitoring PA during the early recovery phase following 
TKA or THA [45]. Eight studies have been performed, with sensor-based outcome variables varying 
considerably between studies [28,50–56]. Two studies investigated the amount of time spent active 
(standing and walking) as outcome variables in the monitoring of PA of hospitalized patients following 
TKA [50,51]. Schotanus et al. [50] showed that patients within an enhanced recovery pathway spent 9% 
of their waking hours standing and walking on POD1. On POD2, this increased towards 11%, with a 
planned discharge within three days post-operation. PA was measured with a triaxial accelerometer 
(GC Dataconcets LLC, Waveland, USA) attached to the non-operated thigh. No details were provided 
regarding the validity of the algorithm to diﬀerentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking in 
hospitalized patients. Due to the lack of insight into the number of waking hours, the results cannot 
be compared to our study. In agreement with our study, they concluded that accelerometry is an 
added value for the objective analysis of PA during the early recovery phase in patients after TKA [50]. 
Fenten et al. [51] compared the amount of time spent active per day between patients receiving 
periarticular local anesthetic inﬁltration (LIA), and patients receiving LIA of the posterior knee capsule 
in combination with a femoral nerve block (FNB) catheter. PA was monitored with an accelerometer, 
attached to the non-operated thigh. No details were provided regarding the accelerometer type or the 
validity of the algorithm to diﬀerentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking in hospitalized 
patients. PA was monitored between 8 am and 8 pm on the day of surgery and on POD1. The mean 
time spent active (SD) on POD1 was 20.5 (14.9) minutes in the FNB group versus 27.7 (14.1) minutes in 
the LIA group [51]. Although the postoperative physiotherapy treatment and LOS were comparable, 
our study shows higher amounts of time spent active on POD1. Patients who did not use Hospital Fit 
spent 70.89 (95% CI: 58.93–82.86) minutes active compared to 102.99 (95% CI: 82.77–123.21) minutes in 
patients who used Hospital Fit. These diﬀerences might be explained by the fact that, in our study, 
PA was monitored continuously for 24 h per day and patients scheduled for a prolonged stay in an 
outpatient rehab clinic were excluded. So far, no studies have investigated the amount of time spent 
active in hospitalized patients following THA. 
One of the main aims of Hospital Fit is to decrease the negative eﬀects of sedentary behavior in 
hospitalized patients through stimulating the amount of time spent active. As hospitalized patients 
spend over 92% of their time lying or sitting [12–14], the number of minutes spent standing and walking 
per day is deemed the most appropriate sensor-based outcome variable for Hospital Fit. Additionally, 
it is a practical outcome variable since it is easily interpreted by patients and physiotherapists. 


Three studies investigated intensity (activity counts) as an outcome variable in monitoring the PA 
of hospitalized patients following TKA [52–54] and THA [52,53]. We believe however, that monitoring 
the time spent active is more meaningful than monitoring intensity levels (activity counts) in the early 
recovery phase after surgery. First, the intensity of PA as perceived by patients may deviate from the 
intensity measured by the accelerometer. During the ﬁrst days after surgery, patients may perceive 
ambulation at low walking speeds as a high intensity activity, while the accelerometer objectively 
classiﬁes this as a low intensity activity. Second, in the early recovery phase after surgery, the focus of 
physiotherapy lies on the recovery of activities which are essential to perform at home, such as walking 
and stair climbing. The focus does not lie on the intensity of the activities performed. 
Three studies investigated step counts as an outcome variable in the monitoring of PA of 
hospitalized patients following TKA [28,55,56] and THA [55]. Using step counts to quantify 
PA has advantages since it is speciﬁc to ambulation and is easily interpreted by patients and 
physiotherapists [57]. However, during the early recovery phase after TKA and THA, all patients 
require a walking aid, and slow and impaired gaits are common [58]. Several studies have shown that 
these factors decrease the validity of activity trackers to measure step counts [59–62]. Furthermore, 
movements of the arms or legs performed in bed or on a chair may result in an overestimation of 
the number of steps taken. We therefore consider the time spent active a more appropriate outcome 
variable for Hospital Fit than step counts. 
The present study investigated an mHealth tool which uses a multimodal approach, tailored 
speciﬁcally to the needs of hospitalized patients and their physiotherapists. Besides objective 
activity monitoring, Hospital Fit also provides patients insight into their recovery progress and 
oﬀers physiotherapists the option of creating a patient-speciﬁc exercise program supported by videos. 
Recently, an increasing number of other mHealth tools have been investigated within the orthopedic 
rehabilitation pathway [28–30,63–69]. These tools are predominantly prescribed in support of outpatient 
physiotherapy. Besides monitoring PA, they are being used to oﬀer biofeedback in exercise programs, 
monitor the range of motion (ROM) of the knee joint, capture PROMs, provide educational material 
and enable telerehabilitation. 
Inertial measurement units (IMUs) contain accelerometers paired with gyroscopes and 
magnetometers, to provide a detailed analysis of limb movements and orientations within a spatial 
reference frame [45]. The use of IMUs enables patients to receive feedback on the performance of their 
exercise technique based on supervised machine learning. It also enables counting exercise repetitions 
as well as recording the ROM of the knee joint. These options can oﬀer additional motivation and 
feedback to enhance adherence, and can positively impact the patient experience and clinical outcome. 
Although this technology seems promising, there is a need for such systems to demonstrate a real-world 
accuracy validation [70,71]. 
Furthermore, some mHealth tools describe using the internal proprietary algorithm of the 
patient’s smartphone to passively measure their step count [28,29]. This requires patients to carry their 
smartphones with them in order to not make an underestimation of the amount of PA performed. 
During hospitalization however, patients often wear hospital gowns or pajamas without pockets, 
or leave their smartphones on their nightstand. Therefore, monitoring PA through a smartphone is not 
recommended in hospitalized patients. Hospital Fit is equipped with an accelerometer attached to the 
upper leg, and the algorithm is able to diﬀerentiate lying and sitting from standing and walking in 
patients using walking aids, or with slow or impaired gait. This is an advantage over many smartphones 
and commercially available activity trackers and one of the reasons Hospital Fit was developed. 
This study was not without limitations. We acknowledge that with the current study design, 
the results may not only be attributable to the introduction of Hospital Fit. The current design 
enabled us to eﬀectively use the time in which Hospital Fit was developed to include patients in the 
control group, and give us a ﬁrst impression of the potential of Hospital Fit. Unfortunately, due to 
technological challenges, the development of Hospital Fit took longer than anticipated. Although the 
clinical care pathway and physiotherapy treatment did not change during this period, awareness on 


the importance of PA during hospitalization might have increased among patients and healthcare 
professionals, which may have resulted in a bias in favor of the intervention group. This could have 
led to a slight overestimation of the results. 
Additionally, the individual functionalities of Hospital Fit were not investigated in this pilot study. 
Therefore, we cannot establish the relationship between each functionality and PA. Enabling this would 
have provided valuable information regarding the contribution of the diﬀerent functionalities on the 
inﬂuence of Hospital Fit. 
Furthermore, when this study was designed in 2016, the median (range) postoperative LOS was 6 
(4–10) days. The implementation of a new clinical care pathway in November 2016 has resulted in a 
reduction in the median (range) LOS to 4 (3–12) days, leaving a relatively short period to introduce 
and use Hospital Fit [8]. In our study, the majority of patients were discharged on POD2 and data 
for only 23 patients were available on POD2. Because the data of these remaining 23 patients were 
not representative of the whole population and resulted in insuﬃcient power to perform a regression 
analysis, only data on the amount of PA performed on POD1 were included in the analysis. 
The present study has a number of important implications for daily practice and future research. 
First, the results show that Hospital Fit has the potential to enhance the amount of PA and functional 
recovery in hospitalized patients, especially when the hospital stay permits the use of the application 
for a longer period. Second, since the literature on the amount of PA performed in hospitalized patients 
following TKA and THA is scarce, this study contributes to the knowledge of the PA behavior of this 
population. Third, continuous objective monitoring provides patients and their physiotherapists the 
advantage of being able to set goals regarding the amount of PA. However, reference values regarding 
the optimal amount of PA after surgery do not exist yet. Hospital Fit and the data it creates have 
tremendous potential, because continuous PA monitoring as part of standard care will enable creating 
population norms for PA. 
In order to determine the eﬀectiveness of Hospital Fit, it is recommended that this pilot study 
should be followed by a larger, cluster randomized controlled trial in a population of hospitalized 
patients with a longer LOS. In order to determine the eﬀect of each functionality of Hospital Fit on PA, 
investigating the individual functionalities is recommended as well. 

This pilot study aimed to gain a ﬁrst impression of whether Hospital Fit has the potential to 
improve the amount of PA and shorten the time until functional recovery is achieved in hospitalized 
patients following orthopedic surgery. The results show an increase in patients’ time spent standing 
and walking, as well as higher odds of functional recovery on POD1 due to the introduction of Hospital 
Fit. This study shows that a smartphone app combined with an accelerometer demonstrates potential 
to enhance patients’ PA levels and recovery processes during hospitalization. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.C.v.D.-H., A.T.R.W., T.A.E.J.B., A.F.L. and R.A.d.B.; Data curation, 
H.C.v.D.-H.; Formal analysis, H.C.v.D.-H. and A.F.L.; Funding acquisition, A.F.L.; Investigation, H.C.v.D.-H. and 
A.T.R.W.; Methodology, H.C.v.D.-H., A.T.R.W., T.A.E.J.B., A.F.L. and R.A.d.B.; Project administration, H.C.v.D.-H.; 
Resources, A.F.L.; Supervision, A.F.L. and R.A.d.B.; Visualization, H.C.v.D.-H.; Writing—original draft, H.C.v.D.-H.; 
Writing—review and editing, H.C.v.D.-H., A.T.R.W., T.A.E.J.B., A.F.L. and R.A.d.B. All authors have read and 
agreed to the published version of the manuscript, and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work to 
ensure that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated 
and resolved. 
Funding: This research was funded by a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) funding, subsidized by the 
Dutch Government, grant number: SB1AP16010. 
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank all physiotherapists working at Maastricht University Medical Center 
for their assistance in this study. We would also like to thank W.J.P. Bijnens of Maastricht University for his 
assistance in creating a customized MATLAB program, and S.M.J. van Kuijk of Maastricht University Medical 
Center for his assistance in the statistical analysis. 
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision 


to publish the results. All subjects gave their informed consent for inclusion before study initiation. This study 
was performed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the protocol was approved by the Medical 
Ethics Committee of the University Hospital Maastricht and Maastricht University (METC azM/UM), registration 
number 2017-0175. 





5. 
6. 



Jansson, M.M.; Harjumaa, M.; Puhto, A.P.; Pikkarainen, M. Patients’ satisfaction and experiences during 
elective primary fast-track total hip and knee arthroplasty journey: A qualitative study. J. Clin. Nurs. 2019. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Berghmans, D.D.P.; Lenssen, A.F.; Emans, P.J.; de Bie, R.A. Functions, disabilities and perceived health in the 
ﬁrst year after total knee arthroplasty; a prospective cohort study. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 2018, 19, 250. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Ibrahim, M.S.; Khan, M.A.; Nizam, I.; Haddad, F.S. Peri-operative interventions producing better functional 
outcomes and enhanced recovery following total hip and knee arthroplasty: An evidence-based review. 
BMC Med. 2013, 11, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Carr, A.J.; Robertsson, O.; Graves, S.; Price, A.J.; Arden, N.K.; Judge, A.; Beard, D.J. Knee replacement. Lancet 
2012, 379, 1331–1340. [CrossRef] 
AJRR. 2019 Annual Report; American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS): Rosemont, IL, USA, 2019. 
Soeters, R.; White, P.B.; Murray-Weir, M.; Koltsov, J.C.B.; Alexiades, M.M.; Ranawat, A.S. Preoperative physical 
therapy education reduces time to meet functional milestones after total joint arthroplasty. Clin. Orthop. 
Relat. Res. 2018, 476, 40–48. [CrossRef] 
Tanzer, D.; Smith, K.; Tanzer, M. Changing Patient expectations decreases length of stay in an enhanced 
recovery program for THA. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 2018, 476, 372–378. [CrossRef] 
Didden, A.G.M.; Punt, I.M.; Feczko, P.Z.; Lenssen, A.F. Enhanced recovery in usual health care improves 
functional recovery after total knee arthroplasty. Int. J. Orthop. Trauma Nurs. 2019, 34, 9–15. [CrossRef] 
Engdal, M.; Foss, O.A.; Taraldsen, K.; Husby, V.S.; Winther, S.B. Daily Physical activity in total hip arthroplasty 
patients undergoing diﬀerent surgical approaches: A Cohort study. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2017, 96, 
473–478. [CrossRef] 
10. Den Hertog, A.; Gliesche, K.; Timm, J.; Muhlbauer, B.; Zebrowski, S. Pathway-controlled fast-track 
rehabilitation after total knee arthroplasty: A randomized prospective clinical study evaluating the recovery 
pattern, drug consumption, and length of stay. Arch. Orthop. Trauma. Surg. 2012, 132, 1153–1163. [CrossRef] 
11. Malviya, A.; Martin, K.; Harper, I.; Muller, S.D.; Emmerson, K.P.; Partington, P.F.; Reed, M.R. Enhanced 
recovery program for hip and knee replacement reduces death rate. Acta Orthop. 2011, 82, 577–581. [CrossRef] 
12. Brown, C.J.; Roth, D.L.; Allman, R.M. Validation of use of wireless monitors to measure levels of mobility 

13. Pedersen, M.M.; Bodilsen, A.C.; Petersen, J.; Beyer, N.; Andersen, O.; Lawson-Smith, L.; Kehlet, H.; 
Bandholm, T. Twenty-four-hour mobility during acute hospitalization in older medical patients. J. Gerontol. 
Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2013, 68, 331–337. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 


observational study. BMC Geriatr. 2017, 17, 110. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
So, C.; Pierluissi, E. Attitudes and expectations regarding exercise in the hospital of hospitalized older adults: 
A qualitative study. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 2012, 60, 713–718. [CrossRef] 


17. Hoogeboom, T.J.; van Meeteren, N.L.; Schank, K.; Kim, R.H.; Miner, T.; Stevens-Lapsley, J.E. Risk factors 
for delayed inpatient functional recovery after total knee arthroplasty. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 167643. 
[CrossRef] 
18. Lenssen, A.F.; Crijns, Y.H.; Waltje, E.M.; van Steyn, M.J.; Geesink, R.J.; van den Brandt, P.A.; de Bie, R.A. 
Eﬃciency of immediate postoperative inpatient physical therapy following total knee arthroplasty: An RCT. 
BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 2006, 7, 71. [CrossRef] 
Joosen, P.; Piette, D.; Buekers, J.; Taelman, J.; Berckmans, D.; De Boever, P. A smartphone-based solution to 
monitor daily physical activity in a care home. J. Telemed. Telecare 2019, 25, 611–622. [CrossRef] 








23. Thijs, I.; Fresiello, L.; Oosterlinck, W.; Sinnaeve, P.; Rega, F. Assessment of physical activity by wearable 
technology during rehabilitation after cardiac surgery: Explorative Prospective monocentric observational 
cohort study. JMIR mHealth uHealth 2019, 7, e9865. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
24. Vandelanotte, C.; Muller, A.M.; Short, C.E.; Hingle, M.; Nathan, N.; Williams, S.L.; Lopez, M.L.; Parekh, S.; 
Maher, C.A. Past, present, and future of eHealth and mHealth research to improve physical activity and 
dietary behaviors. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2016, 48, 219–228. [CrossRef] 


26. van der Weegen, S.; Verwey, R.; Spreeuwenberg, M.; Tange, H.; van der Weijden, T.; de Witte, L. It’s life! 
Mobile and web-based monitoring and feedback tool embedded in primary care increases physical activity: 
A cluster randomized controlled trial. J. Med. Internet Res. 2015, 17, e184. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Feldman, D.I.; Theodore Robison, W.; Pacor, J.M.; Caddell, L.C.; Feldman, E.B.; Deitz, R.L.; Feldman, T.; 
Martin, S.S.; Nasir, K.; Blaha, M.J. Harnessing mHealth technologies to increase physical activity and prevent 
cardiovascular disease. Clin. Cardiol. 2018, 41, 985–991. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 

28. Ramkumar, P.N.; Haeberle, H.S.; Ramanathan, D.; Cantrell, W.A.; Navarro, S.M.; Mont, M.A.; Bloomﬁeld, M.; 
Patterson, B.M. Remote Patient monitoring using mobile health for total knee arthroplasty: Validation of a 
wearable and machine learning-based surveillance platform. J. Arthroplast. 2019, 34, 2253–2259. [CrossRef] 
29. Ramkumar, P.N.; Haeberle, H.S.; Bloomﬁeld, M.R.; Schaﬀer, J.L.; Kamath, A.F.; Patterson, B.M.; Krebs, V.E. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and arthroplasty at a single institution: Real-world applications of machine learning to 
big data, value-based care, mobile health, and remote patient monitoring. J. Arthroplast. 2019, 34, 2204–2209. 
[CrossRef] 
30. Correia, F.D.; Nogueira, A.; Magalhães, I.; Guimarães, J.; Moreira, M.; Barradas, I.; Molinos, M.; Teixeira, L.; 
Tulha, J.; Seabra, R.; et al. Medium-Term outcomes of digital versus conventional home-based rehabilitation 
after total knee arthroplasty: Prospective, parallel-group feasibility study. JMIR Rehabil. Assist. Technol. 2019, 
6, e13111. [CrossRef] 
31. Dorje, T.; Zhao, G.; Scheer, A.; Tsokey, L.; Wang, J.; Chen, Y.; Tso, K.; Tan, B.K.; Ge, J.; Maiorana, A. 
SMARTphone and social media-based Cardiac Rehabilitation and Secondary Prevention (SMART-CR/SP) for 
patients with coronary heart disease in China: A randomised controlled trial protocol. BMJ Open 2018, 8, 
e021908. [CrossRef] 


33. Evenson, K.R.; Goto, M.M.; Furberg, R.D. Systematic review of the validity and reliability of 
consumer-wearable activity trackers. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 2015, 12, 159. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
34. Bijnens, W.A.; Aarts, J.; Stevens, A.; Ummels, D.; Meijer, K. Optimization and validation of an adjustable 
activity classiﬁcation algorithm for assessment of physical behavior in elderly. Sensors 2019, 19, 5344. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
35. Berendsen, B.A.; Hendriks, M.R.; Meijer, K.; Plasqui, G.; Schaper, N.C.; Savelberg, H.H. Which activity 
monitor to use? Validity, reproducibility and user friendliness of three activity monitors. BMC Public Health 
2014, 14, 749. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
36. Annegarn, J.; Spruit, M.A.; Uszko-Lencer, N.H.; Vanbelle, S.; Savelberg, H.H.; Schols, A.M.; Wouters, E.F.; 
Meijer, K. Objective physical activity assessment in patients with chronic organ failure: A validation study of 
a new single-unit activity monitor. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2011, 92, 1852–1857. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
37. Manas, A.; Del Pozo-Cruz, B.; Garcia-Garcia, F.J.; Guadalupe-Grau, A.; Ara, I. Role of objectively measured 
sedentary behaviour in physical performance, frailty and mortality among older adults: A short systematic 
review. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2017, 17, 940–953. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Shields, R.K.; Enloe, L.J.; Evans, R.E.; Smith, K.B.; Steckel, S.D. Reliability, validity, and responsiveness of 
functional tests in patients with total joint replacement. Phys. Ther. 1995, 75, 169–176. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Lineaire Regressieanalyse, 1st ed.; Noordhoﬀ Uitgevers bv: Groningen/Houten, 







The Netherlands, 2010. 
Fisher, S.R.; Goodwin, J.S.; Protas, E.J.; Kuo, Y.F.; Graham, J.E.; Ottenbacher, K.J.; Ostir, G.V. Ambulatory 
activity of older adults hospitalized with acute medical illness. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 2011, 59, 91–95. [CrossRef] 
42. Ostir, G.V.; Berges, I.M.; Kuo, Y.F.; Goodwin, J.S.; Fisher, S.R.; Guralnik, J.M. Mobility activity and its value 
as a prognostic indicator of survival in hospitalized older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 2013, 61, 551–557. 
[CrossRef] 
43. Brown, C.J.; Williams, B.R.; Woodby, L.L.; Davis, L.L.; Allman, R.M. Barriers to mobility during hospitalization 
from the perspectives of older patients and their nurses and physicians. J. Hosp. Med. 2007, 2, 305–313. 
[CrossRef] 
44. Koenders, N.; van Oorsouw, R.; Seeger, J.P.H.; Nijhuis-van der Sanden, M.W.G.; van de Glind, I.; 
Hoogeboom, T.J. “I’m not going to walk, just for the sake of walking . . . ”: A qualitative, phenomenological 
study on physical activity during hospital stay. Disabil. Rehabil. 2018, 1–8. [CrossRef] 
Small, S.R.; Bullock, G.S.; Khalid, S.; Barker, K.; Trivella, M.; Price, A.J. Current clinical utilisation of wearable 
motion sensors for the assessment of outcome following knee arthroplasty: A scoping review. BMJ Open 
2019, 9, e033832. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 





48. Clark, C.C.T.; Nobre, G.C.; Fernandes, J.F.T.; Moran, J.; Drury, B.; Mannini, A.; Gronek, P.; Podstawski, R. 
Physical activity characterization: Does one site ﬁt all? Physiol. Meas. 2018, 39, 09TR02. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
49. Matthews, C.E.; Hagströmer, M.; Pober, D.M.; Bowles, H.R. Best practices for using physical activity monitors 


in population-based research. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012, 44, 68–76. [CrossRef] 
Schotanus, M.G.M.; Bemelmans, Y.F.L.; Grimm, B.; Heyligers, I.C.; Kort, N.P. Physical activity after outpatient 
surgery and enhanced recovery for total knee arthroplasty. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 2017, 25, 
3366–3371. [CrossRef] 
Fenten, M.G.E.; Bakker, S.M.K.; Scheﬀer, G.J.; Wymenga, A.B.; Stienstra, R.; Heesterbeek, P.J.C. Femoral nerve 
catheter vs. local inﬁltration for analgesia in fast track total knee arthroplasty: Short-term and long-term 
outcomes. Br. J. Anaesth. 2018, 121, 850–858. [CrossRef] 




54. Tsuji, S.; Tomita, T.; Fujii, M.; Laskin, R.S.; Yoshikawa, H.; Sugamoto, K. Is minimally invasive surgery-total 
knee arthroplasty truly less invasive than standard total knee arthroplasty? A quantitative evaluation. 
J. Arthroplast. 2010, 25, 970–976. [CrossRef] 
55. Hayashi, K.; Kako, M.; Suzuki, K.; Takagi, Y.; Terai, C.; Yasuda, S.; Kadono, I.; Seki, T.; Hiraiwa, H.; Ushida, T.; 
et al. Impact of variation in physical activity after total joint replacement. J. Pain Res. 2018, 11, 2399–2406. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
56. Twiggs, J.; Salmon, L.; Kolos, E.; Bogue, E.; Miles, B.; Roe, J. Measurement of physical activity in the pre- 
and early post-operative period after total knee arthroplasty for Osteoarthritis using a Fitbit Flex device. 
Med. Eng. Phys. 2018, 51, 31–40. [CrossRef] 




A systematic review. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2013, 68, 39–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Floegel, T.A.; Florez-Pregonero, A.; Hekler, E.B.; Buman, M.P. Validation of consumer-based hip and wrist 
activity monitors in older adults with varied ambulatory abilities. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2017, 
72, 229–236. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 








63. Argent, R.; Slevin, P.; Bevilacqua, A.; Neligan, M.; Daly, A.; Caulﬁeld, B. Clinician perceptions of a prototype 
wearable exercise biofeedback system for orthopaedic rehabilitation: A qualitative exploration. BMJ Open 
2018, 8, e026326. [CrossRef] 
64. Argent, R.; Slevin, P.; Bevilacqua, A.; Neligan, M.; Daly, A.; Caulﬁeld, B. Wearable sensor-based exercise 
biofeedback for orthopaedic rehabilitation: A mixed methods user evaluation of a prototype system. Sensors 
2019, 19, 432. [CrossRef] 




67. Bell, K.M.; Onyeukwu, C.; McClincy, M.P.; Allen, M.; Bechard, L.; Mukherjee, A.; Hartman, R.A.; Smith, C.; 
Lynch, A.D.; Irrgang, J.J. Veriﬁcation of a portable motion tracking system for remote management of physical 
rehabilitation of the knee. Sensors 2019, 19, 21. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
68. Chiang, C.Y.; Chen, K.H.; Liu, K.C.; Hsu, S.J.; Chan, C.T. Data Collection and analysis using wearable sensors 
for monitoring knee range of motion after total knee arthroplasty. Sensors 2017, 17, 418. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
69. Msayib, Y.; Gaydecki, P.; Callaghan, M.; Dale, N.; Ismail, S. An Intelligent remote monitoring system for total 

70. O’Reilly, M.; Caulﬁeld, B.; Ward, T.; Johnston, W.; Doherty, C. Wearable Inertial Sensor Systems for Lower 
Limb Exercise Detection and Evaluation: A Systematic Review. Sports Medicine (Auckland N. Z.) 2018, 48, 
1221–1246. [CrossRef] 
71. Peake, J.M.; Kerr, G.; Sullivan, J.P. A critical review of consumer wearables, mobile applications, and 
equipment for providing biofeedback, monitoring stress, and sleep in physically active populations. 
Front. Physiol. 2018, 9, 743. [CrossRef] 
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
