
Smoked cannabis for spasticity in multiple sclerosis: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled trial 
Competing interests: None 
declared. 
This article has been peer 
reviewed. 
Correspondence to: 
Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, 
jcoreybloom@ucsd.edu 
CMAJ 2012. DOI:10.1503 
/cmaj.110837 


symp tom that remains a substantial prob- 
lem for many patients with multiple scle- 
rosis. Some patients have adverse effects from 
conventional antispasticity medications; for oth- 
ers, spasticity persists despite treatment. A report 
from the Institute of Medicine in the United 
States concluded that the active compounds of 
cannabis (marijuana) are potentially effective in 
treating neurologic conditions and “should be 
tested rigorously in clinical trials.”1 There is evi- 
dence that the cannabinoid receptors CB1 and 
CB2 may be involved in the control of spasticity 
in multiple sclerosis2 and that the endogenous 
ligand of CB1, anandamide, is itself an effective 
antispasticity agent.3 CB1 receptors are primarily 
presynaptic; their activation inhibits calcium 
influx and glutamate release, and reduces neu- 
ronal excitability by activating somatic and den- 
dritic potassium channels.4 
Although many patients with multiple sclerosis 
endorse smoking cannabis as therapy, evidence 
that it relieves spasticity is largely anecdotal, as 
most trials focus on orally ad min istered cannabi- 
noids. We sought to assess the safety and efficacy 
of smoked cannabis versus placebo in patients 
with multiple sclerosis who have treatment- 
resistant spasticity. 
Participants 
We recruited participants from a regional multi- 
ple sclerosis clinic and by referral from special- 
ists. Our eligibility criteria were spasticity and at 
least moderate increase in tone (score ≥ 3 points 
on the modified Ashworth scale5 at the elbow, 
hip or knee). Participants were allowed to con- 
tinue other treatments for spasticity, with the 
exception of benzodiazepines, if they had been 




Jody Corey-Bloom MD PhD, Tanya Wolfson MA, Anthony Gamst PhD, Shelia Jin MD MPH, 
Thomas D. Marcotte PhD, Heather Bentley BA, Ben Gouaux BA 

Background: Spasticity is a common and 
poorly controlled symptom of multiple scle- 
rosis. Our objective was to determine the 
short-term effect of smoked cannabis on this 
symptom. 
Methods: We conducted a placebo-controlled, 
crossover trial involving adult patients with 
multiple sclerosis and spasticity. We re cruited 
participants from a regional clinic or by refer- 
ral from specialists. We randomly assigned 
participants to either the intervention 
(smoked cannabis, once daily for three days) 
or control (identical placebo cigarettes, once 
daily for three days). Each participant was 
assessed daily before and after treatment. 
After a washout interval of 11 days, partici- 
pants crossed over to the op posite group. Our 
primary outcome was change in spasticity as 
measured by patient score on the modified 
Ashworth scale. Our secondary outcomes 
included patients’ perception of pain (as mea- 
sured using a visual analogue scale), a timed 
walk and changes in cognitive function (as 
measured by patient performance on the 
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test), in addi- 
tion to ratings of fatigue. 
Results: Thirty-seven participants were random- 
ized at the start of the study, 30 of whom 
completed the trial. Treatment with smoked 
cannabis resulted in a reduction in patient 
scores on the modified Ashworth scale by an 
average of 2.74 points more than placebo (p < 
0.0001). In addition, treatment reduced pain 
scores on a visual analogue scale by an average 
of 5.28 points more than placebo (p = 0.008). 
Scores for the timed walk did not differ signifi- 
cantly between treatment and placebo (p = 0.2). 
Scores on the Paced Auditory Serial Addition 
Test decreased by 8.67 points more with treat- 
ment than with placebo (p = 0.003). No serious 
adverse events occurred during the trial. 
Interpretation: Smoked cannabis was superior 
to placebo in symptom and pain reduction in 
participants with treatment-resistant spastic- 
ity. Future studies should examine whether 
different doses can result in similar beneficial 
effects with less cognitive impact. 




Our study was approved by the Human Re - 
search Protections Program at the University of 
California, San Diego, the Research Advisory 
Panel of California, the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, the US Food and Drug Admin- 
istration and the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse. Our study was monitored by an indepen- 
dent data safety monitoring board through the 
University of California Center for Medicinal 
Cannabis Research. 
Study design 
We used a randomized, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled crossover design. We evaluated partic- 
ipants during eight visits over a period of two 
weeks. Visit 1 was a screening visit during which 
the participants gave their informed consent. At 
this time, we took medical/medication histories, 
screened participants for substance abuse (using 
urine toxicology) and psychiatric disorders, and 
determined spasticity using the modified Ash- 
worth scale.5 Participants with a positive toxico- 
logical screening result (e.g., presence of delta-9 
tetrahydrocannabinol, amphetamines, benzodi- 
azepines, cocaine and/or benzoylecgonine) were 
excluded. 
Treatment began within seven days of the 
second screening visit, including randomization 
to placebo or smoked cannabis. Phase 1 was fol- 
lowed by an 11-day washout period, after which 
participants crossed over to the opposite treat- 
ment group for phase 2. We assessed each 
patient before and after treatment for three con- 
secutive days during each phase. The examiner 
was blind to the treatment group to which each 
patient was assigned. We assessed patients using 
the modified Ashworth scale, a visual analog 
scale for pain, a timed walk and cognitive tests 
such as the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test 
(PASAT). We as sessed treatment -emergent 
effects about 45 minutes after treatment. We col- 
lected urine for toxicological screening at the 
beginning (baseline) of each phase. 
We assessed participants at the same time of 
day to regulate food, medication and time of 
cannabis intake. Participants smoked either a 
placebo or a cannabis cigarette, using the Foltin 
uniform puff procedure (inhalation for 5 s, fol- 
lowed by a 10-s breath-hold and exhalation, with 
taking stable doses for three months or longer. 
Participants could continue disease -modifying 
therapy (e.g., interferon β-1a, interferon β-1b, 
gla tiramer) if they had been on a stable regimen 
for at least six months. We prohibited any 
changes to medications that were expected to 
affect spasticity scores during the trial. Partici- 
pants could be cannabis-naive or cannabis- 
exposed; if the participants had been previously 
exposed to can nabis, we asked that they refrain 
from smoking cannabis for one month before 
screening and during the trial. 
We excluded patients with a history of major 
psychiatric disorder (other than depression) or 
substance abuse, substantial neurologic disease 
other than multiple sclerosis (e.g., epilepsy, head 
trauma) and severe or unstable medical illnesses, 
known pulmonary disorders (tuberculosis, 
asthma), patients who used benzodiazepines to 
control spasticity or high doses of narcotic med- 
ications for pain, and women who were pregnant 
or breastfeeding. 

• Active drug use n = 21 
• Unavailable for time commitment n = 19 
• Not enough spasticity n = 17 
• Lost interest in study n = 13 
• Could not tolerate smoking n = 9 
• Unstable therapy n = 6 
• Other medical condition n = 5 
• Location/distance too far n = 5 
• Psychiatric disorder n = 3 
• History of drug use n = 1 

• Unwilling to smoke cannabis n = 24 
• Lost interest in study n = 15 
• Location/distance too far n = 3 
• Unavailable for time commitment n = 7 
• Not contactable n = 8 
• Recent medication change n = 1 
• Unable to complete assessments n = 1 

• Unavailable for time 
commitment n = 1 






A second screening visit took place within 
seven days of the first. At this time, we com- 
pleted the expanded disability status scale, deter- 
mined spasticity again using the modified Ash- 
worth scale and conducted a battery of cognitive 
tests to reduce practise effects. During this sec- 
ond visit, participants were given a “practise ses- 
sion” with a placebo cigarette, although they 
were not told that it was a placebo. 
Completed 
prescreening 
n = 196 
Completed 1st 
screening visit 
n = 97 
Completed 2nd 
screening visit 
n = 38 
Randomization 
n = 37 
Patients in cohort 
n = 30 
Primary outcome 
Our primary outcome was change in spasticity as 
measured by patient score on the modified Ash- 
worth scale. The modified Ashworth scale5 is an 
ordinal scale (0–5 points) ranking the intensity of 
muscle tone as follows: 0, no in crease in muscle 
tone; 1, slight increase manifested by a catch and 
release or by minimal resistance at the end of the 
range of motion when the affected part(s) flexed 
or extended; 2, slight increase manifested by a 
catch, followed by minimal resistance throughout 
the remaining (less than half) range of motion; 3, 
more marked increase through most of the range 
of motion, but affected part(s) easily moved; 4, 
considerable increase in tone, and passive move- 
ment is difficult; 5, affected part(s) rigid in flex- 
ion and extension. We combined ratings for both 
elbows, hips and knees for a total possible score 
of 30 points. We assessed participants using this 
scale before and about 45 minutes after treatment 
(cannabis or placebo) at each visit. 
This measure has been validated and corre- 
lates with motor function.8 Although the minimal 
clinically important difference is not available in 
the literature, trials using a rating scale of 0–10 
for spasticity have established a threshold of 
18%.9 Given this threshold and the mean base- 
line score of 9 among our participants, a differ- 
ence of two or more points would be considered 
clinically meaningful. 
Secondary outcomes 
We assessed patients daily for pain (using a 
visual analogue scale), physical performance 
(using a timed walk) and cognitive function (the 
PASAT). We administered these tests before and 
about 45 minutes after treatment at each visit. 

Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), for perceived 
deficits using the Perceived Deficits Question- 
naire (PDQ) and for fatigue using the modified 
Fatigue Impact Scale (mFIS). We did these 
assessments before treatment on day 1 and after 
treatment on day 3. 


a 45-s wait between puffs),6 under supervision in 
a ventilated room. Participants completed an 
average of four puffs per cigarette. 
Prerolled cannabis and placebo cigarettes 
with identical appearances and weight (about 
800 mg) were provided by the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse. Cannabis cigarettes contained 
about 4% delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9- 
THC) by weight; placebo cigarettes had the 
same base material but with the delta-9-THC 
removed. We chose to use the 4% delta-9-THC 
cigarette available from the National Institute on 
Drug Abuse because it most closely resembled 
the strength of cigarettes available in the com- 
munity at the time of the study (typically 
between 5% and 6%).7 
We assessed safety and adverse effects by 
monitoring participants’ vital signs in addition to 
self-report by participants. 


 Interferon β-1a 
 Interferon β-1b 


 
































Patients, no. (%)* 
n = 30 
 





 




 




 




 




 



 



Note: SD = standard deviation. 
*Unless otherwise indicated. 
†Scores range from 0 to 63, with higher scores suggesting a greater severity of depressive 
symptoms. 
‡Scores range from 0 to 10, with higher scores suggesting a greater degree of disability. 
§As determined during screening visit 1. Scores range from 0 to 24, with higher scores 
suggesting greater spasticity. 
 
patients to assess their feeling of “highness” after 
treatment, according to question 1 from the Sub- 
jective Ratings of High and Sedation Question- 
naire (SRHS–R), and to guess which treatment 
they were receiving (placebo or cannabis). 
Detailed descriptions of these measures are 
available in Appendix 1 (available at www .cmaj .ca 
/lookup /suppl /doi :10 .1503 /cmaj .110837 /-/DC1). 
Statistical analysis 
We calculated mean scores (and 95% confi- 
dence intervals [CIs]) on the modified Ash- 
worth scale during each visit of each phase, at 
each assessment time (before and after treat- 
ment). We calculated bootstrap-based, bias - 
corrected, accelerated CIs for extra precision 
around each mean. We calculated four overall 
mean scores on the modified Ashworth scale 
(before and after smoking during both phases). 
We compared the difference in scores before 
and after smoking for each of the two phases 
using paired t tests. We then compared the 
change in this difference (after to before) in the 
two phases (placebo and active) using a paired 
t test. We used the same analysis to examine 
scores on the visual analogue scale for pain, 
the timed walk and the PASAT. 
We analyzed secondary variables according to 
the schedule of measurements. We calculated the 
means and bootstrap-based CIs for patient scores 
on the BSI, the PDQ, and the mFIS for each day 
on which these measures were assessed (day 1 
before smoking, day 3 after smok ing). We as - 
sessed the overall differences for before and after 
treatment with placebo and cannabis using a paired 
t test. We calculated the means and bootstrap- 
based CIs for the answer to question 1 of the 
SRHS–R questionnaire. We used a paired t test to 
compare the overall difference in “highness” 
between treatment and placebo. 
We performed power calculations before 
the beginning of the study, and these were 
reviewed and approved by an external scien- 
tific advisory board and regulatory agencies. A 
priori, we identified as “clinically important” 
any departure from zero in the hypothesized 
direction that is greater than one standard 
deviation (SD) of paired differences. We deter- 
mined that a sample size of 30 would yield 
better than 80% power (α = 0.05) to detect 
such an effect size. 
Study participants 
We identified 196 patients for screening (Fig- 
ure 1). Of these patients, 38 completed both 
screening visits, 37 were randomized, and 30 




 
 
 
 
 

Participants in both conditions showed im - 
provement on the PASAT over the three visits, 
consistent with practise effects. However, 
within sessions, the group smoking cannabis 
had a consistent reduction in performance after 
the drug was administered versus before. Over- 
all, smoking cannabis re duced scores on this 
test by 8.67 points (95% bootstrap CI 4.10 to 
14.31) more than placebo (p = 0.003) (Table 2). 
Smoking cannabis did not significantly affect 
patient perceptions of fatigue or deficits, nor did 
it increase symptoms, but it did increase patient 
perception of “highness” by 5.04 points more 
than placebo (p < 0.001) (Table 3). Seventeen 
participants correctly guessed their treatment 
phase for all six visits, and one participant 
guessed cannabis for all days (data not shown). 
For the remaining participants, cannabis was 
correctly guessed on 33/35 visits; they correctly 
guessed placebo on 21/36 visits (data not 
shown). 
Figure 2: Spasticity as measured by mean combined scores on the modified Ashworth scale, before and after treatment, on each day of 
each phase of the trial. (A) Change in scores by phase, before and after crossover. (B) Change in scores before and after treatment with 
placebo versus cannabis. 


completed the study. (Seven patients withdrew 
before completion.) 
Of the 30 patients who completed the proto- 
col, 63% were women (Table 1). The average 
age of participants was about 50 years, and the 
average level of education was 15 years in 
school. The mean score on the expanded dis- 
ability status scale was 5.3 (SD 1.5). Sixty- 
seven percent of participants required walking 
aids, and 20% required the use of a wheelchair. 
The score on the modified Ashworth scale at 
the initial screening visit was a mean of 9.3 
(SD 2.3). Seventy percent of participants were 
undergoing disease -modifying therapy, and 
60% were taking antispasticity agents. Most of 
the participants (80%) had previous recre- 
ational experience with cannabis, and 33% of 
participants had used cannabis within the pre- 
vious year. 
Primary outcome 
Smoking cannabis reduced patient scores on the 
modified Ashworth scale by an average of 2.74 
points (95% bootstrap CI 2.20 to 3.14) more 
than placebo (p < 0.001) (Table 2 and Figure 2). 
The order of treatment (cannabis in phase 1 or 
phase 2) did not significantly affect the outcome 
(p = 0.8). 
Secondary outcomes 
Smoking cannabis reduced patient scores on the 
visual analogue scale by 5.28 points (95% boot- 
strap CI 2.48 to 10.01) more than placebo (p = 
0.008) (Table 2). The difference between timed 
walk scores in the two conditions was not signif- 
icant (p = 0.2). 


































Placebo, before treatment 
Placebo, after treatment 
Cannabis, before treatment 
Cannabis, after treatment 
Group 1 (placebo first) 
Group 2 (cannabis first) 




Sensitivity analyses 
Using a worst-case scenario sensitivity analysis 
(assuming that the seven patients who withdrew 
would not have shown any treatment effect), 
compared with placebo, smoking cannabis 
reduced average scores on the modified Ashworth 
scale by 2.22 points (p < 0.001), on the visual 
analogue scale of pain by 4.28 points (p = 0.009) 
and on the PASAT by 6.981 points (p = 0.003). 
These findings suggest that dropouts had no 
meaningful effect on our results. 
Safety effects 
Although smoked cannabis was generally well- 
tolerated, patients reported more adverse 
effects during the active phase than during the 
placebo phase (Table 4). Withdrawals from 
treatment were due to adverse events (two 
patients felt uncomfortably “high”, two had 
dizziness and one had fatigue), the schedule 
being too demanding (one patient) and pain 
unrelated to the study (one patient). Of the 
patients who withdrew, three had no previous 
exposure to cannabis, two had only some expo- 
sure (> 1 yr since last use) and two had been 
exposed during the previous year. None of our 
participants had episodes of hypertension, 
hypotension, tachycardia or bradycardia requir- 
ing medical intervention. 
Main findings 
We saw a beneficial effect of smoked cannabis 
on treatment-resistant spasticity and pain associ- 
ated with multiple sclerosis among our partici- 
pants. Although generally well-tolerated by our 
participants, smoking cannabis was accompanied 
by acute cognitive effects. 
Comparison with other studies 
Other studies have investigated the effect of 
orally administered cannabinoids on spasticity 
related to multiple sclerosis, including oromu- 
cosal sprays and capsules containing cannabis 
extract, with mixed results. Any reductions in 
spasticity have generally only been seen on sub- 
jective ratings.10,11 One study showed a reduction 
of 1.82 points on the original Ashworth spastic- 
ity scale (baseline mean 22) compared with a 
reduction of 0.23 points for placebo.12 In a trial 
of a cannabis-based oromucosal spray, Collin 
and colleagues13 found that 40% of patients self- 
reported a benefit of 30% or more over a period 
of six weeks using a numerical rating scale of 
spasticity. Changes in the scores on the Ash- 
worth spasticity scale did not significantly differ 
between participants receiving treatment and 




 
 
 
 
 
Previous studies that have used different de - 
livery systems (pills, oral mucosal sprays) and 
evaluated participants at study completion rather 
than within one hour of smoking have reported 
no or limited adverse effects on cognition.11,18,22,23 
However, smoked cannabis was associated with 
acute cognitive effects among the participants of 
our study, as shown by their performances on the 
PASAT. The clinical significance of this result is 
uncertain; de spite the transient decrease in 
scores, patients were still within normal ranges 
for their ages and levels of education.24 It is 
worth noting that conventional treatments such 
as baclofen and tizanidine hydrochloride may 
also affect cognition,25 although published data 
are scarce. Re cently, concerns have been cited 
regarding the potential long-term cognitive 
effects of cannabis use in patients with multiple 
sclerosis.26,27 Although these studies have had 
small samples and other limitations,28,29 the issue 
warrants further attention. 

on their previous positive response to the drug. 
Thus, our results might not be generalizable to 
patients who are cannabis-naïve. 
It is difficult to completely blind partici- 
pants to psychoactive substances. Participants 
could generally tell which treatment they 
were receiving, although this is unlikely to af - 
fectobjectively assessed spasticity scores. 
 
Although the literature on the reliability of the 
modified Ashworth scale shows mixed opin- 
ion, we selected this measure because it is the 
most widely used in clinical practice, and any 
measurement limitations would likely result 
in increased variance and a failure to find a 
treatment effect. 
Conclusion 
Using an objective measure, we saw a beneficial 
effect of inhaled cannabis on spasticity among 
patients receiving insufficient relief from tradi- 
tional treatments. Although generally well - 
tolerated, smoking cannabis had acute cognitive 
effects. Larger, long-term studies are needed to 
confirm our findings and determine whether 
lower doses can result in beneficial effects with 
less cognitive impact. 
3. Brooks JW, Pryce G, Bisogno T, et al. Arvanil-induced inhibi- 
tion of spasticity and persistent pain: evidence for therapeutic 
sites of action different from the vanilloid VR1 receptor and 
cannabinoid CB(1)/CB(2) receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 2002; 
439: 83-92. 
4. Smith PF. New approaches in the management of spasticity in 
multiple sclerosis patients: role of cannabinoids. Ther Clin Risk 
Manag 2010;6:59-63. 


those getting the placebo. Similar results were 
found in a study involving 337 patients with 
treatment-resistant spasticity.14 
With respect to commonly used medications, 
sublingual tizanidine hydrochloride resulted in a 
3.0-point decline in Ashworth scores when eval- 
uated after one week of treatment, in comparison 
with a 1.81-point decline with oral tizanidine and 
a 1.19-point decline with placebo.15 Baseline 
mean Ashworth scores for the patients in this 
study had ranged from 8.31 to 11.31. In addition, 
a study involving patients who were not respon- 
sive to oral baclofen found that intrathecal deliv- 
ery resulted in a change in mean Ashworth 
scores from 4.0 to 1.2.16 
We saw significant reduction in the pain felt 
by our participants. Although orally adminis- 
tered cannabinoids failed to improve pain in an 
uncontrolled study involving 20 patients with 
multiple sclerosis,17 two placebo-controlled 
studies10,18 did find a treatment effect. In a trial of 
a sublingual spray containing delta-9-THC 
alone or combined with cannabinol, Rog and 
colleagues reported a 41% reduction in pain, 
compared with a 22% reduction with placebo.18 
Literature on cannabinoids for pain conditions 
other than multiple sclerosis is limited, although 
three recent randomized placebo-controlled tri- 
als of smoked cannabis found significant reduc- 
tions in neuropathic pain.19–21 Our participants 
began with relatively low levels of pain; future 
studies might focus on patients with more 
intense pain. 
Limitations 
Many participants had previously used cannabis, 
raising the possibility of self-selection bias based 
References 
1. Watson SJ, Benson JA Jr, Joy JE. Marijuana and medicine: 
assessing the science base: a summary of the 1999 Institute of 
Medicine report. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000;57:547-52. 
2. Pryce G, Baker D. Control of spasticity in a multiple sclerosis 
model is mediated by CB1, not CB2, cannabinoid receptors. Br 
J Pharmacol 2007;150:519-25. 
5. Bohannon RW, Smith MB. Interrater reliability of a modified 
Ashworth scale of muscle spasticity. Phys Ther 1987;67:206-7. 
6. Foltin RW, Ficshman MW, Nellis MJ, et al. Marijuana effects 
and behavioral contingencies. NIDA Res Monogr 1986;67: 
355-61. 
7. Mehmedic Z, Chandra S, Slade D, et al. Potency trends of 
Delta9-THC and other cannabinoids in confiscated cannabis 
preparations from 1993 to 2008. J Forensic Sci 2010;55:1209-17. 
8. Katz RT, Rovai GP, Brait C, et al. Objective quantification of 
 
























spastic hypertonia: correlation with clinical findings. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil 1992;73:339-47. 
10. Zajicek J, Fox P, Sanders H, et al. Cannabinoids for treatment of 
spasticity and other symptoms related to multiple sclerosis 
(CAMS study): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. 
Lancet 2003;362:1517-26. 
11. Wade DT, Makela P, Robson P, et al. Do cannabis-based medici- 
nal extracts have general or specific effects on symptoms in mul- 
tiple sclerosis? A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 
study on 160 patients. Mult Scler 2004;10:434-41. 
12. Zajicek JP, Sanders HP, Wright DE, et al. Cannabinoids in multiple 
sclerosis (CAMS) study: safety and efficacy data for 12 months 
follow up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2005; 76: 1664-9. 
13. Collin C, Davies P, Mutiboko IK, et al. Randomized controlled 
trial of cannabis-based medicine in spasticity caused by multiple 
sclerosis. Eur J Neurol 2007;14:290-6. 
14. Collin C, Ehler E, Waberzinek G, et al. A double-blind, random- 
ized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of Sativex, in sub- 
jects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. Neu- 
rol Res 2010;32:451-9. 
15. Vakhapova V, Auriel E, Karni A. Nightly sublingual tizanidine 
HCl in multiple sclerosis: clinical efficacy and safety. Clin Neu- 
ropharmacol 2010;33:151-4. 
16. Penn RD, Savoy SM, Corcos D, et al. Intrathecal baclofen for 
severe spinal spasticity. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1517-21. 
17. Centonze D, Mori F, Koch G, et al. Lack of effect of cannabis- 
based treatment on clinical and laboratory measures in multiple 
sclerosis. Neurol Sci 2009;30:531-4. 
18. Rog DJ, Nurmikko TJ, Friede T, et al. Randomized, controlled 
trial of cannabis-based medicine in central pain in multiple scle- 
rosis. Neurology 2005;65:812-9. 
19. Abrams DI, Jay CA, Shade SB, et al. Cannabis in painful HIV- 
associated sensory neuropathy: a randomized placebo-controlled 
trial. Neurology 2007;68:515-21. 
20. Ellis RJ, Toperoff W, Vaida F, et al. Smoked medicinal cannabis 
for neuropathic pain in HIV: a randomized, crossover clinical 
trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 2009;34:672-80. 
21. Ware MA, Wang T, Shapiro S, et al. Smoked cannabis for 
chronic neuropathic pain: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 
2010; 182:E694-701. 
22. Vaney C, Heinzel-Gutenbrunner M, Jobin P, et al. Efficacy, 
safety and tolerability of an orally administered cannabis extract 
in the treatment of spasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis: 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. 
Mult Scler 2004;10:417-24. 
23. Aragona M, Onesti E, Tomassini V, et al. Psychopathological 
and cognitive effects of therapeutic cannabinoids in multiple 
sclerosis: a double-blind, placebo controlled, crossover study. 
Clin Neuropharmacol 2009;32:41-7. 
24. Heaton RK, et al. Revised comprehensive norms for an 
expanded Halstead-Reitan battery: demographically adjusted 
neuropsychological norms for African American and Caucasian 
adults. Lutz (FL): Psychological Assessment Resources; 2004. 
25. Shah J, Wesnes KA, Kovelesky RA, et al. Effects of food on the 
single- dose pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of tizanidine cap- 
sules and tablets in healthy volunteers. Clin Ther 2006; 28: 1308 -17. 
26. Ghaffar O, Feinstein A. Multiple sclerosis and cannabis: a cogni- 
28. Arnett PA. Cannabis bliss? Perhaps not? Neurology 2008; 71: 160- 1. 
29. Messinis L, Papathanasopoulos P. Multiple sclerosis and 
cannabis: a cognitive and psychiatric study. Neurology 2009; 72: 
100- 1, author reply 101. 
Affiliations: From the Departments of Neurosciences 
(Corey-Bloom), Biostatistics (Wolfson, Gamst, Jin) and Psy- 
chiatry (Marcotte, Bentley); and the Center for Medicinal 
Cannabis Research (Marcotte, Bentley, Gouaux), University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, Calif. 
Contributors: Jody Corey-Bloom oversaw the design and 
implementation of the study design, and the analysis and 
interpretation of the data, and drafted the manuscript. Tanya 
Wolfson, Anthony Gamst and Shelia Jin participated in the 
designing the study design and conducted the statistical 
analysis. Thomas D. Marcotte participated in drafting the 
manuscript and interpreted the results of the neuropsycholog- 
ical tests. Heather Bentley and Ben Gouaux assisted with the 
design and implementation of the study and helped draft the 
manuscript. All of the authors approved the final version of 
the manuscript submitted for publication. 
Funding: This study was funded by grant number C00-SD-103 
from the University of California, Center for Medicinal 
Cannabis Research (CMCR). The CMCR assisted the investiga- 
tors in obtaining the State and Federal approvals for this project. 


9. Farrar JT, Troxel AB, Stott C, et al. Validity, reliability, and clini- 
cal importance of change in a 0-10 numeric rating scale measure 
of spasticity: a post hoc analysis of a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Clin Ther 2008;30:974-85. 

27. Honarmand K, Tierney MC, O’Connor P, et al. Effects of can - 
nabis on cognitive function in patients with multiple sclerosis. 
Neurology 2011;76:1153-60. 
For the study protocol pertaining to this article, 
please see Appendix 2, available at www.cmaj .ca 
/lookup/suppl /doi:10.1503 /cmaj.110837/-/DC1. 
