Winner of the 2007 O’Donoghue Award
Postoperative Range of Motion Following
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction
Using Autograft Hamstrings
A Prospective, Randomized Clinical Trial of Early Versus
Delayed Reconstructions
Craig R. Bottoni,*† MD, Travis R. Liddell,‡ MD, Timothy J. Trainor,‡ MD,
David M. Freccero,‡ MD, and Kenneth K. Lindell,‡ MD
From †Aspetar Orthopaedic & Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar,
and ‡Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii
Background:There is a common belief that surgical reconstruction of an acutely torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) should be
delayed for at least 3 weeks because of the increased incidence of postoperative motion loss (arthrofibrosis) and suboptimal clin-
ical results.
Hypothesis: There is no difference in postoperative range of motion or stability after ACL reconstructions performed either
acutely or delayed.
Study Design: Randomized controlled trial; Level of evidence, 1.
Methods:Patients with an acute ACL tear were prospectively randomized to either early (within 21days) or delayed (beyond 6
weeks) reconstruction using autograft hamstring tendon. Previous knee surgery on the index extremity and a multiligamentous
injury were exclusionary criteria. Surgical technique and postoperative rehabilitation were identical for all patients. Postoperative
assessments included range of motion and KT-1000 arthrometer measurements compared with the contralateral knee.
Standardized outcome measures were used including single assessment numeric evaluation (SANE), Lysholm, and Tegner
Activity Score.
Results: Seventy consecutive patients were enrolled, and 1 patient was dropped after a postoperative infection. Sixty-nine
patients (34 acute, 35 delayed) with an average age of 27 years composed the study cohort. The mean time from injury to sur-
gery was 9 days (range, 2-17 days) for patients in the early group and 85 days (range, 42-192) for those in the delayed group.
The average follow-up from surgery was 366 days (range, 185-869). Articular cartilage and meniscal injuries were comparable
between the 2 groups. There were no significant differences between the 2 treatment groups in degrees of extension or flexion
lost relative to the nonoperative side, operative time, KT-1000 arthrometer differences, or subjective knee evaluations.
Conclusion: Excellent clinical results can be achieved after ACL reconstructions performed soon after injury using autograft
hamstrings. Although the authors do not advocate that all reconstructions should be performed acutely, they found that early
ACL reconstructions do not result in loss of motion or suboptimal clinical results as long as a rehabilitation protocol emphasiz-
ing extension and early range of motion is employed.
Keywords: ACL; timing; hamstring; acute
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the most common
*Address correspondence to Craig R. Bottoni, MD, Qatar Orthopaedic
completely torn ligament injury in the knee.17The typical
& Sports Medicine Center, PO Box 29222, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: craig.bottoni@
aspetar.com). treatment for a young athlete with a complete ACL tear is
Presented at the 33rd annual meeting of the AOSSM, Calgary, Alberta, a surgical reconstruction. More than 100000 ACL recon-
Canada, July 2007. structions are performed in the United States annually.18
One or more of the authors has declared a potential conflict of inter-
More ACL reconstructions are performed on young male
est: Dr Bottoni has received a research grant from Arthrex Inc.
athletes than female athletes because males participate in
sports that are at high risk for ACL injuries in greater
The American Journal of Sports Medicine, Vol. 36, No. 4
numbers.However,female athletes have a 2.4 to almost 10
DOI: 10.1177/0363546507312164
© 2008 American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine times greater risk to tear their ACL than males when
656
Vol.36,No.4,2008 Range of Motion After ACL Reconstruction 657
competing in the same sport.18An ACL injury in most cases a full range of motion.Their surgery was scheduled at a
prevents an athlete from returning to sports requiring pivot- minimum of 6 weeks from the date of injury.The patients
ing or cutting maneuvers.Although many factors can con- in group 2 were not permitted to return to full active duty
tribute to the timing of an athlete’s return to sports after an or recreational sports during their rehabilitation before
ACL reconstruction, most surgeons prohibit their patients surgery. If a concomitant MCL injury was present, a
from returning to at-risk activities for 4 to 6 months.1,3,4,8 hinged knee brace was prescribed that allowed sagittal
The timing of an ACL reconstruction after an acute plane motion but limited valgus motion and protected the
injury is an issue of considerable debate. In a landmark medial ligament.
study, Shelbourne and Patel19 recommended waiting at
least 3 weeks from injury before proceeding with an ACL Preoperative Assessments
reconstruction because of the risk of arthrofibrosis and
suboptimal clinical results. Several studies subsequently A thorough history was obtained and a physical examina-
corroborated this recommendation.10,20,24 In contradistinc- tion performed on all patients at their initial evaluation.
tion,a few studies have found no loss of motion with sur- Information collected included date and mechanism of
gery performed proximate to injury.2,12,15,16Patellar tendon injury, prior knee injuries, and surgery on either knee.A
autografts were used for the ACL reconstructions in nearly maximum manual side-to-side KT-1000 arthrometer
all of these studies. There have been no studies that we (MEDmetric,San Diego,Calif) assessment was conducted
have identified that prospectively evaluated patients with to quantify and to compare the anterior translation in the
an acute ACL tear who have been randomized to either injured knee to that of the contralateral knee.A battery of
early or late reconstructions using hamstring autografts. subjective knee evaluation instruments were completed by
The purpose of this study was to prospectively compare all patients preoperatively and then at 6-month intervals
the postoperative range of motion,stability,and early clin- postoperatively.Specifically the single assessment numeric
ical results in a similar group of young athletes with an evaluation (SANE), Tegner Activity Score, and Lysholm
acute ACL tear after randomization to either acute or evaluation were used.The SANE score consists of a single
delayed surgical reconstruction.Because the primary out- subjective evaluation score from 1 to 100,where 100 is con-
come measure was restoration of normal range of motion, sidered “normal function.”25 The Lysholm score was origi-
a minimum of 6 months of follow-up was determined to be nally designed to assess ligament injuries of the knee.14The
adequate. Although in some patients, some improvement Lysholm score is a condition-specific instrument that con-
may still be gained at 6 months,if a patient has regained sists of 8 domains:limp,locking,pain,stair climbing,use of
their preinjury range of motion,they should be at minimal supports, instability, swelling, and squatting. An overall
risk to lose motion thereafter. score of 100 is possible and indicates the highest possible
function.The tabulated scores correspond with the following
outcomes:95 to 100,excellent;84 to 94,good;65 to 83,fair;
METHODS and <65,poor.The Tegner Activity Score is a numerical score
from 1 to 10 that subjectively assesses a patient’s current
The study was approved by our Institutional Review
level of activity,with each number corresponding to partici-
Board, and all participants consented to randomization. pation in sporting activities at various levels.23The highest
Only military patients or their family members were eligi-
score of 10 corresponds to participation in sports such as
ble for treatment at our hospital. Patients of at least 18
football,soccer,or rugby at an elite level.A score of 6 corre-
years of age who were seen with an acute ACL tear were
sponds with participation in sports at a recreational level,
given the option of participating in the study.An MRI was
and a score of 0 would represent an individual on sick leave
obtained on all knees to confirm the diagnosis and provide
or disability due to his or her knee.
additional information regarding meniscal and concomi-
tant ligamentous injuries.Exclusion criteria included any
prior ligamentous surgery on the index knee or a concomi- Operative Technique
tant posterior cruciate,fibular collateral,or posterolateral
corner ligamentous knee injury. Concomitant medial col- General anesthesia via endotracheal or laryngeal mask was
lateral ligament (MCL) injuries of any grade were not used in all patients.All knees were examined under anesthe-
exclusionary in either group. sia to assess and to grade ligamentous injuries.All patients
Once an acute ACL tear was diagnosed and the patient received prophylactic intravenous antibiotics.The operative
consented to study participation, the patients were ran- time was calculated from the first incision to the closure of all
domized to either the early (group 1) or delayed (group 2) wounds.An arthroscopic evaluation was first performed in all
surgery group. Randomization was performed via study patients to assess intra-articular pathoanatomy, to confirm
design using sealed envelopes that identified the timing of the ACL tear,and to assess meniscal and chondral injuries as
surgery to be employed.The patients randomized to group well as reparability of these injuries.
1 were scheduled for surgery at the earliest possible date. Meniscal tears were repaired or debrided based on well-
No exceptions were made for swelling,limitations in range established criteria,9,13,21 the primary determinants being
of knee motion, or pain. Patients randomized to group 2 residual rim width and configuration of the tear.Using an
were enrolled in our physical therapy program,where they inside-out technique as described by Bottoni and Arciero,6
began a supervised rehabilitation protocol that empha- all meniscal repairs were performed using double-armed
sized quadriceps muscle strengthening and restoration of nonabsorbable meniscal sutures (0-Ethibond,Ethicon Inc,
658 Bottoni et al The American Journal of Sports Medicine
Somerville, NJ) in a vertical mattress configuration. rehabilitation closely supervised within our military phys-
Meniscal debridement, when repair was not feasible, was ical therapy system. Our rehabilitation protocol empha-
performed with a disposable shaver (4.0-mm Tomcat, sizes early mobilization and maintenance of extension.
Stryker Endoscopy,San Jose,Calif). Slight modifications by the therapists were permitted
Chondral injuries were graded according to the modified based on each patient’s individual progress. For patients
Outerbridge classification7 and documented. The depth with meniscal repair or microfracture,partial weightbear-
and size of the articular cartilage injury determined its ing with crutches for 4 weeks was mandated.The drop-lock
classification.The more superficial injuries (grades I and brace applied in the operating room was used continuously
II) and the more extensive lesions (grades IIII and IV) for 4 to 6 weeks until good quadriceps control was restored.
were combined for study evaluations.Any loose chondral Subsequently, no functional bracing was used for any
flaps were debrided. patient. Return to sports or full active military duty was
permitted at 4 to 6 months depending on individual
ACL Reconstruction Technique progress.
All knees were reconstructed using a quadrupled hamstrings Postoperative Evaluations
autograft.The technique used was described by Bottoni.5The
gracilis and semitendinosus tendons were harvested through All patients were evaluated at 3 days, 2 weeks, and then
a vertical incision over the pes anserinus.The tendons were monthly during the first 6 months postoperatively.
released from the tibia together,secured with a heavy-gauge Thereafter,patients were evaluated every 6 months.Passive
nonabsorbable suture (#5 Ethibond,Ethicon Inc),and then range of motion knee measurements were recorded using a
stripped to the musculotendinous junctions with an open- goniometer and compared with the patient’s nonoperative
ended tendon stripper (Tendon Harvester, Linvatec Cor- side.A physical therapist who was not part of the surgical
poration, Largo, Fla). All remaining muscle was removed team performed all range of motion and stability measure-
from the tendons,and then the free ends were secured with ments. Allowing gravity as the only force, passive exten-
a locking Krackow stitch of #5 Ethibond. The quadrupled sion was recorded while the patient was prone. The
tendons were sized and placed on 15 lb of tension measurements were then compared with those of the
(GraftMaster,Smith & Nephew,Andover,Mass) until needed uninvolved knee.Subjective evaluations were made using
for the ACL reconstruction. established outcome measures at the postoperative visits.
Soft tissue was debrided using a disposable shaver (5.5- SANE, Tegner Activity Score, and Lysholm evaluation
mm Tomcat,Stryker Endoscopy) and bipolar electrocautery scores were used.
device (TurboVac 90, Arthrocare Corporation, Sunnyvale,
Calif) to allow for visualization of the over-the-top position. Statistical Analysis
The posterior aspect of the tibial footprint of the ACL was
used to determine the proper position for the tibial tunnel.A Descriptive statistics were summarized for subject demo-
tibial guide set at 65° (Arthrex Inc,Naples,Fla) was used to graphic data.The SANE scores were analyzed with a 2 ×2
ensure proper orientation of the femoral tunnel as described (group × time) analysis of variance with repeated meas-
by Howell et al.11A femoral tunnel was created using a 5-mm ures for time.The Lysholm and Tegner Activity scores were
over-the-top guide (Arthrex Inc) using a transtibial tech- analyzed with separate independent t tests. Differences
nique.The graft was secured on the femoral side with a 50- between groups regarding postoperative range of motion
mm metallic cross pin (TransFix,Arthrex Inc).The graft was were also analyzed with separate independent t tests.
secured with a resorbable interference screw (Full Thread Alpha level for all statistical tests was set at .05.Microsoft
Bio-Interference Screw, Arthrex Inc) that was the same Excel (Office 2000, Microsoft, Redmond,Wash) and SPSS
diameter as the tibial tunnel.The knee was placed at 20° to for Windows (version 11.5) software (SPSS Science Inc,
30° of flexion and a posterior force applied to the tibia while Chicago,Ill) were used for statistical analysis.
securing the graft on the tibial side.In all cases,the tibial fix-
ation was augmented by a 6.5-mm screw and spiked washer. RESULTS
The knee was then examined to ensure elimination of the
anterior tibial laxity.All incisions were closed with subcuta- Seventy consecutive patients with an acute ACL tear were
neous interrupted absorbable sutures and a subcuticular enrolled in our study (Figure 1). By study design, they
skin closure (2-0 Vicryl and 4-0 Monocryl, Ethicon Inc). were evenly split between the acute and delayed surgery
Cryotherapy via a compression sleeve (Cryo/Cuff, Aircast/ groups.Fifty-eight were men,and the average age was 27
DJO,Vista,Calif) was applied over a thigh-high compressive years (range, 18-43). Noncontact, pivoting injuries during
stocking (TED hose,Kendall-LTP,Chicopee,Mass).The knee sports participation accounted for the majority (70%) of the
was immobilized in a brace locked in extension (Telescoping ACL tears. There were no statistically significant differ-
Cool ELS,DJO). ences between groups for all demographic characteristics
(Table 1).The mean time from injury to surgery was 9 days
Postoperative Rehabilitation (range,2-18) in the early group and 85 days (range,42-192)
in the delayed group.Based on the established criteria,no
Postoperatively, patients from both groups followed the patients were excluded for prior knee surgery on the index
same closely supervised rehabilitation protocol. All knee,a multiligamentous knee injury,or locked knee due
patients were admitted overnight and then initiated their to an entrapped meniscal tear. One patient who met all
Vol.36,No.4,2008 Range of Motion After ACL Reconstruction 659
Pt with an acute ACL injury
(n = 70 )
Excluded (n = 0 )
Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 5)
Enrollment Multiligamentous injuries
Refused to participate (n = 0)
Randomization
Other reasons (n = 0)
Allocated to Acute Surgery Allocated to Delayed Surgery
(n = 35) (n = 35)
Received allocated intervention Received allocated intervention
(n = 35) Allocation (n = 35)
Did not receive allocated intervention Did not receive allocated intervention
(n = 0) (n = 0)
Lost to follow-up (n = 1) Lost to follow-up (n = 0)
Sustained a postoperative infection
which required graft removal.
Therefore, pt dropped from study Follow-up Discontinued intervention
Discontinued intervention (n = 0)
(n = 0)
Analyzed (n = 34) Analyzed (n = 35)
Analysis
Excluded from analysis (n = 1) Excluded from analysis (n = 0)
Pt noted above
Figure 1. The consort flowchart, showing the timing of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) surgery. Pt, patient.
study criteria and underwent an acute ACL reconstruction in the acute group, 18 (56%) were found in the lateral
(group 1) was dropped after he sustained a postoperative meniscus and none were reparable. Most of these were
intra-articular infection that necessitated graft removal. small radial posterior horn injuries.Of the 14 tears in the
There were no other perioperative complications. Two medial meniscus in knees of group 1,8 (57%) were repara-
patients (2.9%),1 from each group,sustained a traumatic ble. In contrast, of the 15 medial meniscal tears in the
retear of their ACL graft.One patient sustained a reinjury knees from group 2, only 4 (27%) were reparable. These
at 8 months playing basketball and the other at 11 months data are shown in Table 3.
during military training. Both of these patients had The average postoperative range of motion loss as meas-
returned to full military duty and recreational sports ured by the deficits in flexion and extension compared with
before their reinjuries.As these patients were available for the contralateral knee is shown in Table 4.There was only
follow-up evaluations for a minimum of 6 months, their 1 patient in the delayed group and none in the early group
range of motion and clinical scores are included until they with >10° loss of extension.If that outlier was dropped,the
sustained their reinjury. Follow-up for all patients aver- extension deficit would be 0.8° compared with 0.6° average
aged 1 year (range,180-708 days). loss in the acute group. There were 2 patients in the
Chondral injuries were found in a minority of the delayed group and 1 patient in the early surgery group
patients. Nine of the knees in group 1 (25%) and 5 of the who had 5° to 10° loss of extension. There were only 2
knees in group 2 (14%) had chondral injuries.None of these patients in the delayed group and 1 in the early group with
injuries required microfracture. The specific locations and >10° loss of flexion.There were 5 patients in the delayed
classification of these lesions are listed in Table 2. group and 5 patients in the early surgery group who had
Meniscal tears were found in 32 of the knees in group 1 5° to 10° loss of flexion. There were no statistically
(91%) and 24 of the knees in group 2 (69%).Of the 32 tears significant differences in extension or flexion deficits
660 Bottoni et al The American Journal of Sports Medicine
TABLE 1
Demographics of the Patient Populationa
Variable All Patients Group 1 (Early) Group 2 (Delayed)
No.of patients 70 35 35
Gender
Male 58 29 29
Female 12 6 6
Mean age (y) 27.3 26.4 27.5
Range (SD) 18-43 (6.4) 18-40 (6.8) 19-43 (6.0)
Days from injury to surgery 9.0 84.8
Range (SD) 2-8 (4.4) 42-192 (38.2)
Total operative time ±SD (min) 64.0 ±25.5 61.5 ±23.9
Mechanisms of injury
Sports participation 49
Fall,trip,or awkward landing from a jump 13
Military training accident 4
Motocross/ATV accident 4
aSD,standard deviation;ATV,all-terrain vehicle.
TABLE 2 TABLE 4
Chondral Injuries Range of Motion Deficit and Stability (Compared With
Contralateral Side)a
Medial Lateral
Femoral Femoral Extension Flexion Stability
Condyle Condyle Patella Trochlea Deficit Deficit (KT-1000)
Acute Acute 0.6° 2.1° 1.2 mm
Outerbridge 0 3 (0/3) 5 (2/3) 1 (0/1) Range (SD) 0-7° (1.6) 0-10° (3.9) 0-7 mm (1.8)
I & II/III & IV Delayed 1.5° 2.6° 0.88 mm
Delayed Range (SD) 0-22° (4.2) 0-15° (4.8) 0-3 mm (1.1)
Outerbridge 4 (1/3) 0 0 1 (1/0) Pvalue .27 .19 .17
I & II/III & IV
Pvalue .11 .11 .023 1.0 aSD,standard deviation.
TABLE 5
Average Clinical Outcome Scores
TABLE 3
Meniscal Injuries
Acute Delayed PValue
Medial Lateral SANEa 83.1 81.4 .66
Lysholm 80.6 83.4 .61
Acute
Tegner 5.8 4.9 .34
Debridement/repair 14 (6/8) 18 (18/0)
Delayed aSANE,single assessment numeric evaluation.
Debridement/repair 15 (11/4) 9 (7/2)
Pvalue 1.0 .025 (.005/.49)
DISCUSSION
between knees in groups 1 or 2 when compared with the
contralateral knee.Similarly,there was no statistically sig- In this study,our primary objective was to compare the post-
nificant difference in stability as measured by the average operative knee motion and stability after reconstruction in 2
maximum manual KT-1000 arthrometer between knees in groups of young athletic patients with an acute tear of the
groups 1 or 2. ACL.Half the patients were randomized to receive their sur-
Clinical outcome scores were comparable for both groups gery acutely and the others delayed.We purposefully did not
(Table 5).The patients in the acute group rated their knees exclude patients based on clinical criteria such as limited
with the SANE score slightly better,on average,than those preoperative range of motion or persistent hemarthrosis,
in the delayed group.However,using the Lysholm scores, both of which,if present,have been identified as criteria to
the average for the patients in the delayed group was delay surgery.By not preselecting those patients with an opti-
slightly better. Using the Tegner Activity Score, the mal condition for knee surgery and thus biasing our results,
patients in the acute group rated their activity level at the we sought to determine whether reconstructing the ACL in
latest follow-up on average higher by almost a full level an acutely injured knee,irrespective of its preoperative sta-
than the patients in the delayed group. tus, would be problematic with regard to postoperative
Vol.36,No.4,2008 Range of Motion After ACL Reconstruction 661
motion or clinical outcome.To the contrary,we found those and 21 days (group II) fared significantly better when this
patients reconstructed early quickly regained their prein- “more accelerated”protocol was employed.
jury range of motion and,subjectively,felt better faster.We Our early group was defined as a reconstruction within
believe that the reason for this is the theory of a “second 21 days of injury (Shelbourne et al’s groups I and II),but
hit.” If the surgery is performed proximate to the injury, our goal was to perform the surgery as soon as possible.
the body has just one “trauma”from which to heal.In con- Our average time from injury to surgery in our early group
tradistinction, when the surgery is delayed, the knee was 9 days.Moreover,nearly half (15 of 34) of the patients
recovers from the first injury.The hemarthrosis resolves, in this early group had their reconstruction within a week
and motion is restored.However,the subsequent surgery is of their injury (equivalent to group I in Shelbourne et al’s
then perceived by the body as a “second hit” from which study).Only a few of these patients demonstrated any loss
healing must again commence. of flexion or extension.
The concept of a cyclops lesion as a cause of arthrofibro- One theoretical advantage of early surgery is a faster
sis is also,in our opinion,flawed.As long as any residual return to full activities.Patients in group 1,whose surgery
stump of the torn ACL is adequately resected, no tissue was performed acutely,were able to return to sports earlier
should remain that blocks extension. In our experience, because there was no initial delay in beginning their reha-
any loss of active extension noted preoperatively was due bilitation.Another theoretical advantage of an early recon-
to a limitation secondary to pain.In nearly all cases,on ini- struction is the avoidance of further meniscal or chondral
tiation of anesthesia,full knee motion was demonstrated. injuries that may occur if an athlete returns to some level of
Our emphasis on extension immediately postoperatively activities with an ACL-deficient knee. Wasilewski et al24
prevented loss of terminal hyperextension in either the reported a significantly higher incidence of chondral injuries
early or delayed surgical group in the vast majority of our (44% vs 17%) in knees that underwent delayed ACL recon-
patients. The 1 patient with the greatest loss of motion struction compared with those performed acutely.However,
postoperatively was randomized to the delayed group. they reported a higher incidence of meniscal tears in their
Preoperatively, she had difficulty regaining her full acute group.This correlates with our findings of a high inci-
motion.Despite regaining full extension and flexion at sur- dence of posterior horn lateral meniscal tears noted in our
gery,she had a difficult time in maintaining her full range acute group (18 vs 9). However, most of these were small
of motion postoperatively. Despite aggressive physical radial tears that required minimal debridement.None of the
therapy,she ended up with a significant loss of extension knees in the acute group required lateral meniscal repairs,
and a suboptimal clinical result. This patient may have compared with 2 that required repairs in the delayed group.
had a fibrotic diathesis and experienced difficulty with Although the incidence of medial meniscal tears was com-
postoperative range of motion irrespective of when she parable (14 vs 15), twice as many (8 vs 4) of these medial
underwent reconstruction. meniscal tears were reparable in the acute group.The delay
The landmark study by Shelbourne et al22is the primary in surgery and probable increased trauma sustained by the
source for the recommendation to delay an ACL recon- meniscus could account for the inability to repair these
struction by at least 3 weeks.This work was a retrospec- meniscal tears.
tive review of 169 ACL reconstructions followed for 13 Relatively low subjective outcome scores were found for
weeks.They stratified the patients based on the time from patients in both the acute and delayed groups.The average
injury to surgery.Group I was less than 8 days;group II,8 Lysholm scores for both groups categorize the results as fair.
to 21 days;and group III,>21 days.The authors reported a The scores are consistent across different outcome instru-
significantly increased incidence of arthrofibrosis in ments.We believe the reason for the relatively low scores is
patients reconstructed acutely (group I) when compared the relatively short clinical follow-up (<2 years, as is stan-
with those reconstructed at 21 days or longer (group III). dard for clinical outcome studies) and possibly the expecta-
The authors also reported that an accelerated rehabilita- tions of the servicemen and servicewomen that make up our
tion program resulted in significantly less arthrofibrosis in study population.The high demands placed on these patients
group II patients than when a slower rehabilitation proto- and the activities required magnify any limitation in func-
col was employed.In designing our protocol,we used their tion.The subjective evaluation scores obtained for compari-
study as our model. However, several salient differences son are considered inadequate for clinical comparisons and
are apparent. Shelbourne et al used an ipsilateral bone- thus should not be used as such.Our primary objective was
tendon-bone autograft inserted via a mini-open,2-incision to ascertain the patients’ assessment of their progress.
technique.The graft was secured on both the femoral and One limitation of our study is the fact that none of the
tibial sides with heavy sutures tied over a polypropylene patients in our acute group were given the chance to demon-
ligament button. In contrast, we used an autograft ham- strate that they could have functioned without an ACL recon-
string via a single-incision arthroscopic technique. struction. Our justification, however, is that the activities
Theoretically,the additional trauma from the arthrotomy required of active duty servicemen and servicewomen,in the
in the mini-open technique could have contributed to the vast majority of cases, preclude functioning with an ACL-
increased arthrofibrosis reported in their study. Shelbourne deficient knee.In addition,the inability of junior enlisted per-
et al did not perform any concomitant meniscal repairs in any sonnel to make autonomous decisions as to their activity level
of their patients requiring ACL reconstructions.Additionally, precludes a “wait and see” approach.They are expected to
only some of their patients were rehabilitated with an accel- participate in training and unit sporting activities unless
erated protocol with an emphasis on extension and early given specific limitations defined in a “medical profile”writ-
restoration of motion.The patients reconstructed between 8 ten by a physician or physician’s assistant.Anecdotally,we
662 Bottoni et al The American Journal of Sports Medicine
have found that those who continue to attempt to perform at 3.Beck PR, Nho SJ, Balin J, et al. Postoperative pain management after
the high level required of an active duty service member anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Knee Surg. 2004;17:18-23.
4.Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Abate JA, Fleming BC, Nichols CE.
with an ACL-deficient knee often do considerably more
Treatment of anterior cruciate ligament injuries: part I. Am J Sports
damage to their knees before their reconstruction.
Med. 2005;33:1579-1602.
The results from this study in a military population may
5.Bottoni C. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in active-duty
not be applicable to a community orthopaedic practice.The military patients. Oper Tech Sports Med. 2005;13:169-175.
captive population and relatively quick referrals allowed us 6.Bottoni C, Arciero R. Conventional meniscal repair techniques. Oper
to perform surgery acutely.Additionally,the military popu- Tech Orthop. 2000;10:194-208.
lation allowed us to adequately protect those patients in the 7.Cameron ML, Briggs KK, Steadman JR. Reproducibility and reliability
of the Outerbridge classification for grading chondral lesions of the
delayed group from resuming activities that may have
knee arthroscopically. Am J Sports Med. 2003;31:83-86.
resulted in further injury to their ACL-deficient knees.
8.Freedman KB, D’Amato MJ, Nedeff DD, Kaz A, Bach BR Jr. Arthroscopic
Another limitation is the relatively short postoperative anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a metaanalysis comparing
follow-up.However,unlike clinical outcome studies,our pri- patellar tendon and hamstring tendon autografts. Am J Sports Med.
mary outcome measure was postoperative range of motion. 2003;31:2-11.
We chose 6 months as a minimum period of follow-up.Because 9.Hantes ME, Zachos VC, Varitimidis SE, Dailiana ZH, Karachalios T,
Malizos KN. Arthroscopic meniscal repair: a comparative study
most patients return to sports at or before this time,any post-
between three different surgical techniques. Knee Surg Sports
operative motion gained by this point should not be lost
Traumatol Arthrosc. 2006;14:1232-1237.
unless another injury occurs.Although some improvement in 10.Harner CD, Irrgang JJ, Paul J, Dearwater S, Fu FH. Loss of motion
range of motion could be feasible after 6 months, it is not after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med.
likely in most cases.Shelbourne et al reported their results at 1992;20:499-506.
3 months (13 weeks) postoperatively when it was conceivable 11.Howell SM, Gittins ME, Gottlieb JE, Traina SM, Zoellner TM. The rela-
tionship between the angle of the tibial tunnel in the coronal plane and
that additional improvement could still be achieved. Using
loss of flexion and anterior laxity after anterior cruciate ligament
similar logic,laxity assessments using KT-1000 arthrometer
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 2001;29:567-574.
side-to-side measurements taken at 6 months should not
12.Hunter RE, Mastrangelo J, Freeman JR, Purnell ML, Jones RH. The
change unless reinjury occurs. impact of surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability fol-
Another difference of our study from the study of lowing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy.
Shelbourne et al was that we used autograft hamstring 1996;12:667-674.
tendons and they used autograft bone–patellar tendon– 13.Klimkiewicz JJ, Shaffer B. Meniscal surgery 2002 update: indications
and techniques for resection, repair, regeneration, and replacement.
bone grafts. The fixation techniques were also different.
Arthroscopy. 2002;18(9 Suppl 2):14-25.
However,all patients in both studies were treated with the
14.Lysholm J, Gillquist J. Evaluation of knee ligament surgery results
same graft.Therefore,the dependent variable was the tim- with special emphasis on use of a scoring scale. Am J Sports Med.
ing of the surgery. 1982;10:150-154.
Our study demonstrated that comparable knee flexion and 15.Majors RA, Woodfin B. Achieving full range of motion after anterior
extension can be achieved with either early or delayed surgi- cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 1996;24:
350-355.
cal reconstruction of a torn ACL. Our early results do not
16.Marcacci M, Zaffagnini S, Iacono F, Neri MP, Petitto A. Early versus
demonstrate any clinical differences in postoperative range
late reconstruction for anterior cruciate ligament rupture: results after
of motion, stability, or early subjective outcome measures five years of followup. Am J Sports Med. 1995;23:690-693.
between knees reconstructed acutely or those that are 17.Muneta T, Sekiya I, Yagishita K, Ogiuchi T, Yamamoto H, Shinomiya K.
delayed. Although we do not recommend that the ACL Two-bundle reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament using
should be reconstructed acutely,our study demonstrates that semitendinosus tendon with endobuttons: operative technique and
preliminary results. Arthroscopy. 1999;15:618-624.
surgery need not be delayed to obtain satisfactory clinical
18.Owings MF, Kozak LJ. Ambulatory and inpatient procedures in the
results.We believe that it is permissible to proceed with an
United States, 1996. Vital Health Stat 13. 1998;139:1-119.
ACL reconstruction soon after injury and delaying the sur-
19.Shelbourne K, Patel D. Timing of surgery in anterior cruciate ligament-
gery for some arbitrary period of time is not necessary. injured knees. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 1995;3:148-156.
20.Shelbourne KD, Johnson GE. Outpatient surgical management of
arthrofibrosis after anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Am J Sports
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Med. 1994;22:192-197.
21.Shelbourne KD, Patel DV, Adsit WS, Porter DA. Rehabilitation after
We acknowledge and thank Arthrex Inc for its unrestricted meniscal repair. Clin Sports Med. 1996;15:595-612.
research grant to assist us with study coordination and 22.Shelbourne KD, Wilckens JH, Mollabashy A, DeCarlo M.
data collection. Arthrofibrosis in acute anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the
effect of timing of reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med.
1991;19:332-336.
REFERENCES 23.Tegner Y, Lysholm J. Rating systems in the evaluation of knee liga-
ment injuries. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1985;198:43-49.
1.Bach BR Jr. Revision anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Arthroscopy. 24.Wasilewski SA, Covall DJ, Cohen S. Effect of surgical timing on
2003;19 Suppl 1:14-29. recovery and associated injuries after anterior cruciate ligament
2.Bach BR Jr, Jones GT, Sweet FA, Hager CA. Arthroscopy-assisted ante- reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 1993;21:338-342.
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction using patellar tendon substitution: 25.Williams GN, Taylor DC, Gangel TJ, Uhorchak JM, Arciero RA.
two- to four-year follow-up results. Am J Sports Med. 1994;22: Comparison of the single assessment numeric evaluation method and
758-767. the Lysholm score. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000;373:184-192.
