Full length article
Functional outcome of an early anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction in comparison to delayed: Are we waiting in
$
vain?
Rajeev Raj Manandhara,*, Karthik Chandrashekharb, Vinay Kumaraswamyc,
Santosh Sahanandd, David Rajand
aDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital, Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal
bArathana Hospital, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu, India
cDepartment of Orthopaedics, Kempegowda Institute of Medical Sciences, KR Road, VV Puram, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
dOrtho One, Orthopaedic Specialty Centre, 657, Trichy Road, Singanallur, Coimbatore-5, Tamil Nadu, India
A R T I C L E I N F O
Article history:
Received 5 September 2016
Accepted 2 March 2017
Available online 18 March 2017
Keywords:
Anterior cruciate ligament
A
reconstruction
Early
Delayed
Results
B S T R A C T
Background: Surgical techniques of ACL reconstruction (ACLR) have evolved over the past three decades
along with debate regarding timing of reconstruction. It was a widespread belief that the timing of
surgery was an important factor in determining the resulting stiffness after ACLR. Delayed rather than
early reconstruction of the ACL is the current recommended treatment since it is thought to give a better
functional outcome. However, there is no consensus in the literature regarding the optimal time of
surgical intervention. The purpose of this study was to compare the range of motion and functional
outcome in patients who underwent ACLR early with those that were delayed.
Materials and Methods: The patients were randomized into two groups; patients who underwent the
procedure within three weeks were kept in Group I (Early) and those patients who were reconstructed
after six weeks were categorized as Group II (Delayed). Hamstring grafts were used and a standard
protocol of surgery and physiotherapy was followed. The range of motion, IKDC and Tegner scores were
compared.
Results: A hundred and four patients underwent ACLR; fifty-three patients were grouped as Group I
(Early) and fifty one as Group II (Delayed). The range of motion of both groups was comparable. The IKDC
and Tegner scores were also comparable for early (Group I) ACLR and the patients who had their ACL
reconstructed after a delay of at least 6 weeks (Group II).
Conclusion: There are no clinical differences in terms of range of motion and functional results between
early and delayed ACLR.
© 2017 Delhi Orthopedic Association. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is the most commonly
injured ligament of the knee.1,2Arthroscopic reconstruction is the
usual treatment for younger athletes or those with occupational or
sporting pursuits since it restores stability and limits the
prospective for progressive degeneration and long-term instability
of the knee.3,4 Surgical techniques of ACL reconstruction
have
(ACLR)
evolved over the past three decades along with debate
regarding timing of reconstruction.5
It was a widespread belief that the timing of surgery was an
important factor in determining the resulting stiffness after
ACLR.6,7In a landmark publication, Shelbourne et al. recommended
delaying surgery for at least 3 weeks would result in considerable
decrease of arthrofibrosis.5
Delaying surgical intervention was thought to allow optimiza-
tion of pre-operative knee range of motion and recovery of
surrounding soft tissues from the initial injury potentially reducing
the incidence of post-operative arthrofibrosis and wound com-
plications.5,8The knee would have recovered from the first injury.
However, the ensuing surgery is then perceived by the body as a
“second hit” from which healing must again commence. On the
contrary, if the surgery is performed early, there is just
$ Study
one
performed at Ortho One, Orthopaedic Specialty Centre, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu, India.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: rajeevrajmanandhar@gmail.com (R.R. Manandhar),
karthikwillbe@gmail.com (K. Chandrashekhar), maildrvinay@gmail.com
(V. Kumaraswamy), sahanand@gmail.com (S. Sahanand), davidvrajan@gmail.com
(D. Rajan).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2017.03.001
0976-5662/© 2017 Delhi Orthopedic Association. All rights
Journal
reserved.
of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma 9 (2018) 163–166
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma
journa l homepage: www.e lsevier.com/locate/jcot
trauma.9 Early surgery also hastens return to sporting and work
with considerable economic consequences.
Francis et al.,10 conducted a national survey in the UK. 81%
reported that they considered the ideal time span from injury to
operation to be between 1 and 6 months, although it was
acknowledged that only 35% of ACL reconstructions are performed
within this time-frame.11
Delayed reconstruction is the current recommended treatment
since it is thought to give a better functional outcome.12 Recent
random controlled trials suggest that early surgery does not affect
post-op range of motion. Meta-analysis of 6 studies found no
difference in clinical outcome between patients who underwent
early and delayed ACL reconstruction.13 Hence, there is no
consensus in the current literature regarding the optimal time
of surgical intervention.
2. Objectives
The purpose of this study was to compare the range of motion
and functional outcome in patients undergoing arthroscopic
assisted ACL reconstruction early within 3 weeks and delayed
after 6 weeks.
3. Materials and methods
A randomized prospective study was performed on adult
patients who underwent arthroscopic assisted ACL reconstruction
from January 2014 to January 2015 for a period of one year. Patients
with ACL insufficiency with or without associated chondral
(Outerbridge I &II) injuries, meniscal injuries, which required
partial meniscectomy or debridement, were included. The patients
were randomized into two groups; patients who underwent the
procedure within three weeks were kept in Group I (Early) and
those patients who were reconstructed after six weeks were
catergorized as Group II (Delayed). The patients were randomized
into two groups on the basis of odd and even hospital numbers. The
odd numbers were placed in Group 1 (Early) and the even in Group
2 (Delayed). The prerequisite for surgery was knee flexion of at
least 120(cid:1). Ethical clearance for the study was obtained and
informed consent was taken from all patients.
All patients underwent physiotherapy, and surgery in the early
group was performed as soon as flexion of 120(cid:1)was achieved. The
patients in the delayed group were placed on a physiotherapy
program where the quadriceps was strengthened and the range of
motion restored to 120(cid:1)of flexion and they were operated after 6
weeks. Those patients who had undergone previous knee surgery,
multi ligament injuries, associated chondral injuries > Grade III, IV
(Outerbridge classification), associated meniscal injuries requiring
repair and patients in whom BPTB and Quadriceps grafts were used
were excluded.
3.1. Operative technique
An examination under anaesthesia was performed to confirm
the findings and an anterolateral parapatellar viewing portal and
accessory anteromedial parapatellar working portals were made.
Diagnostic arthroscopy was done. The hamstring graft was then
harvested making a vertical incision below and medial to the tibial
tuberosity in between the tibial tuberosity and the medial tibial
flare. After the hamstring tendons were palpated the skin was
incised, the fat was pushed away using a gauze piece and the
sartorius fascia was visualized. A transverse incision was made in
the fascia in between the gracilis and semitendinosis tendons and
the semitendinosis was isolated initially using a 90(cid:1) right angled
artery forceps. The tendon was removed from its insertion on the
tibia and held by a luggage tag suture.14 A closed end
stripper
tendon
was used to strip the tendon. Then the gracilis was
removed. Ethibond no 2 whipstitches were applied at the ends and
a quadrupled graft construct was made.
The femoral tunnel was made using the transportal technique.
The knee was placed in about 130(cid:1)of flexion. The transportal guide
wire was placed 30–45(cid:1)in the sagittal plane and horizontal to the
floor via the accessory anteromedial portal.15 Then a 4.5 mm
cannulated drill was used to drill a tunnel and the length was
measured. Then the femoral tunnel was made larger as needed
according to the width of the graft with flower head tipped drills.
The entrance to the femoral tunnel was widened and smoothened
to help graft passage with a curette and rasp.
The tibial tunnel was made using the ACL jig. The graft was
passed and fixed proximally with CL loop endobutton. Impinge-
ment was checked and cyclical loading done and then distal
fixation was done with a bioscrew. Placement of the screw was
confirmed under arthroscopic guidance, the tension in the
reconstructed ligament was checked using a probe and Lachman
test.
The knee was placed in a knee brace. Mobilization and partial
weight bearing with a pair of crutches as tolerated was started the
next day, but their range of motion was restricted to 0–90(cid:1) of
flexion for the first three weeks. The patients were discharged on
the second post-operative day. Partial weight bearing with a pair of
crutches was advised for two weeks. After two weeks, the operated
side crutch was removed. Recumbent cycling was started at three
weeks and the second crutch was discontinued to be used in
crowded places if necessary. Half squats were started. Slow
walking and jogging was allowed and speed and duration was
increased.
After three months, swimming and side running progressing to
zig zag running was advised. Single leg presses and single half
squats were also taught. The balance training was started at the
end of the fourth month, using wobble board. Plyometrics and skill
exercises were taught at the fifth month. The patient was
encouraged to start playing gradually after six months. The
patients were followed up at intervals of three, six and twelve
weeks postoperatively, then at six months and thereafter at six-
monthly intervals.
Passive range of motion was measured and compared with the
opposite knee. A physiotherapist performed the range of motion
assessments using a goniometer. The heel was elevated on a
support to assess the total amount of extension. The final
assessment was carried out on patients who had completed six
months of their rehabilitation. Their pre-operative and present
IKDC (International Knee Documentation Committee) and Tegner
scores and range of motion were compared.
Statistical analysis was done using SPSS version 20. The mean
pre-operative and post-operative IKDC and Tegner scores were
compared using paired samples t-test. The mean scores in the two
groups at the final assessment at 6 months were compared using
independent samples t-test. A p value of less than 0.05 was
considered to be statistically significant.
4. Results
A total of one hundred and ten patients underwent ACLR from
January 2014 to January 2015. Six patients were lost to follow up
and could not be contacted and were excluded from the study. Of
the remaining hundred and four patients, fifty-three patients were
grouped as Group I (Early) and fifty-one as Group II (Delayed). The
time period from injury to surgery was 11.20 days (Range: 4-
21 days) in Group I and 48 days (Range: 42-60 days) in Group II. The
mean age was 30 years (Range: 18–55 years).
There were 21 female and 83 male patients. The right side was
involved in 64 and left in 40 patients. The commonest mode
164
of
R.R. Manandhar et al. / Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma 9 (2018) 163–166
injury was sports related in 73 patients (70.19%) followed by road
traffic accidents (26 patients). The patients were young profes-
sionals leading active lives employed in various professions.
In Group I, 22 patients had meniscal injuries: 12 involving the
lateral meniscus and 6 the medial meniscus and in four patients
both menisci were involved. In Group II, 34 patients had meniscal
tears, 8 involving the lateral meniscus, 20 involving medial
meniscus and in 6 patients both were torn (Table 1). All identified
tears were either debrided or underwent partial excision. The
incidence of chondral injuries was higher in Group II (28 patients)
compared to Group I (10 patients).
The range of motion of both groups was comparable. The
amount of flexion following surgery was reduced in both groups
for measurements made in the first three months (Table 2). There
was no statistical difference between the two groups. The pre-
operative and post-operative IKDC and Tegner scores were
recorded. The final assessment was performed at 6 months and
the final IKDC and Tegner scores were compared (Table 3).
The mean IKDC score in GI (Early) was 69.68 and in GII
(Delayed) was 67.14, the difference not being statistically signifi-
cant (p = 0.077). The mean Tegner activity level scale in GI was 4.15
and in GII was 3.72, difference was not statistically significant
(p = 0.064). Thus, the functional outcome after early ACL recon-
struction and delayed ACL reconstruction is comparable based on
the IKDC score and Tegner activity score.
One patient in Group I had post-operative infection which
resolved after daily dressings and a course of oral antibiotics.
5. Discussion
The timing of reconstruction after an ACL injury is a subject of
extensive debate. The assumption that early reconstruction would
lead to an increased incidence of arthrofibrosis was widespread
after a landmark paper published by Shelbourne et al.,5 where a
retrospective review of 169 patients was performed. The patients
were followed for 13 weeks, and three groups were made on the
basis of time from injury to surgery. Group I was less than 8 days,
Group II from 8 to 21 days and Group III more than 21 days. They
found a significant increase of arthrofibrosis in patients recon-
structed acutely (Group I) when compared with those after 3weeks
(Group III). They also reported that an accelerated rehabilitation
program resulted in significantly less arthrofibrosis in group II
patients than when a slower rehabilitation protocol was employed.
An ipsilateral bone tendon-bone autograft inserted via a mini open,
two incision technique was employed. The graft was held with
heavy sutures tied over a polypropylene ligament button. In
contrast, we used an autograft hamstring via a single-incision
arthroscopic technique and graft was fixed with CL loop
endobutton on the femur and bioscrew in the tibia following a
modern operative technique. Theoretically, the additional trauma
from the arthrotomy in the mini open technique could have
contributed to the increased arthrofibrosis reported in their study.9
Hunter et al.16conducted a prospective study to determine the
impact of surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability
following ACLR. 185 patients were entered into four separate
groups based on the time interval from injury to surgery. No
arthrotomy or surgical intervention for other ligamentous
structures was performed. No statistical difference in
of
restoration
extension or flexion in any group at any time point was found.
They concluded that by using modern arthroscopic surgical
techniques and an aggressive postoperative physical therapy
protocol, motion and stability can be restored in a high percentage
of patients and that surgical success is independent of the timing of
surgery.
Many studies have investigated the effect of the timing of
surgical reconstruction on patient outcomes. There is significant
heterogeneity in terms of surgical technique, graft material, graft
fixation devices, rehabilitation protocols and outcomes measured.
This has made it difficult to clearly identify the isolated effect of
time to surgery on the risk of postoperative stiffness.13Our study
has uniformity in terms of surgical technique, graft material,
fixation devices and rehabilitation protocol and outcomes meas-
ures.
In our study, the amount of flexion following surgery was
reduced in both groups for the first three months. Almekinders and
colleagues17 studied 70 adults who underwent ACLR using bone
patella tendon bone autograft. Patients who underwent recon-
struction less than one month from injury had limitations in knee
range of motion early in rehabilitation; however, after one year,
there was no difference in motion between patients who
underwent early or delayed surgery.
The meniscal and chondral injuries were found in both groups
but they were more in the delayed group. Several authors have
reported an increased risk of developing meniscal and chondral
lesions with the lengthening of time from injury to surgery.18The
odds for a cartilage lesion increased by nearly 1% for each month
that elapsed from the time of injury till surgery and that cartilage
lesions were nearly twice as frequent if there was a concurrent
meniscal tear and vice versa.19 Restoring knee stability would
minimize the risk of further meniscal and chondral damage which
may lead to premature degenerative joint changes.
There appears to be a lack of consensus regarding the
definitions of early and delayed ACLR. Various studies have used
their own definition of early and delayed. Church and Keating used
12 months as a marker to distinguish between early and delayed.
Bottoni et al9 defined early reconstruction as occurring at the
earliest possible date from injury and delayed reconstruction as a
minimum of 6 weeks from the date of injury. In our study the two
groups have been constructed according to the landmark paper
published by Shelbourne.
Post-operative rehabilitation has changed substantially as
surgical techniques have improved. The modern arthroscopic
assisted transportal ACL reconstruction technique utilized allowed
accelerated rehabilitation with emphasis on early mobilization,
weight bearing and lower extremity strength training. There was
no difference in the range of motion in between our two groups
although both groups had reduced flexion for the first
Table
three
months.
1
Meniscal tears: Total no. 56 patients.
Group Medial meniscus Lateral meniscus Both Total
GI (Early) 6 12 4 22
GII (Delayed) 20 8 6
Table
34
2
Post- op Range of motion.
Group 3 weeks 6 weeks 12 weeks 24 weeks
GI (Early) 10–80 6–100 2–120 (cid:3)1 to 134
GII (Delayed) 8–82 5–110 2–122 (cid:3)1 to 135
Table 3
Final IKDC and Tegner scores at 6 months.
Scores GI (Early) GII (Delayed) P value
IKDC 69.68 (cid:4) 8.14 67.14 (cid:4) 6.08 0.077
Tegner 4.15 (cid:4) 1.45 3.72 (cid:4) 1.34
R.R.
0.064
Manandhar et al. / Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma 9 (2018) 163–166 165
In our study, as the transportal technique was used, physio-
therapy was advised and the knee had to achieve a pre-operative
flexion of 120(cid:1). Mayr et al.,20 found evidence that preoperative
synovitis of the knee with limited range of motion was highly
significant in terms of occurrence of arthrofibrosis after ACLR. 70%
of their patients, who had a swollen, inflamed knee at the time of
reconstruction developed postoperative arthrofibrosis. Thus, the
interval between knee trauma and ACL reconstruction was not the
determining factor.
6. Conclusion
The results of early and delayed arthroscopic ACLR using
hamstring autograft are comparable. There are no clinical differ-
ences in terms of range of motion and functional results. One can
proceed with the surgery early rather than waiting and delaying
surgery once patient has regained 120(cid:1) of knee flexion.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Dr Umesh Aryal and Dr Krishna Khanal for
their support with the statistical data management and prepara-
tion for the study
References
1. Clayton RA, Court-Brown CM. The epidemiology of musculoskeletal tendinous
and ligamentous injuries. Injury. 2008;39:1338–1344.
2. Meighan AS, Keating JF, Will E. Outcome after reconstruction of the anterior
cruciate ligament in athletic patients. A comparison of early versus delayed
surgery. J Bone Joint Surg. 2003;85-B:521–524.
3. Amis AA, Dawkins GP. Functional anatomy of the anterior cruciate ligament.
Fibre bundle actions related to ligament replacements and injuries. J Bone Joint
Surg. 1991;73-B:260–267.
4. Jomha NM, Borton DC, Clingeleffer AJ, Pinczewski LA. Long term osteoarthritic
changes in anterior cruciate ligament reconstructed knees. Clin Orthop Relat
Res.
5.
1999;358:188–193.
Shelbourne KD, Wilckens JH, Mollabashy A, Decarlos M. Arthrofibrosis in acute
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the effect of timing of
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med. 1991;19:332–336.
6. Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Abate JA, Fleming BC, Nichols CE. Treatment of
anterior cruciate ligament injuries: part I. Am J Sports Med. 2005;33:1579–
1602.
7. Magit D, Wolff A, Sutton K, Medvecky MJ. Arthrofibrosis of the knee. J Am Acad
Orthop Surg. 2007;15:682–694.
8. Mohtadi NG, Webster-Bogaert S, Fowler PJ. Limitation of motion following
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. A case–control study. Am J Sports
Med. 1991;19:620–625.
9. Bottoni CR, Liddell TR, Trainor TJ, Freccero DM, Lindell KK. Postoperative range
of motion following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using autograft
hamstrings: a prospective, randomized clinical trial of early versus delayed
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 2008;36:656–662.
10. Francis A, Thomas RWM, McGregor A. Anterior cruciate ligament rupture:
reconstruction surgery and rehabilitation: a nation-wide survey of current
practice. Knee. 2001;8:13–18.
11. Smith TO, Davies L, Hing CB. Early versus delayed surgery for anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Knee Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2010;18:304–311.
12. Raviraj A, Anand A, Kodikal G, Chandrashekar M, Pai S. A comparison of early
and delayed arthroscopically-assisted reconstruction of the anterior cruciate
ligament using hamstring autograft. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010;92:521–526.
13. Kwok CS, Harrison T, Servant C. The optimal timing for anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction with respect to the risk of postoperative stiffness.
Arthroscopy. 2013;29(3):556–565.
14. Woodacre T, Marshall M, Hockings M. Luggage tag technique for preparation of
anterior cruciate ligament grafts. Techn Knee Surg. 2011;10(4):231.
15. Iyyampillai G, Raman ET, Rajan DV, Krishnamoorthy A, Sahanand S.
Determinants of femoral tunnel length in anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction: CT analysis of the influence of tunnel orientation on the
length. Knee Surg Relat Res. 2013;25(4):207–214.
16. Hunter RE, Mastrangelo J, Freeman JR, Purnell ML, Jones RH. The impact of
surgical timing on postoperative motion and stability following anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy. 1996;12(6):667–674.
17. Almekinders LC, Moore T, Freedman D, Taft TN. Postoperative problems
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc. 1995;3(2):78–82.
18. Brambilla L, Pulici L, Carimati G, et al. Prevalence of associated lesions in
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: correlation with surgical timing
and with patient age, sex, and body mass index. Am J Sports Med. 2015;43
(12):2966–2973.
19. Granan LP, Bahr R, Lie SA, Engebretsen L. Timing of anterior cruciate ligament
reconstructive surgery and risk of cartilage lesions and meniscal tears. Am J
Sports Med. 2009;37(5):955–961.
20. Mayr HO, Weig TG, Plitz W. Arthrofibrosis following ACL reconstruction –
reasons and outcome. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg.
166
2004;124:518–522.
R.R. Manandhar et al. / Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma 9 (2018) 163–166
