Outcome after reconstruction of the anterior
cruciate ligament in athletic patients
A COMPARISON OF EARLY VERSUS DELAYED SURGERY
A. A. S. Meighan, J. F. Keating, E. Will
From the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Scotland
We randomised 31 patients with acute tears of the Table I. The inclusion criteria
for entry into the study
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) to receive either
comparing the outcome after
early (within 2 weeks) or delayed (8 to 12 weeks) either early or delayed
reconstruction using a quadruple hamstring graft in reconstruction of the ACL
order to determine if there was any functional Acute ACL tear seen within 10
advantage to early reconstruction. Outcome measures days of injury
Athletically active
included return of knee movement, muscle
Less than 35 years of age
dynamometry, International Knee Documentation
No associated injury to the
Committee (IKDC) scores and Tegner activity levels. medial collateral ligament
Two cases of symptomatic deep-venous thrombosis No previous ligament injury
No previous meniscal tear
occurred in the early group. The mean range of
movement was significantly greater at two weeks in the
delayed group. Quadriceps muscle power was injuries because of instability of the knee.5 Currently, many
significantly better in the delayed group at 12 weeks (p < surgeons prefer to treat injuries of the ACL with an initial
0.05). These trends were evident at later time points, but period of rehabilitation followed by reconstruction two
were not statistically significant. One patient in each months or more after the injury.4,6
group had clinically significant knee stiffness at 52 Previous studies have suggested that the risk of joint
weeks. IKDC scores and Tegner activity levels were not stiffness is greatest if the surgery is carried out two to eight
significantly different at 52 weeks. We conclude that weeks after injury.2 It has been proposed that early recon-
there is no functional advantage to be gained by early struction, within a week of injury, will minimise the risk of
reconstruction of the ACL. stiffness. Immediate reconstruction in suitable patients may
have other advantages, such as a reduction in the overall
J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 2003;85-B:521-4.
Received 7 August 2002; Accepted after revision 30 January 2003 rehabilitation period and an earlier return to sporting and
occupational activities.7 On this basis many surgeons now
carry out an immediate reconstruction of the ACL on ath-
Postoperative stiffness of the knee is a well-recognised letic patients.5,8 Although modern methods of reconstruc-
complication of reconstruction of the anterior cruciate liga- tion with minimally invasive techniques and accelerated
ment (ACL).1-3 In particular, early reconstruction after tears rehabilitation appear to have reduced the risks associated
of the ACL has been associated with an increased incidence with early reconstruction, there is limited evidence in the lit-
of stiffness and prolonged rehabilitation.4 A delay in surgi- erature to support this approach. Our aim in this prospec-
cal reconstruction also has a potential morbidity, such as tive, randomised study therefore was to compare the
inability to return to employment or sporting activities, as functional outcome of early and delayed reconstruction of
well as an increased risk of meniscal damage from further the ACL in order to determine whether there was an advan-
tage to early reconstruction.
Patients and Methods
A. A. S. Meighan, FRCS (Trauma & Orth), Knee Fellow We randomised 31 patients with acute tears of the ACL by
J. F. Keating, FRCS (Trauma & Orth), Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon selection of an envelope to either an early, within two weeks
E. Will, MCSP, Research Physiotherapist
Department of Orthopaedic Trauma, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Lauris- (group I), or delayed reconstruction, between 8 and 12
ton Place, Edinburgh EH3 9YW, UK. weeks (group II). The inclusion criteria are given in Table I.
Correspondence should be sent to Mr J. F. Keating. All patients were athletically active in a sport, which was
©2003 British Editorial Society of Bone and Joint Surgery considered likely to cause symptomatic instability in a knee
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.85B4.13743 $2.00 which was ACL-deficient. The activity rating of Tegner and
VOL. 85-B, No. 4, MAY 2003 521
522 A. A. S. MEIGHAN, J. F. KEATING, E. WILL
Table II. The change in Tegner activity 60
rating of patients before injury and at the
52-week follow-up after reconstruction of
50 the ACL
Tegner Before injury At 52 weeks 40
activity (number of (number of
level patients) patients)
30
2 0 1
5 0 3 20
6 2 7
7 16 10 10
8 2 2
9 9 6
0
10 2 2 2 week 6 week 3 month 6 month 1 year
Time
Table III. Range of knee movement (degrees) for the
early (group I) and late (group II) groups, 12 weeks after
reconstruction of the ACL
Follow-up
(weeks) Group I Group II
2 11 to 76* 8 to 93*
6 4 to 112 2 to 121
12 2 to 123 2 to 128
24 0 to 131 -1 to 131 and 52 weeks after operation. The range of knee movement
52 -2 to 131 -2 to 131 was measured with a long-arm goniometer. There was an
* significant, p <0.05 active warm-up period before each test, followed by meas-
urements of flexion and extension at 180˚/second. The phys-
Lysholm9 is given in Table II. There were 28 men and three iotherapist repeated the tests ten times using standardised
women with a mean age of 21 years (15 to 35). Most rup- commands. The values obtained in the injured limb were
tures had occurred while playing football (18 patients), compared with those of the uninjured side, which was con-
rugby (6 patients) and basketball (4 patients). sidered to be normal for that patient. We expressed the
All the patients were seen at a specialist soft-tissue knee results for the injured knee as a percentage loss when com-
injury clinic between October 1996 and May 2000. The pared with the normal side. The IKDC score assessed func-
diagnosis was made on the basis of an acute haemarthrosis tional outcome.10,11
associated with clinical signs of laxity of the ACL. Patients Statistical analysis. A comparison of means was carried
with associated medial collateral ligament (MCL) sprains out by Student’s t-test. For non-parametric data we used the
were excluded. Group I (13 patients) had an early recon- Mann-Whitney U test for unpaired data and the Wilcoxon
struction carried out within two weeks. Group II (18 test for paired comparisons.
patients) had preoperative physiotherapy to restore knee
movement and underwent reconstruction between eight and
Results
12 weeks after injury.
We confirmed the diagnosis at the time of surgery and Early postoperative outcome. The mean tourniquet time
the ACL was reconstructed with a quadruple hamstring graft for group I was 67 minutes compared with 74 minutes for
inserted by an arthroscopically-assisted, single-incision group II (p = 0.3). Meniscal tears were identified in three
technique. On the femoral side an Endobutton secured the patients in group I and in four in group II. The presence of a
graft and on the tibial side a soft-tissue interference screw. meniscal tear was not associated with a poorer outcome
The patients in both groups underwent an identical post- during the period of study. The reconstruction failed in one
operative programme of accelerated rehabilitation. This patient in group II shortly after the 12-week assessment. He
concentrated particularly on the management of the soft- subsequently underwent a revision reconstruction and his
tissue swelling, the recovery of full extension of the knee data are not included beyond the 12-week assessment. In
and muscle control, and on proprioception exercises. group I there was one superficial wound infection and two
All patients were followed up for one year and none was patients developed a symptomatic deep-vein thrombosis and
lost to follow-up. Clinical assessments were made before required anticoagulation.
operation and after surgery at two, six, 12, 24, and 52 Range of movement. The range of flexion was reduced in
weeks. Any postoperative complications were recorded. A group I for all measurements made in the first 12 weeks
research physiotherapist (EW), blinded to the randomisa- after surgery (Table III). This difference was significant at
tion, carried out isokinetic muscle testing of the quadriceps two weeks. The trend was evident throughout the period of
and hamstring muscles with a dynamometer (Biodex system follow-up, although the differences were most apparent
2; Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, New York) at 12, 24 during the first three months (Fig. 1). There was no signifi-
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
)%(
tnemevom
fo
ssoL
Early
Late
Fig. 1
Percentage loss of movement for early and late ACL-reconstructed knees
compared with the uninjured side. The range of knee movement was better
at all time points for those patients who underwent a delayed reconstruction
of the ACL.
OUTCOME AFTER RECONSTRUCTION OF THE ANTERIOR CRUCIATE LIGAMENT IN ATHLETIC PATIENTS 523
Table IV. Total work deficit, mean quadriceps power deficit and peak torque deficit of the
quadriceps, expressed as a percentage of the uninjured side. The results at 12 weeks were
significantly better in those patients who had undergone a delayed reconstruction (p < 0.05)
Work Power Torque
Follow-up
(weeks) Group I Group II Group I Group II Group I Group II
12 36* 22* 36* 23* 35 24
24 16 9 13 7 19 11
52 11 4 10 4 13 4
*significant, p <0.05
cant difference in the loss of extension of the knee between This is the first randomised comparison of early and
the two groups at any stage. At the final follow-up (52 delayed reconstruction of the ACL using objective outcome
weeks) the mean range of movement in both groups was the assessments. The patients were carefully selected in order to
same. Clinically significant residual stiffness (fixed flexion exclude patients with associated sprains of the medial col-
deformity >5˚, flexion <120˚) was present in one patient in lateral ligament and previous problems in the knee. All
each group. The patient in group II subsequently underwent patients underwent identical surgical treatment and acceler-
a successful arthrolysis. ated postoperative rehabilitation and objective assessments
Muscle function. The mean quadriceps power and total were undertaken by a research assistant who was blinded to
work were reduced in group I at all measurement intervals the randomisation. The main disadvantage of the study, the
(Table IV). This trend continued for 52 weeks but the differ- small sample size, is mainly due to the pattern of presenta-
ences were only significant at 12 weeks (p < 0.03). Ham- tion. Restrictions in access to acute orthopaedic services and
string power, torque and total work were reduced at 12 stringent inclusion criteria contributed to the difficulty of
weeks in group I. The difference was not significant. The recruiting larger numbers of patients.
results after 12 weeks for the hamstrings were similar in Other studies have investigated the risks of immediate
both groups. or very early reconstruction of the ACL. Shelbourne and
Functional outcome. There were no differences in the Foulk12 found a delayed return of quadriceps strength in
IKDC scores at 52 weeks. There were two abnormal results patients who elected to have an early reconstruction and a
in group I. One patient had a painful tibial fixation screw slower progress to sport-specific rehabilitation exercises.
which impaired function at one year. This was subsequently An increased incidence of arthrofibrosis was also reported
removed. The other had troublesome knee stiffness (range if the reconstruction was carried out within one week of
of movement 10˚ to 122˚). He declined further surgical injury.4 They therefore recommended that surgery be
treatment. In group II there were three abnormal results. delayed by at least three weeks, and suggested introducing
One patient had a significant reinjury and ruptured the ACL an accelerated postoperative rehabilitation programme to
graft. Another complained of subjective instability although reduce knee stiffness. Several authors have found similar
the graft was intact. The third had persistent knee stiffness results, with an increase in arthrofibrosis and a decrease in
(range of movement 5˚ to 120˚) and underwent an arthro- quadriceps strength after an acute reconstruction.2,13
lysis, which was successful in restoring movement. These studies were retrospective, included a variety of lig-
The Tegner activity scores were reduced for the whole ament injuries and surgical techniques, and had restrictive
study group when compared with their preinjury levels postoperative rehabilitation regimes. Accelerated proto-
(Table II; p < 0.002) with no differences between groups I cols of knee rehabilitation with early knee movement after
and II. reconstruction of the ACL are now common and not asso-
ciated with an increase in complications or morbidity.1
Discussion This has led to the widespread practice of early reconstruc-
tion on the basis that it may shorten rehabilitation and
We have found no evidence to suggest that an early recon- allow an earlier return to the preinjury level of muscle
struction is of benefit to athletic individuals with an acute function and sporting activity, as well as an economic
rupture of the ACL. The movement returns more slowly and advantage.7
the recovery of muscle function is delayed after an early Karlsson et al5 found that reconstruction between two
reconstruction. However, one year after surgery there was and 12 weeks after injury resulted in a higher activity level
no difference between early and delayed reconstruction in for competitive athletes. There was also a decrease in
terms of muscle function, range of movement and func- meniscal damage when compared with delayed surgery.
tional outcome. There was an increased rate of complica- Other authors have found no differences in function or
tions in the early group with one patient having stiffness of strength tests relative to the timing of surgery.5,7,8 These
the knee and two having clinically significant deep-vein findings disagree with our results and those of Shelbourne et
thromboses. There was no difference in the incidence of al,4 in which recovery of muscle function was slower in the
meniscal tears between the two groups. early reconstruction group.
VOL. 85-B, No. 4, MAY 2003
524 A. A. S. MEIGHAN, J. F. KEATING, E. WILL
We therefore conclude that there is no advantage in 5.Karlsson J, Kartus J, Magnusson L, et al. Subacute versus delayed
early reconstruction for isolated tears of the ACL and that reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament in the competitive ath-
lete. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 1999;7:146-51.
this is associated with an increased rate of complications.
6.Peterson W, Laperell H. Combined injuries of the medial collateral lig-
Delayed surgery is associated with a more rapid return of ament and the anterior cruciate ligament: early ACL reconstruction ver-
sus late ACL reconstruction. Arch Orth Tr Surg 1999;119:258-62.
movement and muscle function. In addition, a delay in sur-
7.Berbig R, Rillman P. Timing of the surgery of rupture of the anterior
gical intervention allows the surgeon time to assess more
cruciate ligament: effects of acute or delayed surgery on arthrofibrosis
carefully a patient’s suitability for reconstruction of the rate and work disability. Unfallchirurg 2000;103:726-30.
ACL. 8.Jarvela T, Nyyssonen M, Kannus P, Paakala T, Jarvinen M. Bone-
patellar tendon-bone reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament: a
long-term comparison of early and late repair. Int Orthop 1999;23:227-
No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a com-
31.
mercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.
9.Tegner Y, Lysholm J. Rating systems in the evaluation of knee ligament
injuries. Clin Orthop 1985;198:43-9.
References
10.Hefti F, Muller W, Jakob RP, Staubli HU. Evaluation of knee ligament
injuries with the IKDC form. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
1.Noyes FR, Mangine RE, Barber S. Early knee motion after open and 1993;1:226-34.
arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med
11.Risberg MA, Holm I, Steen H, Beynnon BD. Sensitivity to changes
1987;15:149-60.
over time for the IKDC form, the Lysholm score, and the Cincinnati
2.Mohtadi NGH, Webster-Bogaert S, Fowler PJ. Limitation of motion knee score: a prospective study of 120 ACL reconstructed patients with
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a case control study. a 2-year follow-up. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 1999;7:152-9.
Am J Sports Med 1991;19:620-4.
12.Shelbourne KD, Foulk DA. Timing of surgery in acute anterior cruci-
3.Hughston JC. Complications of anterior cruciate ligament surgery. ate ligament tears on the return of quadriceps muscle strength after
Orthop Clin North Am 1985;16:237-40. reconstruction using an autogenous patellar tendon grafts. Am J Sports
4.Shelbourne K, Wilckens JH, Mollabashy A, DeCarlo M. Arthro- Med 1995;23:686-9.
fibrosis in acute anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: the effect of 13.Wasilewski SA, Covall DJ, Cohen S. Effect of surgical timing on
timing of reconstruction and rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med recovery and associated injuries after anterior cruciate ligament recon-
1991;19:332-6. struction. Am J Sports Med 1993;21:338-42.
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
