Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233
DOI10.1186/s13063-016-1353-x
STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
Mediterranean versus vegetarian diet for
cardiovascular disease prevention (the
CARDIVEG study): study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial
Francesco Sofi1,2,3*, Monica Dinu1, Giuditta Pagliai1, Francesca Cesari1,4, Rossella Marcucci1,4
and Alessandro Casini1,2
Abstract
Background: Nutrition is able to alter the cardiovascular health of the general population. However, theoptimal
dietary strategy for cardiovascular disease preventionis still far from being defined. Mediterraneanand vegetarian
diets are thosereporting thegreatest grade of evidence intheliterature,but noexperimental studies comparing
thesetwo dietary patternsare available.
Methods/design: This is anopen randomizedcrossover clinical trial including healthy subjects with a low-to-
medium cardiovascular risk profile, characterizedby being overweight and bythepresence of atleast an additional
metabolic risk factor (abdominalobesity, high total cholesterol, highLDL cholesterol, hightriglycerides, impaired
glucose fasting levels) but freefrom medications.A total of 100 subjects will be included and randomly assigned to
two groups: Mediterranean calorie-restricted diet (n=50) and vegetarian calorie-restricted diet (n=50).The
intervention phases will last 3 months each, and atthe end ofinterventionphase Ithegroups will be crossed over.
The two diets will be isocaloric and of three different sizes (1400 –1600 –1800 kcal/day),according to specific
energy requirements.Adherenceto the dietary intervention will be establishedthrough questionnaires and 24-h
dietary recall. Anthropometric measurements, body composition,blood samples and stool samples will be obtained
from each participant atthe beginning and atthe end ofeach interventionphase. The primary outcome measure
will be change in weightfrom baseline. The secondary outcome measures will be variations of anthropometricand
bioelectrical impedance variablesas well as traditional and innovativecardiovascular biomarkers.
Discussion: Despite allthedata supporting theefficacy of Mediterranean and vegetarian diets onthe prevention
ofcardiovascular diseases, nostudies have directlycompared these two dietary profiles. The trial will testwhether
thereare statistically significant differencesbetween thesedietary profiles inreducing thecardiovascular risk burden
for thegeneralpopulation.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02641834
Keywords: Diet, Prevention, Cardiovascular disease, Mediterranean, Vegetarian
*Correspondence:francesco.sofi@unifi.it
1DepartmentofExperimentalandClinicalMedicine,SchoolofHumanHealth
Sciences,UniversityofFlorence,LargoBrambilla3,50134Florence,Italy
2UnitofClinicalNutrition,CareggiUniversityHospital,Florence,Italy
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©2016Sofietal.OpenAccessThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0
InternationalLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedyougiveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinkto
theCreativeCommonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomainDedicationwaiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,unlessotherwisestated.
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page2of8
Background systematic review with a meta-analysis on more than
Nutrition is able to substantially alter the health status 120,000 vegetarians, showing that adherence to a vege-
of the general population [1]. In industrialized countries tarian dietary pattern helps to determine, among case-
the most important association between diet and health control studies, lower levels of the most important risk
is the relationship with cardiovascular disease, the lead- factor for chronic disease, along with a reduced risk of
ing cause of death and disability worldwide. Therefore, occurrence for ischemic heart disease (–25 %) when co-
the ability to identify with certainty the relationship be- hort prospectivestudieswere taken intoaccount[10].
tween diet and cardiovascular disease appears to be a Despite all these findings, however, to the best of our
key element in the implementation of specific primary knowledge, no randomized controlled trial that com-
prevention strategies [2]. Recent studies have focussed pares, in the same group of patients, the efficacy of nu-
their interest on the impact of a whole dietary approach tritional interventions based on Mediterranean and
rather than on isolating single nutrients on the occur- vegetarian dietary patterns is available in the literature.
rence of cardiovascular disease; it is recognized that ana- To date, it is unclear whether the supposed health bene-
lyses of single nutrients ignore the important and fits for vegetarians can be attributed to the absence of
complex interactions between components of a diet and, meat in the diet, to the increased consumption of par-
more importantly, ignore the fact that people do not eat ticular food component(s), to the pattern of foods eaten
isolated nutrients [3, 4]. However, an optimal dietary within the vegetarian diet or to other healthy lifestyle
strategy for the prevention of cardiovascular disease has componentsoften associated withvegetarianism.
notbeen found[5]. Hence, we aimed to design this randomized, open,
Several models of diet have been imposed on public crossover clinical trial that will test whether there is a
attention, but those that have received the most interest difference between a vegetarian calorie-restricted diet
are the Mediterranean and vegetarian diets [6, 7]. These and a Mediterranean calorie-restricted diet in reducing
dietarypatternsseemtoexertprotectiveeffectsonblood total weight and ameliorating the cardiovascular risk
pressure,lipidprofiles,cardiovasculardiseasesandmeta- profile ofaclinicallyhealthygroupofsubjects.
bolic parameters.
The term Mediterranean diet has been widely used to Methods/design
describe the traditional dietary habits of people in Crete, Studydesignandsetting
South Italy and other Mediterranean countries during The randomized, open, crossover clinical trial will be
the decade of the 1960s. This dietary pattern is charac- conducted at the Unit of Clinical Nutrition of the
terized by plentiful plant-derived foods (fruits, vegeta- Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy. A crossover
bles, breads, other forms of cereals, beans, nuts and design will be implemented to allow comparison of the
seeds), olive oil as the principal source of fat, moderate vegetarian and Mediterranean diets within the same in-
amounts of dairy products (mainly cheese and yogurt), dividual. Participants will act as their own controls in
low-to-moderateamountsoffishandmeatandamoder- crossover studies, so individual differences will be con-
ate consumption, usually with meals. Since the results of trolled for, making the error variance smaller and subse-
the first data from the Seven Countries Study, several quently reducing the sample size required to find a
studies in different populations have established a bene- significant effect due to increased statistical power. This
ficial role for the main components of the Mediterra- design will also be adopted in an effort to minimize at-
nean diet on the occurrence of cardiovascular and trition and to maximize participant interest and compli-
chronic degenerative diseases [8]. Recently, a meta- ance by enabling each participant to experience both
analysisconductedbyourgrouphasrevealed,inapopu- diet conditions. The study design follows the SPIRIT
lation of more than 2 million people, that a strict adher- guidelines(seeAdditionalfiles 1and2).
ence to a Mediterranean dietary pattern is associated
with a significant improvement in health status, as seen Eligibilitycriteria
by a significant reduction in overall mortality (10 %) and Eligible participants will be clinically healthy subjects
incidence of and/or mortality from cardiovascular dis- (aged 18–75 years) with a low-to-medium cardiovascular
eases(9%)[9]. risk profile (1–5 % according to the guidelines of the
A vegetarian diet is a dietary profile characterized by European Society of Cardiology) [11], determined by be-
abstention from consuming meat and meat products, ing overweight (body mass index >25.1 kg/m2) and by
poultry, seafood and flesh from any other animal. In the the concomitantpresenceofatleastoneofthefollowing
past few decades, some case-control and cohort pro- criteria:
spective studies reported beneficial effects of this dietary
profile on the occurrence of cardiovascular and neoplas- (cid:1) Waistcircumference>88 cm(women) or>102cm
tic disease. Very recently, our group conducted a (men)
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page3of8
(cid:1) Circulatinglevelsoftotalcholesterol>190mg/dL, per day for men. Participants will be asked not to alter
notondrugtreatment(measurednomore than theirexercisehabitsduringthestudy.
3monthspriortothe startofthestudy) Standardized baseline assessment for both groups will
(cid:1) CirculatinglevelsofLDLcholesterol>115mg/dL, include a questionnaire regarding demographic informa-
notondrugtreatment(measurednomore than tion, risk factors and co-morbidities. Moreover, at the
3monthspriortothe startofthestudy) baseline visit, participants will be educated about the
(cid:1) Circulatinglevelsoftriglycerides>150mg/dL,not aims and methods of the clinical trial. The subjects who
ondrugtreatment(measurednomore than agree to participate in the study, after signing the in-
3monthspriortothe startofthestudy) formed consent, will be included and randomly divided
(cid:1) Circulatinglevelsoffastingblood glucose>110 mg/ into two groups, each assigned to consume first either
dLbut<126 mg/dL,notondrugtreatment the vegetarian or Mediterranean diet. Each participant,
(measured nomore than3monthspriortothe start before starting, needs to complete a 3-day dietary record
ofthestudy) (two weekdays and one weekend day). A dietician will
analyse all the 3-day dietary records using a country-
Exclusion criteria are the presence of a current serious specific foodnutrientdatabase.
illness or unstable condition that requires physician The study procedures are depicted in Fig. 1. There will
supervision of diet or physical activity (e.g. recent myo- be five clinical evaluations of the study population: one
cardial infarction, chronic liver disease, inflammatory before the dietary intervention (Time 0), one 1.5 month
bowel diseases); pregnancy or intention to become preg- after the start of the first dietary intervention (Time 1),
nant in the next 18 months; lactation; current or recent one 3 months after the start of the first dietary interven-
(past 6 months) participation in weight loss treatment tion and at the time of intersection between the two
program or use of weight loss medication; no regular in- groups (Time 2), one 4.5 months after the start of the
takeofmeat,fishorpoultry for thepastmonth. study and 1.5 month from the intersection (Time 3), and
the last one 6 months after the start of the study and
3 months from the intersection (Time 4). This design
Interventionsandparticipanttimeline was chosen to ensure that there will be adequate time to
This clinical randomized study of vegetarian and Medi- achieve steady-state levels of lipid, glucometabolic, in-
terranean diets will use a crossover design with two flammatory andoxidativestress parameters.
intervention periods. After a 2-week run-in period, the Compliance with the interventioniscritical to the suc-
eligible participants will be randomly assigned into two cess of this project and will be achieved using behaviour
groups: either the group which will receive a vegetarian change strategies including self-monitoring and regular
diet or the group which will receive a Mediterranean phone calls for dietary counselling. Furthermore, a diet-
diet. Following the first intervention phase, the partici- ician will provide the participants with a detailed 1-week
pants will be crossed over in order to obtain the second menu plan for each dietary period, with all food ingredi-
intervention phase. Each diet period will be 3 months ents expressed in weight and/or volume measures, and a
long. The vegetarian diet will not contain meat, poultry handoutcontainingdetailsontheirassigneddiet,includ-
or fish but will contain eggs and dairy, in addition to ing food groups that can be included and ones that
plant-based foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole should be avoided. The vegetarian menu plan will also
grains, legumes, nuts and seeds. The Mediterranean diet include recipes for preparing meals. Sessions for the two
will contain all foods, including meat, poultry, fish, eggs, groups are similar in duration and content, except with
and dairy. However, red meat will be limited to once per regard to dietary details, and group leaders will be
week, poultry will be limited to ≤3 times per week and instructed to make no comment favouring one diet over
fish will be recommended two to three times per week. theotherorindicatingtheirowndietary habits.
Both diets will derive approximately 25–30 % of energy Participants may discontinue the intervention or with-
from fat, 15–120 % from protein and the remainder draw from the study for the following reasons: (1) at the
from (primarily complex) carbohydrate. The vegetarian request of the participant or (2) if the investigator con-
and Mediterranean diets will be calorie-restricted and siders that a participant’s health will be compromised
isocaloric, supplying 1400 kcal/day for women and due to adverse events or concomitant illnesses that de-
1600 kcal/day for men with a weight <90 kg at baseline velop afterenteringthe study.
and 1600 kcal/day for women and 1800 kcal/day for
men with a weight >90 kg at baseline. No meals or sup- Outcomes
plements will be provided. Participants will prepare their Primaryoutcome
mealsoreatatrestaurants.Forbothdiets,alcoholic bev- The primary outcome is total weight change from
erages are limited to one per day for women and two baseline.
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page4of8
Fig.1Organizationoftheinterventionstudy
Secondaryoutcomes alpha<0.05, for two groups, with a mean difference be-
Thesecondaryoutcomesare: tween groups from 2 to 3.5 kg and a standard deviation
between 1.6 and 3.9, a sample size of at least 50 in each
(cid:1) Fatmasschangefrombaseline group of the study was required. It is projected that 100
(cid:1) Bodymassindex(BMI)changefrom baseline subjects will be required in the final database and 10–
(cid:1) Lipidprofile change frombaseline(total cholesterol, 25%moremustberandomizedtoachievethisnumberof
LDLcholesterol, HDL cholesterol,triglycerides) completed subjects. These projections will be reviewed
(cid:1) Glycemic profile change frombaseline(fasting throughout the course of the study. Losses will be
glucose, insulin, HbA1c) included in the intention-to-treat but not in the per-
(cid:1) Inflammatoryparameters’changefrom baseline[hs- protocol analyses. The sample size calculation was per-
CRP(high-sensitivityC-reactiveprotein), circulating formed using an online calculator software (available at
levelsofinflammatorycytokines:IL-1ra(interleukin- http://www.powerandsamplesize.com).
1ra),IL-1β(interleukin-1 beta),IL-2 (interleukin-2),
IL-4(interleukin-4),IL-6 (interleukin-6),IL-8(inter- Recruitmentandrandomization
leukin-8),IL-10(interleukin-10),IL-12(interleukin- Male and female participants will be recruited by trial
12),IL-17 (interleukin-17), IL-18 (interleukin-18), personnel using advertisements in local media, newspa-
TNF-α(tumornecrosisfactor alpha),IFN-γ(inter- pers, social media, sheets and official websites. They will
ferongamma),VEGF (vascularendothelialgrowth also recruit from a pre-existing database of participants
factor), MCP-1(monocyte chemoattractantprotein- and from friends or relatives of the hospital and univer-
1),IP-10(IFN-γ-inducible protein10)] sitystaff.
(cid:1) Oxidativestressmarkers’change frombaseline(total After approval and completion of the initial assess-
antioxidantprofile,parametersoflipidperoxidation) ment, subjects will be formally entered into the study
and randomized with a 1:1 randomization to study arms
Samplesize bya statistician, usingaweb-basedonlinerandomization
The sample size was determined on the basis of previous procedure. Randomization will be stratified by age. The
studies conducted to test the efficacy of a vegetarian diet allocation concealment will be ensured using a central-
on patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus [12]. To achieve ized service, and it will not be possible for the investiga-
aneffect sizebetween1.25and2.1forapowerof80%at tors toknowtheallocation sequence inadvance.
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page5of8
Blinding serum, and then stored at –80 °C until analysis. The fol-
In this trial, blinding of participants and dieticians is not lowing biochemical measurements will be evaluated:
possible because of obvious differences between the completebloodcount,lipidprofile(total cholesterol,LDL
intervention diets; however, outcome measures in the cholesterol,HDLcholesterol,triglycerides),glucoseprofile
present study cannot be easily influenced by the obser- (fasting glucose, insulin, HbA1c), liver function tests (as-
ver. In addition, trial personnel who will enrol partici- partate aminotransferase, alanine transaminase, gamma-
pants, outcome assessors and data analysts will be glutamyltransferase, alkaline phosphatase),renal function
blindedtotreatmentallocation,andanemployeeoutside tests (serum creatinine, urea, uric acid), mineral profile
of the research team will enter data into the computer (sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium), iron metabol-
in separate datasheets. On the other hand, making the ism(iron,ferritin),vitaminprofile(vitaminB ,folicacid),
12
trialopenratherthan blinded may improve recruitment. pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory profile [hs-CRP
(high-sensitivity C-reactive protein), circulating levels of
Datacollection inflammatory cytokines: IL-1ra (interleukin-1ra), IL-1β
Follow-upassessmentsanddatacollectionwillbeunder- (interleukin-1beta),IL-2(interleukin-2),IL-4(interleukin-
taken at the Unit of Clinical Nutrition of the Careggi 4), IL-6 (interleukin-6), IL-8 (interleukin-8), IL-10 (inter-
University Hospital, Florence, Italy, by trial personnel. leukin-10), IL-12 (interleukin-12), IL-17 (interleukin-17),
All subjects will be examined between 6.30 and IL-18 (interleukin-18), TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor
9.30a.m. aftera12-hfastingperiod. alpha), IFN-γ (interferon-gamma), VEGF (vascular endo-
thelial growthfactor), MCP-1(monocyte chemoattractant
Adherenceandacceptability protein-1), IP-10 (IFN-γ-inducible protein 10)], as well as
In order to assess diet compliance, participants will be antioxidantprofile(totalantioxidantprofile,parametersof
contacted at least twice during the study period. A diet- lipid peroxidation) and parameters related to vascular
ician will make unannounced telephone calls to each endothelial function such as circulating endothelial pro-
participant to administer a 24-h diet recall. Adherence genitorandcirculatingendothelialcellcount.
to the vegetarian diet will be measured as the absence of
meat and fish from the dietary recalls. Participants in Stoolsamples
the Mediterranean group will be considered adherent if Stool samples (four or five scoops totalling 4 g) will be
their food records report a great adherence (≥10 points collected before and after each intervention phase. Stool
on the 9-item literature-based Adherence ScoreTool) to sample collection kits, including containers, will be pro-
theMediterraneandiet. vided for the participants. It is optional for the partici-
At Time 2 and Time 4 participants will complete a pants to provide the stool samples, so they can continue
modified version of the Food Acceptability Question- participating in the study even if they choose not to pro-
naire asking participants to answer questions regarding videstool samples.
the feasibility, the acceptability and the satisfaction/dis-
satisfaction with both diets. This questionnaire also asks Datamanagement
respondentstoindicatewhethertheyhavefrequentlyex- Data will be collected in an electronic database. Identifi-
perienced any of the following perceived benefits or ad- able data will not be recorded in the database or other
verse effects during the intervention period: changes in documents, and participants will be identified by a
digestion and gastrointestinal function, increased or de- unique trial ID only. Hard copies of data sheets linking
creased energy, better or worse sleep than usual and the participant identification number to the person’s
self-perceived qualityoflife. contact details will be kept securely in a locked filing
cabinet in a locked office, accessible only to key research
Anthropometricmeasurementsandbodycomposition team members. Participant files and other source data
Weightandheightwillbemeasuredusinga stadiometer. (including copies of protocols, questionnaires, original
Body mass index (BMI) will be calculated as weight reports of test results, correspondence, records of in-
(kg)/height (m)2. The body composition will be deter- formed consent and other documents pertaining to the
mined with a bioelectrical Body Composition Analyzer conduct of the study) will be kept for the maximum
device (Tanita, model TBF-410) at baseline and follow- period oftime permittedbytheinstitution.
upvisits.
Statisticalanalysis
Bloodsamples Statistical analyses will be performed using SPSS soft-
Blood samples will be collected at the beginning and at ware for Macintosh (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Out-
theend of eachintervention phase. Bloodsamples will be comes will be analysed by intention-to-treat and on-
centrifugedat3000rpmfor15minutes,aliquotedtoyield treatment procedures. Histograms and box plots will be
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page6of8
used to assess the distributional assumptions and to withdrawal will be documented in the participant re-
check for possible outliers. Log transformations will be cords for the subsequent analysis in the interpretation of
applied, where appropriate, in order to render the out- theresults.
come distributions closer to the normal. Bootstrap tech- Sensitivity analyses will be undertaken, based on the
niques will be used if this does not achieve reasonable assumption that missing outcomes are the worst pos-
normality to the extent that it may influence the proper- sible, or the best possible, in different randomization
ties of the regression analysis. Continuous variables that groups. If these show that conclusions may differ based
follow an approximately normal distribution will be on missing values, then supplementary multiple imput-
summarized using the mean and standard deviations. ation for missing values will be undertaken. These ana-
Categorical variables will be presented in terms of fre- lyses will account for results of any losses to follow-up
quencies and percentages. Before starting the data ana- insofar as they pertain to differences in measured vari-
lysis, the level, pattern and likely causes of the ables (i.e.undertheassumption ofmissingatrandom).
missingness in the baseline variables and outcomes will For questionnaire items related to acceptability, differ-
beinvestigatedbyformingappropriatetables.Thisinfor- ences between responses during the vegetarian and
mation will be used to determine whether the level and Mediterranean diet phases will be tested using the Wil-
type of missing data has the potential to introduce bias coxon matched-pairs signed ranks test. The independent
intotheanalysisresultsorsubstantiallyreducethepreci- samples Mann-Whitney U test will be used to compare
sionofestimatesfor theproposed statisticalmethods. the diet groups. To test for differences in reported bene-
Alldata willbetreatedaspaired samples fromacross- fits and adverse effects of the diets, the chi-square test
over study. The two interventions will be analysed by for independent samples will compare the two diet
taking into account both periods in the two groups of groups regarding frequency of changes in reported
subjects at different stages. The primary outcome, total symptoms from baseline to final time points, and
weight change from baseline, will be analysed within paired-comparison t tests will assess within-group
each group using paired comparison t tests to test changes over time. A P value<0.05 will be considered
whether the changes from baseline to 3 months, from statisticallysignificant.
baseline to 6 months and from 3 to 6 months will be
statistically significant. The absolute change (mean value Monitoring
at baseline subtracted from the mean value after inter- Given the limited objectives and its short-term nature,
vention for each subject) will be estimated with inde- this trial will be monitored by the protocol team and the
pendentt sampletests.One-wayanalysis of variance will local Institutional Review Board, without the use of a
be used for testing differences between changes in the formal data monitoring committee. Data access will be
vegetarian and Mediterranean intervention diet groups. restricted to trained staff with unique password-
A linear regression analysis (after checking regression protected accounts.Adverse eventssuchas unfavourable
assumptions), adjusting for age, gender, smoking habits and unintended signs, abnormal laboratory findings,
and sedentary lifestyle, will be performed in order to symptoms or diseases temporally associated with the
compare the effect of the two different treatments. Data intervention diet will be collected from the time of
for the general linear model for repeated measurements randomization until the final 6-month follow-up visit for
will be reported as geometric means with their standard each participant, whether or not considered related to
errors. A significant effect will indicate that the change the intervention study. All adverse events will be
from baseline to the vegetarian diet phase will be differ- followed upuntiltheyareresolved.
ent from the change from baseline to the Mediterranean
diet phase. Secondary outcome variables will be analysed Ethicsanddissemination
similarly. The study will be conducted in accordance with the
Multiple strategies will be employed to reduce attri- Declaration of Helsinki and the Data Protection Act.
tion, including an accuraterecruitment, a structured and Trial personnel will obtain informed consent from all
time-limited protocol, the inclusion of a run-in period, participants prior to inclusion (see Additional file 3). All
the limitation of the burden and inconvenience of data patients must agree to participate voluntarily and will be
collection on the participants and the development of a freetowithdrawfrom thestudyatany time.
trusting and collaborative relationship between research The study has received ethical approval by the Tus-
units and participants. If participants do not attend a cany Regional Ethics Committee (REC) of the University
scheduled appointment, a maximum of three telephone Hospital of Careggi under the number SPE 15.054. REC
calls will be made and one email sent prior to withdraw- approval included the trial protocol, information sheet
ingtheparticipant fromthestudy.Ifaparticipantwishes and consent form, questionnaires, interviews, any other
to withdraw from the study intervention, the reason for written information that will be provided to the
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page7of8
participants and any advertisements that will be used Trial status
during the study. The trial is registered at the clinical At the time of manuscript submission, the enrolment of
trial registration (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02641834, date clinicallyhealthysubjectsisongoing.
of registration: 29 December 2015) in accordance with
the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors
Additional files
(ICMJE)requirements.
Any amendments to the protocol and information pro-
Additionalfile1:SPIRITChecklist.(DOC120kb)
videdtoparticipantswill besubmittedtotheRECforap-
Additionalfile2:SPIRITtimeschedule.(PDF35kb)
proval prior to implementation. Substantial amendments
Additionalfile3:Informedconsentform.(DOC220kb)
may only be implemented after written REC approval has
been obtained, whereas non-substantial amendments can
Abbreviations
be implemented without written approval from the REC.
BMI:bodymassindex;HbA1c:glycatedhaemoglobin;HDL:high-density
TheChiefInvestigatorwillhavetoensurethatthepartici- lipoprotein;hs-CRP:high-sensitivityC-reactiveprotein;IL-1ra:interleukin-1
pant’s privacy is maintained. Data and source documents receptorantagonist;IFN-γ:interferongamma;IL-1β:interleukin-1beta;IL-
2:interleukin-2;IL-4:interleukin-4;IL-6:interleukin-6;IL-8:interleukin-8;IL-
willbestoredinsuchawaythattheycanbeaccessedata
10:interleukin-10;IL-12:interleukin-12;IL-17:interleukin-17;IL-18:interleukin-
laterdateforthepurposesofmonitoringorinspectionby 18;IP-10:IFN-γ-inducibleprotein10;LDL:low-densitylipoprotein;MCP-
theREC.Attheendofthestudy,participantswillbeable 1:monocytechemoattractantprotein-1;REC:RegionalEthicsCommittee;
TNF-α:tumornecrosisfactoralpha;VEGF:vascularendothelialgrowthfactor.
torequestacopyoftheresultsofthestudyfromtheChief
Investigator.
Competinginterests
The results from the trial will be submitted for publi- Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterestsandtheresearch
cation in a peer-reviewed journal irrespective of the out- isnotbeingsupportedbyanycommercialinterests.
come. The final report will follow the CONSORT 2010
Authors’contributions
guidelines. Authorship of presentations and reports re-
FSconceivedthestudy,participatedinthedesignofthestudyandwriting
lated to the study will be in the name of the collabora- ofthestudyprotocolandpreparedthefinalversionofthemanuscript.Heis
tive group. responsibleforrecruitment,clinicalevaluationsandbloodanalyses.MD
participatedinthedesignofthestudyandwritingofthestudyprotocoland
iscurrentlyscreeningandinstructingsubjectsregardingtheprotocol.GP
participatedinthedesignofthestudyandwritingofthestudyprotocoland
Discussion iscurrentlyscreeningandinstructingsubjectsregardingtheprotocol.FCis
Becauseofthegrowingevidenceinfavourofthelinkbe- responsiblefortheevaluationofallthelaboratoryparametersand
participatedinthedesignofthestudy.RMparticipatedinthecritical
tween red and processed meat and cardiovascular dis-
revisionofthemanuscriptandiscurrentlyscreeningandrecruitingthe
ease risk [13], cancer [14], diabetes [15] and overall participants.ACparticipatedinthedesignofthestudyandcriticalrevision
mortality [16], the interest in vegetarian diets has in- ofthemanuscriptforimportantintellectualcontent.Allauthorsreadand
approvedthefinalmanuscript.
creased. Over the last few years, the number of subjects
who began to adopt aplant-based dietary pattern has in-
Acknowledgements
creased with respect to the past, when the population of Theauthorsacknowledgeallthenursesandadministrativestaffofthe
vegetarians was limited to only a few and selected co- DepartmentofGeriatricMedicineoftheCareggiUniversityHospitalof
Florence,Italyfortheirsupportinconductingtheclinicaltrial.
horts [17]. This increase has been mainly attributed to
ethical and environmental motivations, as well as to Authordetails
health-related concerns[18]. 1DepartmentofExperimentalandClinicalMedicine,SchoolofHumanHealth
Sciences,UniversityofFlorence,LargoBrambilla3,50134Florence,Italy.
There are several beneficial nutrients that are abun-
2UnitofClinicalNutrition,CareggiUniversityHospital,Florence,Italy.3Don
dant in Mediterranean and vegetarian diets, such as CarloGnocchiFoundationItaly,OnlusIRCCS,Florence,Italy.4Unitof
monounsaturated fatty acids and high amounts of fiber AtherothromboticDiseases,CareggiUniversityHospital,Florence,Italy.
and antioxidants; both diets also feature a low intake of
Received:18January2016Accepted:21April2016
total and saturated fats. However, to date, no studies are
available that evaluate the effect of both diets in the
same group of subjects at different time points. The References
1. GBD2013RiskFactorsCollaborators.Global,regional,andnational
comparison between vegetarian and Mediterranean diet-
comparativeriskassessmentof79behavioural,environmentaland
ary patterns in terms of cardiovascular risk prevention occupational,andmetabolicrisksorclustersofrisksin188countries,1990-
will be of paramount clinical significance for the general 2013:asystematicanalysisfortheGlobalBurdenofDiseaseStudy2013.
Lancet.2015;386:2287–323.
population and will help to improve understanding of
2. OliveiraGBF,AvezumA,RoeverL.Cardiovasculardiseaseburden:evolving
the possible metabolic mechanisms underlying the knowledgeofriskfactorsinmyocardialinfarctionandstrokethrough
health benefits associated with the adherence to either population-basedresearchandperspectivesinglobalprevention.Front
CardiovascMed.2015;2:32.
diet on ameliorating the cardiovascular risk profile of
3. JacobsDR,TapsellLC.Food,notnutrients,isthefundamentalunitin
clinicallyhealthysubjects. nutrition.NutrRev.2007;65:439–50.
Sofietal.Trials (2016) 17:233 Page8of8
4. ChahoudG,AudeW,MehtaJL.Dietaryrecommendationinpreventionand
treatmentofcoronaryarterydisease.Dowehavetheidealdietyet?AmJ
Cardiol.2004;94:1260–7.
5. WHO.Preventionofcardiovasculardisease.Guidelineforassessmentand
managementofcardiovascularrisk.2007.
6. ReesK,HartleyL,FlowersN,ClarkeA,HooperL,ThorogoodM,etal.
‘Mediterranean’dietarypatternfortheprimarypreventionofcardiovascular
disease.CochraneDatabaseSystRev.2013;8:CD009825.
7. HaV,deSouzaRJ.“Fleshingout”thebenefitsofadoptingavegetariandiet.
JAmHeartAssoc.2015;4:e002654.
8. KeysA,MenottiA,KarvonenMJ,AravanisC,BlackburnH,BuzinaR,etal.The
dietand15-yeardeathrateintheSevenCountriesStudy.AmJEpidemiol.
1986;124:903–15.
9. SofiF,MacchiC,AbbateR,GensiniGF,CasiniA.Mediterraneandietand
healthstatus:anupdatedmeta-analysisandaproposalforaliterature-
basedadherencescore.PublicHealthNutr.2014;17:2769–82.
10. DinuM,AbbateR,GensiniGF,CasiniA,SofiF.Vegetarian,vegandietsand
multiplehealthoutcomes:asystematicreviewwithmeta-analysisof
observationalstudies.CritRevFoodSciNutr.2016.doi:10.1080/10408398.
2016.1138447.
11. EuropeanGuidelinesoncardiovasculardiseasepreventioninclinical
practice(version2012)’TheFifthJointTaskForceoftheEuropeanSociety
ofCardiologyandOtherSocietiesonCardiovascularDiseasePreventionin
ClinicalPractice(constitutedbyrepresentativesofninesocietiesandby
invitedexperts)*DevelopedwiththespecialcontributionoftheEuropean
AssociationforCardiovascularPrevention&Rehabilitation(EACPR).Eur
HeartJ.2012;33:1635–1701.
12. MishraS,XuJ,AgarwalU,GonzalesJ,LevinS,BarnardND.Amulticenter
randomizedcontrolledtrialofaplant-basednutritionprogramtoreduce
bodyweightandcardiovascularriskinthecorporatesetting:theGEICO
study.EurJClinNutr.2013;67:718–24.
13. AbeteI,RomagueraD,VieiraAR,LopezDeMunainA,NoratT.Association
betweentotal,processed,redandwhitemeatconsumptionandall-cause,
CVDandIHDmortality:ameta-analysisofcohortstudies.BrJNutr.
2014;112:762–75.
14. LippiG,MattiuzziC,CervellinG.Meatconsumptionandcancerrisk:acritical
reviewofpublishedmeta-analyses.CritRevOncolHematol.2016;97:1–14.
15. KimY,KeoghJ,CliftonP.Areviewofpotentialmetabolicetiologiesofthe
observedassociationbetweenredmeatconsumptionanddevelopmentof
type2diabetesmellitus.Metabolism.2015;64:768–79.
16. WangX,LinX,OuyangYY,LiuJ,ZhaoG,PanA,etal.Redandprocessed
meatconsumptionandmortality:dose-responsemeta-analysisof
prospectivecohortstudies.PublicHealthNutr.2015;6:1–13.
17. LeitzmannC.Vegetariannutrition:past,present,future.AmJClinNutr.
2014;100:496S–502S.
18. DeBackerCJ,HuddersL.FrommeatlessMondaystomeatlessSundays:
motivationsformeatreductionamongvegetariansandsemi-vegetarians
whomildlyorsignificantlyreducetheirmeatintake.EcolFoodNutr.2014;
53:639–57.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and we will help you at every step:
• We accept pre-submission inquiries
(cid:129) Our selector tool helps you to find the most relevant journal
(cid:129) We provide round the clock customer support
(cid:129) Convenient online submission
(cid:129) Thorough peer review
(cid:129) Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services
(cid:129) Maximum visibility for your research
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
