NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
Published in final edited form as:
J Abnorm Psychol. 2005 August ; 114(3): 409–420.
Association of Parental Depression with Psychiatric Course from
Adolescence to Young Adulthood among Formerly Depressed
Individuals
Paul Rohde and Peter M. Lewinsohn
Oregon Research Institute, Eugene
Daniel N. Klein
Stony Brook University and Oregon Research Institute
John R. Seeley
Oregon Research Institute, Eugene
Abstract
We examined whether parental major depressive disorder (MDD) is associated with course of
depression and other psychopathology among formerly depressed adolescents as they enter
adulthood. The sample consisted of 244 individuals (age 24) in a longitudinal study who had
experienced MDD by 19. Maternal MDD was associated with MDD recurrence, chronicity, and
severity, anxiety disorders, and (among sons only) lower psychosocial functioning in offspring
between 19–24. Paternal MDD was associated with lower functioning. Sons of depressed fathers had
elevated suicidal ideation and attempt rates in young adulthood. Recurrent paternal MDD was
associated with depression recurrence in daughters but not sons. The impact of parental MDD on
offspring could not be attributed to characteristics of the offspring’s depression prior to 19.
Association of Parental Depression with Psychiatric Course from
Adolescence to Young Adulthood among Formerly Depressed Individuals
It is well-established that major depressive disorder (MDD) is a condition occurring in early
adolescence, with the female preponderance emerging at that time and levels quickly reaching
rates comparable to adults (e.g., Kashani et al., 1987; Lewinsohn, Hops, Roberts, Seeley, &
Andrews, 1993; McGee et al., 1990). Recent studies exploring the longitudinal course of
adolescent MDD (e.g., Harrington, Fudge, Rutter, Pickles, & Hill, 1990; Lewinsohn, Rohde,
Klein, & Seeley, 1999; Rao et al., 1999; Reinherz, Giaconia, Hauf, Wasserman, & Silverman,
1999; Weissman et al., 1999) indicate that while most depressed adolescents recover from the
index MDD episode, the risk of depression recurrence and psychiatric comorbidity in young
adulthood is substantial.
Depression is increasingly being recognized as a set of heterogeneous conditions (Cicchetti &
Toth, 1998; Harrington, Rutter, & Fombonne, 1986; Winokur, 1997), and it has been suggested
that depressive episodes occurring in adolescence are even more heterogeneous than child or
adult depression (Wickramaratne & Weissman, 1998), with a greater proportion of adolescent
MDD episodes being due to developmental challenges and stressors, which are significant
during this age period (Arnett, 1999). For some adolescents, the depression experience may
Address correspondence to Paul Rohde, Oregon Research Institute, 1715 Franklin Blvd., Eugene, OR, 97403-1983. E-mail:paulr@ori.org.
This work was partially supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grants RO1 MH66023 (Dr. Klein), RO1 MH40501, RO1
MH50522, and RO1 MH52858 (Dr. Lewinsohn).
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 2
be fairly transient, whereas for others, it indicates the beginning of a more chronic and
debilitating condition. Given the apparent heterogeneity of depression, longitudinal data
regarding the course of MDD and its diversity of outcomes are essential for understanding this
disorder. The primary question we address in the present study is whether parental MDD serves
as a useful marker for more negative psychiatric and functioning trajectories among formerly
depressed adolescents as they transition into early adulthood. The present analyses focus on
participants in a longitudinal, community-based study who had experienced an episode of
MDD before age 19. These formerly depressed adolescents are stratified on the basis of parental
MDD (occurring before the offspring is 19 years of age) and compared on their psychiatric
course between 19 and 24 years of age.
While a growing literature exists on the transmission of MDD from parents to depression
onset in offspring (e.g., Klein, Lewinsohn, Seeley, & Rohde, 2001; Weissman et al., 1984),
the factors and processes that contribute to the maintenance and course of a disorder are not
necessarily the same as those that are responsible for onset (Depue & Monroe, 1986;
Lewinsohn, Allen, Seeley, & Gotlib, 1999). For example, Daly, Hammen, and Rao (2000)
reported that parental psychopathology predicted MDD onset but not recurrence. Similarly,
genetics played a role in MDD onset but not its continuity in a recent twin study (Scourfield
et al., 2003), although genetic factors have predicted the stability of depression in other twin
studies (O’Connor, Neiderhiser, Reiss, Hethertington, & Plomin, 1998; Silberg et al., 1999).
Steinberg and Avenevoli (2000) recently urged developmental psychopathologists to
distinguish research on the determinants of onset from the determinants of course, and argued
that the latter has not received sufficient attention.
Only a small number of studies have addressed the effects of parental MDD on the course of
offspring MDD, and those that do generally address it only briefly as part of a larger focus on
depression onset. Compared to depressed offspring of nondepressed parents, findings suggest
that a family history of depression may be associated with greater depression severity and
chronicity, MDD recurrence, psychiatric comorbidity, impaired psychosocial functioning
(Lieb, Isensee, Höfler, Pfister, & Wittchen, 2002; Warner, Weissman, Fendrich,
Wickramaratne, & Moreau, 1992; Weissman, Warner, Wickramaratne, Moreau, & Olfson,
1997), and suicidal behavior (Brent et al., 1993; Weissman, Fendrich, Warner, &
Wickramaratne, 1992). Our first aim in the present study is to replicate and extend the previous
findings regarding the impact of parental depression on the course of psychopathology in the
depressed offspring.
If parental MDD is found to be associated with a negative course of offspring MDD, our second
aim is to examine whether the effects of maternal or paternal MDD on young adult psychiatric
and functional status of formerly depressed adolescents persist after controlling for factors that
could account for, and possibly mediate, these associations. Data are available in the present
study to examine potentially relevant psychiatric and demographic characteristics. Given the
increased likelihood of depression in one parent given depression in the co-parent (e.g.,
Matthews & Reus, 2001), the first covariate was the presence of MDD in the co-parent. Second,
we adjusted for demographic and psychiatric factors occurring in the offspring prior to age 19
that are found to be associated with parental MDD. If parental MDD has its strongest negative
effect in association with the initial experience of MDD in adolescence, controlling for the
presentation of psychopathology in adolescence might eliminate any association between
parental MDD and course of disorder in the offspring. We also adjust for whether the offspring
was living with the biological parent as an adolescent, which would be an important mediating
factor if family environmental mechanisms account for the impact of parental depression on
offspring depression course. Finally, we adjusted for the presence of current MDD in the
offspring at the time of the young adult assessment, as current mood state might bias recall of
the course of depression between age 19 and the T3 evaluation.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 3
Impact of Parent and Offspring Gender
Our third aim concerns gender moderation. We believe a primary contribution of our study
over previous research is a focus on the degree to which parental and offspring gender
moderates the associations between parental MDD and course of offspring psychopathology.
We examine the impact of maternal and paternal depression separately. The role of maternal
depression on offspring depression onset has received much more research attention than
paternal depression (e.g., Phares, 1992) and a recent meta-analysis (Connell & Goodman,
2002) concluded that internalizing disorders, such as depression, in offspring were more closely
related to depression in mothers than to depression in fathers. Paternal depression has not been
found to increase the risk of offspring depression onset beyond maternal depression in most
research (Brennan, Hammen, Katz, & Le Brocque, 2002; Lieb et al., 2002; Radke-Yarrow,
Nottelmann, Martinez, Fox, & Belmont, 1992, although see Marchand & Hock, 1998). On the
other hand, some research suggests that differences between effects of maternal and paternal
MDD on offspring are relatively minor (Dierker, Merikangas, & Szatmari, 1995; Jacob &
Johnson, 1997; Phares, Duhig, & Watkins, 2002), and a recent meta-analysis (Kane & Garber,
2004) concluded that father’s depression had a significant but modest effect on offspring
internalizing symptoms and disorder. The available research on the effects of depressed
parent’s gender on offspring depression concerns onset; the present study is the first study to
our knowledge that explicitly examines effects of maternal and paternal MDD on course of
offspring depression. Given the general pattern of findings and the fact that no research suggests
that paternal depression is more debilitating than maternal depression, we predict that maternal
MDD will be more strongly associated with the course of psychopathology in formerly
depressed adolescents than paternal MDD.
Our analyses also examine the possibility of different outcomes as a function of offspring
gender. Goodman and Gotlib (1999) suggest that daughters are at greater risk than sons for
experiencing maladaptive effects of parental depression. The heritability of MDD in twin
studies has varied by gender of the offspring, being higher for female offspring in some research
(Kendler, Gardner, Neale, & Prescott, 2001; Scourfield et al., 2003) but not others (Eley &
Stevenson, 1999). Female gender may have a stronger association with depression incidence
than with depression recurrence. Several studies have noted that women have higher rates of
first onset but not greater persistence or recurrence (Hankin et al., 1998; Kessler, 2003; Kovacs,
2001; Lewinsohn, Rohde, Seeley, Klein, & Gotlib, 2000; Wainwright & Surtees, 2002),
although adult female patients have been found to have higher rates of recurrence compared
to adult male patients (Kuehner, 1999; Mueller et al., 1999), which may be related to differences
in ruminative cognitive style (Kuehner & Weber, 1999). In the present study, we examine
whether factors associated with parental MDD predispose formerly depressed daughters to a
more negative course compared to formerly depressed sons.
The course of offspring depression may also be influenced by interactions between parent
gender and offspring gender. Specifically, girls may be at particular risk for depression as a
function of maternal depression. Girls spend a greater proportion of their time with their parents
than boys (Montemayor, 1983), and mothers tend to report more conflict with daughters than
with sons (Hill, Holmbeck, Marlow, Green, & Lynch, 1985). Maternal depression symptoms
have been found to be associated with depression symptoms in girls but not boys (Davies &
Windle, 1997; Fergusson, Horwood, & Lynskey, 1995; Thomas & Forehand, 1991). Sheeber,
Davis, and Hops (2002) proposed a model of same-gender transmission in which the family
normalizes depressive behaviors in women and fails to reinforce instrumental behaviors in
daughters. Modeling hypotheses also predict that there should be an interaction between the
gender of the depressed parent and the gender of the child, with greater risk in same-gender
pairs (Connell & Goodman, 2002). Unfortunately, few studies have explored this issue with
respect to depression onset, and, to our knowledge, no research has examined the impact of
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 4
parent and offspring gender on relations between parental depression and the course of
offspring depression. Our general hypothesis is that same-gender effects will be stronger than
cross-gender effects.
Characteristics of Parental MDD
Our fourth aim is to examine the degree to which aspects of the parental MDD moderate the
effects of parental depression on the course of disorder in formerly depressed offspring.
Previous research suggests that early onset or recurrent MDD episodes in parents are among
the strongest predictors of MDD onset in offspring (Beardslee et al., 1996; Keller et al.,
1986; Kupfer, Frank, Carpenter, & Neiswanger, 1989; Orvaschel, 1990; Orvaschel, Walsh-
Allis, & Ye, 1988; Warner, Mufson, & Weissman, 1995; Weissman, Leckman, Merikangas,
Gammon, & Prusoff, 1984; Weissman, Warner, Wickramaratne, & Prusoff, 1988). Early onset
of parental MDD is generally assumed to confer more genetic liability (Todd et al., 1993) but
early MDD onset in the parent would also be generally associated with greater exposure to the
depressed parent and exposure at an earlier developmental period for the offspring. Similarly,
recurrent MDD in the parent would generally be associated with greater exposure to depression
in the offspring. In the present study, we examine whether early onset or recurrent MDD in the
parent is associated with a more negative course of psychopathology and functioning in
formerly depressed offspring.
The present study extends our previous research, which has documented the high degree of
MDD continuity from adolescence into young adulthood (Lewinsohn et al., 1999), the
aggregation of MDD within families (Klein et al., 2001), and the fact that familial loading of
recurrent MDD predicts depression recurrence in formerly depressed adolescents (Lewinsohn
et al., 2000). The present study is most closely related to a recent study in which we examined
the impact of parental gender and clinical characteristics of parental MDD on the incidence of
MDD and other psychopathology in adolescent and young adult offspring of depressed parents
(Klein, Lewinsohn, Rohde, Seeley, & Olino, in press). In that paper, we reported that maternal
MDD was significantly associated with the incidence of MDD in offspring. In contrast, paternal
MDD was only associated with the onset of MDD among offspring with moderate-severe
episodes. There was considerable diagnostic specificity in that parental non-mood disorders
did not predict rates of MDD in offspring and parental MDD did not predict rates of non-mood
disorders in offspring. Finally, rates of MDD were particularly elevated in offspring of parents
with early-onset MDD. The current study extends our previous research by addressing very
specific questions regarding the psychiatric trajectories taken by formerly depressed
adolescents as a function of gender and various aspects of parental depression.
Method
Participants and Procedures
Offspring—A concerted effort was made to assemble a representative sample of community-
residing adolescents for the initial (T1) sample. The population for this sample was the total
enrollment (approximately 10,200) of nine high schools in two urban and three rural
communities in western Oregon. Sampling within each school was proportional to size of
school, size of grade within school, and gender within grade. T1 diagnostic interviews and
questionnaire assessments were conducted between 1987–1989 with 1,709 adolescents (14–
18 years of age, 61% participation rate). Approximately one year later (T2), 1,507 (88%) of
the T1 participants returned for a re- administration of the interview and questionnaire (mean
T1–T2 interval = 13.8 months, SD = 2.3). Checks regarding the representativeness of the T1
sample and the impact of attrition from T1 to T2 have been previously described (Lewinsohn
et al., 1993) and indicate that the study participants may be considered representative of high
school students in western Oregon. Most importantly, there were no indications that
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 5
participants differed from non-participants or individuals who discontinued participation on
diagnostic or dimensional measures of depression.
Between 1994–1999, a third (T3) wave of questionnaire and diagnostic interviews was
conducted with selected participants after they had turned 24 years of age. We attempted to
interview participants with a T2 lifetime history of MDD (n = 360), participants with a T2
history of nonaffective disorder (n = 284), and a randomly-selected subset of participants with
no history of mental disorder at T2 (n = 457 of 863; all non-White T2 participants with no
history of disorder at T2 were retained in the sample to enhance the ethnic representation of
the T3 group). Of the 1,101 participants selected for T3, 941 (85%) completed the mailer
questionnaire and the T3 diagnostic interview, which was conducted by telephone (see Rohde,
Lewinsohn, & Seeley, 1997 for data on the comparability of telephone and face-to-face
assessment formats). The mean time between the T2 and T3 assessments was 6.8 years (SD =
1.4). Although women were more likely than men to complete the T3 assessments (89% vs.
81%);χ2(1, N = 1101) = 13.55, p < .001, T3 participation differences as a function of other
demographic variables or T2 diagnostic status, including a history of MDD at T2, were
nonsignificant.
Written informed consent was obtained from participants (and their guardians, if applicable)
to conduct all assessments.
Parents—As a separate project, biological parents and full siblings of the T3 participants
were recruited and interviewed for lifetime psychopathology, with the goal of obtaining two
sources of data for each family member (either direct and informant interviews or two informant
interviews). Psychiatric data were obtained between 1995 and 1998 on 802 families (85% of
T3 interviewed participants), which represented 2,646 individuals (804 mothers, 787 fathers,
and 1,055 siblings). Only data on parental psychopathology were used in the present study.
The sample for the present study was restricted to T3 participants who had experienced and
recovered from an episode of MDD prior to 19 years of age and on whom we had data on
parental psychopathology (n = 244). Among mothers of the 244 participants, 178 (73%)
participated in the direct interviews. Two sources of maternal diagnostic data were available
for 203 (83%) of the families, most commonly a direct interview with the mother and an
informant interview with the OADP participant (n = 165). One source of diagnostic data for
mothers in the remaining 41 (17%) families was available, usually an informant interview with
the OADP participant (n = 36). Fewer fathers provided direct interviews (n = 95, 39%).
However, two sources of diagnostic data were obtained for 195 (80%) of the fathers, most often
(a) a direct interview with the father plus an informant interview with the OADP participant
(n = 81), or (b) two informant interviews with the mother (spouse of father) and the OADP
participant (n = 74). One source of diagnostic data for father in the remaining 49 (20%) families
was available, most often an informant interview with the OADP participant (n = 35).
Diagnostic Interviews
Offspring—Participants were interviewed at T1 with a version of the Schedule for Affective
Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children (K-SADS, Orvaschel, Puig-Antich,
Chambers, Tabrizi, & Johnson, 1982) that combined features of the Epidemiologic version and
the Present Episode version, and included additional items to derive DSM-III-R (American
Psychiatric Association, 1987) diagnoses. At T2 and T3, participants were interviewed using
the Longitudinal Interval Follow- up Evaluation (LIFE, Keller et al., 1987), which elicited
detailed information about the course of psychiatric disorders since the previous interview,
adapted for DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) criteria.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 6
Most interviewers had an advanced degree in psychology or social work, and all were
extensively trained prior to data collection. Based on a randomly selected subsample at T1 and
T2 (n = 233), interrater reliability for lifetime diagnoses were good to excellent: MDD k = .86,
kappas for non-mood disorder categories ranged from k = .76 to .89. For the T2–T3 period
(n = 178), interrater reliability was excellent: MDD k = .87, non-mood disorder k = .82.
Parents—Parents were directly interviewed using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-
IV, nonpatient version (SCID-NP; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1992). Family history
informant data were collected using a revised version of the Family Informant Schedule and
Criteria (FISC; Mannuzza & Fyer, 1990) modified for DSM-IV criteria. Kappas for the
interrater reliability of lifetime diagnoses were excellent, all kappas from both SCID-NP (n =
157) and FISC (n = 242) interviews were greater than .80, with the exception of anxiety
disorders as per FISC (k = .77).
We examined the sensitivity and specificity of informants’ reports by comparing FISC
diagnoses to SCID diagnoses for parents who had both sources of data available. Sensitivity
varied according to the informant and target, but specificity was consistently acceptable. With
the OADP proband (offspring) as the informant, sensitivity and specificity for MDD in mothers
(n = 523) was .45 and .85, respectively; sensitivity and specificity for MDD in fathers (n =
316) was .32 and .90, respectively. With another family member (generally the co-parent) as
the informant, sensitivity and specificity for MDD in mothers (n = 59) was .30 and .80,
respectively; sensitivity and specificity for MDD in fathers (n = 40) was .66 and .82,
respectively. The high sensitivity of other family members’ reports of paternal MDD likely
reflects the fact that the other family member informant was generally the mother, and mothers
tend to have the best knowledge of family members (Cohen, 1988). Finally, the correlations
between informants’ reports of the age of onset of MDD on the FISC and parents’ reports of
age of onset of MDD on the SCID for cases in which both the parent and informant agreed on
the presence of MDD were .43 for mothers (n = 77, p < .001) and .47 for fathers (n = 26, p < .
05).
As data were available from multiple informants for most parents, we derived lifetime DSM-
IV diagnoses for the parents using the “best-estimate” procedure (Leckman, Sholomskas,
Thompson, Belanger, & Weissman, 1982). Two diagnosticians, from a team of four senior
clinicians, independently reviewed all information from the SCIDs and FISCs without
knowledge of offspring diagnoses, and made best-estimate diagnoses for the parents using the
guidelines in Klein, Ouimette, Kelly, Ferro, and Riso (1994). The diagnosticians’ conclusions
were then compared, and disagreements were resolved by consensus. Interrater reliability of
the independently derived best-estimate diagnoses prior to the resolution of discrepancies
exceeded k = .90, indicating excellent agreement.
Outcome Variables: Course of MDD and Functioning from 19 to 24
Depression characteristics consisted of (a) MDD recurrence between 19–24 (Yes/No), (b)
MDD chronicity, which was defined as the number of weeks the participant was in an episode
of MDD between ages 19–24 (ICC = .99), (c) MDD severity, which was defined as the
maximum number of MDD symptoms experienced during the time period (range = 0–9; ICC
= .90), and (d) the development of mania (i.e., switching from unipolar to bipolar disorder; k
= 0.74 for this low baserate occurrence).
Suicidal behavior consisted of (a) the presence of suicidal ideation, which was defined as the
number K-SADS symptoms (i.e., thoughts of death, wishing to be dead, suicidal ideation,
suicidal plan) experienced during the worst MDD episode between 19–24 (ICC = 0.83), and
(b) a suicide attempt occurring between the ages of 19–24 (Yes/No) (k = 0.90).
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 7
Psychiatric comorbidity consisted of two diagnostic categories common in young adulthood:
(a) anxiety disorders (i.e., panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, specific phobia, social
phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorders,
generalized anxiety disorder) (k = 0.87), and (b) substance use disorders (i.e., abuse or
dependence) (k = 0.81).
Low psychosocial functioning was defined as a DSM-IV Global Assessment of Functioning
(GAF) score at the time of the T3 assessment (ICC unavailable).
Statistical Analyses
We first examined the associations of young adult outcomes as a function of either maternal
or paternal MDD using logistic regression to predict the dichotomous outcome measures, and
linear regression to predict the continuous outcome measures. To ensure that the direction of
temporal effects was unambiguous, the parent’s first episode of MDD had to occur prior to the
offspring turning 19. In addition, analyses controlled for whether the parental diagnostic data
had been obtained directly from the parent (yes/no). This first set of analyses also examined
whether offspring gender or the source of parental diagnostic data (direct report; yes/no)
moderated any of the associations.
Next, associations were adjusted for the following potential confounding or mediating factors,
in addition to source of parental diagnostic data: (a) MDD in the co-parent, (b) characteristics
of the offspring’s MDD or other psychiatric factors prior to age 19 that were found to be
associated with parental MDD, (c) whether the offspring was living with the parent at T1, and
(d) the presence of current MDD at the T3 assessment (4% of the sample), which may have
biased recall of previous psychiatric functioning.
The last set of analyses examined the degree to which early onset or recurrent MDD in the
parent (as opposed to late onset or single episodes of MDD) were associated with more negative
psychiatric outcomes among formerly depressed offspring. Analyses were computed
separately for maternal and paternal MDD and were restricted to the subset of offspring with
parental depression. MDD onset age in the parent was treated as a continuous measure.
Analyses examined the impact of main effects and two-way interactions with offspring gender
and source of parental diagnostic data. For analyses involving the entire sample, power greater
than .80 was available to detect small-medium effects. For the analyses on parental MDD
characteristics (onset age and recurrence), adequate power was available to detect medium to
large effects in association with characteristics of maternal MDD and large effects only in
association with paternal MDD. Given our interest in balancing concerns with Type I versus
II errors, alpha was set at p < .05 throughout the analyses.
Results
Descriptive Characteristics of the Sample
Of the 244 formerly depressed adolescents in the present study, 101 (41%) had a mother with
a history of MDD and 74 (30%) had a father with a history of MDD occurring prior to the
offspring’s 19th birthday. We first examined whether maternal or paternal MDD was associated
with T2 demographic characteristics or psychiatric characteristics of the offspring prior to the
age 19. Demographic differences between offspring as a function of parental MDD were
nonsignificant. The mean age of sample at T2 was 17.9 (SD = 1.2) years; 70% were female,
91% were White, and 38% had one or more parents with a Bachelors degree. Approximately
one-third (35%) were living with both biological parents at T2; an additional 33% lived with
their biological mother but not father, and 6% lived with their biological father but not mother.
The remaining 26% (n = 63), who were no longer living with either biological parent, had a
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 8
mean age of 18.8 years (SD = 1.0) and were attending college (n = 23), living with other relatives
(n = 9), or living on their own (n = 31).
The presence of either maternal or paternal MDD was not associated with the number of MDD
episodes occurring before age 19 (M = 1.3, SD = 0.6), onset age (years) of first MDD episode
(M = 15.0, SD = 2.7), number of weeks in MDD episodes prior to age 19 (M = 22.5; SD =
52.2), or a history of dysthymia by age 19 (7%). Differences as a function of parental depression
were, however, significant for the two remaining variables: (a) presence of non-mood disorders
prior to age 19 (59% given maternal MDD vs. 45% given no maternal MDD; χ2(1, N = 244)
= 5.08, p = .024; 61% given paternal MDD vs. 45% given no paternal MDD; χ2(1, N = 244) =
4.24, p = .039), and (b) presence of non-mood disorders in the parents prior to the offspring
turning 19 (73% given maternal MDD vs. 61% given no maternal MDD; χ2(1, N = 244) = 4.07,
p = .044; 78% given paternal MDD vs. 61% given no paternal MDD; χ2(1, N = 244) = 7.27,
p = .007). Of the mothers with MDD, lifetime rates of anxiety and substance use disorders
were 28% and 36%, respectively (compared to 11% and 20%, respectively, for mothers with
no history of MDD). Of the fathers with MDD, lifetime rates of anxiety and substance use
disorders, were 19% and 65% (compared to 6% and 45%, respectively, for fathers with no
MDD history).
Association of Parental MDD with Course of Psychopathology and Functioning in Offspring
Formerly depressed offspring were compared on characteristics of depression, suicidality,
psychiatric comorbidity, and psychosocial functioning between 19–24 as a function of maternal
and paternal MDD. Rates of the various outcomes as a function of parent and offspring gender
are shown in Table 1. The first set of analyses, which were adjusted for the source of parental
diagnostic data, are shown as Model 1 in Table 2. Five of the 10 examined variables had a
significant main effect association with maternal depression. Specifically, formerly depressed
offspring with depressed mothers were more likely to experience MDD recurrence and
comorbid anxiety disorders, have greater depression chronicity and severity, and lower
psychosocial functioning at T3 compared to formerly depressed offspring of nondepressed
mothers. The presence of paternal MDD had a main effect association with one outcome: lower
psychosocial functioning at age 24.
Interactions with offspring gender—Offspring gender moderated the impact of parental
MDD on three young adult outcomes. Maternal MDD interacted with offspring gender in
relation to offspring psychosocial functioning at age 24, semi-partial correlation (sr) = −.13,
p = .045. Paternal MDD interacted with offspring gender in relation to suicidal ideation, sr = .
13, p = .048, and suicide attempt in the offspring, OR = 2.15 (95% CI = 1.08–4.26), p = .029.
Examining the outcomes separately by gender suggested that parental MDD was associated
with problematic functioning in these outcome areas for the sons of depressed parents but not
the daughters. Mean GAF scores were significantly lower for male offspring with depressed
mothers (M = 72.5, SD = 12.5) relative to other formerly depressed males (M = 79.5, SD =
6.9); t(70) = −3.05, p = .003. Comparable differences for female offspring were nonsignificant,
M = 76.3 (SD = 9.3) vs. M = 77.4 (SD = 9.3); t(170) = −0.74, p = .461. Suicidal ideation levels
were (nonsignificantly) higher for male offspring with depressed fathers (M = 0.81, SD = 1.3)
relative to male offspring of nondepressed fathers (M = 0.33, SD = 0.84); t(70) = 1.91, p = .
060. Differences for female offspring as a function of paternal MDD were nonsignificant, M
= 0.42 (SD = 0.87) vs. M = 0.43 (SD = 0.92); t(170) = −0.07, p = .945. Rates of suicide attempt
were 23% among male offspring with depressed fathers compared to 2% among male offspring
with nondepressed fathers; χ2(1, N = 72) = 8.27, p = .004. Differences among female offspring
in the two groups were nonsignificant, 4% vs. 6%; χ2(1, N = 171) = 0.16, p = .688.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 9
Interactions with source of parental diagnostic data—Whether the parent had been
directly interviewed moderated the impact of parental MDD on one young adult outcome.
Maternal MDD interacted with source of parental diagnostic data in relation to suicidal ideation
in the offspring during the 19–24 age period, sr = −.16, p = .014. Examining the outcomes
separately by direct versus informant only data suggested that maternal MDD was associated
with suicidal ideation in the offspring only when mothers were not directly interviewed. For
the 178 participants who mothers had been directly interviewed, the association between
maternal MDD and offspring suicidal ideation in young adulthood was nonsignificant; sr =
−0.07; p = .350. For 95 participants whose mothers had not participated, maternal MDD was
associated with offspring suicidal ideation, sr = .31, p = .010; mean (SD) suicidal ideation in
the offspring with maternal MDD was 0.84 (1.21) versus 0.27 (0.74) in offspring of
nondepressed mothers.
Adjusting for Potential Confounding or Mediating Factors in the Associations with Parental
MDD
To examine the possibility that other factors accounted for or mediated the significant
associations with parental MDD, outcome variables in the offspring that had a significant
association with maternal or paternal MDD were re-analyzed controlling for (a) MDD in the
co-parent, (b) the two adolescent offspring characteristics that were associated with parental
MDD (i.e., presence of non-mood disorder in the offspring by age 19, presence of parental
non-mood disorder prior to the offspring turning 19 years of age), (c) whether the offspring
had been living with the parent at T1, and (d) whether the offspring was in a current episode
of MDD at T3. Results are shown as Model 2 in Table 2.
Adjusting for these five covariates (in addition to source of parental diagnostic data) reduced
two of the five previously-significant main effect associations with maternal MDD to
nonsignificance: MDD severity and GAF scores at age 24. Psychosocial functioning at age 24,
however, had been significant only for male offspring and that association remained significant
after the adjustments, sr = .28, p = .021. The three other outcomes remained significantly
associated with maternal MDD in this rigorously controlled analysis.
Adjusting for the covariates reduced the main effect association of paternal MDD with T3 GAF
score to nonsignificance. Adjusting for covariates in the gender-moderated findings, higher
rate of suicide attempts among male offspring with depressed fathers remained significant,
OR = 7.40 (95% CI = 1.50–36.35), p = .014, although the presence of suicidal ideation in male
offspring was no longer significantly associated with paternal MDD, sr = .24, p = .053.
Examination of the potential confounding or mediating factors for the outcomes that became
statistically nonsignificant in Model 2 indicated that only one factor -- current MDD at age 24
(T3) -- had a significant effect. None of the other potential mediating factors had a significant
association with the young adult outcomes.
Association of Parental MDD as a Function of Parental MDD Onset Age and Recurrence
The last set of analyses examined whether early onset or recurrence of MDD in the parent
predicted any of the psychiatric or functional outcomes in the offspring during the 19–24 age
period. Results were conducted separately for offspring with maternal and paternal depression
and were restricted to the subset of offspring with parents with MDD. Results were adjusted
for source of parental diagnostic data and interactions with offspring gender and source of
parental diagnostic data were considered. Neither MDD onset age or the presence of recurrent
MDD episodes in either the mother or the father had a main effect association with any of the
offspring outcomes. However, three interactions were significant and are described next.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 10
Interactions with offspring gender—Offspring gender moderated the association
between recurrent paternal MDD and recurrence in the offspring, OR = 1.79 (95% CI = 1.06–
3.04), p = .030. Recurrent paternal MDD was associated with recurrence in daughters; 62% of
daughters with recurrent paternal MDD experienced recurrence themselves vs. 27% of
daughters whose father had a single MDD episode; χ2(1, N = 48) = 5.64, p = .018. The
association for sons was nonsignificant; 36% vs. 53%, respectively; χ2(1, N = 26) = 0.73, p = .
391.
Interactions with source of parental diagnostic data—The source of parental
diagnostic data moderated two associations between onset age of parental MDD and offspring
outcomes: onset of maternal MDD in predicting MDD chronicity in the offspring, sr = .24, p
= .016; and onset of paternal MDD in predicting anxiety disorders in the offspring, OR = 1.01
(95% CI = 1.00–1.02), p = .009. An earlier onset of maternal MDD was significantly associated
with MDD chronicity in offspring given direct maternal report (sr = .251, p = .029) but not
when only informant reports were available (sr = .18, p = .379). The interaction for onset of
paternal MDD with anxiety disorder in the offspring was in a counter-intuitive direction. For
direct report of paternal MDD onset age, the association with anxiety disorders in the offspring
was nonsignificant (OR = 0.99, 95% CI = 0.98–1.01; p = .247). When direct report from the
father was not available, informant report of later paternal MDD onset was associated with
anxiety disorders in the offspring (OR = 1.02, 95% CI = 1.00–1.03; p = .027). It should be
noted that the number of offspring with anxiety disorders in these two groups were extremely
low (4 and 6 cases, respectively).
Because paternal MDD had been found to be associated with suicidal ideation and attempt in
male offspring, we also divided the depressed fathers into those with or without suicidal
behavior to examine whether rates of suicidality in the male offspring would be higher given
paternal suicidality. Rates of both suicidal ideation and suicide attempt in male offspring did
not differ as a function of paternal suicidality, t(18) = 1.98, p = .063 and χ2(1, N = 20) = 0.01,
p = .999, respectively.
Discussion
Our goal in this study was to examine whether the history of MDD in a biological parent serves
as a useful marker for divergent psychiatric and functioning pathways among formerly
depressed adolescents as they transition into early adulthood. While the literature on familial
transmission of depression is growing, it has focused primarily on the relation between parental
MDD and depression incidence in the offspring. In the present study, all of the offspring had
already experienced an episode of MDD by adolescence. Our interest was in whether maternal
or paternal depression had detectable associations with the psychiatric course of the formerly
depressed adolescent as he or she becomes a young adult, given that they are entering this
important developmental period with a history of depression. We were particularly interested
in whether gender, of either the parent or offspring, moderated any of these associations. It is
increasingly being recognized that the variables related to the maintenance and course of
depression may differ from those related to first incidence. Other contributions of the present
study are that participants were selected from the community rather than patient samples, and
that attempts were made to directly interview parents wherever possible. Much of the previous
research on parental MDD has relied on patient samples, which may not be representative of
the broader population of depressed individuals. In their recent meta-analysis of the effects of
paternal depression on offspring internalizing problems, Kane and Garber (2004) found that
effects were greatest when community samples were examined, presumably because of
restricted variance in patient samples. In addition, the adult offspring are often interviewed
regarding the presence of psychopathology in their parent, which may be somewhat insensitive,
whereas we attempted to interview parents directly whenever possible.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 11
Consistent with the conclusions drawn by Connell and Goodman (2002) in their meta-analysis
examining associations between parental and offspring psychopathology, maternal depression
in the present study had more negative associations with offspring course compared to paternal
MDD. Specifically, in the initial main effects models, depression in the mothers was related
to greater MDD recurrence, chronicity, and severity; higher rates of anxiety disorders; and
lower psychosocial functioning in the offspring. Conversely, depression in the fathers was
associated with only one outcome measure: lower psychosocial (GAF) functioning in young
adulthood. Our findings are consistent with others who have found that a family history of
depression is a marker for a poorer course among depressed children and adults (Akiskal,
1982; Beardslee, Keller, Lavori, Staley, & Sacks, 1993; Kendler, Walters, & Kessler, 1997;
Weissman et al., 1997).
Three associations were moderated by gender of the offspring. In each, parental depression
was associated with poorer outcomes for formerly depressed sons but not daughters.
Specifically, the association of maternal depression with lower psychosocial (GAF)
functioning was limited to male offspring, and both measures of suicidality in offspring (i.e.,
suicidal ideation and suicide attempt) were elevated in the sons of depressed fathers relative
to the sons of nondepressed fathers (and all daughters). The fact that offspring gender-specific
interactions involved the sons of depressed parents but not daughters was counter-intuitive
given previous research. This unexpected pattern of results may have to do with the fact that
all of the offspring in this study had already experienced an episode of MDD; perhaps boys
who reach this threshold are particularly susceptible biologically or psychologically to the
effects of parental depression. In addition, two of the three gender-specific associations
pertained to sons and fathers, which would be consistent with the same-gender effects model.
Second, these two son-father specific interactions involved measures of suicidality, which is
associated with other psychiatric factors in addition to depression (e.g., Brent & Moritz,
1996). The effects of a father’s depression on suicidality in the son were quite striking, with
more than a sevenfold increase in suicide attempts given paternal MDD. Almost one quarter
of the sons of depressed fathers attempted suicide between the ages of 19–24. Rates of suicide
attempts in the other groups of formerly depressed offspring were only 2–6%. If replicated,
this association could indicate a significant same-gender marker in the identification of young
men most at risk for future suicidal behaviors.
The association of maternal depression with psychiatric comorbidity in the young adult
offspring was restricted to internalizing disorders: 14% of the formerly depressed adolescents
with depressed mothers had experienced anxiety disorders in young adulthood, compared to
only 5% of the formerly depressed adolescents with no maternal MDD history. This is
consistent with evidence of intergenerational transmission of some anxiety disorders in the
offspring of depressed parents (Silberg & Rutter, 2002; Weissman, Warner, Wickramaratne,
Moreau, & Olfson, 2000). The presence of depression in either parent did not increase the
likelihood of switching from MDD to bipolar disorder or the development of other psychiatric
comorbidities, although it was noteworthy that almost all of the results were in the direction
of greater psychopathology given depression in either parent.
The impact of parental MDD on course of disorder in the formerly depressed offspring was
not due to characteristics of the offspring’s depression prior to age 19. Formerly depressed
adolescents with parental depression did not differ from formerly depressed adolescents with
no history of parental depression on adolescent demographic factors or on the aspects of
adolescent mood disorder that we examined (i.e., onset age of MDD, number or duration of
MDD episodes, presence of dysthymia prior to 19 years of age). It is possible that the absence
of associations between parental MDD and aspects of adolescent depression in the offspring
may have been due to limited variance in the presentation of psychopathology in our sample
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 12
prior to age 19. Having a depressed parent was, however, associated, with a greater likelihood
of non-mood disorders in both the depressed adolescent and parent.
Controlling for the various potential confounding or mediating factors did not appreciably
reduce the magnitude of the associations, although it should be noted that we examined only
a very limited number of factors. These adjustments reduced two of the five previously-
significant main effect associations with maternal MDD to the level of a statistical trend; the
other three main effect associations with maternal MDD and the one main effect association
with paternal MDD remained significant. When we examined which of the additional factors
weakened the association with parental MDD, only one measure – the presence of a current
episode of MDD at age 24 -- had a significant association with any of the young adult outcomes
and its strongest influence was on the outcome measure of psychosocial functioning (GAF) at
age 24. This association is almost guaranteed by the fact that both measures referred to the
offspring’s current state at the time of the third assessment. We believe these controls provided
a very rigorous test of the associations of parental depression with course of psychopathology
in formerly depressed offspring, strengthening the conclusion that maternal depression is
associated with a noticeably poorer course of depression in offspring.
In addition to adjusting for the source of parental diagnostic data (direct versus informant), we
also considered the possibility that the presence of a direct parent report might moderate the
associations. Informants, especially offspring, may not have much knowledge of depression
in their parents, especially detailed information regarding earlier onset and recurrent depressive
episodes occurring when the offspring was just a child. Regarding the impact of data source
on the main effect analyses, only one interaction was present: maternal MDD as assessed by
informant report predicted suicidal ideation in the offspring but not when mothers were directly
interviewed. The finding needs to be replicated but one possible explanation is that suicidal
ideation in the offspring may be associated with greater psychopathology (or suicidality,
specifically) in the mothers, which was related to their nonparticipation in the project.
Alternatively, mother non-participation could be a marker for greater family dysfunction,
which might increase suicidality in offspring with a familial vulnerability for depression.
Restricting our analyses to biological parents with presumably more serious forms of
depression had a fairly subtle impact. Among the parents with depression, outcomes in the
offspring were not associated with main effects of earlier onset or recurrence in the parent.
However, one interaction with offspring gender emerged: recurrent depression in the fathers
before the offspring was 19 predicted recurrent MDD in daughters in young adulthood. In a
previous study examining a large set of psychosocial and familial predictors of MDD
recurrence during this same time period (Lewinsohn et al., 2000), we found that a higher
proportion of family members (parents and siblings) with recurrent MDD was a strong
predictor of recurrence in the offspring. The present findings, which were restricted to parents
and required that the parent’s depression began before the offspring outcome, suggest the more
specific nature of that association.
The source of parent diagnostic data moderated two outcomes in the analyses examining onset
age or recurrence of parental MDD. We assumed that direct parent report would be particularly
important in these fine-grained analyses, due to the modest correspondence between
informants’ and parents’ reports of clinical characteristics of MDD in the parents. In the first
interaction, earlier onset of maternal depression was associated with chronicity in offspring
when mothers provided direct report but not based on informant information. In the second
interaction, a later onset of paternal depression by informant report was associated with
significantly higher rates of anxiety disorders in the children; this association was not found
when fathers reported directly on their depressive history. This second interaction was based
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 13
on only ten cases of anxiety disorder in the offspring and is considered suspect pending
replication.
If our findings that parental MDD influence the course of MDD in offspring are replicated,
these associations could be due to genetics or several environmental processes. Several theories
related to the maintenance and course of depression focus on environmental factors that could
be related to parental depression, including childhood adversity (Gilman, Kawachi,
Fitzmaurice, & Buka, 2003; Brown & Moran, 1994), harsh parental discipline (Lara, Klein, &
Kasch, 2000), parent divorce (Warner et al., 1992), and expressed emotion (e.g., McCleary &
Sanford, 2002). In addition, genetic factors could influence the presentation of depression
through main effects, effects mediated by emotional disturbance, or changes that predispose
the person to stress sensitivity (Kendler, Gardner, & Prescott, 2002; Rutter, 2003). Family data
such as the present study cannot distinguish genetic from environmental factors; twin or
adoption studies are needed for that. It is misleading, however, to assume an easy separation
of genetic versus environmental variance (Rutter, 2003) and, consistent with a multifactorial
model of psychopathology, gene-environment interactions are increasingly being recognized
(Cadoret, Yates, Troughton, Woodworth, & Stewart, 1995; Caspi et al., 2002). We believe that
the first step in this process is to document the impact of parental MDD on the trajectories of
depression in offspring. Future research, probably involving a much more detailed assessment
of the parent, child, and home environment, are needed to address the mechanisms accounting
for these associations.
The study has several potential limitations. First, not all relatives were directly interviewed.
Therefore, we had to rely on informant reports in some cases, which resulted in lowered
sensitivity, especially regarding depression in fathers. In addition, more mothers provided
direct diagnostic reports than fathers. Therefore, we adjusted for the source of parental
diagnostic data in all analyses and examined whether source of parental data moderated an
association.
Second, data for the parents were based on lifetime retrospective ratings and data for the
offspring at the T3 covered an average period of seven years. This may have resulted in biased
recall, especially for the small number of participants who were in a current MDD at the time
of the T3 interview. We attempted to address this confound by controlling for current MDD
state at T3 in the adjusted analyses. It should be noted, however, that this approach may have
“overcontrolled” for the impact of current MDD. If parental MDD is truly associated with
higher recurrence rates and greater chronicity among offspring, it will by definition also be
associated with a greater likelihood that the offspring will be depressed at any point in time
(i.e., the current MDD is a consequence of greater recurrence and chronicity rather than an
artifactual cause).
Third, our sample consisted of individuals who had developed depression prior to age 19. It is
possible that the relations between parental depression and course of offspring MDD may differ
for individuals with prepubertal versus postpubertal MDD onset (Harrington et al., 1997). We
merged those two potentially distinct subgroups of offspring due to the small number of
participants with prepubertal MDD.
Fourth, our focus was restricted to biological parents. While this allowed us to examine specific
factors related to gender and MDD characteristics within the parent, depression within the
siblings and grandparents may have important effects (Kovacs, Devlin, Pollock, Richards, &
Mukerji, 1997; Orvaschel, 1990; Warner, Weissman, Mufson, & Wickramaratne, 1999). In
addition, if environmental mechanisms predominantly account for the impact of parental
depression on the course of depression in offspring, the inclusion of step-parents in a study
would be critical. There is currently stronger evidence for genetic than shared familial
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 14
environmental effects on depression (Sullivan, Neale, & Kendler, 2000) and this fact informed
our original design decision to restrict our assessments to biological parents. The fact that we
cannot comment on the impact of depression in step-parents on course of offspring
psychopathology is a limitation of the present report.
Fifth, the sample was restricted to OADP participants whose parents had also participated in
the companion study. In addition to the 244 formerly depressed participants who formed the
subject pool for the present study, an additional 45 OADP participants had a history of MDD
prior to age 19 but their parents had not provided diagnostic data. We compared the 244
participants from the present study to the 45 participants excluded from the present study on
the examined young adult outcome measures; all differences were nonsignificant, which
suggests that the present findings were not biased by differential rates of parental participation
in our project.
Sixth, several of the offspring course characteristics examined in the present study were
probably correlated. In addition, our measures of the characteristics of the offspring’s
depression may have been somewhat insensitive (e.g., other methods for evaluating the severity
of depression or psychosocial functioning could have been examined) and caution is needed
in interpreting the negative, as well as positive, findings.
Lastly, a large number of comparisons were computed, which increased the potential for
experiment-wide error. We did not statistically adjust for experiment-wide error, opting instead
to rigorously control for several potential confounding or mediating factors. Our decision to
not control for Type I error was made to balance this issue with avoiding a Type II error, given
the statistical power for the analyses. We were adequately powered to detect small to medium
effects in analyses using the entire sample but could detect only medium to large effects in
association with MDD onset age or recurrence in the parents. Future research is needed to
replicate the present results and evaluate whether the course of formerly depressed adolescents
of depressed and non-depressed parents will continue to diverge or will begin to converge as
the formerly depressed offspring move further into adulthood.
Clinical implications of the present study include the need for particularly intensive treatment
and monitoring of depressed adolescents and young adults who have a depressed parent,
especially the mother. This subgroup of depressed adolescents may benefit from maintenance
therapy. A history of maternal depression also increases the likelihood of comorbid anxiety
disorders in the depressed adolescent or young adult, which might warrant separate treatment.
Our findings suggest that parental depression has an equally negative effect on the course of
depression in formerly depressed sons and daughters but may more negatively influence the
psychosocial functioning and potential for suicidality of sons, which warrants particularly close
monitoring of risk. The presence of parental depression appears to be a salient selection criteria
for identifying formerly depressed adolescents in need of prevention treatments aimed at
reducing the development of recurrent, chronic, or severe depression in young adulthood. The
present study also suggests that depressed clients who are parenting may require additional
support. Although we do not know what mechanisms mediate the association between parental
depression and the trajectory of depression in offspring, clinicians treating depressed parents
need to evaluate potential contributing factors (e.g., parenting skills, expressed emotion,
modeling of depressotypic coping patterns) and address those that can be modified.
References
Akiskal HS. Factors associated with incomplete recovery in primary depressive illness. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 1982;43:266–271. [PubMed: 7085586]
American Psychiatric Association (1987). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, III-
R Washington, DC: Author.
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 15
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, fourth
edition Washington, DC: Author.
Arnett JJ. Adolescent storm and stress, reconsidered. American Psychologist 1999;54:317–326.
[PubMed: 10354802]
Beardslee WR, Keller MB, Lavori PW, Staley J, Sacks N. The impact of parental affective disorder on
depression in offspring: A longitudinal follow-up in a nonreferred sample. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1993;32:723–730. [PubMed: 8340291]
Beardslee WR, Keller MB, Seifer R, Lavori PW, Staley J, Podorefsky D, et al. Prediction of adolescent
affective disorder: effects of prior parental affective disorders and child psychopathology. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1996;35:279–288. [PubMed: 8714315]
Brennan PA, Hammen C, Katz AR, Le Brocque RM. Maternal depression, paternal psychopathology,
and adolescent diagnostic outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 2002;70:1075–
1085. [PubMed: 12362958]
Brent DA, Perper JA, Moritz G, Allman C, Friend A, Roth C, et al. Psychiatric risk factors for adolescent
suicide: A case-control study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
1993;32:521–529. [PubMed: 8496115]
Brent, D. A., & Moritz, G. (1996). Developmental pathways to adolescent suicide. In S. L. Toth and D.
Cicchetti (Eds.), Adolescence: Opportunities and challenges (pp. 233–258). Rochester, NY:
University of Rochester Press.
Brown GW, Moran P. Clinical and psychosocial origins of chronic depressive episodes: I. A community
survey. British Journal of Psychiatry 1994;165:447–456. [PubMed: 7804658]
Cadoret RJ, Yates WR, Troughton E, Woodworth G, Stewart MAS. Genetic-environmental interaction
in the genesis of aggressivity and conduct disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry 1995;52:916–
924. [PubMed: 7487340]
Caspi A, McClay J, Moffitt TE, Mill J, Martin J, Craig IW, Taylor A, Poulton R. Role of genotype in the
cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science 2002;297:851–854. [PubMed: 12161658]
Cicchetti D, Toth SL. The development of depression in children and adolescents. American Psychologist
1998;53:221–241. [PubMed: 9491749]
Cohen, P. (1988). The effects of diagnostic instrumentation and informants on ascertainment. In L. Robins
and M. Rutter (Eds.), Relatives at risk for mental disorders (pp. 31–52). New York: Raven.
Connell AM, Goodman SH. The association between psychopathology in fathers versus mothers and
children's internalizing and externalizing behavior problems: A meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin 2002;128:746–773. [PubMed: 12206193]
Daley SE, Hammen C, Rao U. Predictors of first onset and recurrence of major depression in young
women during the 5 years following high school graduation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
2000;109:525–533. [PubMed: 11016122]
Davies PT, Windle M. Gender-specific pathways between maternal depressive symptoms, family discord,
and adolescent adjustment. Developmental Psychology 1997;33:657–668. [PubMed: 9232381]
Depue RA, Monroe SM. Conceptualization and measurement of human disorder in life stress research:
The problem of chronic disturbance. Psychological Bulletin 1986;99:36–51. [PubMed: 3704034]
Dierker LC, Merikangas KR, Szatmari P. Influence of parental concordance for psychiatric disorders on
psychopathology in offspring. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
1999;38:280–288. [PubMed: 10087689]
Eley T, Stevenson J. Exploring the covariation between anxiety and depression. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 1999;40:1273–1282. [PubMed: 10604405]
Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Lynskey MT. Maternal depressive symptoms and depressive symptoms in
adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1995;36:1161–1178. [PubMed: 8847378]
Gilman SE, Kawachi I, Fitzmaurice GM, Buka SL. Socio-economic status, family disruption and
residential stability in childhood: Relation to onset, recurrence and remission of major depression.
Psychological Medicine 2003;33:1341–1355. [PubMed: 14672243]
Goodman SH, Gotlib IH. Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed mothers: A
developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychological Review
1999;106:458–490. [PubMed: 10467895]
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 16
Hankin BL, Abramson LY, Moffitt TE, Silva PA, McGee R, Angell KE. Development of depression
from preadolescence to young adulthood: Emerging gender differences in a 10-year longitudinal
study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 1998;107:128–140. [PubMed: 9505045]
Harrington RC, Fudge H, Rutter M, Pickles A, Hill J. Adult outcomes of childhood and adolescent
depression: I. Psychiatric status. Archives of General Psychiatry 1990;47:465–473. [PubMed:
2184797]
Harrington R, Rutter M, Weissman M, Fudge H, Groothues C, Bredenkamp D, et al. Psychiatric disorders
in the relatives of depressed probands: I. Comparison of prepubertal, adolescent and early adult onset
cases. Journal of Affective Disorders 1997;42:9–22. [PubMed: 9089054]
Harrington R, Rutter M, Fombonne E. Developmental pathways in depression: Multiple meanings,
antecedents, and endpoints. Development and Psychopathology 1996;8:601–616.
Hill JP, Holmbeck GN, Marlow L, Green TM, Lynch ME. Menarcheal status and parent-child relations
in families of seventh-grade girls. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 1985;14:301–316.
Jacob T, Johnson SL. Parent-child interaction among depressed fathers and mothers: Impact on child
functioning. Journal of Family Psychology 1997;11:391–409.
Kane P, Garber J. The relations among depression in fathers, children’s psychopathology, and father-
child conflict: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review 2004;24:339–360. [PubMed:
15245835]
Kashani JH, Carlson GA, Beck NC, Hoeper EW, Corcoran CM, McAllister JA, Fallahi C, Rosenberg
TK, Reid JC. Depression, depressive symptoms, and depressed mood among a community sample
of adolescents. American Journal of Psychiatry 1987;144:931–934. [PubMed: 3605407]
Keller MB, Beardslee WR, Dorer DJ, Lavori PW, Samuelson H, Klerman GR. Impact of severity and
chronicity of parental affective illness on adaptive functioning and psychopathology in children.
Archives of General Psychiatry 1986;43:930–937. [PubMed: 3753160]
Keller MB, Lavori PW, Friedman B, Nielsen E, Endicott J, McDonald-Scott PA. The Longitudinal
Interval Follow-up Evaluation: A comprehensive method for assessing outcome in prospective
longitudinal studies. Archives of General Psychiatry 1987;44:540–548. [PubMed: 3579500]
Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Neale MC, Prescott CA. Genetic risk factors for major depression in men and
women: Similar or different heritabilities and same or partly distinct genes? Psychological Medicine
2001;31:605–616. [PubMed: 11352363]
Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Prescott CA. Toward a comprehensive developmental model for major
depression in women. American Journal of Psychiatry 2002;159:1133–1145. [PubMed: 12091191]
Kendler KS, Walters EE, Kessler RC. The prediction of length of major depressive episodes: Results
from an epidemiological sample of female twins. Psychological Medicine 1997;27:107–117.
[PubMed: 9122291]
Kessler RC. Epidemiology of women and depression. Journal of Affective Disorders 2003;74:5–13.
[PubMed: 12646294]
Klein, D. N., Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., Seeley, J. R., & Olino, T. (in press). Psychopathology in a
community sample of adolescent and young adult offspring of parents with major depressive disorder:
The effects of parental gender, diagnostic specificity, and moderating factors. Psychological
Medicine
Klein DN, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR, Rohde P. A family study of major depressive disorder in a
community sample of adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry 2001;58:13–20. [PubMed:
11146753]
Klein DN, Ouimette PC, Kelly HS, Ferro T, Riso LP. Test-retest reliability of team consensus best-
estimate diagnoses of Axis I and II disorders in a family study. American Journal of Psychiatry
1994;151:1043–1047. [PubMed: 8010362]
Kovacs M. Gender and the course of major depressive disorder through adolescence in clinically referred
youngsters. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2001;40:1079–
1085. [PubMed: 11556632]
Kovacs M, Devlin B, Pollock M, Richards C, Mukerji P. A controlled family history study of childhood-
onset depressive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry 1997;54:613–623. [PubMed: 9236545]
Kuehner C. Gender differences in the short-term course of unipolar depression in a follow-up sample of
depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders 1999;56:127–139. [PubMed: 10701470]
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 17
Kuehner C, Weber I. Responses to depression in unipolar depressed patients: An investigation of Nolen-
Hoeksema’s response styles theory. Psychological Medicine 1999;29:1323–1333. [PubMed:
10616938]
Kupfer DJ, Frank E, Carpenter LL, Neiswanger K. Family history in recurrent depression. Journal of
Affective Disorders 1989;17:113–119. [PubMed: 2527886]
Lara ME, Klein DN, Kasch KL. Psychosocial predictors of the short-term course and outcome of major
depression: A longitudinal study of a nonclinical sample with recent-onset episodes. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 2000;109:644–650. [PubMed: 11195988]
Leckman JF, Sholomskas D, Thompson WD, Belanger A, Weissman MM. Best-estimate of lifetime
psychiatric diagnoses. Archives of General Psychiatry 1982;39:879–883. [PubMed: 7103676]
Lewinsohn PM, Allen NB, Seeley JR, Gotlib IH. First onset versus recurrence of depression: Differential
processes of psychosocial risk. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 1999;108:483–489. [PubMed:
10466272]
Lewinsohn PM, Hops H, Roberts RE, Seeley JR, Andrews JA. Adolescent psychopathology: I. Prevalence
and incidence of depression and other DSM-III-R disorders in high school students. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 1993;102:133–144. [PubMed: 8436689]
Lewinsohn PM, Rohde P, Klein DN, Seeley JR. Natural course of adolescent major depressive disorder:
I. Continuity into young adulthood. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 1999;38:56–63. [PubMed: 9893417]
Lewinsohn PM, Rohde P, Seeley JR, Klein DN, Gotlib IH. Natural course of adolescent major depressive
disorder in a community sample: Predictors of recurrence in young adults. American Journal of
Psychiatry 2000;157:1584–1591. [PubMed: 11007711]
Lieb R, Isensee B, Höfler M, Pfister H, Wittchen HU. Parental major depression and the risk of depression
and other mental disorders in offspring. Archives of General Psychiatry 2002;59:365–374. [PubMed:
11926937]
Mannuzza, S. & Fyer, A. J. (1990). Family informant schedule and criteria (FISC), July 1990 revision.
New York: Anxiety Disorders Clinic, New York State Psychiatric Institute
Marchand J, Hock E. The relation of problem behaviors in preschool children to depressive symptoms
in mothers and fathers. Journal of Genetic Psychology 1998;159:353–366. [PubMed: 9729841]
Matthews CA, Reus VI. Assortative mating in the affective disorders: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Comprehensive Psychiatry 2001;42:257–262. [PubMed: 11458299]
McCleary L, Sanford M. Parental expressed emotion in depressed adolescents: Prediction of clinical
course and relationship to comorbid disorders and social functioning. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines 2002;43:587–595.
McGee R, Feehan M, Williams S, Partridge F, Silva PA, Kelly J. DSM-III disorders in a large sample of
adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1990;29:611–
619. [PubMed: 2387797]
Montemayor R. Parents and adolescents in conflict: All of the families some of the time and some families
most of the time. Journal of Early Adolescence 1983;3:83–103.
Mueller TI, Leon AC, Keller MB, Solomon DA, Endicott J, Coryell W, Warshaw M, Maser JC.
Recurrence after recovery from major depressive disorder during 15 years of observational follow-
up. American Journal of Psychiatry 1999;156:1000–1006. [PubMed: 10401442]
O’Connor T, Neiderhiser J, Reiss D, Hetherington E, Plomin R. Genetic contributions to continuity,
change, and co-occurrence of antisocial and depressive symptoms in adolescence. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 1998;39:323–336. [PubMed: 9670088]
Orvaschel H. Early onset psychiatric disorder in high risk children and increased familial morbidity.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1990;29:184–188. [PubMed:
2324059]
Orvaschel H, Puig-Antich J, Chambers WJ, Tabrizi MA, Johnson R. Retrospective assessment of
prepubertal major depression with the Kiddie-SADS-E. Journal of the American Academy of Child
Psychiatry 1982;21:392–397. [PubMed: 7119313]
Orvaschel, H., Walsh-Allis, G., & Ye, W. (1988). Psychopathology in children of parents with recurrent
depression. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 16, 17–28. Puig-Antich, J. & Ryan, N. (1986).
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 18
The Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children (K-SADS-P)
Pittsburgh, PA: Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic.
Phares V. Where’s Poppa? The relative lack of attention to the role of fathers in child and adolescent
Psychopathology. American Psychologist 1992;47:656–664. [PubMed: 1642375]
Phares, V., Duhig, A. M., & Watkins, M. M. (2002). Family context: Fathers and others supports. In S.
H. Goodman, and I. H. Gotlib (Eds.), Children of depressed parents: Mechanisms of risk and
implications for treatment (pp.203–226). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Radke-Yarrow M, Nottelmann E, Martinez P, Fox MB, Belmont B. Young children of affectively ill
parents: A longitudinal study of psychosocial development. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1992;33:68–77. [PubMed: 1537784]
Rao U, Ryan ND, Dahl RE, Birmaher B, Rao R, Williamson DE, et al. Factors associated with the
development of substance use disorder in depressed adolescents. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1999;38:1109–1117. [PubMed: 10504809]
Reinherz HZ, Giaconia RM, Hauf AMC, Wasserman MS, Silverman AB. Major depression in the
transition to adulthood: Risks and impairments. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 1999;108:500–
510. [PubMed: 10466274]
Rohde P, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR. Comparability of telephone and face-to-face interviews assessing
Axis I and II disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry 1997;154:1593–1598. [PubMed: 9356570]
Rutter M. Commentary: Nature-nature interplay in emotional disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 2003;44:934–944. [PubMed: 14531576]
Scourfield J, Rice F, Thapar A, Harold G, Martin N, McGuffin P. Depressive symptoms in children and
adolescents: Changing aetiological influences with development. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 2003;44:968–976. [PubMed: 14531579]
Sheeber, L., Davis, B., & Hops, H. (2002). Gender-specific vulnerability to depression in children of
depressed mothers. In Goodman, S. H. & Gotlib, I. H.: Children of depressed parents: Mechanisms
of risk and implications for treatment (pp. 253–274). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press.
Silberg J, Pickles A, Rutter M, Hewitt J, Simonoff E, Maes H, Carbonneau R, Murrelle L, Foley D, Eaves
L. The influence of genetic factors and life stress on depression among adolescent girls. Archives of
General Psychiatry 1999;56:225–232. [PubMed: 10078499]
Silberg, J., & Rutter, M. (2002). Nature-nurture interplay in the risks associated with parental depression.
In Goodman, S. H. & Gotlib, I. H.: Children of depressed parents: Alternative pathways to risk for
psychopathology (pp. 13–36). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association
Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Gibbon M, First MB. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R
(SCID): I. History, rationale, and description. Archives of General Psychiatry 1992;49:624–629.
[PubMed: 1637252]
Steinberg L, Avenevoli S. The role of context in the development of psychopathology: A conceptual
framework and some speculative propositions. Child Development 2000;71:66–74. [PubMed:
10836559]
Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of major depression: Review and meta-
analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry 2000;157:1552–1562. [PubMed: 11007705]
Thomas AM, Forehand R. A response to Levant: There is little disagreement but a need for more research.
Journal of Family Psychology 1991;4:276–277.
Todd RD, Neuman R, Geller B, Fox LW, et al. Genetic studies of affective disorders: Should we be
starting with childhood onset probands. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 1993;32:1164–1171. [PubMed: 8282660]
Wainwright NWJ, Surtees PG. Childhood adversity, gender, and depression over the life-course. Journal
of Affective Disorders 2002;72:33–44. [PubMed: 12204315]
Warner V, Mufson L, Weissman MM. Offspring at high and low risk for depression and anxiety:
Mechanisms of psychiatric disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 1995;34:786–797. [PubMed: 7608053]
Warner V, Weissman MM, Fendrich M, Wickramaratne P, Moreau D. The course of major depression
in the offspring of depressed parents: Incidence, recurrence, and recovery. Archives of General
Psychiatry 1992;49:795–801. [PubMed: 1417432]
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 19
Warner V, Weissman MM, Mufson L, Wickramaratne PJ. Grandparents, parents, and grandchildren at
high risk for depression: A three-generation study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry 1999;38:289–296. [PubMed: 10087690]
Weissman MM, Fendrich M, Warner V, Wickramaratne P. Incidence of psychiatric disorder in offspring
at high and low risk for depression. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 1992;31:640–648. [PubMed: 1644726]
Weissman MM, Leckman JF, Merikangas KR, Gammon GD, Prusoff BA. Depression and anxiety
disorders in parents and children: Results from the Yale family study. Archives of General Psychiatry
1984;41:845–852. [PubMed: 6466043]
Weissman MM, Prusoff BA, Gammon GD, Merikangas KR, Leckman JF, Kidd KK. Psychopathology
in the children (ages 6–18) of depressed and normal parents. Journal of the American Academy of
Child Psychiatry 1984;23:78–84. [PubMed: 6693680]
Weissman MM, Warner V, Wickramaratne P, Moreau D, Olfson M. Offspring of depressed parents: 10
years later. Archives of General Psychiatry 1997;54(10):932–940. [PubMed: 9337774]
Weissman, M. M., Warner, V., Wickramaratne, P., Moreau, D., & Olfson, M. (2000). Offspring at risk:
Early-onset major depression and anxiety disorders over a decade. In J. L. Rapoport (Ed.): Childhood
onset of "adult" psychopathology: Clinical and research advances (pp. 245–258). Washington, DC:
American Psychopathological Association.
Weissman MM, Warner V, Wickramaratne P, Prusoff BA. Early-onset major depression in parents and
their children. Journal of Affective Disorders 1988;15:269–277. [PubMed: 2975299]
Weissman MM, Wolk S, Goldstein RB, Moreau D, Adams P, Greenwald S, et al. Depressed adolescents
grown up. Journal of the American Medical Association 1999;281:1707–1713. [PubMed: 10328070]
Wickramaratne PJ, Weissman MM. Onset of psychopathology in offspring by developmental phase and
parental depression. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
1998;37:933–942. [PubMed: 9841243]
Winokur G. All roads lead to depression: Clinically homogeneous, etiologically heterogeneous. Journal
of Affective Disorders 1997;45:97–108. [PubMed: 9268779]
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 20
1
elbaT
.noisserpeD
latneraP
fo
noitcnuF
a
sa
42–91
morf
gnirpsffO
desserpeD
ylremroF
ni
semoctuO
cirtaihcysP
fo
setaR
DDM
lanretaP
DDM
lanretaM
elaM
elameF
elaM
elameF
tneserP
tnesbA
tneserP
tnesbA
tneserP
tnesbA
tneserP
tnesbA
elbairav
gnirpsffO
serusaem
suomotohciD
5.45
4.74
ecnerrucer
DDM%
3.1
1.1
redrosid
ralopiB%
3.5
3.5
tpmetta
ediciuS%
3.41
4.7
redrosid
yteixnA%
1.22
0.02
esu
ecnatsbuS%
serusaem
suounitnoC
)4.52(
6.51
)7.12(
3.11
)DS(M
yticinorhc
DDM
)2.3(
5.5
)2.3(
8.4
)DS(M
ytireves
DDM
)9.0(
4.0
)9.0(
4.0
)DS(M
noitaedi
ladiciuS
)3.9(
3.67
)3.9(
4.77
)DS(M
FAG
.noitaived
dradnats
=
DS
;naem
=
M
;gninoitcnuF
fo
tnemssessA
labolG
= FAG
;redrosid
evisserped
rojam
=
DDM
.etoN
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
Rohde et al. Page 21
2
elbaT
.42–91
morf
gnirpsffO
ni
gninoitcnuF
dna
ygolohtapohcysP
htiw
DDM
latneraP
fo
noitaicossA
eht gnitseT
sledoM
DDM
lanretaP
DDM
lanretaM
eulav-p
2
ledoM
eulav-p
1 ledoM
eulav-p
2
ledoM
eulav-p
1
ledoM
elbairav
gnirpsffO
serusaem
suomotohciD
816.
)44.1–08.0(
80.1
182.
)45.1–88.0(
61.1
520.
)08.1–40.1(
73.1
920.
)27.1–30.1(
33.1
ecnerrucer
DDM
123.
)67.6–35.0(
09.1
842.
)41.7–16.0(
40.2
425.
)53.2–91.0(
66.0
347.
)07.2–42.0(
28.0
redrosid
ralopiB
950.
)49.2–89.0(
07.1
480.
)36.2–49.0(
65.1
991.
)22.1–93.0(
96.0
453.
)33.1–54.0(
77.0
tpmetta
ediciuS
982.
)11.2–08.0(
03.1
580.
)33.2–49.0(
94.1
440.
)67.2–10.1(
76.1
910.
)68.2–01.1(
57.1
redrosid
yteixnA
001.
)08.1–59.0(
13.1
990.
)88.5–82.0(
03.1
516.
)62.1–76.0(
29.0
196.
)72.1–07.0(
49.0
esu
ecnatsbuS
serusaem
suounitnoC
736.
30.
692.
70.
720.
41.
120.
51.
yticinorhc
DDM
393.
50.
390.
01.
101.
01.
730.
31.
ytireves
DDM
192.
70.
881.
80.
659.
00.
286.
30.
noitaedi
ladiciuS
342.
80.
810.
51.−
262.
60.−
230.
41.−
FAG
)b(
,tnerap-oc
eht
ni
DDM
)a(
rof
stsujda
2
ledoM
;atad
citsongaid
latnerap
fo
ecruos
eht
rof
stsujda
1
ledoM
.gninoitcnuF
fo
tnemssessA
labolG
=
FAG
;redrosid
evisserped
rojam
= DDM
.etoN
edosipe
tnerruc
a
ni
saw
gnirpsffo
eht
rehtehw
)e(
dna
,redrosid
doom-non
latnerap
)d(
,91
ega
yb
gnirpsffo
eht
ni
redrosid
doom-non
)c(
,1T
ta
tnerap
eht
htiw
gnivil
neeb
dah
gnirpsffo
eht
rehtehw
.snoitalerroc
laitrap-imes
htiw
detaulave
era
semoctuo
suounitnoc
;)slavretni
ecnedifnoc
%59
dna(
soitar
sddo
htiw
detaulave
era
semoctuo
suomotohciD
.3T ta
DDM
fo
J Abnorm Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 February 6.
