The first outbreak of coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19)
started during December 2019 in Wuhan, China. Shortly
thereafter, the World Health Organization classified COVID-19
as a pandemic and recommended strict restrictions regarding
most aspects of daily activities including work, social life, lei-
sure time, and healthcare [1].
As soon as the pandemic was identified, hospitals and ambu-
latory care facilities planned prevention and control strategies
to reduce transmission of COVID-19 to patients and healthcare
workers [1]. Although their goal was to reduce the impact on
emergency departments and hospital bed capacity in addition to
maximizing the efficiency of healthcare personnel with regard
to COVID-19 cases, it also created a challenge for hospitals to
establish non-COVID 19 medical priorities. Evidence is emerg-
ing on the dramatic decline of the number of patients with seri-
ous medical conditions, such as strokes and myocardial infarc-
tion, arriving at hospitals since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic [2-4]. This deferral has already resulted in increased
morbidity and mortality among cardiac, neurologic, and onco-
logic patients, and may also jeopardize the safety of patients in
the future [5,6].
Limited data are available about how COVID-19 affects the
behavior, prenatal care, and outcomes of pregnant women with-
out the disease. Most obstetrics and gynecology organizations
have issued guidance regarding prenatal care for low- and high-
risk women during the COVID-19 outbreak. Some of the sug-
gestions include reducing the number of in-person visits by us-
ing telehealth, altering the timing of visits, grouping screening
tests, restricting accompanied visitors, and scheduling maternal
and fetal assessment appointments when relevant [7-10].
Following the restrictions imposed by the Ministry of Health,
we noticed a drop in the number of prenatal visits and admis-
sions to our obstetrics and gynecology department. We therefore
decided to characterize this change and to assess whether this
drop, similar to other disciplines, had any adverse effect on the
maternal and fetal outcomes.
This cross-sectional study was conducted at a large tertiary re-
ferral center. The hospital opened a dedicated inpatient ward for
receiving patients, including pregnant women, who had been
diagnosed with the COVID-19. However, no pregnant women
who were diagnosed with COVID-19 were included in our study.
Preparations included the formation of a distinct staff for this
department as well as the establishment of a set of procedures
to ensure safe and comprehensive isolation, in accordance with
the strict requirements defined by the Ministry of Health [11].
Our obstetrics and gynecology department provides care to ap-
proximately 15,000 patients annually, and includes nearly 5500
births. The study was approved by the hospital’s research ethics
board (REB-0172-20).
Demographic and clinical data were retrieved from the
combined maternal and fetal medical records, and included
antenatal, intrapartum, and postpartum characteristics. All
registered visits to our obstetrics and gynecology department
during two distinct time periods were eligible for the study:
March–April 2019 was defined as period I and March–April
2020 (throughout the peak COVID-19 outbreak) was defined
as period II.
During the outbreak, all personnel working in the triage
areas were protected from the virus by wearing a face mask,
screen shield, and disposable medical gown. In the triage, every
woman was asked about respiratory symptoms, fever, and any
close contact with COVID-19 cases. Women were told to con-
tinue ongoing home care or were sent to a regular labor ward or
to a designated labor ward if COVID-19 was suspected.
The primary objective of this study was to describe changes No power calculations were computed for this cross-sectional
in outpatient clinic visits and to compare the rates of cesarean study. Descriptive statistics were reported as mean ± standard
and instrumental deliveries between study period I (March– deviation for continuous variables and as numbers (percent-
April 2019) and period II (March–April 2020). The secondary ages) for categorical variables. Univariate analyses were per-
goal was to compare other maternal and neonatal outcomes formed using Chi-square and -test or Mann–Whitney U test to
during the peak COVID-19 outbreak to the same period of the compare the groups on maternal and neonatal outcomes. The
preceding year. To reduce personal contact and to protect as threshold of statistical significance was
many medical staff members as possible, the only difference in analyses were performed using IBM Statistical Package for
care during the COVID-19 outbreak was that we switched to the Social Sciences statistics software, version 25 (SPSS, IBM
12-hours shifts followed by 24-hours of rest. Perinatal outcomes Corp, Armonk, NY, USA).
were only analyzed in women who ultimately gave birth at our
institution. Maternal outcome data included demographic data,
medical data, and maternal and fetal outcome. Estimated blood
loss of > 500 ml during a vaginal delivery and more than 1000 ml During the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, the num-
during a cesarean delivery were used to define postpartum hem- ber of visits and admissions to our obstetrics and gynecology
orrhage. Clinical criteria for chorioamnionitis were maternal department declined significantly [Figure 1]. Visits to obstetric
fever with two or more of the following symptoms: maternal triage, gynecologic triage, high-risk clinic, and ultrasound unit,
tachycardia, fetal tachycardia, leukocytosis, uterine tenderness, as well as the total number of deliveries decreased by 36.4%,
and malodorous amniotic fluid. Neonatal outcomes included 34.7%, 32.8%,18.1%, and 17.8%, respectively. The total num-
shoulder dystocia, Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes, umbilical ber of admissions to high-risk unit also declined by 22.3%.
artery cord pH, admission to the neonatal intensive care unit, Twenty pregnant women were tested for the virus due to high
and intrauterine fetal death. suspicion and all were ultimately proved negative.
Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the Women who attended their visits were more likely to be nullipa-
study groups are presented in Table 1. Pregnant women were rous, high-risk patients, who presented with hypertensive disor-
more likely to be nulliparous (33.3% vs. 27.6%, = 0.02), to ders of pregnancy or gestational diabetes and used more epidural
present with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (7.5% vs. 4%, analgesia during labor. We also observed a higher rate of oper-
= 0.005) or gestational diabetes (13% vs. 10%, = 0.03), and ative vaginal deliveries among nulliparous women. No differ-
to use epidural analgesia (83.1% vs. 77.1%, = 0.006) during ences were demonstrated in any of the other perinatal outcomes.
period II compared with period I. As the COVID-19 pandemic continued, many pregnant
Table 2 shows comparisons of maternal and neonatal out- women were uncertain about the impact of the outbreak on their
come variables between the two groups. The rate of cesarean pregnancy outcome. Pregnancy by itself constitutes a state of
deliveries, including of emergency cesarean deliveries, was not relative immunosuppression [12,13], and recent data suggest
different between the two periods: 22.1% (164/742) in period I that pregnant women have increased susceptibility to contract
vs. 24.1% (147/610) in period II, = 0.39. Rates of operative the disease as well as to increased morbidity [8].
vaginal deliveries were overall similar in both groups; however, We did not expect the number of childbirths, which reflect
there were more operative vaginal deliveries among nulliparous the number of pregnancies that began several months earlier,
women during period II than during period I (16.7% vs. 6.8%, to drop during the pandemic period. In our opinion, by being a
= 0.01). A sub-analysis of the common indications for op- referral center for patients with COVID-19, women preferred to
erative vaginal deliveries (non-reassuring fetal heart rate, pro- reduce the risk of acquiring the virus by choosing to give birth in
longed second stage, maternal exhaustion) showed that pro- a non-COVID-19 medical center. We speculate that women who
longed second stage was significantly more common in period gave birth elsewhere were more likely to be low-risk patients
II than in period I: 14.3% (2/14) in period I vs. 52.9% (18/34) and multiparous, which left us with a relative higher number of
in period II, = 0.01. All other maternal and neonatal outcomes high-risk and nulliparous women. Another possible explanation
were similar between the two periods. for the increased number of women with hypertensive disorders
of pregnancy and gestational diabetes may be the stress associ-
ated with the COVID-19 lockdown.
The stress that pregnant women experienced during the
During the first months of the outbreak of the coronavirus dis- COVID-19 lockdown could instigate a cascade of endocrino-
ease, we noticed a dramatic decrease in the number of visits logical and immunological alterations that affect the delicate
and admissions into our obstetrics and gynecology department. equilibrium needed to maintain a normal pregnancy and give
rise to the development of coexisting pregnancy complications.
It was postulated that the high maternal cortisol levels could This cross-sectional study has limitations. For example, we pos-
be correlated to reduced T-lymphocyte sensitivity to glucocor- tulated that, at least in part, COVID-19 was the main reason
ticoids. This acquired form of steroid resistance could be as- for the decline in number of hospital visits and births, but there
sociated with a higher release of pro-inflammatory cytokines might be other explanations for the decline that we were not
(TNF- and IL-6) and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis dys- able to explore. As the aim of our study was to describe the peri-
regulation, leading to endothelial dysfunction and consequent natal care and outcomes during the two periods of time, some
other variables, such as the indications for cesarean delivery
preeclampsia development [14]. Similarly, excessive activity of
and distinction between the types of gestational diabetes and the
circulating cortisol is a possible contributor to increased insulin
types of hypertensive disorders, were not fully evaluated in the
resistance, a typical feature in the pathogenesis of gestational
current study. Evaluating these additional parameters would add
diabetes [15,16].
little to this aim. In addition, the small number of vacuum assist-
Nulliparity is a known risk factor for operative vaginal de-
ed deliveries prevented us from performing multivariate analy-
livery [17]. Yet, we noticed an increase in the rate of vacu-
sis that could have shed some more light regarding the causes
um assisted births during the initial months of the outbreak
for our observations. Also, no data are available regarding the
among nulliparous women. The increase in the rate of vacuum
women who did not deliver at our institution or their pregnancy
assisted births during the COVID-19 pandemic may be the
outcome. The major strengths of this study include the relatively
consequence of a combination of well-known risk factor for
large number of deliveries and our ability to describe maternal
operative deliveries, high-risk nulliparous women, and pro-
and neonatal outcomes in two consecutive months during the
longed second stage [18,19]. In addition, although the effect
COVID-19 outbreak compared to the same period in the pre-
of neuraxial analgesia on the second stage of labor is incon- ceding year.
sistent [20,21], we assume that the higher rate of epidural an-
algesia use during period II also contributed to the higher rate
of operative deliveries during period II. Fortunately, we did During the COVID-19 outbreak a decline in all obstetrics and
not observe a higher rate of maternal or fetal complications gynecology visits in general, and specifically in births, was not-
secondary to the procedure. ed. This decline resulted in higher risk women attending labor
and delivery wards. Hospitals and caregivers should be aware
that higher risk women may attend labor and delivery wards
during the time of the pandemic.
Immune-regulatory mechanisms of drug-free remission biopsy fluorescent activated cell sorted STMs, revealed
in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are unknown. Alivernini and two STM subpopulations (MerTKposTREM2high and
co-authors hypothesized that synovial tissue macrophages MerTKposLYVE1pos) with unique remission transcriptomic
(STM), which persist in remission, contribute to joint signatures enriched in negative regulators of inflammation.
homeostasis. The authors used single-cell transcriptomics These STMs were potent producers of inflammation-
resolving lipid mediators and induced the repair response
in patients with early/active RA, treatment-refractory/active of synovial fibroblasts in vitro. A low proportion of MerTKpos
RA and RA in sustained remission. Each clinical state was STMs in remission was associated with increased risk
characterized by different frequencies of nine discrete of disease flare after treatment cessation. Therapeutic
phenotypic clusters within four distinct STM subpopulations modulation of MerTKpos STM subpopulations could
with diverse homeostatic, regulatory and inflammatory therefore be a potential treatment strategy for RA.
functions. This cellular atlas, combined with deep-
phenotypic, spatial and functional analyses of synovial
