ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 23 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.767446
Edited by:
John Anthony Johnson,
The Pennsylvania State University
(PSU), United States
Reviewed by:
Elizabeth A. Boyle,
University of the West of Scotland,
United Kingdom
Micah Mazurek,
University of Virginia, United States
*Correspondence:
Nancy Yang
nancy_yang_2@sfu.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 30 August 2021
Accepted: 10 January 2022
Published: 23 February 2022
Citation:
Yang N, Hurd PL and Crespi BJ
(2022) Why iPlay: The Relationships
of Autistic and Schizotypal Traits With
Patterns of Video Game Use.
Front. Psychol. 13:767446.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.767446
Why iPlay: The Relationships of
Autistic and Schizotypal Traits With
Patterns of Video Game Use
Nancy Yang1*, Pete L. Hurd2 and Bernard J. Crespi1
1 Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2 Department of Psychology,
Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Video games are popular and ubiquitous aspects of human culture, but their
relationships to psychological and neurophysiological traits have yet to be analyzed in
social-evolutionary frameworks. We examined the relationships of video game usage,
motivations, and preferences with autistic and schizotypal traits and two aspects of
neurophysiology, reaction time and targeting time. Participants completed the Autism
Quotient, Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire, a Video Game Usage Questionnaire,
and two neurophysiological tasks. We tested in particular the hypotheses, motivated
by theory and previous work, that: (1) participants with higher autism scores would
play video games more, and participants with higher schizotypy scores would play
video games less; and (2) autism and positive schizotypy would be associated with
opposite patterns of video game use, preferences and motivations. Females, but not
males, with higher autism scores played more video games, and exhibited evidence
of relatively male-typical video game genre preferences and motivations. By contrast,
positive schizotypy was associated with reduced video game use in both genders, for
several measures of game use frequency. In line with previous ﬁndings, males played
video game more than females did overall, preferred action video games, and exhibited
faster reaction and targeting times. Females preferred Puzzle and Social Simulation
games. Faster reaction and targeting times were associated with gaming motives related
to skill development and building behavior. These ﬁndings show that gaming use and
patterns reﬂect aspects of psychology, and gender, related to social cognition and
imagination, as well as aspects of neurophysiology. More generally, the results suggest
that video game use is notably affected by levels of autistic and schizotypal traits, and
that video games may provide an evolutionarily novel medium for imaginative play in
which immersive play experiences can be decoupled from social interaction.
Keywords: autism, schizotypy, video games (psychology), play, imagination, evolution, social cognition,
technology
INTRODUCTION
Why do people play? Play is a nearly universal behavior among mammals (Burghardt, 2005), but
only humans have the capacity for complex and social pretend play, and for developing the multiple
orders of intentionality necessary for narrative production, theory-of-mind, and abstract thinking
(Nowell, 2016). Play has also been postulated as a fundamental preparatory adaptation for higher-
order adult social behaviors such as competition, reciprocity, and moral development (Bekoﬀ, 2001;
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Bateson, 2005). There is also evidence that play may be
considered a form of proto-creativity, which may underlie
higher-order social cognitive processes including imagination,
theory-of-mind, and abstract problem-solving (Vygotsky, 1967;
Leslie, 1987). For example, in both object and pretend play,
there is a transitive process where children spontaneously extract
or conjure abstract properties of objects, manipulate or “play”
with such constructs, then project them onto other entities. The
transitive process of spontaneously conjuring abstract properties
and manipulating them among unrelated objects is a hallmark
of imagination, creativity, and divergent thinking. Physical play,
such as rough-and-tumble play, has also been implicated in
the development of social behaviors, such as dominance and
cooperation (Smith and Boulton, 1990). Thus, play appears to
be a key ontogenetic developmental phase in human social
cognitive development.
How, then, does the current digitalization of the social world
aﬀect how people play? Given increased virtualization of the
social world, video games have come to increasingly predominate
the “iGen” (i.e., the generation of individuals born between 1995
and 2011, who grew up with smartphones and social media)
play space (Twenge, 2017). As of 2021, there are nearly 227
million video game players in the U.S., with the median age at
31 years old (Entertainment Software Association [ESA], 2021),
making video games one of the most popular pastimes enjoyed
by people from all age groups. Annual video game sales in the
U.S. have also grown from $25 billion in 2016 to $35 billion in
2018 (Entertainment Software Association [ESA], 2019), making
it one of the most lucrative and fastest growing industries in the
entertainment sector. The increasing accessibility and ubiquity of
digital technology, such as mobile phones and tablets, have made
it possible for most of the population to access games at their
ﬁngertips. The increasingly accessibility of video games has also
made it possible for games to be incorporated into a diverse range
of day-to-day activities, including but not limited to education,
entertainment, rehabilitation, and therapy.
Despite the growing importance and popularity of video
games in modern life, the relationships of video game culture
with social and cognitive phenotypes remain little understood.
To date, most research on video games had focused on speciﬁc
aspects of neuropsychological traits to video game use, such as
the relationship between aggression and violent video games
(Scott, 1995), the use of video games in training faster reaction
times (Dye et al., 2009), and the eﬀects of Big Five personality
traits on video game preferences (Peever et al., 2012). Such work
is useful for elucidating the proximate mechanisms underlying
video game use but does not capture the overarching questions of
how and why video game usage is involved in the larger socio-
evolutionary framework of play, social cognitive development,
and imaginative culture. In other words, why do people play
video games? Why is such play important? What social-cognitive,
psychological, and neurophysiological traits are associated with
video game usage, preferences, and motivations? And how do
video games factor into the evolutionary functions of play in
general?
Current evidence suggests that video game usage patterns
are consistent with psychological proﬁles and behaviors that
mirror real life motivations and preferences (Wang et al., 2019;
Delhove and Greitemeyer, 2020). For example, self-perceived in-
game aggression in the First Person Shooter game Overwatch
is positively associated with trait aggression, Dark Tetrad traits,
and negatively with empathy and agreeableness in players
(Delhove and Greitemeyer, 2020). Multiple lines of evidence also
suggest Big Five personality traits have a measurable impact
in individual patterns of video game usage (Tabacchi et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). For example,
extraversion has been positively associated with preference
for party, music, and casual games, and negatively with
fantasy role-playing, MMORPGs (massively multiplayer online
role playing games), action role-playing, and strategy games
(Peever et al., 2012). Similarly, conscientiousness has been
associated with preferences for sport, racing, ﬂight simulation,
and ﬁghting games (Peever et al., 2012), which suggests
that athletic and action video game genres involve clear and
identiﬁable goals and immediate reinforcement of achievements,
and conscientiousness is associated with greater goal orientation
(Colquitt and Simmering, 1998). Openness to experience,
a personality trait linked with creativity and imagination
(McCrae, 1987), has been associated with preferences for
action-adventure and platformer games (Peever et al., 2012),
both of which usually involve open exploration of virtual
environments and creative puzzle-solving (e.g., Legend of
Zelda, Super Mario). Indeed, openness to experience has
also been associated with greater motivation to play video
games for immersive experiences (Johnson and Gardner,
2010). Individuals with higher social orientation tend to play
competitive or multiplayer games such as Call of Duty or World
of Warcraft and individuals with high goal orientation prefer
exploratory, intrinsically rewarding games such as Minecraft
(Tondello and Nacke, 2019).
How,
then,
does
the
development
of
diverse
social-
psychological phenotypes correlate with general video usage?
From the pattern described above, diﬀerent typologies of video
game players may be elucidated further, based on diﬀerential
development in socio-cognitive traits and usage proﬁles.
Emerging
evidence
indicates
that
video
games
usage
may reﬂect not only users’ psychological traits, but also
neurophysiological skills such as reaction time (Dye et al., 2009;
Deleuze et al., 2017; Gorbet and Sergio, 2018; Kowal et al., 2018;
Torner et al., 2019), spatial visualization (Dorval and Pepin,
1986), multiple object tracking (Green and Bavelier, 2006),
better cognitive ﬂexibility in task-switching (Li et al., 2020) and
probabilistic inferences on visual perceptual task (i.e., being able
to quickly discriminate whether a display of randomly moving
dots are moving toward the left or right) that are generalizable
across modalities (Green et al., 2010). Furthermore, video game
users also exhibit better hand-eye coordination skills than non-
users (Griﬃth et al., 1983), but the question of whether video
game usage improves hand-eye coordination times, or whether
users with better hand-eye coordination play more video games
(or both), is not yet resolved.
Considered together, these results support the view that
video game usage patterns are associated with variation in
some psychological traits and neurophysiological phenotypes.
However, most studies have focused on action games, and no
previous work has analyzed subclinical autistic and schizotypal
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
traits (i.e., traits related to social cognition, neurodevelopment,
and other phenotypes) together in relation to video game usage
and preferences and their neurophysiological correlates. Such
studies are important given the important roles of video games
of diverse genres in human imaginative culture, and given
that individuals with autism or schizotypy show some evidence
of high rates of video game usage (Mazurek and Engelhardt,
2013a,b; Schimmenti et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2020; Menear and
Ernest, 2020; Coutelle et al., 2021). This study thus analyzes
how video game usage patterns, genre preferences, motivations,
and reaction times are associated with measures of non-clinical
autism and schizotypy.
Two studies suggest that psychological variations related to
the autism spectrum and the schizophrenia spectrum, including
positive schizotypy, may mediate aspects of video game use. First,
Wendt et al. (2019) reported a positive genetic correlation of
computer game use with autism risk, and a negative genetic
correlation of computer game use with schizophrenia risk. These
ﬁndings suggest that autism and schizophrenia or schizotypy
may show opposite patterns of association with video game
use in non-clinical populations, for reasons that have yet to
be investigated.
Second, according to the diametric model of social brain
disorders (Crespi and Badcock, 2008; Crespi and Go, 2015;
Crespi, 2016, 2019, 2020), autism and psychosis can be
conceptualized as polar ends of a continuum of social cognition
development, with normality at its center. Thus, autism is
characterized by low mentalistic thought (i.e., social cognition)
and high mechanistic thought (i.e., non-social cognition),
and psychotic-aﬀective conditions, such as schizotypy, are
characterized by high mentalistic and low mechanistic thought
(Crespi and Badcock, 2008). Given that childhood play can be
categorized in non-social (i.e., object) and social (i.e., pretend or
imaginary) domains, video game usage patterns may be expected
to co-vary according to the socio-cognitive traits in autistic and
schizotypal spectra.
Mechanistic thought is characterized by a cognitive style
specialized for recognizing patterns in rule-based systems (i.e.,
“if p, then q”) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009). In autism, a
systemizing cognitive style is applicable to a broad swath of
domains such as collectibles (i.e., distinguishing between types of
objects and collecting them), motoric (i.e., throwing a Frisbee),
mechanical (i.e., taking apart objects and reassembling them),
spatial (i.e., ﬁxed interests with routes), action sequences (i.e.,
analyzing dance techniques), and numerical traits (i.e., solving
math or logical problems) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009)—all of
which are conducive for puzzles, action, platformer, sports, and
construction simulation types of video games where extensive
strategizing of rule-based systems is involved. Indeed, previous
studies have found that individuals with autism prefer gaming
genres such as Action, Platformer, and Shooter (Mazurek and
Engelhardt, 2013b; Kuo et al., 2014), all of which challenge the
player’s coordination, and speed in rule-based gameplay. A strong
systemizing style can also involve especially high attention to
details and fast sensory processing (Baron-Cohen et al., 2009),
which may facilitate higher video game usage by enhancing
attentional focus, reaction times, and hand-eye coordination.
Furthermore, autistic traits have been associated with higher
video game usage (Mazurek and Engelhardt, 2013b), and
problematic video game usage (i.e., symptoms of clinical
addiction to video games) (Liu et al., 2017; Coutelle et al.,
2021; Craig et al., 2021; Murray et al., 2021). Compared to
neurotypicals, boys and male adolescents with ASD also play
video games for longer times, prefer to play alone, and play
less frequently in multiplayer mode (Paulus et al., 2019). Taken
together, autistic traits may thus involve higher video game usage,
as well as increased preferences for puzzle, action, platformer,
strategy, racing, sports, idle, and construction and management
simulation games. Given the positive association of action video
games with autistic traits, we also expect that autistic traits in
non-clinical individuals may also be positively associated with
increased neurophysiological skills such as faster reaction and
hand-eye coordination times.
In contrast to autism, positive schizotypy can be characterized
by hyper-mentalistic traits such as fantasy-proneness, ideas of
reference (i.e., illusory social references to self), paranoia (e.g.,
illusory eye contact and fear), and increased imagination (Crespi
and Badcock, 2008; Crespi et al., 2016). All of these traits may
be expected to increase preferences for fantasy or fantasy-based
role-playing video games that are extensions of pretend play.
In contrast to autism, which is known for its singular focus on
select topics of special interests (Casey et al., 1993), schizotypy
is associated with information processing impairments such as
poor sustained attention (Lenzenweger et al., 1991), deﬁcits in
sensorimotor gating (i.e., inability to ﬁlter out irrelevant stimuli
from the environment) (Cadenhead et al., 2000; Park et al., 2015),
and deﬁcits in smooth eye pursuits (Lenzenweger and O’Driscoll,
2006)—all traits that may make video games challenging, as
they commonly involve detecting and tracking sudden and fast-
moving objects and distractors while multi-tasking (Hubert-
Wallander et al., 2011).
Positive schizotypal traits, in particular, have been associated
with slower reaction time during conditions of high perceptual
load (Lenzenweger, 2001) and deﬁcits in predicting targeting
hand movements (Asai et al., 2008), both of which would
impede video gameplay, particular action genres, as a large
component of gameplay involve fast decision-making and quick
executions of hand-eye movements via controller use. Thus,
positive schizotypal traits may be associated with decreased video
game usage, as well as a preference for fantasy or fantasy-based
role-playing video games, which tend to be slower-paced and
emphasize user-directed exploratory behavior rather than time-
intensive tasks.
Gender diﬀerences in play have been well-documented in the
literature, extending into video game usage and preferences. Male
play is more physically aggressive (Ostrov and Keating, 2004) and
“thing-oriented,” with increased interests in objects and functions
of objects such as construction and transportation (Servin et al.,
1999). In comparison, female play tends to be more socially
directed and involve fantasy-role playing, such as play parenting
(i.e., doll playing), a sex diﬀerence that has been observed in
primates (Pryce, 1995), and pretend play (i.e., toy tea-sets) (Servin
et al., 1999). Preliminary lines of evidence suggest that sex
diﬀerences in childhood play may also extend to video game
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
usage. For example, college-aged males prefer more physical
aggressive video game genres such as action, racing, and sports
(Greenberg et al., 2010). In contrast, females prefer to prefer
more “traditional” games such as puzzles, cards, classic arcade
games, or board games (Greenberg et al., 2010), all of which
are less physically aggressive. Thus, sex diﬀerences in patterns of
video game usage, genre preferences, and motivations might be
expected to reﬂect general sex diﬀerences in childhood play.
Based on the reasons outlined above, the following predictions
can be made:
Hypothesis 1: Gender diﬀerences in video game usage,
genre preferences, and motivations will vary in the
following ways: (1) Males will report greater video game
usage than females, (2) Males will prefer mechanistic-
oriented video games such as Action, Platformer, Strategy,
Racing, Sports, RPG, and Construction and Management
Simulation games while females will prefer Puzzle and
Social Simulation video games, (3) Males will report greater
motivation for Skill Development and Customization
games and females will report greater motivations of Social
Interaction, a Way to Fantasize, and a Way to Escape on the
Video Game Usage Questionnaire used here.
Hypothesis 2: Autistic traits will be associated with
increased video game usage. Total and positive schizotypal
traits, as quantiﬁed by total score on the SPQ-BR and
scores on the SPQ Cognitive-Perceptual subscale, will be
negatively associated with frequency of video game usage.
Hypothesis 3: Autistic traits will be positively associated
with preferences for relatively rule-based video game
genres including Puzzle, Action, Platformer, Strategy,
Racing, Sports, Idle, and Construction and Management
Simulation games. Total and positive schizotypal traits will
be positively associated with preferences for Fantasy, Role
Playing, and Social Simulation video games.
Hypothesis 4: Autistic traits will be positively associated
with mechanistic motivations such as Skill Development
and
Customization
on
the
Video
Game
Usage
Questionnaire.
Total
and
positive
schizotypal
traits
will be positively associated with mentalistic motivations
such as Social Interaction, Way to Fantasize, and Way to
Escape on the Video Game Usage Questionnaire used here.
Hypothesis 5: Autistic traits will be associated with
increased neurophysiological skills, such as faster reaction
time and hand-eye coordination time. Conversely, total and
positive schizotypal traits will be associated with slower
reaction and hand-eye coordination times.
Hypothesis 6: Increased total video game usage will be
predicted by higher reaction and hand-eye coordination
time. In turn, slower reaction and hand-eye coordination
time will predict lower video game usage.
The predictions of these hypotheses were tested using data on
measures of autism spectrum and schizotypy spectrum cognition
in a non-clinical population, and data on reaction times and
targeting times, two measures of neurophysiological performance
that may be related to video game use and performance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants
A total of 351 participants (207 females, 144 males, mean
age = 20.20 ± 3.04 years old) were included in the study.
The participants were recruited from various electronic mailing
lists (i.e., university student lists and newsletters) and the
Simon Fraser University Undergraduate Psychology Research
Pool. The following study description was circulated as the
recruitment email: “Do you play video games? Or do you not
play video games? Either way, we want to hear from you!
We are doing an online study on the relationship between
psychological traits and video game usage. You will receive a
$10 gift card for participation. For more info please contact
nancy_yang_2@sfu.ca.” Participants were reimbursed with either
a course credit or a $10 electronic gift card for their time.
All participants provided informed consent before participating
in this study. Data collection took place during the Spring
2021 semester (January–April 2021). The study was approved
by the Simon Fraser University Research Ethics Board (Study
Permit 2020s0503).
Psychological Questionnaires
The Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) was used to assess
individual variations in autistic traits (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001).
The AQ comprises 50 questions assessing ﬁve diﬀerent domains:
(i) social skills, (ii) attention switching, (iii) attention to detail,
(iv) communication, (v) imagination. Responses were scored in a
4-point Likert-scale format from “deﬁnitely agree” to “deﬁnitely
disagree.” Participants score one point when they report a trait
that is consistent with the autism spectrum, for a possible
scoring range of 0–50. Higher scores on the Social Skills and
Imagination subscale represent lower social skills and lower
social imagination.
Schizotypal traits were quantiﬁed with Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire-Brief Revised (SPQ-BR) (Cohen et al., 2010). The
SPQ-BR includes 32 items in a 5-point Likert scale format
with response choices ranging from “strongly disagree” to
“strongly agree.” Possible scores range from 0 to 160, with
higher scores indicative of higher levels of schizotypy. The
SPQ-BR is clustered into three superordinate factors: Cognitive-
Perceptual, Interpersonal, and Disorganized schizotypy—which
map onto the positive, negative, and disorganized dimensions
of schizophrenia, respectively (Andreasen et al., 1995). The
Cognitive-Perceptual (positive) schizotypy scale (referred to
here as SPQ-CogPer) consists of three subscales: Magical
Thinking, Unusual Perceptions, and Ideas of Reference. The
Interpersonal schizotypy factor includes Social Anxiety and
Constricted
Aﬀect,
and
the
Disorganized
factor
includes
Eccentric Behavior and Odd Speech.
A Video Game Usage Questionnaire was adapted from the
Gaming Attitudes, Motives, and Experiences Scales (GAMES)
(Hilgard et al., 2013). The questionnaire has six main sections to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
assess patterns of video game usage, as well a short demographic
section that asks participants to report their age and gender (ex:
male, female, other, prefer not to answer). First, participants
were asked the amount of weekday and weekend hours spent
on video games, as well as self-evaluations of video game usage.
Participants are also asked the titles of the video games that
they play, preferred types of video game genres, motivations for
gaming (i.e., Social Interactions, Stress Relief, Skill Development,
Adrenaline Rush, A Place to Escape, A Way to Fantasize,
Customization), self-evaluations of video game performance, as
well as preferred type of device for playing video games. For game
titles, participants were given a list of popular video games to
choose from, as well as write their own response in an open-
ended “Other” answer box. For video game genres, participants
were given the following list to choose from, as well as brief
examples of what each genre entails. The list of video game
genres was as follow: Puzzle games (candy crush, portal), Action
games (ﬁrst-person shooter like Doom, Call of Duty), Platformer
games (side scrolling games like Mario, Sonic), RPG (action-
based role-playing games, Darkest Dungeon, Skyrim, Kingdom-
come: Deliverance), Strategy (turn based or real time—Xcom,
Civilization, Total Warhammer), Sports games (tennis, golf),
Construction and management simulation (Minecraft), Social
Simulation (Animal Crossing), Idle games (Cookie click, idle
heros), and Other (open ended response where participants
could write their own). Given that most video games overlap
somewhat in their genres, we hereby diﬀerentiate action-oriented
role-playing games and fantasy-based role-playing games by
categorizing the former as “RPG,” as per popular usage (Rehbein
et al., 2016), and the latter as “Social Simulation” to better
emphasize diﬀerences between these two genres. We excluded
responses entered in the “Other” video game genre question item
as the responses were too few to reach statistical power.
The frequency of video game usage was quantiﬁed via
participant self-evaluations on this questionnaire. There were
ﬁve questions pertaining to video game usage. First, participants
were asked on the following: (1) Self report usage: “What is
your video game usage like?” on a 5-point Likert scale where 1
was “Very Often” and 5 was “Very rarely or not at all,” (2) Self
report frequency: “How frequent do you play video games? Check
one.” Participants had the option of selecting from “Daily,” “2–
3 times a week,” “weekly,” “2–3 times a month,” “monthly,” “less
than monthly,” and “never,” (3) Self report spare time: “What
proportion of your spare time is spent on video games?” on a 5-
point Likert scale where 1 was “Almost all of none of my spare
time” and 5 “Almost all of my spare time.” For self-reported
frequency, responses were scored as “1” if participants answered
“Never” and “7” for “Daily.” Participants were also asked to
enter the number of hours spent on video games for an average
weekday and weekend day.
Experimental Procedures
Participants were ﬁrst given the battery of questionnaires
to complete, in the following order: Video Game Usage
Questionnaire,
AQ,
and
SPQ-BR.
Afterward,
participants
completed
two
computer
tasks
(1)
Fitts
Law
Task
to
quantify
targeting
time,
and
(2)
Simple
Choice
Task
to
quantify
reaction
time.
Both
computer
tasks
were
administered
via
https://www.psytoolkit.org/
(Stoet,
2010,
2017),
a
toolkit
for
online
cognitive-psychological
experiments
and
surveys1.
The
questionnaires
were
administered via SurveyMonkey2. The computer tasks are
described below.
Fitts’ Law Task (20 Trials in total) (Fitts, 1954): There were
20 trials in total. On each trial, the participant was presented
with a yellow square on the left upper side of a black screen.
The participant was instructed to click on the yellow square with
their mouse cursor. After the yellow square was clicked on, a red
rectangle, of a randomized size, appeared on a random place on
the screen. The participant was then instructed to move their
mouse cursor to the red rectangle as quickly as possible, for a
total of 20 times. When participant completed the Fitts’s Law
Task, they were presented with a feedback screen that said: “Great
job! Press the space bar to continue.” Then the participants were
presented with a short summary of the task objectives: “Fitts’s
Law. The time it takes you to move the cursor on the red rectangle
depends on the size and the distance. Press space bar to exit.”
After completion of the Fitts’ Law Task, the participant moved
onto the Simple Choice Task.
Simple Choice Task (8 Training Trials, 20 Experimental Trials)
(Deary et al., 2011): For this task there were 28 trials in total, with
8 practice and 20 experimental trials. On each trial, a black cross
appeared on a white square on the computer screen. Participants
were instructed to press the space bar as soon as possible when
they see a black cross appearing in the white box. The time when
the cross appeared in the white box varied from trial to trial. No
feedback on performance was given for either computer tasks.
Analyses
Analyses were conducted in R (v4.0.5) (R Core Team, 2021)
using functions in the base statistical package. Linear regressions
were conducted using the lm() function while logistic regressions
were conducted using the glm() function with binomial response
family. Stepwise elimination of independent variables, for
stepwise regressions, was accomplished using the step() function.
Two extreme outliers were removed from the reaction time
analysis, due to them being over eight standard deviations from
the other reaction time scores. To assess the relationship between
the frequency of video game use and the thirteen AQ and SPQ
subscales we conducted multiple regressions for each of the ﬁve
measures of videogame use. We also conducted separate analyses
of covariance (ANCOVAs) for each of these dependent variables,
using each of the AQ and SPQ subscale scores as independent
variables, and gender as a cofactor. To assess the relationship
between the frequency of video game use and the composite,
we conducted ANCOVAs as for the subscales and included
interaction terms along with the gender cofactor. Correlations
between reaction time and targeting score were assessed using a
linear model analysis of covariance using the targeting score as
the outcome variable and reaction time as independent variable,
with gender as a covariate.
1https://www.psytoolkit.org/
2www.surveymonkey.com
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Eﬀects of reaction time and targeting scores on each of the
ﬁve measures of video game use were analyzed with ANCOVAs
using each of the game use variables as an outcome and either
reaction time or targeting time score as the independent variable,
and gender included as a covariate, and without an interaction
term. To analyze the eﬀects of the AQ and SPQ subscales, we
performed backward stepwise regressions starting with each all of
the AQ and SPQ subscales and gender as independent variables
for each of the ﬁve use measure outcome variables. The least
informative independent variable was iteratively dropped from
the model until dropping a variable led to a less eﬃcient model,
as assessed using the Akaike information criterion.
Tests for association between reaction time, and targeting
scores, on the type of games played were conducted using logistic
regressions. Each of the game types was modeled with a separate
analysis, with type of game played as a Boolean outcome; the
independent variables were either reaction time, or targeting
score, each of which also included gender as a covariate, without
interaction terms. Tests for the association between reaction time
and targeting scores and each of the diﬀerent types of motivation
to play games were conducted in the same manner, with one
logistic regression of the motivational type as a Boolean outcome
variable against either reaction time or targeting with gender
included as a covariate.
To test for associations of AQ and SPQ scales with the type of
games played, logistic regressions were conducted using general
linear models with binomial response families. Each of the game
types was modeled with a separate analysis, with type of game
played as a Boolean outcome, and all subscales were entered
as independent variables along with gender. No interaction
terms were entered. A backward stepwise method was used to
successively drop the least informative independent variable,
until dropping a variable led to a less eﬃcient model, as assessed
using the Akaike information criterion. Tests for association
between the AQ and SPQ subscales and the motivations to
play games were conducted in the same manner, with a
separate stepwise elimination of subscales until reaching the most
eﬃcient model for each of the diﬀerent motivation types. Simple
bivariate analyses (e.g., t-tests, product-moment correlations)
were conducted for some analyses, in addition to ANCOVAs and
multiple regression analyses, for representation and depiction
of the results for each relevant test, since these analyses make
fewer assumptions.
RESULTS
Gender Differences in Autism Spectrum
Quotient, Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire, and Patterns of Video
Game Usage
Females scored higher than males on SPQ-Ideas of Reference,
SPQ-Social Anxiety, SPQ-Magical Thinking, SPQ-Odd Speech,
SPQ-Cognitive-Perceptual, SPQ-Disorganized, and SPQ-Total
(Supplementary Tables 1, 2). There were no outliers in the
AQ-total or SPQ-total scores (Supplementary Figures 1, 2).
Males scored higher than females on all the variables that
quantiﬁed video game usage (Supplementary Tables 1, 2). Males
also demonstrated faster reaction and targeting time on the
Simple Choice Task and Fitts’ Law Task than females, respectively
(Supplementary Tables 1, 2).
Females preferred Puzzle and Social Simulation games more
than males did. By contrast, males preferred Action, RPG,
Strategy, and Sports games (Supplementary Tables 1, 2). Males
were more motivated by Social Interaction, Skill Development,
Adrenaline Rush, and Fantasy reasons compared to females.
No gender diﬀerences were detected for the motivations
Stress Relief or Escape. Females were more motivated by
Customization than males.
Patterns of Video Game Use in Relation
to Autism Spectrum Quotient-Total,
Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire-Total, and Schizotypal
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
By
product-moment
correlations,
higher
AQ-total
scores
were signiﬁcantly associated with higher video game use for
the following usage measures: weekend hours, self-reported
frequency, and self-reported usage, in females only (Table 1).
Higher SPQ-CogPer scores were associated with reduced
weekday and weekend hours, as well as decreased self-reported
frequency and self-reported spare time spent on video games,
when both genders were pooled together. In females only,
higher SPQ-CogPer scores were also associated with decreased
self-reported spare time video games usage. No statistically
signiﬁcant relationships were found for SPQ-Total. Higher
TABLE 1 | Pearson Correlations of AQ-total, SPQ-total, and SPQ-CogPer scores
with Measures of Video Game Usage.
Video game usage
Weekday
time (h)
Weekend
time (h)
Self-
report
frequency
Self-
report
usage
Self-
report
spare time
Females (N = 207)
AQ: Total
0.13
0.21**
0.17**
−0.20**
0.11
SPQ: CogPer
−0.05
−0.06
−0.12
−0.04
−0.17*
SPQ: Total
−0.02
0.05
−0.01
−0.10
−0.03
Males (N = 144)
AQ: Total
−0.02
0.04
−0.03
0.07
0.05
SPQ: CogPer
−0.04
−0.03
−0.10
0.02
−0.04
SPQ: Total
0.03
0.06
−0.02
−0.10
0.11
Both Genders
(N = 351)
AQ: Total
0.02
0.08
0.04
−0.06
0.04
SPQ: CogPer
−0.13**
−0.14**
−0.20***
0.06
−0.18***
SPQ: Total
−0.05
−0.02
−0.09
−0.04
−0.04
Note that the scale for “Self report usage” is directionally opposite to the
other scales. *Denotes signiﬁcance at < 0.05. **Denotes signiﬁcance at < 0.01.
***Denotes signiﬁcance at < 0.001. Boldface values indicate that relationships were
statistically signiﬁcant.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
FIGURE 1 | Relationship between self-reported frequency and AQ scores for
females (red) and males (blue).
AQ-Total scores were positively associated with higher self-
reported frequency of video game usage in females, while male
video game usage was relatively high across the entire range of
AQ-Total scores (Figure 1).
ANCOVAs revealed that higher AQ-total was associated with
greater weekend time, higher self-reported frequency, and higher
self-reported usage of video game usage with an interaction
eﬀect indicating that the eﬀects were restricted to females
(Supplementary Table 3 and Figure 1). Higher scores on SPQ-
CogPer were associated with lower self-reported frequency and
lower self-reported spare time, with no gender interaction eﬀect
(Supplementary Table 3).
Both forms of analyses showed that higher AQ-total scores
were associated with greater weekend time, self-reported
frequency, and self-reported usage, in females only. Higher scores
on SPQ-CogPer were also associated with lower self-reported
spare time in females only and in both genders pooled together.
Higher scores on SPQ-CogPer were also associated with lower
self-reported frequency scores in both genders together.
Patterns of Video Game Use in Relation
to Autism Spectrum Quotient and
Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire
Subscales
By product-moment correlations, in females only, scores on
AQ-Attention to Detail were associated with greater weekday
hours spent on video games (Supplementary Table 4). AQ-total
was not associated with any of the video game usage variables
when males were analyzed separately or with the genders pooled
together. In females only, AQ-Social Skills scores were positively
associated with greater weekend time, self-reported frequency,
and self-reported usage spent on video games. In females only,
scores on AQ-Imagination scores were associated with greater
weekend time and self-reported frequency spent on video games.
In females only, higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated
with decreased self-reported spare time, while SPQ-Social
Anxiety and SPQ-Disorganization were associated with greater
weekend time on video games. In females only, SPQ-Eccentric
Behavior scores were also positively associated with greater
weekend time and self-report spare time on video games, with
the relationship marginally non-signiﬁcant (p = 0.06).
In males only, higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated
with greater self-reported usage and spare time spent on video
games. Higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior was associated with
greater self-reported usage and spare time on video games.
In males, higher SPQ-Disorganization was marginally non-
signiﬁcantly associated with greater weekend time (p = 0.06),
and signiﬁcantly associated with greater self-reported usage, and
self-report spare time on video games.
When both genders were pooled together, higher SPQ-
Magical Thinking was associated with decreased weekday,
weekend, self-reported frequency, self-reported usage, and self-
reported spare time on video games. Higher SPQ-Ideas of
Reference scores were associated with decreased self-reported
frequency on video games. Higher SPQ-Unusual Perception
was associated with decreased weekday hours on video games.
Higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior scores were associated with
greater weekend time, self-reported usage, and self-reported
spare time on video games.
By ANCOVAs, higher SPQ-Eccentric scores and SPQ-Magical
Thinking were associated with higher and lower self-report
spare time spent on video games, respectively (Supplementary
Table 5). The combined results from both analysis revealed that
higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with lower self-
reported spare time spent on video games in females, in males,
and in both genders combined. Higher SPQ-Eccentric was also
associated with greater self-reported spare time spent on video
games in males only, and in both genders combined.
Video Game Genre Preferences in
Relation to Autism Spectrum
Quotient-Total, Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire-Total and Schizotypal
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
Scores
By t-tests, higher AQ scores were associated with increased
preference for Construction type games and higher SPQ scores
were associated with preferences for Social Simulation, when
both genders were pooled together (Supplementary Table 6).
Higher AQ-total scores were also associated with decreased
preference for Sports, and higher SPQ-total scores were also
associated with preference for Puzzle and Racing. Higher SPQ-
CogPer scores were associated with increased preference for
Puzzle and Racing games, and decreased preferences for RPG and
Construction type games.
When males were analyzed separately, higher AQ-total scores
were associated with decreased preference for Platformer and
Sport games. Higher SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer scores were
associated with increased preference for Racing games in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
males. When females were analyzed separately, higher AQ-
total scores were associated with increased preference for RPG
and Construction games. Higher SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer
scores were associated with increased preference for Puzzle
games in females.
Backward stepwise regression, conducted to test the eﬀects
of AQ-total, SPQ-total, and SPQ-CogPer on each video game
genre while taking account of gender diﬀerences, showed that
males reported higher preference for Action and Strategy games
(Supplementary Table 7). Preferences for Action and Strategy
video games were not associated with AQ-total, SPQ-total,
or SPQ-CogPer. Higher AQ-total scores were associated with
preference for RPG and Construction games in females. Higher
SPQ-CogPer scores and higher SPQ-Total were associated with
higher preference for Puzzle games. Both sets of results indicated
that females with higher AQ-total scores reported a higher
preference for RPG and Construction games.
Video Game Genre Preferences in
Relation to Autism Spectrum Quotient
and Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire Subscales
Preference for Puzzle games was associated with higher AQ-
Imagination, higher SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors, and in females.
Preference for Action games was associated with higher
SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors in males (Supplementary Table 7).
Preference for Platformer was associated with higher SPQ-
Eccentric Behaviors. Preference for RPG was associated with
higher AQ-Social Skills, lower SPQ-Ideas of Reference, and
higher SPQ-Eccentric, and in males. Preference for Strategy
was associated with higher SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors and in
males. Preference for Sports was associated with lower AQ-
Communication and in males. Preference for Construction
was associated with higher AQ-Social Skills, marginally with
lower SPQ-Ideas of Reference, lower SPQ-Magical Thinking, and
higher SPQ-Odd Speech. Preference for Social Simulation was
detected in females, but no relationship to either AQ or SPQ
subscales. Preference for Idle games was marginally associated
with AQ-Attention Switch.
Video Game Motivations in Relation to
Autism Spectrum Quotient -Total,
Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire-Total and Schizotypal
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer
By t-tests, females with higher AQ-Total scores were motivated
by Stress Relief, Fantasy, and Customization (Supplementary
Table 8). Males with higher SPQ-CogPer scores were motivated
by Stress Relief and Skill Development. Males with higher SPQ-
total scores were motivated by Escape and Customization. Males
with higher AQ-Total scores were more motivated to play video
games for Customization.
When both genders were pooled together, higher AQ-Total
scores were associated with motivations of Skill Development,
Fantasy, Customization, and Stress Relief. Higher SPQ-Total
scores were also associated with the motivation of Stress Relief.
By multiple regression analyses, Social Interaction was
associated with decreased AQ-Social Skills, increased AQ-
Attention
to
Detail,
increased
SPQ-Social
Anxiety,
and
decreased SPQ-Magical Thinking (Supplementary Table 9).
Stress Relief was associated with increased AQ-Social Skills
and increased SPQ-Unusual Perception. Skill Development
was
associated
with
increased
AQ-Attention
to
Detail,
increased SPQ-Idea of Reference, and increased SPQ-Social
Anxiety. Adrenaline Rush was associated with lower AQ-
Attention Switch, higher AQ-Attention to Detail, higher
AQ-Communication, and higher AQ-Imagination. Escape was
marginally associated with higher SPQ-Constricted Aﬀect,
higher SPQ-Eccentric Behavior, and marginally associated
with SPQ-Magical Thinking. Fantasy was associated with
higher AQ-Social Skills and higher SPQ-Magical Thinking.
Customization was associated with higher AQ-Attention to
Detail and higher AQ-Communication. Higher AQ-Total was
associated with greater motivations of Stress Relief, Fantasy,
and marginally with Customization. No signiﬁcant relationships
were observed between SPQ-Total, SPQ-CogPer, and any of
the motivations.
Reaction and Targeting Times in Relation
to Autism Spectrum Quotient -Total,
Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire-Total, Schizotypal
Personality Questionnaire-CogPer, and
Gender
By product-moment correlations, in females only, faster reaction
times were associated with higher AQ-Total and SPQ-Total
scores (Supplementary Table 10). There was also a marginally
non-signiﬁcant trend of association of higher AQ-Total scores
with faster targeting time in females (p = 0.06). No other
statistically signiﬁcant relationships were detected in males or in
both genders pooled together.
Reaction and Targeting Times in Relation
to Autism Spectrum Quotient and
Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire
Subscale Scores, and Gender
Faster reaction times were associated with higher SPQ-Eccentric
Behavior scores in both genders pooled together and in females.
In females only, faster reaction times were associated with higher
SPQ-Social Anxiety, SPQ-Disorganization AQ-Social Skills, and
AQ-Attention to Detail. Higher SPQ-Magical Thinking scores
were associated with slower reaction time in both genders pooled
together and in males only (Supplementary Table 10).
Higher AQ-Social Skills and SPQ-Social Anxiety scores were
associated with faster targeting times in females. Higher SPQ-
Magical Thinking scores were associated with slower targeting
times in both genders pooled together, in males, and in females.
Higher SPQ-Unusual Perception scores were associated with
slower targeting times in both genders pooled together. Faster
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
targeting time associated SPQ-Interpersonal in males. Higher
SPQ-CogPer scores were associated with slower targeting time in
both genders and in males.
By
multiple
regression
analyses,
reaction
times
were
signiﬁcantly positively correlated with targeting times, with
males being faster for both relative to females. No AQ or SPQ
subscales were signiﬁcantly associated with faster reaction
times. Higher SPQ-Magical Thinking scores were associated
with slower targeting times. These results are summarized in
Supplementary Table 11. By both forms of analyses, males
exhibited faster reaction and targeting times than females,
and higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with slower
targeting times.
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
Times With Video Game Usage,
Preferences and Motivations
By product-moment correlations, faster targeting times were
associated with increased self-reported spare time, weekend
hours, weekday hours, greater self-reported video game usage
and frequency in both genders pooled together, males only, and
females only (Supplementary Table 12). Faster reaction times
were also associated with greater self-reported of spare time,
weekend hours, weekday hours, greater self-reported usage, and
greater self-reported frequency of video game usage in both
genders pooled together and in males (Supplementary Table 8).
By stepwise regression analyses, higher self-reported video
game usage was associated with higher AQ-Attention to
Detail,
higher
SPQ-Eccentric,
faster
targeting
times,
and
being male. Higher self-report frequency of video game
usage was associated with faster targeting times, and being
male. Higher weekday time was marginally associated with
higher AQ-Attention to Detail (p = 0.058), SPQ-Odd Speech,
faster targeting times, and being male. Higher weekend
time was marginally associated with AQ-Communication,
SPQ-Odd speech, faster targeting times, and being male.
Higher self-report spare time was associated with higher
SPQ-Eccentric Behaviors, lower SPQ-Magical Thinking, faster
targeting time, and being male. No statistically signiﬁcant
relationships were detected for reaction times and any of the
time use variables. Results are summarized in Supplementary
Table 13.
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
Times With Video Game Usage
ANCOVAs were also conducted to analyze the relationships of
neurophysiological indices (i.e., reaction and targeting times) and
the ﬁve video game usage variables. Gender was signiﬁcantly
associated with all usage variables (Supplementary Table 14). In
the case of self-reported frequency, males reported high baselines
of video game use frequencies; a potential positive relationship
between self-reported frequency and faster reaction time may
have gone undetected due to a ceiling eﬀect of general usage.
In females, a strong positive relationship between self-reported
video game use frequency and faster targeting times was detected.
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
Times With Video Game Genre
Preferences
By t-tests, faster reaction times were associated with preference
for Action video games in both genders pooled together and
marginally non-signiﬁcantly in males (p = 0.07) (Supplementary
Table 15). Faster reaction times were also associated with
preference for RPG in both genders pooled together, in females,
and in males. Strategy was also associated with faster reaction
times in both genders pooled together and marginally non-
signiﬁcantly in females (p = 0.06). Construction was associated
with faster reaction times with both genders pooled together and
in females. Idle game use was associated with faster reaction time
in both genders and in males only.
Preferences for Action and Idle game genres was associated
with faster targeting time in both genders pooled together,
and in females. Preferences for Role Playing Games (RPG),
Strategy Games, and Construction Games were associated with
faster targeting time in both genders, in females, and in
males. Preferences for Social Simulation were associated with
faster targeting time in females and males when they were
analyzed separately.
ANCOVA was also conducted to analyze the separate
relationships of reaction times, targeting times, to each of the
10 video game genres (Supplementary Table 16). Faster reaction
times were associated with preference for Action, RPG, Strategy
in in males. Faster reaction times showed a marginal association
with preference for Construction (p = 0.066). Females reported
greater preference for Puzzle and Social Simulation, but no
signiﬁcant relationships were found between reaction times and
these two genres.
Faster targeting times were associated with preference for
Action, RPG, Strategy, and Sports games in males. Faster
targeting times were associated with preference for Construction
and Idle, but no gender diﬀerences were detected. Females
reported greater preference for Puzzle, but there were no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in preference for Puzzle games and
targeting times. Preference for Social Simulation were associated
with faster targeting times in females. Results are presented in
Supplementary Table 16.
By both types of analyses, preference for Action, RPG, Strategy
were associated with faster reaction and targeting times in
males. Faster reaction and targeting times were associated with
preference for Construction in both genders together. Preference
for Social Simulation was associated with faster targeting times
in females. Females reported greater preference for Puzzle
but Puzzle was not associated with either faster reaction or
targeting times.
Relationships of Reaction and Targeting
Times With Video Game Motivations
By t-tests, faster reaction times were associated with the
motivations
Social
Interaction,
Skill
Development,
and
Customization, in both genders pooled together and in males
(Supplementary Table 17). Faster targeting times were associated
with
Social
Interaction,
Stress
Relief,
Skill
Development,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Adrenaline Rush, Escape, Fantasy, and Customization in both
genders pooled together, males only, and females only.
By
logistic
regression
analyses,
Social
Interaction
was
marginally non-signiﬁcantly (p = 0.067) associated with faster
reaction times in males (Supplementary Table 18). Skill
Development was associated with faster reaction times in males.
Males reported a greater preference for Adrenaline Rush, but no
signiﬁcant relationships were detected between Adrenaline Rush
and faster reaction times. Customization was associated with
faster reaction times. Social Interaction and Skill Development
were associated with faster targeting time in males. Stress
Relief was marginally non-signiﬁcantly associated with faster
targeting times (p = 0.051). Males reported greater preference
for Adrenaline Rush, but no relationship were detected between
Adrenaline Rush and targeting times. Fantasy and Customization
were associated with faster targeting times.
By both types of analyses, Social Interaction and Skill
Development were associated with faster reaction and targeting
time in males. Customization was associated with both faster
targeting and reaction time. Stress Relief and Fantasy were
associated with faster targeting times.
DISCUSSION
The principal aims of this study were to investigate the
relationships of autistic and schizotypal traits, gender, and select
neurophysiological traits, with video game usage, preferences,
and motivations. Table 2 summarizes the main results in the
context of the predictions described in the Introduction. The
most important ﬁndings are threefold. First, our results are
largely consistent with prior ﬁndings that diﬀerences in patterns
of video game usage mirror gender diﬀerences in childhood play,
with some notable diﬀerences in females with higher autistic
traits. Second, we have observed a male-typical pattern of video
game usage, motivation, and genre preferences in females with
higher autistic traits, which is in support of the Extreme Male
Brain theory of autism (Baron-Cohen, 2002). Third, the results
partially support Crespi and Badcock’s (2008) diametrical model
of social brain disorders, in that some video game variables
show opposite patterns between autism and positive schizotypy.
We expand on each main result in turn, and then discuss the
evolutionary psychological implications of virtual play on human
social behaviors.
Gender Differences in Patterns of Video
Game Usage
First, diﬀerences in video game usage patterns, genre preferences,
and motivations are largely consistent with prior ﬁndings that
males played more video games than females, preferred action
type video games, and exhibited both faster reaction times
(Greenberg et al., 2010) and enhanced targeting abilities (Watson
and Kimura, 1991; Cook and Saucier, 2010). Our study has found
that females reported greater gaming motives of Customization;
by contrast, Hartmann and Klimmt (2006) found that females
generally enjoy video games for their socially interactive aspects.
Why do males play video games more than females? One
possibility may be that most video games are designed to simulate
male-male individual or coalitional competition (Mendenhall
et al., 2010), which are intrinsically rewarding and enjoyable to
males (Chou and Tsai, 2007; Olson et al., 2007). For example,
most ﬁrst-person shooter (FPS) video games, such as Call of
Duty, involve playing from the ﬁrst-person view of a soldier. FPS
gameplay mostly involves three main themes: (1) mastering the
deployment of various weapons to destroy targets and enemies,
(2) collaborating with other soldiers to accomplish missions,
(3) rising through status hierarchies via achieving goals or
collecting rewards and gear. In line with our results, previous
studies on ﬁrst-person shooter games have identiﬁed that they
are mostly played by young males, who spend an average of
2.6 h a day on gaming, and report social interaction, competition,
and challenge as their main motives for gaming (Jansz and
Tanis, 2007). Likewise, MMORPGs, such as World of Warcraft
(reported to consist of 85% of male user-base (Ducheneaut
et al., 2006) are designed to promote inter-factional warfare, the
collection of rare and conspicuous avatar equipment (i.e., status
signaling) and collaborative practices that simulate conditions
of hunting (Mendenhall et al., 2010). Altogether, the greater
representation of male video game players appears to reﬂect
the male-typical competitive environments of most video game
genres, which seek to recreate or simulate settings of cooperative
hunting and warfare.
The ﬁndings reported here are also consistent with prior
research indicating that females prefer classic puzzle or board
games (Greenberg et al., 2010) and life simulation games
(Nepomuceno et al., 2010; Yee, 2017), the latter of which tends
to be more exploratory in nature and with a greater emphasis
on social relationships than competition. Interestingly, although
females generally reported a preference for Social Simulation
games, they did not cite Social Interaction as a motivation for
using video games. Contrary to the hypothesis posited here,
females reported Customization as their primary motivation.
Two possibilities may be at play here. First, given that females
with higher autistic traits play more video games (as discussed in
more detail below), the female pattern of video game motivation
may reﬂect the higher mechanistic (i.e., non-social) preferences
of the autistic phenotype. That is, given that autistic traits have
been associated with greater preference for building activities and
solitary play (Holmes and Willoughby, 2005), the identiﬁcation
of Customization, rather than Social Interaction, as the main
gaming motive, may reﬂect the systemizing bias of autism.
Secondly, given that females are more likely to be casual video
game players than males, and casual video game players tend
to rank higher on extraversion (Potard et al., 2019), females (at
least ones with lower AQ scores) may have other social outlets
for meeting interpersonal needs outside video games, and thus
be less likely to identify Social Motivation as a main motive for
video game usage.
Females with higher levels of autistic traits also preferred
male-typical video game preferences, including RPG and
Construction, relative to general female-typical genre preferences
such as Puzzle and Social Simulation. A preference for
Construction type games was not detected among males,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
TABLE 2 | Study ﬁndings in relation to the main predictions.
Predictions
Supported?
Findings
(1.1) Males will report greater video game usage than females.
Yes
Males reported higher video game usage across all time use variables.
(1.2) Males will prefer mechanistic-oriented video games (Action,
Platformer, Strategy, Racing, Sports, RPG, Construction) while females
will prefer Puzzle and Social Simulation video games.
Partially
Males reported greater preference for Action, Strategy, Sports, and
RPG games. Females reported greater preference for Puzzle and Social
Simulation games.
(1.3) Males will report greater motivation of Skill Development and
Customization and females will report greater motivations of Social
Interaction, Fantasy, and a way to Escape.
Partially
Males reported greater motivations of Social Interaction and Skill
Development. Females with higher AQ reported greater motivations of
Fantasy, Stress Relief, and Customization.
(2): Autistic traits will be associated with increased video game usage
across all time use variables. SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer will be
associated with decreased video game usage across all time use
variables.
Partially
Higher autistic traits were associated with greater video game usage in
females. Higher SPQ-CogPer scores were associated with lower video
game usage in both genders pooled together Higher autistic traits were
not associated with greater video game usage in males.
(3): Autistic traits will be positively associated with preferences for
Puzzle, Action, Platformer, Strategy, Racing, Sports, Idle, and
Construction. SPQ-total and SPQ-CogPer will be positively associated
with preferences for fantasy, RPG, and social simulation video games.
Partially
Females with higher AQ-Total preferred Construction and RPG games.
Higher SPQ-CogPer scores and higher SPQ-Total scores were
associated with greater preference for Puzzle games.
(4): Autistic traits will be positively associated with greater mechanistic
motivations. SPQ-Total and SPQ-CogPer will be positively associated
with mentalistic motivations.
Partially
Higher AQ-Total was associated with greater motivations of Stress
Relief, Fantasy, and Customization. No associations were found for
SPQ-Total or SPQ-CogPer.
(5): Autistic traits will be associated with faster reaction times and
targeting times. SPQ-Total and SPQ-CogPer will be associated with
slower reaction and targeting times.
Partially.
Higher SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with slower targeting
times.
(6): Increased total video game usage will be predicted by higher
reaction and targeting times. In turn, slower reaction and targeting
times will predict lower video game usage.
Yes
Faster reaction and targeting times were associated with greater video
game usage.
although previous studies have documented male preferences
for constructive toys (Blakemore and Centers, 2005). As for
males with higher AQ, females with higher AQ also identiﬁed
the mechanistic preference Customization as one of their
main gaming motives.
Extreme Male Brain Theory of Autism
and Patterns of Video Game Usage
Our second hypothesis predicted that autistic traits will be
associated with increased video game usage. Interestingly, higher
autistic traits were associated with greater video game usage, but
only in females and not in males. The pattern of females with
higher total autism scores playing video games more frequently
is of notable interest, as it ﬁts with Baron-Cohen’s (2002) extreme
male brain theory of autism, and partially with the predictions
from Crespi and Badcock (2008) and Wendt et al. (2019). Thus,
females with higher AQ-total scores were “more male” in their
pattern of higher video game usage. Analysis of the AQ subscales
revealed that that decreased social skills, higher attention to
detail, and lower social imagination showed evidence of being
related to greater video game usage in females with higher
autistic traits. Taken together, the cluster of autistic traits outlined
above suggest that higher video game usage in females may
be attributable to a more systemizing cognitive style (Baron-
Cohen, 2010). Indeed, the association between higher autistic
traits in females and greater motives of Customization and
preference for Construction-type games is consistent with such
view. For example, one popular Construction game, Minecraft,
focuses predominately on the mechanistic drive of building
objects. As the virtual environment is literally made of pixelated
blocks, gameplay is centered around manipulating objects in
systematic ways to construct buildings, mazes, and even entire
cities. Paralleling play behaviors in children with autism, building
activities in Minecraft are usually solitary, detail-oriented, and
reality-based. For example, “making” a book in Minecraft, as with
real life, requires arranging virtual pieces of paper with virtual
leather in a particular order for the object to be realized. Given
that people with autism are disproportionately represented in
the engineering ﬁeld (Baron-Cohen et al., 1997; Baron-Cohen,
1998) and children with autism tend to focus on functional play
(i.e., play with an object for its function) and constructive play
(i.e., building sand castles), preference for parallel (i.e., playing
alongside others but not together) or solitary play (Holmes and
Willoughby, 2005), the patterns of video game usage described
above appear to be an extension of autistic play behaviors to in a
virtual, computerized medium.
Females with higher total autism scores also reported greater
gaming motivations of Stress Relief, Fantasy, and Customization;
the ﬁrst two motivations may be categorized under social
fulﬁllment via virtual play, and the latter may represent an
autism-related preference for rule-based, solitary mechanistic
interest such as building objects (e.g., Minecraft). Taken together,
these patterns suggest that higher autistic traits may be related
to greater video game usage via a decreased capacity for, or
interest in, social and pretend play. In other words, because most
video games environments involve pre-programmed characters,
narratives, and behaviors, they may appeal to individuals with
higher autistic traits who prefer predictable environments that
can be navigated with pre-deﬁned action patterns. In this
light, video games may also function speciﬁcally for their self-
contained immersive experiences that provide the illusion of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
sharing a social world without partaking in one. Furthermore,
the relative anonymity and use of virtual avatars in video
games oﬀer an additional layer of interpersonal distance that
can be conceptualized as the virtual extensions of parallel play
behaviors commonly observed in children with autism (Holmes
and Willoughby, 2005). Users are thus playing “together” but
remain alone. Moreover, the pattern of autistic game play
pattern described here can be diﬀerentiated from general play
diﬀerences in two important ways: (1) although females with
higher autistic traits report male-typical preferences such as RPG
and Customization, they do not share the other male-typical
preferences that were more socially collaborative in nature,
such as Sports, or Action and Strategy genres that involve
extensive teamwork (ex: military group-collaborations in Call
of Duty); and (2) the identiﬁcation of Fantasy as a motivation
was not associated with the concurrent motivation of Social
Interaction, which suggest that solitary play was the common
denominator described here.
Why was there no evidence of a positive correlation of AQ
score with video game use among males? One possibility is a
“ceiling eﬀect,” whereby males would exhibit too little variation in
video game use scores for a positive relationship to be detected.
However, males do exhibit comparable levels of variability
(as measured by standard deviations) to females across the
various measures of video game usage, and positive correlations
restricted to females were found for multiple video game use
frequency measures, which appears to render major inﬂuences
from ceiling eﬀects relatively unlikely. Alternatively, because
most video games are designed with male-typical preferences
such as competition (Jansz and Tanis, 2007) and physical violence
(Jansz, 2005), and females are more likely to prefer non-violent
entertainment ventures (Slater, 2003) and may be less competitive
than males (Deaner, 2013), video game usage among females with
higher total AQ scores may be more pronounced, compared to
males, with high-AQ females demonstrating more male-typical
cognitive phenotypes relative to the general female population.
The Diametrical Model of Social Brain
Disorders and Patterns of Video Game
Usage
Our second hypothesis also predicted that patterns of video
game usage would vary in opposite patterns along the autism-
schizotypal axis, with autistic traits associated with greater video
game usage and positive schizotypal traits (i.e., SPQ-Total and
SPQ-CogPer) with lower video game usage.
Evidence of negative relationships of SPQ-CogPer and SPQ-
Magical Thinking with video game usage was detected from
several analyses. These ﬁndings partially support predictions
of the Crespi and Badcock (2008) model, in that autistic and
positive schizotypy traits predicted greater and lower video
game usage, respectively (though with gender-limited eﬀects
for autism that were not predicted by the model). Given
that SPQ-Magical Thinking was also associated with slower
targeting times, lower video game usage of individuals with
high levels of this psychological trait may stem, in part, from
general hand-eye motor speed and coordination diﬃculties
from executing particular action patterns necessary for eﬀective
console/controller use. Indeed, a positive relationship was
detected between SPQ-CogPer and Puzzle games, but Puzzle
was not associated with faster reaction or targeting times.
Furthermore, although both Puzzle and Social Simulation games
are generally designed to be played at leisure, the latter was
associated with faster targeting times but not the former, further
providing support that variation in neurophysiological indices
may be contributing to the overall lower video game usage.
Why would individuals higher in positive schizotypal traits
play video games less frequently? As outlined above, most video
games appear to oﬀer immersive but ultimately solitary play
experiences that may not fulﬁll the mentalistic interests of many
schizotypal individuals. Historically, most video games were
developed as single-player ventures; lack of historical internet
access meant that most games were developed to be enjoyed with
only a limited number of players. For examples, the popularity
of PC-based games in the 1990s meant that most games were
designed to be self-contained, with clearly deﬁned objectives,
and catering to single players. In this light, given that the
Crespi and Badcock (2008) model predicts that autistic and
schizotypal traits would vary in opposite directions in socio-
cognitive development—what would be the theoretical equivalent
of autism and videogames for positive schizotypy?
An opposite medium (as opposed to diﬀerent games per se)
would theoretically contain the following characteristics of high
positive schizotypy: (1) rely on a short and fractured attention
span on a wide variety of inter-changeable topics instead of one
highly concentrated focus on a restricted set of clearly deﬁned
objectives, (2) verbally based, (3) high social connectivity, (4)
virtual elements of high social monitoring in terms of detectable
social feedback signals (i.e., likes, followers) that mimic in-person
cues of joint attention and/or eye contact. In short, the logical
equivalent of autism-video games appears to be schizotypy-
Twitter or TikTok. Although we did not explicitly test for the
relationship between schizotypy and social media platforms here,
the association between positive schizotypy and Puzzle games
suggest that such preferences could theoretically be extrapolated
to social media platforms. Like most Puzzle games, most social
media applications are designed to be used leisurely, with less
cognitively taxing actions, and with no penalties if the user has
less than accurate targeting movements.
Several
explanations
have
been
proposed
for
gender
diﬀerences in reaction and targeting time. First, given that
playing action video games can improve reaction time (Chandra
et al., 2016), the gender diﬀerences may stem from the strong
male preference toward action-oriented video games that require
fast decision-making and projectile analysis in a simulated
3-D space. Our data support the training eﬀects of video game
usage in that in both genders, reaction and targeting times were
positively associated with greater video game usage. Second,
males also reported greater motivation for using video games
for Skill Development, another factor that could contribute to
the development of faster reaction and targeting time due to
greater intrinsic motivation for improvement. Alternatively,
the gender diﬀerences in reaction and targeting time may stem
from evolved physiology in sexual divisions of labor; that is,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
males may have evolved faster reaction and targeting times
than females due to greater neurophysiological demands of
hunting and competition that have characterized the human
hunter-gatherer past (Cherney and Poss, 2008). Finally, given
that SPQ-Magical Thinking was associated with slower targeting
times and that females scored higher on SPQ-Magical Thinking
than did males, the gender diﬀerences in targeting time may
be linked with general gender diﬀerences in levels of this
schizotypal trait. Indeed, the association of higher Magical
Thinking with slower targeting time is consistent with previous
literature showing that higher positive schizotypy is associated
with higher prediction error rates on hand-eye coordination
tasks (Asai et al., 2008) and increased dyscontrol in ﬁne motor
movements (Roché et al., 2015). These ﬁndings may, more
generally, reﬂect the higher levels of sensory and sensorimotor
deﬁcits found among individuals on the schizophrenia spectrum
(Javitt and Freedman, 2015).
Second, in accordance with the Crespi and Badcock (2008)
model, autistic traits were generally associated with mechanistic
genre preferences such as Construction and RPG. However,
contrary to the predictions made here, higher SPQ-CogPer
scores and higher SPQ-Total scores were associated with greater
preference for Puzzle games. Theoretically, puzzle games could
be considered a mechanistic-typical genre as most traditional
puzzles involve deducing or reverse-engineering a set of given
patterns to arrive at the correct solution. What would explain
this ﬁnding? One possibility is that most virtualized puzzle games
do not involve the same depth or rigor of algorithmic thinking
as it would in traditional puzzle games. For example, one of the
most popular app-based puzzle games, Candy Crush, involves
detecting a pattern of three or more identical shapes and swiping
them away with ones’ ﬁngers; gameplay is largely easy and simple
pattern-detection in a 2-D space. In contrast, a traditional puzzle
game might be solving the Magic Cube, a task that involves
simultaneous operations of 3-D mental rotation, mathematical
operations, and mental simulation of object transformations
in horizontal/vertical space. Thus, although both physical and
virtual “puzzle” games may appear similar, the constraints of
representing games in a virtual 2-D space may remove or imbue it
with diﬀerent functions that may render it considerably diﬀerent
from its original counterpart.
The association of positive schizotypal traits with Puzzle
type games is consistent with previous ﬁndings that patients
with schizophrenia rated puzzle-type games as one of their
top three preferred game genres (i.e., board/card games) (Choi
et al., 2020). Surprisingly, contrary to the predictions made
here, positive schizotypal traits were not related to more
socially oriented or fantasy-based genres such as RPG or Social
Simulation. Two possible explanations may help to account for
this result. First, most popular role-playing video game games,
such as World of Warcraft, are cognitively demanding and
involve juggling of multiple simultaneous tasks (i.e., switching
between weapons, building and maintaining multiple coalitions,
tracking and shooting at multiple targets), which may be
challenging given that schizotypy has been associated with
attentional impairments under situations of high perceptual load
(Stotesbury et al., 2018). In comparison, Puzzle-type games, such
as Candy Crush, tend to less time-intensive, more casual, and
designed to be played at leisure with no penalties if the user
stops at random intervals. Second, the most popular current
Social Simulation franchise, such as Animal Crossing, involve
considerable components of customization (e.g., building and
furnishing houses, gathering, and collecting items) which may be
more mechanistically inclined and less appealing to individuals
with higher schizotypal traits.
Lastly, patterns of video game motivations described here
partially support the Crespi and Badcock (2008) model that
autistic traits predict mechanistic motivations for playing video
games (i.e., Customization). Interestingly, AQ-total was also
associated with Fantasy, but not Social Interaction, motivations.
The pattern described here is suggestive that video games provide
an evolutionarily novel play environment where fantasy play can
be decoupled from social interactions. In other words, although
autistic traits were associated with motivations for utilizing
video games for Stress Relief and Fantasy motives, it was not
associated with motivations for socially interacting with others,
which suggests that although, on the surface, most role-playing
games involve multiplayer modes and opportunities for social
interactions, individuals with autistic traits seem to partake in
them for the immersive experience but not the social aspect.
Thus, utilizing video games for fantasy play appears to diﬀer from
real-life fantasy play in the important aspect that the imaginative
component could be dissociated from its corresponding social
component, which are intricately linked together most real-life,
in-person childhood pretend play.
Limitations
Our study is constrained by several limitations. First, the data
were collected during a school semester; thus, general video
game usage patterns may have been under-reported due to
greater time demands of the typical school semester. Future
studies may account for potential diﬀerences in video game usage
patterns due to classwork demands by incorporating a non-
typical school semester in its time span of data collection for
comparison. Second, given that we primarily recruited through
a psychology student pool as well as university email lists,
most of participants may have come from the undergraduate
population; thus, the ﬁndings cannot be extrapolated to clinical
populations, children, the elderly, or professional gamers who
may demonstrate psychological traits atypical of our sample.
Third, given that autistic and schizotypal traits were assessed
via self-reports, results may be limited in that higher autistic
and schizotypal traits may, paradoxically, be associated with
lower cognitive insights and thus under-report of traits. Fourth,
given the heterogeneous nature of most video games (ex: Legend
of Zelda is classiﬁed as Action on most commercial video
game websites, but it also involves considerable role-playing
and puzzle-solving), ﬁndings from this study may be limited
due to blending of mechanistic vs. mentalistic gameplay that
characterize some video games. Future research could address
such limitations by adding an open-feedback answer item as to
better disentangle nuances in users’ motivations for gaming and
gaming preferences. Finally, given that we administered reaction
time and targeting time tasks online, variability in reaction and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
targeting time data may be confounded by participants’ choice
of electronic device to complete the tasks (ex: computer with
mouse, laptop, iPad or another hand-held device with touchpad).
Although the computer tasks were designed to accommodate a
wide variety of electronic devices, variability in reaction time
and targeting time data may be inﬂuenced by participants’ use
of a mouse vs. touchpad, which we did not control for. Some
studies have shown that individuals were slower and tend to make
more errors when using a touchpad than mouse to make pointing
actions (Hertzum and Hornbæk, 2010), and that using the mouse
was faster than touchpads or MultiTouch devices in cursor
positioning (Shanis and Hedge, 2003). Given that our study was
conducted remotely and thus we could not verify what sort of
hardware participants used, future research could collect data on
the type of device used to control for any potential confounds.
Since
the
COVID
pandemic
began,
more
and
more
recreational platforms have been moving to the virtual world.
What will become of iGen 2030? The patterns described above
suggest that the replacement of in-person play with virtual media
may have important implications for the evolution of imaginative
culture. First, the patterns in autistic play behaviors and video
game usage described in this study suggest that video games may
be a proverbial “new and reinvented” version of fantasy play.
That is, unlike a traditional fantasy game where people must
spontaneously imagine a shared mental space and participate
accordingly, video games oﬀer a pre-programmed imaginative
space where anyone can join without having to spontaneously
imagine entities into existence. Moreover, for the ﬁrst time in
human history, people are no longer bounded by the temporal-
spatial limitations of other players to start and maintain a game.
Almost everyone now can play a video game together—and alone.
Finally, although we have found some evidence of decreased
video game usage in association with positive schizotypy, we
did not observe statistically signiﬁcant patterns for greater
mentalistic preferences in positive schizotypy as we did for
mechanism and autism. Why would this be? One possibility is
that video games only represent one end of the spectrum of
virtual play behaviors that has now substituted for much of real-
life play. The patterns of video game usage, preferences, and
motivations described above suggest that imaginative and social
aspects could be dissociated in video games; individuals with
higher autistic traits appear to partake more in the former in
lieu of the latter. In this light, as Crespi and Badcock (2008)
postulated autism and psychosis as two ends of a continuum
of social cognitive development, so there may exist a similar
virtual gradient of play behaviors that may be expressed in two
opposites but related media. What could be on the other end of
the spectrum? Given that most social media platforms are highly
socially oriented, verbally based, and performative, future studies
could investigate potential relationships of social media use and
positive schizotypy given the former’s mentalistic bias.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by the Simon Fraser University Department
of Research Ethics. The participants provided their written
informed consent to participate in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada, Discovery Grant 2019-04208, funded this work, and
played no role in the design or execution of the research.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.
2022.767446/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Andreasen, N. C., Arndt, S., Del Miller, D., Flaum, M., and Napoulos, P. (1995).
Correlational studies of the Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms and
the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms: an overview and update.
Psychopathology 28, 7–17. doi: 10.1159/000284894
Asai, T., Sugimori, E., and Tanno, Y. (2008). Schizotypal personality traits and
prediction of one’s own movements in motor control: what causes an abnormal
sense of agency? Conscious Cogn. 17, 1131–1142. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2008.04.
004
Baron-Cohen, S. (1998). Does autism occur more often in families of
physicists, engineers, and mathematicians? Autism 2, 296–301. doi: 10.1177/
1362361398023008
Baron-Cohen, S. (2002). The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 6, 248–254. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01904-6
Baron-Cohen, S. (2010). Empathizing, systemizing, and the extreme male brain
theory of autism. Prog. Brain Res. 186, 167–175. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-
53630-3.00011-7
Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Ashwin, C., Tavassoli, T., and Chakrabarti, B. (2009).
Talent in autism: hyper-systemizing, hyper-attention to detail and sensory
hypersensitivity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 364, 1377–1383. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2008.0337
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., and Clubley, E.
(2001).
The
autism-spectrum
quotient
(AQ):
evidence
from
asperger
syndrome/high-functioning
autism,
males
and
females,
scientists
and
mathematicians. Rev. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 31, 5–17. doi: 10.1023/A:100565341
1471
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Stott, C., Bolton, P., and Goodyer, I. (1997). Is
there a link between engineering and autism? Autism 1, 101–109. doi: 10.1177/
1362361397011010
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Bateson, P. (2005). “The role of play in the evolution of great apes and humans,”
in The Nature of Play: Great Apes and Humans, eds A. D. Pellegrini and P. K.
Smith (New York: the Guildford Press), 13–24.
Bekoﬀ, M. (2001). Social play behaviour. Cooperation, fairness, trust, and the
evolution of morality. J. Conscious. Stud. 8, 81–90.
Blakemore, J. E. O., and Centers, R. E. (2005). Characteristics of boys’ and girls’
toys. Sex Roles 53, 619–633. doi: 10.1007/s11199-005-7729-0
Burghardt, G. M. (2005). The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the Limits.
Cambridge: MIT press.
Cadenhead, K. S., Light, G. A., Geyer, M. A., and Braﬀ, D. L. (2000). Sensory gating
deﬁcits assessed by the P50 event-related potential in subjects with schizotypal
personality disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 157, 55–59. doi: 10.1176/ajp.157.1.55
Casey, B. J., Gordon, C. T., Mannheim, G. B., and Rumsey, J. M. (1993).
Dysfunctional attention in autistic savants. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 15,
933–946. doi: 10.1080/01688639308402609
Chandra, S., Sharma, G., Salam, A. A., Jha, D., and Mittal, A. P. (2016). Playing
action video games a key to cognitive enhancement. Procedia Comput. Sci. 84,
115–122. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.04.074
Cherney, I. D., and Poss, J. L. (2008). Sex diﬀerences in Nintendo WiiTM
performance as expected from hunter-gatherer selection. Psychol. Rep. 102,
745–754. doi: 10.2466/pr0.102.3.745-754
Choi, W. T., Dan, K. S., Wong, T., Lantta, T., Yang, M., and Välimäki, M. (2020).
Habits and attitudes of video gaming and information technology use in people
with schizophrenia: cross-sectional survey. J. Med. Internet Res. 22:e14865.
doi: 10.2196/14865
Chou, C., and Tsai, M. J. (2007). Gender diﬀerences in Taiwan high school students’
computer game playing. J. Med. Internet Res. 23, 812–824. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.
2004.11.011
Cohen, A. S., Matthews, R. A., Najolia, G. M., and Brown, L. A. (2010). Toward a
more psychometrically sound brief measure of schizotypal traits: introducing
the SPQ-Brief Revised. J. Pers. Disord. 24, 516–537. doi: 10.1521/pedi.2010.24.
4.516
Colquitt, J. A., and Simmering, M. J. (1998). Conscientiousness, goal orientation,
and motivation to learn during the learning process: a longitudinal study.
J. Appl. Psychol. 8, 654–665. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.83.4.654
Cook, C. M., and Saucier, D. M. (2010). Mental rotation, targeting ability
and Baron-Cohen’s empathizing–systemizing theory of sex diﬀerences. Pers.
Individ. Dif. 49, 712–716. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2010.06.010
Coutelle, R., Weiner, L., Paasche, C., Pottelette, J., Bertschy, G., Schröder, C. M.,
et al. (2021). Autism spectrum disorder and video games: restricted interests or
addiction? Int. J. Ment. Health Addict. 1–22. doi: 10.1007/s11469-021-00511-4
Craig, F., Tenuta, F., De Giacomo, A., Trabacca, A., and Costabile, A. (2021).
A systematic review of problematic video-game use in people with Autism
Spectrum Disorders. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 82:101726. doi: 10.1016/j.rasd.
2021.101726
Crespi, B. (2020). How is quantiﬁcation of social deﬁcits useful for studying
autism and schizophrenia?
Psychol.
Med. 50, 523–525. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291719003180
Crespi, B., and Badcock, C. (2008). Psychosis and autism as diametrical disorders of
the social brain. Behav. Brain. Sci. 3, 241–261. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X08004214
Crespi, B., Leach, E., Dinsdale, N., Mokkonen, M., and Hurd, P. (2016).
Imagination in human social cognition, autism, and psychotic-aﬀective
conditions. Cognition 150, 181–199. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2016.02.001
Crespi, B. J. (2016). “The evolutionary etiologies of autism spectrum and psychotic
aﬀective spectrum disorders,” in Evolutionary Thinking in Medicine. Advances in
the Evolutionary Analysis of Human Behaviour, eds A. Alvergne, C. Jenkinson,
and C. Faurie (Cham: Springer), 299–327. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-29716-3_20
Crespi, B. J. (2019). Comparative psychopharmacology of autism and psychotic-
aﬀective disorders suggests new targets for treatment. Evol. Med. Public Health
2019, 149–168. doi: 10.1093/emph/eoz022
Crespi, B. J., and Go, M. C. (2015). Diametrical diseases reﬂect evolutionary-
genetic tradeoﬀs: evidence from psychiatry, neurology, rheumatology, oncology
and immunology. Evol. Med. Public Health 2015, 216–253. doi: 10.1093/emph/
eov021
Deaner, R. O. (2013). Distance running as an ideal domain for showing a sex
diﬀerence in competitiveness. Arch. Sex Behav. 42, 413–428. doi: 10.1007/
s10508-012-9965-z
Deary, I. J., Liewald, D., and Nissan, J. (2011). A free, easy-to-use, computer-based
simple and four-choice reaction time programme: the Deary-Liewald reaction
time task. Behav. Res. Methods 43, 258–268. doi: 10.3758/s13428-010-0024-1
Deleuze, J., Christiaens, M., Nuyens, F., and Billieux, J. (2017). Shoot at ﬁrst sight!
First person shooter players display reduced reaction time and compromised
inhibitory control in comparison to other video game players. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 72, 570–576. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.027
Delhove, M., and Greitemeyer, T. (2020). The relationship between video game
character preferences and aggressive and prosocial personality traits. Psychol.
Pop. Media Cult. 9, 96–104. doi: 10.1037/ppm0000211
Dorval, M., and Pepin, M. (1986). Eﬀect of playing a video game on a measure of
spatial visualization. Percept. Mot. Skills 62, 159–162. doi: 10.2466/pms.1986.62.
1.159
Ducheneaut, N., Yee, N., Nickell, E., and Moore, R. J. (2006). Building an MMO
with mass appeal: a look at gameplay in World of Warcraft. Games Cult. 1,
281–317. doi: 10.1177/1555412006292613
Dye, M. W., Green, C. S., and Bavelier, D. (2009). Increasing speed of processing
with action video games. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 18, 321–326. doi: 10.1111/j.
1467-8721.2009.01660.x
Entertainment
Software
Association
[ESA]
(2019).
ESA
Essential
Facts
2019. Available Online at: www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/
ESA_Essential_facts_2019_ﬁnal.pdf. (accessed Aug 6, 2021).
Entertainment Software Association [ESA] (2021). Industry Facts. Available Online
at: http://www.theesa.com/facts/index. (accessed Aug 6, 2021).
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor system in
controlling the amplitude of movement. J. Exp. Psychol. 47, 381–391. doi: 10.
1037/h0055392
Gorbet, D. J., and Sergio, L. E. (2018). Move faster, think later: women who play
action video games have quicker visually-guided responses with later onset
visuomotor-related brain activity. PLoS One 13:e0189110. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0189110
Green, C. S., and Bavelier, D. (2006). Enumeration versus multiple object tracking:
the case of action video game players. Cognition 101, 217–245. doi: 10.1016/j.
cognition.2005.10.004
Green, C. S., Pouget, A., and Bavelier, D. (2010). Improved probabilistic inference
as a general learning mechanism with action video games. Curr. Biol. 20,
1573–1579. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.07.040
Greenberg, B. S., Sherry, J., Lachlan, K., Lucas, K., and Holmstrom, A. (2010).
Orientations to video games among gender and age groups. Simul. Gaming 41,
238–259. doi: 10.1177/1046878108319930
Griﬃth, J. L., Voloschin, P., Gibb, G. D., and Bailey, J. R. (1983). Diﬀerences in
eye-hand motor coordination of video-game users and non-users. Percept. Mot.
Skills 57, 155–158. doi: 10.2466/pms.1983.57.1.155
Hartmann, T., and Klimmt, C. (2006). Gender and computer games: exploring
females’ dislikes. J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 11, 910–931. doi: 10.1111/j.
1083-6101.2006.00301.x
Hertzum, M., and Hornbæk, K. (2010). How age aﬀects pointing with mouse and
touchpad: a comparison of young, adult, and elderly users. Int. J. Hum. Comput.
Interact. 26, 703–734. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2010.487198
Hilgard, J., Engelhardt, C. R., and Bartholow, B. D. (2013). Individual diﬀerences
in motives, preferences, and pathology in video games: the gaming attitudes,
motives, and experiences scales (GAMES). Front. Psychol. 4:608. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00608
Holmes, E., and Willoughby, T. (2005). Play behaviour of children with autism
spectrum disorders. J. Intellect. Dev. Disabil. 30, 156–164. doi: 10.1080/
13668250500204034
Hubert-Wallander, B., Green, C. S., and Bavelier, D. (2011). Stretching the limits
of visual attention: the case of action video games. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Cogn.
Sci. 2, 222–230. doi: 10.1002/wcs.116
Jansz, J. (2005). The emotional appeal of violent video games for adolescent males.
Commun. Theory 15, 219–241. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2885.2005.tb00334.x
Jansz, J., and Tanis, M. (2007). Appeal of playing online ﬁrst person shooter games.
Cyberpsychol. Behav. 10, 133–136. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2006.9981
Javitt, D. C., and Freedman, R. (2015). Sensory processing dysfunction
in the personal experience and neuronal machinery of schizophrenia.
Am.
J.
Psychiatry
172,
17–31.
doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.1312
1691
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Johnson, D., and Gardner, J. (2010). “Personality, motivation and video games,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the Computer-Human Interaction Special
Interest Group of Australia on Computer-Human Interaction, ed. M. Brereton
(New York: Association for Computing Machinery), 276–279. doi: 10.1145/
1952222.1952281
Kowal, M., Toth, A. J., Exton, C., and Campbell, M. J. (2018). Diﬀerent cognitive
abilities displayed by action video gamers and non-gamers. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 88, 255–262. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2018.07.010
Kuo, M. H., Orsmond, G. I., Coster, W. J., and Cohn, E. S. (2014). Media use
among adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Autism 18, 914–923. doi:
10.1177/1362361313497832
Lenzenweger, M. F. (2001). Reaction time slowing during high-load, sustained-
attention
task
performance
in
relation
to
psychometrically
identiﬁed
schizotypy. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 110, 290–6. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.110.2.290
Lenzenweger, M. F., Cornblatt, B. A., and Putnick, M. (1991). Schizotypy and
sustained attention. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 100, 84–9. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.100.
1.84
Lenzenweger, M. F., and O’Driscoll, G. A. (2006). Smooth pursuit eye movement
and schizotypy in the community. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 115, 779–86. doi: 10.
1037/0021-843X.115.4.779
Leslie, A. M. (1987). Pretense and representation: the origins of "theory of mind".
Psychol. Rev. 94, 412–426. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.94.4.412
Li, X., Huang, L., Li, B., Wang, H., and Han, C. (2020). Time for a true display of
skill: top players in league of legends have better executive control. Acta Psychol.
204:103007. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2020.103007
Liu, S., Yu, C., Conner, B. T., Wang, S., Lai, W., and Zhang, W. (2017). Autistic
traits and internet gaming addiction in Chinese children: the mediating eﬀect
of emotion regulation and school connectedness. Res. Dev. Disabil. 68, 122–130.
doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2017.07.011
Mazurek, M. O., and Engelhardt, C. R. (2013a). Video game use in boys with autism
spectrum disorder, ADHD, or typical development. Pediatrics 132, 260–266.
doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-3956
Mazurek, M. O., and Engelhardt, C. R. (2013b). Video game use and problem
behaviors in boys with autism spectrum disorders. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord.
7, 316–324. doi: 10.1016/j.rasd.2012.09.008
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to experience.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 52, 1258–1265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009818
Mendenhall, Z., Saad, G., and Nepomuceno, M. V. (2010). “Homo virtualensis:
evolutionary psychology as a tool for studying video games,” in Evolutionary
Psychology and Information Systems Research. Integrated Series in Information
Systems, ed. N. Kock (Boston: Springer), 24. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6139-
6_14
Menear, K. S., and Ernest, J. M. (2020). Comparison of physical activity, TV/video
watching/gaming, and usage of a portable electronic devices by children with
and without autism spectrum disorder. Matern. Child Health J. 24, 1464–1472.
doi: 10.1007/s10995-020-03013-2
Murray, A., Mannion, A., Chen, J. L., and Leader, G. (2021). Gaming disorder in
adults with autism spectrum disorder. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 1–8. doi: 10.1007/
s10803-021-05138-x
Nepomuceno, M. V., Saad, G., Stenstrom, E., and Mendenhall, Z. (2010). “Finger
length ratio and attitudes toward several product categories,” in NA - Advances
in Consumer Research, Vol. 37, eds M. C. Campell, J. Inman, and R. Pieters
(Minnesota: Association for Consumer Research), 872–872.
Nowell, A. (2016). “Childhood, play and the evolution of cultural capacity in
Neanderthals and modern humans,” in The Nature of Culture. Vertebrate
Paleobiology and Paleoanthropology, eds M. Haidle, N. Conard, and M. Bolus
(Dordrecht: Springer), doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-7426-0_9
Olson, C. K., Kutner, L. A., Warner, D. E., Almerigi, J. B., Baer, L., Nicholi, A. M.
II., et al. (2007). Factors correlated with violent video game use by adolescent
boys and girls. J. Adolesc. Health 41, 77–83. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.01.
001
Ostrov, J. M., and Keating, C. F. (2004). Gender diﬀerences in preschool aggression
during free play and structured interactions: an observational study. Soc. Dev.
13, 255–277. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.000266.x
Park, H. R., Lim, V. K., Kirk, I. J., and Waldie, K. E. (2015). P50 sensory gating
deﬁcits in schizotypy. Pers. Individ. Dif. 82, 142–147. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2015.
03.025
Paulus, F. W., Sander, C. S., Nitze, M., Kramatschek-Pfahler, A. R., Voran,
A., and von Gontard, A. (2019). Gaming disorder and computer-mediated
communication in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder.
Z. Kinder Jugendpsychiatr. Psychother. 48, 113–122. doi: 10.1024/1422-4917/
a000674
Peever, N., Johnson, D., and Gardner, J. (2012). “Personality and video game genre
preferences,” in Proceedings of the 8th Australasian Conference on Interactive
Entertainment: Playing the System, eds C.T. Tan, C. Walker, and D. Cermak-
Sassenrath (New York: Association for Computing Machinery), 1–3. doi: 10.
1145/2336727.2336747
Potard, C., Henry, A., Boudoukha, A. H., Courtois, R., Laurent, A., and Lignier, B.
(2019). Video game players’ personality traits: an exploratory cluster approach
to identifying gaming preferences. Psychol. Pop. Media Cult. 9, 499–512. doi:
10.1037/ppm0000245
Pryce, C. R. (1995). “Determinants of motherhood in human and nonhuman
primates: a biosocial model,” in Motherhood in Human and Nonhuman
Primates: Biosocial Determinants, eds C. R. Pryce, R. D. Martin, and D. Skuse
(Basel: Karger), 1–15. doi: 10.1159/000424482
R Core Team (2021). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rehbein, F., Staudt, A., Hanslmaier, M., and Kliem, S. (2016). Video game playing
in the general adult population of Germany: can higher gaming time of males
be explained by gender speciﬁc genre preferences? Comput. Hum. Behav. 55,
729–735. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.10.016
Roché, M. W., Fowler, M. L., and Lenzenweger, M. F. (2015). Deeper into
schizotypy and motor performance: investigating the nature of motor control
in a non-psychiatric sample. Psychiatry Res. 228, 20–25. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.
2015.03.016
Schimmenti, A., Infanti, A., Badoud, D., Laloyaux, J., and Billieux, J. (2017).
Schizotypal personality traits and problematic use of massively-multiplayer
online role-playing games (MMORPGs). Comput. Hum. Behav. Rep. 74, 286–
293. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2017.04.048
Scott, D. (1995). The eﬀect of video games on feelings of aggression. J. Psychol. 129,
121–132. doi: 10.1080/00223980.1995.9914952
Servin, A., Bohlin, G., and Berlin, L. (1999). Sex diﬀerences in 1−, 3−, and
5−year−olds’ toy−choice in a structured play−session. Scand. J. Psychol. 40,
43–48. doi: 10.1111/1467-9450.00096
Shanis, J. M., and Hedge, A. (2003). Comparison of mouse, touchpad and
multitouch input technologies. Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 47,
746–750. doi: 10.1177/154193120304700418
Slater, M. D. (2003). Alienation, aggression, and sensation seeking as predictors of
adolescent use of violent ﬁlm, computer, and website content. J. Commun. 53,
105–121. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2003.tb03008.x
Smith, P. K., and Boulton, M. (1990). Rough-and-tumble play, aggression and
dominance: perception and behaviour in children’s encounters. Hum. Dev. 33,
271–282. doi: 10.1159/000276524
Stoet, G. (2010). PsyToolkit - A software package for programming psychological
experiments using Linux. Behav. Res. Methods. 42, 1096–1104. doi: 10.3758/
BRM.42.4.1096
Stoet, G. (2017). PsyToolkit: a novel web-based method for running online
questionnaires and reaction-time experiments. Teach. Psychol. 44, 24–31. doi:
10.1177/0098628316677643
Stotesbury, H., Gaigg, S. B., Kirhan, S., and Haenschel, C. (2018). The inﬂuence of
schizotypal traits on attention under high perceptual load. Schizophr. Res. Cogn.
11, 6–10. doi: 10.1016/j.scog.2017.10.002
Tabacchi, M. E., Caci, B., Cardaci, M., and Perticone, V. (2017). Early usage
of Pokémon Go and its personality correlates. Comput. Human. Behav. 72,
163–169. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.047
Tondello, G. F., and Nacke, L. E. (2019). Player characteristics and video game
preferences. Proc. Annu. Symp. Comput. Hum. Interact. Play 2019, 365–378.
doi: 10.1145/3311350.3347185
Torner, H. P., Carbonell, X., and Castejón, M. (2019). A comparative analysis of
the processing speed between video game players and non-players. Aloma Rev.
Psicol. Ciències de l’Educació i de l’Esport 37, 13–20. doi: 10.51698/aloma.2019.
37.1.13-20
Twenge, J. M. (2017). iGen: Why Today’s Super-Connected Kids Are Growing Up
Less Rebellious, More Tolerant, Less Happy – And Completely Unprepared For
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

Yang et al.
Autism, Schizotypy, and Video Games
Adulthood – And What That Means For The Rest Of Us. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child.
Soviet Psychol. 5, 6–18. doi: 10.2753/RPO1061-040505036
Wang, Z., Sapienza, A., Culotta, A., and Ferrara, E. (2019). “Personality
and behavior in role-based online games,” in In 2019 IEEE Conference
on Games (CoG), (Piscataway: IEEE), 1–8. doi: 10.1109/CIG.2019.884
8027
Watson,
N.
V.,
and
Kimura,
D.
(1991).
Nontrivial
sex
diﬀerences
in
throwing and intercepting: relation to psychometrically-deﬁned spatial
functions. Pers. Individ. Dif. 12, 375–385. doi: 10.1016/0191-8869(91)900
53-E
Wendt, F. R., Muniz Carvalho, C., Pathak, G. A., Gelernter, J., and Polimanti, R.
(2019). Deciphering the biological mechanisms underlying the genome-wide
associations between computerized device use and psychiatric disorders. J. Clin.
Med. 8:2040. doi: 10.3390/jcm8122040
Yang, W., Huang, T., Zeng, J., Chen, L., Mishra, S., and Liu, Y. E. (2020).
“Correlation between personality and social interactions in online strategy
games,” in 2020 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), (Piscataway: IEEE), 756–759.
doi: 10.1109/CoG47356.2020.9231956
Yee,
N.
(2017).
Genre-Gender
Averages.
Available
Online
at:
https:
//quanticfoundry.com/2017/01/19/female-gamers-by-genre/genre-gender-
averages/#iLightbox[postimages]/0 (accessed Dec 18, 2021).
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Yang, Hurd and Crespi. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
17
February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 767446

