## Author Manuscript
#### J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15.


Published in final edited form as:
_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008 August ; 47(8): 879–889. doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e318179963c._

## Longitudinal Mental Health Service and Medication Use for ADHD


## Among Puerto Rican Youth in Two Contexts

**Hector R. Bird, M.D., Patrick E. Shrout, Ph.D., Cristiane S. Duarte, Ph.D., M.P.H., Sa Shen,**
**Ph.D., José J. Bauermeister, Ph.D., and Glorisa Canino, Ph.D.**
_Drs. Bird, Duarte, and Shen are with the Department of Psychiatry, Division of Child Psychiatry,_
_Columbia University/New York State Psychiatric Institute; Dr. Shrout is with the Department of_
_Psychology at New York University; Drs. Canino and Bauermeister are with the Behavioral Sciences_
_Research Institute, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR_


### Abstract

**Objective—The study describes prevalence and rates of service and medication use and associated**
factors over time among Puerto Rican youth with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).

**Methods—Longitudinal data are obtained on Puerto Rican children aged 5 through 13 years in the**
South Bronx (SB) in New York (n=1,138) and two Metropolitan Areas in Puerto Rico (PR) (n=1,353).
The DISC-4 is the diagnostic tool. Five composite measures of risk factors: negative family
influences, ineffective structuring, environmental risks, child risks, and maternal acceptance are
constructed to relate service patterns and medication use to demographic and risk variables.

**Results—ADHD prevalence is similar in PR and SB. Overall mental health service, medication**
and psychostimulant use are lower in PR across three time points. The vast majority of the participants
never received treatment at any time point. More environmental risks, negative child traits and lack
of maternal warmth are associated with more service, even after adjusting for comorbidity. When
risk variables are controlled, the effects of ADHD on service use decrease. Previous treatment is a
strong predictor of subsequent treatment.

**Conclusions—Rates of service and medication use are lower in PR. Context seems to be more**
important than ethnicity in predicting mental health service and medication use among Puerto Rican
children with ADHD. Other psychiatric diagnoses and general risk variables are important correlates
of services and medication use.


**Keywords**

epidemiology; ADHD; psychostimulant use


ADHD is one of the most common psychiatric disorders in the child and adolescent population,
with reported prevalences ranging from 4 to 7% across different contexts and cultural settings
(Bauermeister et al., 1994). Symptoms indicating overactivity, inattention and impulsivity seem
to cluster together similarly in different cultural settings across the world (Bird, 2002; Ivanova
et al., in press) and there is no compelling reason to believe that there are features of the
syndrome unique to any culture.


The existing literature on the diagnosis and management of ADHD is inconsistent regarding
the rates of medication use across different geographic locations or ethnic groups.
Psychostimulants are widely recognized as the treatment of choice for ADHD (American

Correspondence to Dr. Hector R. Bird, 1300 Luchetti St., San Juan, PR 00907; e-mail: hecbird@aol.com.


-----

Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2007; Dulcan and Benson, 1997) and are not
used in treating other childhood conditions except for rare disorders such as narcolepsy.
However it has been shown that a large number of children in the community receive
psychostimulants without meeting full diagnostic criteria for ADHD (Jensen et al., 1999a),
albeit that such children have higher symptoms of ADHD (elevated above those of nontreated
children). Although some concerns have been expressed that psychostimulants are overprescribed, there is evidence to suggest the opposite (Goldman et al., 1998). On the other side
of the argument, a number of studies report that the majority of children with ADHD do not
receive psychostimulants (Jensen et al., 1999a; Rowland et al., 2002).

Some studies suggest that Hispanic populations are particularly underserved when it comes to
medication use, (Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2005; Rowland et al., 2002; Safer
and Malever, 2000) but evidence for such disparities is not consistent. This may not apply to
Puerto Rican children because other studies report that no significant differences exist between
treatment patterns among Puerto Rican children and children in other ethnic groups (Jensen et
al., 1999a; Leslie et al., 2005). In the MECA study (Lahey et al., 1996) no differences in the
prescribing patterns of psycho-stimulants were noted between Puerto Rico and three other
communities in the United States (Bauermeister et al., 2003). More recently, Leslie (2005)
compared prescription patterns of clinic children with ADHD from two different mental health
systems, one in Puerto Rico, the other in San Diego, CA. There were again, no significant site
differences in medication use by site. Of more import is the fact that all three studies showed
that less than 15% of children meeting diagnostic criteria for ADHD (Puerto Rican or
otherwise), received medication. This is a very low rate compared with what had been
previously reported by other studies in the general population (Angold et al., 2000; Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2005; Rowland et al., 2002). One possible source of the
variation in results of studies comparing Latino to non-Latino groups is that the comparisons
tend to confound group membership with context. Latino attitudes toward medication might
affect treatment rates, but living as a minority member in an impoverished area may also affect
treatment patterns. In this report we aim to separate context from Puerto Rican ethnic identity.
Through secondary analyses of existing data, we describe the rates of mental health service
and medication use and the related risk factors among community-based probability samples
of Puerto Rican youth in two different contexts, one in the South Bronx, NY (SB) and one in
San Juan, PR (PR)

The present analyses aim to answer five main questions: (1) Are there differences in the
prevalence of ADHD among Puerto Rican children in two different contexts? (2) To what
extent are Puerto Rican children in the two contexts receiving medication for ADHD? (3) How
do differences in context influence mental health service, medication, and psychostimulant use
in children of the same ethnic background with and without ADHD? (4) What influence do
risk factors have on mental health service, medication and psychostimulant use among Puerto
Rican children in the two contexts? (5) To what extent does service/medication use persist over
time? Our hypotheses are that prevalence will be similar, regardless of context, that a lower
proportion of children in PR receive mental health services and medication, including
psychostimulants, than Puerto Rican children in the SB and that an explanation for such
variation in medication use would be differences in the levels of risk factors in the two
situations.


### METHODS

Bird et al. (2006a; 2006b; 2007) provide detailed information about the parent study’s
methodology and initial findings. In brief, this is an NIMH funded longitudinal study designed
to assess the prevalence, associated comorbidities and correlates of disruptive behavior
disorders among Puerto Rican children in two contexts: the South Bronx (SB) in New York


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

**Procedures**


City (n=1,138) and the Standard Metropolitan Areas in San Juan and Caguas, Puerto Rico (PR)
(n=1,353) (total n=2,491). Children aged 5 to 13 years at baseline were followed over three
waves of data collection one year apart (mean 349.6 days; s.d. 54.6). Each sample is a multistage
probability sample of households of the target population, and each can be weighted to
represent the populations of Puerto Rican children in the SB and those in PR. A household was
eligible for the study if: (1) there was at least one child residing in the household aged 5 through
13 years identified by the family as being of Puerto Rican background; and (2) at least one of
the child’s parents or primary caretakers also self-identified as being of Puerto Rican
background. All eligible children were selected to participate up to a maximum of three children
per household.

At each assessment children and their primary caretakers were interviewed in the language of
their choice (English or Spanish), using the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISCIV) ( Shaffer et al., 2000; Bravo et al., 2001) and a wide array of risk factor measures previously
described by Bird et al. (2006a). The DISC was not administered to children under 10 years
because the reliability of younger child informants is questionable (Breton et al., 1995;
Edelbrock et al., 1985; Fallon, Jr. and Schwab-Stone, 1994; Jensen et al., 1999b; Schwab-Stone
et al., 1994). All adult informants and children who were 10 years old or older were
administered the DISC-IV. The following diagnoses were ascertained: Conduct Disorder and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Major
Depression, Dysthymia, Anxiety Disorders (Separation Anxiety, Panic, and Generalized
Anxiety Disorders, Social Phobia and PTSD) and Substance Use Disorder.

The test-retest reliability of parent reports of ADHD using the DISC IV in English or Spanish
have been reported (Bravo et al., 2001; Shaffer et al., 2000). Test-retest reliability for ADHD
was acceptable (K=0.49 for the Spanish DISC-IV and K=0.60 for the English DISC-IV),
representing fair to good agreement. Agreement between lay interviewer and clinician
administered DISC-IV as well as with clinical judgment for the ADHD schedule has fluctuated
from fair to good (Schwab-Stone et al., 1996; Ribera et al., 1996).

Consent forms and procedures were approved by the N. Y. State Psychiatric Institute and the
University of Puerto Rico Medical School Institutional Review Boards. After obtaining
informed consent from the adult and assent from the youth, each informant was interviewed
by separate trained lay interviewers using laptop computers. Data collection for the three-wave
study spanned a period of almost four years averaging approximately one year between waves
for each respondent. Retention in the three wave panel design was excellent, and has been
previously reported (Bird et al., 2007).


**Diagnostic Status**

For the present analyses we constructed three categories of diagnostic status: (1) neither current
ADHD nor ADHD-NOS, (2) current ADHD and (3) current ADHD-NOS. The ADHD-NOS
category included children with inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity having clinically
significant impairment, but whose symptom pattern fell below the symptomatic threshold for
the disorder. For ADHD-NOS, the age of onset criterion was not considered. To examine the
impact of comorbid psychiatric disorders, for some of the analyses, children were subdivided
into those who met criteria for one or more of the other disorders considered in the study and
those with none of the diagnoses included. All diagnostic categories include impaired
functioning in at least one setting.


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

**Mental Health Service and Medication Use**

At each wave, caretakers were asked about mental health service use over the past year for
emotional, behavioral, alcohol or drug problems. These included inpatient, outpatient, day
treatment, special education for emotionally disturbed or school counseling. Caretakers also
provided the names of any medication used for problems with emotions or behavior. All
psychotropic medications were recorded in the data set and classified by the first author. Of
approximately thirty medications listed, five were classified as psychostimulants: two
amphetamine products (Adderal and Dexedrine) and three methylphenydate preparations
(Ritalin, Concerta and Focalin). Other medications consisted of SSRI’s or other
antidepressants, major and minor tranquilizers, mood stabilizers or anti-convulsants, and antihypertensives. Caretaker attitudes towards medication use were assessed through an item that
asked caretakers whether they agreed or would agree to their child receiving medications
prescribed for behavior problems or problems with hyperactivity or paying attention, with three
response options (“Yes”, “No”, or “Maybe”).


**Risk variables**

As described in detail by Bird et al (2006a), information about parenting and environmental
and child-based risks were obtained at the three time points from the caretaker and from
children. We considered all the risk variables included in the study, except for neighborhood
and cultural factors, which are not comparable between sites. The measures were grouped in
four conceptual dimensions: 1) Negative Family Influences, 2) Ineffective Structuring
Variables, 3) Child Risks, 4) Environmental Risks. Data reduction analyses were carried out
that led us to focus on 18 specific risk measures that have been previously described (Bird et
al., 2006a) related to these domains. Below we provide the main reference source for each
measure.

_Negative Family Influences included family functioning (Good et al., 1979), parent social_
support (Thoits, 1995), religiosity (Miller et al., 1997), and if the child was in a single parent
family. Ineffective Structuring included parental monitoring (Patterson and StouthamerLoeber, 1984), parental discipline (Goodman et al., 1998), and parental attitudes towards
delinquency (Loeber et al., 1998). Environmental Risks included Exposure to Violence (Raia,
1995; Richters and Martinez, 1993), School Environment (Bird et al., 2006a), Peer
Delinquency (Loeber et al., 1998), Stressful Life Events (Goodman et al., 1998; Johnson and
McKutcheon, 1980) and an adaptation of the Home Environment Scale (Bradley and Caldwell,
1977). Negative Child Characteristics included early agressivity, assessed through 6 items
about aggressive behaviors at age 2–3 years (such as hitting or biting); social adjustment,
ascertained by 2 questions about getting along with teachers and peers; poor academic
performance, determined by the child’s performance in 10 academic subjects; child talents
included special skills in 6 different areas (e.g., sports, arts, etc); and peer relations (Hudson,
1992). In addition to these four summary variables, we included Maternal Acceptance/
_Warmth, based on Hudson, (1982) in our analyses. This variable did not emerge from the data_
reduction screen but was a key variable in cross sectional analyses reported by Bird et al
(2006b). It includes items related to the child/parent relationship and to parental burden.

All risk variables retained for further analysis had Cronbach alpha values equal to or greater
than 0.54. Specific values are reported in Bird et al (Bird et al., 2006a). To represent Negative
_family influences, Ineffective structuring variables, Environmental risks and Negative child_
_characteristics we used regression-based factor score estimates from factor analyses of both_
samples combined. Across both samples, the mean of these scores was centered at zero. To
make it comparable, the Maternal acceptance/warmth scale was standardized to have mean
zero and variance one in the combined sample. The risk variables are highly correlated over
the three years (median correlation of the risks variables across the three waves is 0.64 in PR


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

and 0.54 in the SB) and tend to represent situations that are relatively stable. For this reason,
we present the risks as the average across the three waves.


**Statistical Analyses**

We adjusted for differences in the probability of selection due to the sample design and
differences from the 2000 census in the age/gender distribution. For estimates of means, rates
and correlations among variables, we used SUDAAN software (release 8) (Research Triangle
Institute, 2001) to compute weighted estimates and to adjust standard errors for intraclass
correlations induced by multi-stage sampling, with children nested within households and
households nested within primary sampling units.

In order to make comparisons of the two sites, we adjusted for a propensity score distribution
constructed using a logistic regression model that included maternal age, maternal education,
and income with membership in the SB as the outcome variable. Following guidelines of
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), we identified strata of youth in the two sites who according to
the logistic model had the same predicted probability of having come from the same site. Five
such propensity score strata were defined and indicators of these strata were included in the
analyses to adjust for site differences.

At each wave of data, we estimate the rates of mental health service use, all psychotropic
medication use and specifically psychostimulant use among the three groups of children. These
analyses reveal the extent of unmet need for ADHD in particular. They are carried out
separately for PR and the SB.

We developed descriptive models that relate service and medication use to demographic
characteristics and risk variables to better understand the patterns of use and possible disparities
over time. These models used logistic regression with three binary outcomes: service (vs. none),
medication (vs. none) and psychostimulants (vs. none). Explanatory variables included child’s
age, gender, and diagnostic status and risk variables as defined above. Included in these
variables are constructs relevant to service/medication use, including demographics, parental
burden, school problems, externalizing problems, impairment and attitudes toward medication
(Alegria et al., 2004; Bauermeister et al., 2003).

The data across time were included in the analysis and linear time trends were examined. To
take into account dependencies among repeated measures, we used generalized estimating
equations (Diggle et al., 2002) as implemented in the GENMOD procedure of SAS (SAS
Institute, 2005). The same analysis was also conducted in a sub-sample that included only
children with ADHD or ADHD-NOS. An additional longitudinal analysis was done to look at
persistence of service/medication use. In this analysis we examined the explanatory variables
after adjusting for service/medication use in the previous wave.


### RESULTS

**Descriptive results**


The prevalences of both ADHD and ADHD-NOS (see Table 1) are similar in Puerto Rico and
the South Bronx over the three waves. Mental health service use, however, is substantially
lower among children in PR relative to the South Bronx across all three time points. All site
differences are significant (p<.0.001). Service use among children with ADHD is more than
twice the overall service use rate. Among those with ADHD-NOS the results are similar. There
is a tendency for ADHD-NOS children to receive less service in PR than in the SB, with fewer
than half in PR receiving service.

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

Overall rates of medication use are also significantly lower in PR relative to the SB at all three
waves [(2.8%, 5.7%) Wave 1; (3.1%, 5.9%) Wave 2; (3.3%, 5.8%) Wave 3]. Among children
with ADHD there are no statistically significant site differences in medication use. Despite the
moderate rates of general service use among children with ADHD, the proportion of children
with ADHD who receive medications is only about one in 4 in each site.

Like general service use and medication use, there is less overall use of psychostimulants in
PR relative to the SB. This difference is significant in only the first two waves although the
same tendency is apparent in Wave 3. Psychostimulants are the treatment of choice for children
with ADHD, but relatively few of those with the diagnosis receive psychostimulants in either
site. Similar findings were obtained for those with ADHD-NOS; site differences were not
significant and few of those with ADHD-NOS were receiving psychostimulants. Indeed,
among children with ADHD who received medication of any kind, the proportion whose
prescription was for psychostimulants was as large or larger in PR than that in the SB (results
not shown in table).

Table 1 also shows site differences of an important indicator of service/medication use that
will be discussed in detail later, namely caretaker attitudes toward medications for their
children. In SB the majority of caretakers expressed a negative attitude towards medication
use whereas in PR the proportions were significantly smaller.\


**Multivariate models of longitudinal data**

We next considered service/medication patterns across all three waves in multivariate linear
models that take into account site, gender and age (centered at 10), as well as diagnostic and
risk variables. These models help to estimate the relative importance of these predictor sets on
service, medication and psychostimulant use in each of the sites. In Table 2 we present results
from two versions of the model for each of these outcomes. The first considers only
demographic and diagnostic variables, while the second adjusts for known child/family risk
variables.

After adjusting for demographic variables and considering the data from all time points, the
site difference in overall service use remains statistically significant (b=−.63, se=0.11, p<.001).
Children in the SB are 1.88 more likely to report service use than those in PR. Across both
sites there was no evidence that service use varied over wave of study, but males were more
likely to use service and age at baseline was related to service use in a nonlinear pattern.
Children who were younger at baseline were less likely to use services but by age 10 there was
little difference in the likelihood of service use with increasing age. Those with ADHD and
ADHD-NOS were approximately three times more likely to use service than those with no
ADHD (b=1.22, se=.18, p<.001, OR=3.4; b=1.08, se=.16, p<.001, OR=2.9), but the ADHD
and ADHD-NOS groups did not differ significantly from each other. Those with another
diagnosis besides ADHD also reported receiving more service, even after adjusting for
comorbid ADHD (b=0.71, se=0.17, OR=2.0). Table 2 also shows that children whose parents
would consider medication use for their treatment were also more likely to receive services
(b=0.48, se=.12, p<.001, OR=1.6).

The second multivariate model adjusted for the five risk variables in addition to the variables
just reviewed. Four of these five variables were related to reported service use. Children in
families with elevated Negative Family Influence scores were less likely to receive services
(b=−0.21, se=.0.07, p<.01), while those exposed to elevated Environmental Risks (b=0.20,
se=0.05, p<.0001), who themselves had elevated Negative Child Characteristics (b=0.77,
se=0.07, p<.0001) and who had reduced Maternal Warmth (b=0.27, se=0.06, p<.0001) were
all more likely to receive mental health services. These associations were all adjusted for
ADHD diagnosis. However, it is interesting to note that the magnitudes of the associations of


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

ADHD and ADHD-NOS with service use were dramatically reduced when adjusting for these
risk processes. After adjustment, ADHD was no longer significant (b=0.34, se=.21, ns,
OR=1.4) and ADHD-NOS was reduced by a third (b=0.68, se=.17, p<.001, OR=2.0). The
adjustment also eliminated the association of other diagnoses (b=0.19, se=0.20, ns) and reduced
the difference between the sites by half (b=−0.34, se=0.13, p<.01, OR=0.72).

Next we consider multivariate models of medication use. Model 1 in Table 2 reveals substantial
site (b=−1.12, se=0.22, p<.0001, OR=0.33) and gender differences (b=−1.0, se=0.24, p<.0001,
OR=0.37) in medication use, with less use in PR and less use for females at both sites. There
was no change over follow-up time in medication use, but there was a pattern with age at time
of recruitment that resembled the pattern for overall service use. Children with ADHD (b=0.75,
se=0.28, p<.01, OR=2.12) and ADHD-NOS (b=1.13, se=0.30, p<.001, OR=3.10) were more
likely to receive medications, as were those with other diagnoses (b=0.65, se=0.30, p<.05,
OR=1.92). Medication use was strongly related to caretakers’ reports of openness to
pharmaceutical treatment, both stated unequivocally (“Yes”)(b=2.33, se=0.26, p<.001,
OR=10.28) and ambivalently (“Maybe”)(b=0.74, se=0.34, p<.05, OR=2.10). When the five
child/family risk variables were adjusted in Model 2, the associations of medication use to
ADHD diagnoses (ADHD: b=0.19, se=0.34, ns; ADHD-NOS: b=0.18, se=.28, ns) and to other
diagnoses (b=0.10, se=.32, ns) were again reduced to non-significance. In contrast, the effects
for site, gender, and caretaker attitudes toward medication were not much affected by the
adjustment. Among the five risk variables that were adjusted, three were related to medication
use: Negative family influence (b=−0.32, se=0.12, p<.01), Negative Child Characteristics
(b=0.61, se=0.13, p<.0001) and Lack of Maternal Warmth (b=0.50, se=0.11, p<.0001).
_Environmental risks, which had been significantly related to overall service use, had no_
association with medication use (b=0.09, se=0.10, ns).

The final two columns of Table 2 show results for psychostimulant use (vs. no psychostimulant
use). Like the results for medication use, psychostimulants are less used in PR (b=−0.96,
se=0.28, p<.001, OR=0.38) and by girls (b=−1.0, se=0.32, p<.01, OR=0.37). ADHD (b=0.80,
se=0.37, p<.05, OR=2.23) and AHDH-NOS (b=0.92, se=.34, p<.01, OR=2.51) are
significantly related to psychostimulant use, but other diagnosis is not (b=0.60, se=0.37, ns,
OR=1.82). Strong caretaker openness to pharmaceutical treatment is strongly related to
psychostimulant use (b=2.53, se=0.36, p<.0001, OR=12.55) but ambivalent openness was not
(b=0.52, se=0.50, ns, OR=1.68). In Model 2, Negative Family Influence (b=−0.36, se=0.16,
p<.05), Negative Child Characteristics (b=0.50, se=0.16, p<.01) and Lack of Maternal Warmth
(b=0.50, se=0.14, p<.001) were all related to psychostimulant use, but Ineffective Parent
Structuring and Environmental Risks were not. When these risks were adjusted, the
associations of ADHD and ADHD-NOS to psychostimulant use were reduced in magnitude
and were no longer significant.

We reexamined these predictors of service and medication use in the sub-sample of children
who received either the ADHD or ADHD-NOS diagnosis. These results are shown in Table
3. Overall, the patterns of results were similar to what we found in the total sample. Overall
service was more likely to be provided to ADHD children in the SB than in PR, to males, to
those who had comorbid disorders, and to those whose parents expressed openness to
medication interventions. When individual risk variables were included, the diagnosis of a
comorbid disorder no longer predicted service use. The same risk variables predict service use
among ADHD children as in the total population: Exposure to environmental risks, negative
child characteristics, and lack of maternal warmth made service use more likely, while negative
family influences was inversely related to the likelihood of service use. Similar patterns were
found for medication use. Important factors were site, gender, and caretaker attitude toward
medication. Here again, comorbidity was not related to medication use once the sample is
limited to those with ADHD.

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

The results for the ADHD subgroup were most different from the general sample for the
prescription of medication in general and psychostimulants specifically. There is no evidence
of a site difference in psychostimulant use, and the strongest predictor was caretaker’s attitude
toward medication. Medication and psychostimulant use seem to be more a function of the
caretaker’s attitude towards medication use than the psychiatric needs of the child. Children
with ADHD whose caretakers were amenable to medication use (responding “yes” or “maybe”
to their acceptance of using medications for their child’s behavior problems) were 11 times
more likely to receive psychostimulants or other medications than those who were adverse to
this type of intervention. Among caretakers of ADHD children receiving medication, an
average (over three waves) of 90.5% in P.R. and 92.0% in the Bronx were amenable to
medication use (“maybe” or “yes” responses) but the same was true of fewer caretakers (65.8%
in PR and 48.0% in SB) of ADHD children not receiving medications. It is evident that the
caretaker’s attitude towards medication use has a major bearing on whether an ADHD child
receives medication.

Among the composite risk variables, only two were predictive. Those with ADHD were less
likely to get psychostimulants if there was dysfunction in the family (Negative family
_influences), and they were more likely to get them if there was an impaired relationship with_
the caretaker (Low maternal acceptance/warmth). There was no indication that Negative child
_characteristics increased the likelihood that psychostimulants would be prescribed. The gender_
effect was diminished in this analysis, and was only significant when individual risk variables
were adjusted.


**Persistence of Service, Medication and Psychostimulant Use**

Table 4 shows patterns of service, medication and psychostimulant use over the three waves
of data in the total sample. The patterns were similar for overall service, medication use and
psychostimulant use. The majority of the participants never received services or medications
at any time point. Of those who did, between one fifth and one quarter reported it in all three
waves. Among those who reported services or medication in some waves but not others, there
were roughly equal numbers of persons that started, that moved off and that were variable. We
carried out an analysis of services or medication use at waves 2 and 3 using services or
medication use at the previous wave as a predictor. For all three outcomes, the previous use
was a strong predictor of subsequent use (OR’s>11). The persistence of service use was not
greater among those with ADHD or ADHD-NOS (Not shown on table. Results available from
authors).


### DISCUSSION

There were no significant differences among Puerto Rican children in the SB and in PR in the
prevalence of ADHD, which falls within the range reported in studies carried out in other
populations (Bird, 2002). The finding was consistent at each of the three waves of the study.
Given that ADHD is considered to be a chronic disorder that is biologically determined, a
similar prevalence across both sites and a prevalence comparable to that found in other settings
was expected.

Overall use of mental health services is significantly lower in PR than in the SB, even after
adjusting for demographic variables. This had been predicted based on previous research
findings (Canino et al., 2004; Jensen et al., 1999a; Lahey et al., 1996). While arguably, language
could be a barrier to mental health service use in the SB, it does not seem to be a relevant factor
in the SB population studied. All of the Puerto Rican children in the SB sample and threefourths of their caretakers chose to respond to the interviews in English, suggesting that in the
SB we are dealing with a population that is fairly well assimilated. Previous studies have shown
disparities in access to care and in the availability of mental health services in Puerto Rico as


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

compared to other communities in the mainland (Canino et al., 2004; Lahey et al., 1996). In
our study, we do not have comparable data from other populations to address this issue, but
our findings indicate that Puerto Rican children who live on the island are substantially less
likely to receive all levels of treatment, including any mental health service, any medication
or psychostimulant medication than Puerto Rican children who live in the SB. The rates of
treatment with psychotropic medications in the population as a whole are half as large in PR.
These differences remain after adjusting for ADHD spectrum diagnosis, other diagnoses,
parental attitudes towards medication use and other risk variables. We consider that the
disparity has to do with service system differences (greater availability of services in the SB)
and is contrary to the notion that minority status is the determining factor, given that a larger
proportion of a minority group (Puerto Ricans in the SB) are more likely to receive services
than Puerto Rican children in PR (where they are a majority).

Our results also showed a service use gender disparity; at both sites males received more mental
health services than females, even when controlling for psychopathology, age, caretaker
attitudes and a number of psychosocial risk factors. The literature on treatment disparities based
on gender has been equivocal with some studies showing boys receiving more services (Burns
et al., 1995; Cabiya et al., 2006; Cohen and Hesselbart, 1993; Verhulst and van der Ende,
1997), and others not finding gender differences in service utilization (Kataoka et al., 2002).

There appears to be greater acceptance of medications for treating behavioral problems by
caretakers in PR, which may be explained by the fact that unlike the US mainland, the island
does not have pressure groups militating against the use of medication in children. It is rare to
find negative news media or propaganda against the use of stimulants in PR. Nevertheless, in
terms of medication use in the population as a whole, there is significantly lower medication
use in PR (See Table 3) and the difference in psychostimulant use is suggested although not
statistically significant. This finding cannot be associated to parental attitudes towards
medication use since parents in PR are less adverse to the use of medication than those in the
SB and it is more likely to be related to the disparities in the mental health delivery systems
noted above.

The MTA Study (MTA Collaborative Group, 2004) demonstrated that medication, specifically
psychostimulants, is the most effective treatment for reduction of ADHD symptoms, albeit that
psychosocial treatments may have some positive impact as well. The majority of the ADHD
children in the present study are not receiving medications but some (still a small proportion)
are receiving other services. It is unlikely, however, that other services in this population are
psychosocial treatments in any way akin to the manualized treatments offered in the MTA
Study (Bauermeister et al., 2003). Among ADHD children there is lower service and overall
medication use in PR than in the SB and a tendency in that direction for psychostimulant use
as well.

While a lower proportion of children with ADHD in PR received services, those who did were
more likely to receive psychotropic medications than their counterparts in the SB. This
paradoxical site difference, given the higher rate of service use in the SB must involve other
factors. While contrary to PR, the majority of SB children with ADHD received some service,
less than one-third with a diagnosis of ADHD (according to the DISC-IV) receive medication
and less than one fifth receive psychostimulants to treat it. Besides greater availability of
services in SB and greater acceptance of medication in PR, this paradoxical finding may also
relate to differences in the service systems that are qualitative rather than quantitative. In PR
mental health services are regulated so that only psychiatrists are reimbursed for prescribing
pychotropic medications. In the SB, other physicians are able to prescribe psychostimulants
and receive reimbursement for the visits. We consider that psychiatrists are more likely to
follow treatment guidelines for ADHD than primary physicians or other specialists, thus

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

making it more likely for PR children to receive psychotropic medications once they have
accessed the service system.

Of greater importance in the overall picture is the fact that only one-fourth of the children with
ADHD receive medications in both sites. This is less than half the medication rate reported by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Sept 2, 2005) (Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2005), namely that 56.3% of U.S. children with ADHD were on medication.
Moreover, among the Puerto Rican children in our study, very few of those with the diagnosis
are receiving psychostimulants. The dearth of appropriate treatments may relate to a
misperception of the problems among parents and mental health providers or a lack of
diagnostic acuity or knowledge of treatment guidelines among the professionals treating these
children as well as to differences in the service delivery system.

Given the large proportion of children with ADHD and ADHD-NOS not receiving any kind
of services or medication, it is important to ask whether there may be an issue involving our
method of ascertainment and that the diagnostic instrument employed (DISC-IV) may be
overdiagnosing. Important arguments against this possibility are reports indicating that the
DISC-IV has good psychometric characteristics for this diagnosis, as well as the fact that the
prevalence rates of ADHD obtained at each wave over three waves, are consistent with
prevalence rates reported in other studies (Bird, 2002). It is therefore unlikely that the untreated
ADHD cases in our study are false positives.

We found that certain risk variables were also powerful predictors of service, medication and
psychostimulant use. The most consistent finding was Negative child characteristics, which
included poor performance in school, non-engagement in extra-curricular activities and
aggressive behaviors. Children who were elevated one standard deviation on this risk
composite were more than twice as likely to be receiving service, and nearly twice as likely to
be receiving medication. They were 64% more likely to be receiving psychostimulants.
Similarly, youth whose relationships with their parents or caretakers were troubled, as
measured by Low maternal Acceptance/warmth, were also more likely to be receiving service,
medication and psychostimulants, although the magnitude of the effect was less strong than
the child risks. When service, medication and psychostimulant use were examined in the total
population, these general quantitative risk variables were more powerful predictors of
treatment than a diagnosis of ADHD. Indeed, when these risks were adjusted, ADHD, ADHDNOS and diagnoses of other disorders were no longer significant predictors of treatment use,
indicating that parental attitudes as well as other risk factors are more likely to lead to service
use than the diagnosis itself.

In neither site did we find reliable evidence that treatment patterns changed over the three-year
follow-up period. We did find that children who receive services, medication or
psychostimulants at one point in time are likely to maintain the treatment at the next wave.
Possible barriers to treatment seem to be more relevant than maintenance of children in the
service system once care is initiated.


**Clinical Implications**

Puerto Rican children with ADHD both in the SB and in PR are underserved. Clinicians
working with these populations and agencies involved in service delivery must consider the
importance of screening for this disorder in schools and day-care settings and referring children
who screen positive for subsequent assessments. The fact that a sizeable proportion of
caretakers are adverse to the use of medication for treating problems associated with ADHD,
indicates that community education is a paramount issue. The findings point to the need for
better training among providers, school personnel, and a higher level of community education
and outreach efforts. In Puerto Rico, where there are less services available but the treatment


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

**Limitations**


of ADHD children is more likely to be in the hands of specialized psychiatrists and child
psychiatrists, a larger proportion of children received the treatment of choice. This finding
suggests that training of other professionals or direct involvement by psychiatrists in
monitoring the care of ADHD children is necessary.

As with any epidemiologic study that is not of broader scope, there are limits to the
generalizability of the study findings. Our results are generalizeable to Puerto Rican children
in PR and the SB. However, they would need to be replicated in other PR populations in the
United States and in other Latino populations if they are to be applied more broadly.
Comparability with research findings on other ethnic groups is limited by the fact that
differences in results could always be attributed to differences in research design, ages under
consideration and other methodological differences. A wide array of risk factors are included
in our study, but they are by no means exhaustive. Besides demographic variables other known
predictors of service utilization, such as parental burden, parent/child relationship and
impairment, were considered in our study as indicators within other measures employed, but
standardized measures of some of those known constructs (e.g. parental burden) were not.
Future studies would require a more formal delineation of these variables.


### CONCLUSIONS

Over the course of three years, ADHD was related to mental health service, medication and
stimulant use among Puerto Rican children living in the SB and PR. Although both sites
presented similar patterns of association with ADHD, rates of service, medication and stimulant
use are lower in PR. Other psychiatric diagnosis and general risk variables also seem to be
important correlates of use of services and medication, including psychostimulants.
Particularly, Environmental risks were related to greater mental health service use, but not to
medication use. Negative child behavior and Lack of maternal warmth were related to both
service and medication use, while Negative family influence was related to less medication use.
In both sites the diagnosis itself was a weaker predictor of service and medication use than
individual risk variables. While children in PR received less service and medication overall,
the patterns of associations were similar across the two sites. The disparities reported in the
literature between ethnic minorities and other ethnic groups need to be re-examined. Based on
the fact that the same ethnic group shows differences in service and medication use patterns
in two different contexts, it is likely that disparities are more related to context than to ethnicity.


### Acknowledgements

The primary study was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health through grants RO-1 MH56401 (Dr. Bird,
principal investigator) and P-20MD000537-01 (Dr. Canino, principal investigator) from the National Center for
Minority Health Disparities. The current work was supported through a contract with McNeil Pediatrics Division of
McNeil PPC, Inc.


### References

Alegria M, Canino G, Lai S, Ramirez RR, Chavez L, Rusch D, Shrout PE. Understanding caregivers’
help-seeking for Latino children’s mental health care use. Med Care 2004;42:447–455. [PubMed:
15083105]
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Practice Parameter for the Assessment and
Treatment of Children and Adolescents with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivy Disorder.
[http://www.aacap.org/galleries/PracticeParameters/New_ADHD_Parameter.pdf. 2007. 7-17-2007](http://www.aacap.org/galleries/PracticeParameters/New_ADHD_Parameter.pdf)
Angold A, Erkanli A, Egger HL, Costello EJ. Stimulant treatment for children: a community perspective.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2000;39:975–984. [PubMed: 10939226]


_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

Bauermeister J, Canino G, Bird H. Epidemiology of disruptive behavior disorders. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America: Disruptive Disorders 1994;3:177–194.
Bauermeister JJ, Canino G, Bravo M, Ramirez R, Jensen PS, Chavez L, Martinez-Taboas A, Ribera J,
Alegria M, Garcia P. Stimulant and psychosocial treatment of ADHD in Latino/Hispanic children. J
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003;42:851–855. [PubMed: 12819445]
Bird, HR. The diagnostic classification, epidemiology and cross-cultural validity of ADHD. In: Jensen,
P.; Cooper, J., editors. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: State of the science: Best Practices.
Kingston, NJ: Civic Research Institute; 2002. p. 2-1-2-16.
Bird HR, Canino GJ, Davies M, Duarte CS, Febo V, Ramirez R, Hoven C, Wicks J, Musa G, Loeber R.
A study of disruptive behavior disorders in Puerto Rican youth: I. Background, design, and survey
methods. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2006a;45:1032–1041.

[PubMed: 16926610]
Bird HR, Davies M, Duarte CS, Shen S, Loeber R, Canino GJ. A study of disruptive behavior disorders
in Puerto Rican youth: II. Baseline prevalence, comorbidity, and correlates in two sites. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2006b;45:1042–1053. [PubMed: 16926611]
Bird HR, Shrout PE, Davies M, Canino G, Duarte CS, Shen S, Loeber R. Longitudinal development of
antisocial behaviors in young and early adolescent Puerto Rican children at two sites. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 2007;46:5–14. [PubMed: 17195724]
Bradley RH, Caldwell BM. Home observation for measurement of the environment: a validation study
of screening efficiency. Am J Ment Defic 1977;81:417–420. [PubMed: 66872]
Bravo M, Ribera J, Rubio-Stipec M, Canino G, Shrout P, Ramirez R, Fabregas L, Chavez L, Alegria M,
Bauermeister JJ, Martinez TA. Test-retest reliability of the Spanish version of the Diagnostic
Interview Schedule for Children (DISC-IV). J Abnorm Child Psychol 2001;29:433–444. [PubMed:
11695544]
Breton JJ, Bergeron L, Valla JP, Lepine S, Houde L, Gaudet N. Do children aged 9 through 11 years
understand the DISC Version 2.25 questions? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1995;34:946–
954. [PubMed: 7649966]
Burns BJ, Costello EJ, Angold A, Tweed D, Stangl D, Farmer EM, Erkanli A. Children’s mental health
service use across service sectors. Health Aff (Millwood ) 1995;14:147–159. [PubMed: 7498888]
Cabiya JJ, Canino G, Chavez L, Ramirez R, Alegria M, Shrout P, Hohman A, Bravo M, Bauermeister
JJ, Maritinez-Taboas A. Gender disparities in mental health service use of Puerto Rican children and
adolescents. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2006;47:840–848. [PubMed: 16898998]
Canino G, Shrout PE, Rubio-Stipec M, Bird HR, Bravo M, Ramirez R, Chavez L, Alegria M,
Bauermeister JJ, Hohmann A, Ribera J, Garcia P, Martinez-Taboas A. The DSM-IV rates of child
and adolescent disorders in Puerto Rico: prevalence, correlates, service use, and the effects of
impairment. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004;61:85–93. [PubMed: 14706947]
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Mental health in the United States. Prevalence of diagnosis
and medication treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder--United States, 2003. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54:842–847. [PubMed: 16138075]
Cohen P, Hesselbart CS. Demographic factors in the use of children’s mental health services. Am J Public
Health 1993;83:49–52. [PubMed: 8417606]
Diggle, PJ.; Heagerty, PJ.; Liang, KY.; Zeger, SL. Analysis of Longitudinal Data. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press; 2002.
Dulcan MK, Benson RS. AACAP Official Action. Summary of the practice parameters for the assessment
and treatment of children, adolescents, and adults with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
1997;36:1311–1317. [PubMed: 9291734]
Edelbrock C, Costello AJ, Dulcan MK, Kalas R, Conover NC. Age differences in the reliability of the
psychiatric interview of the child. Child Dev 1985;56:265–275. [PubMed: 3987406]
Fallon T Jr, Schwab-Stone M. Determinants of reliability in psychiatric surveys of children aged 6–12.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1994;35:1391–1408. [PubMed: 7868635]
Goldman LS, Genel M, Bezman RJ, Slanetz PJ. Diagnosis and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder in children and adolescents. Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical Association.
JAMA 1998;279:1100–1107. [PubMed: 9546570]

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

Good MD, Smilkstein G, Good BJ, Shaffer T, Arons T. The family APGAR Indices: A study of construct
validity. Journal of Family Practice 1979;8:577–582.
Goodman SH, Hoven CW, Narrow WE, Cohen P, Fielding B, Alegria M, Leaf PJ, Kandel D, Horwitz
SM, Bravo M, Moore R, Dulcan MK. Measurement of risk for mental disorders and competence in
a psychiatric epidemiologic community survey: the National Institute of Mental Health Methods for
the Epidemiology of Child and Adolescent Mental Disorders (MECA) Study. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 1998;33:162–173. [PubMed: 9567666]
Hudson, WW. The WALMYR Assessment Scales Scoring Manual. Tempe, AZ: WALMYR Publishing
Co; 1992.
Ivanova MY, Achenbach TM, Dumenci L, Rescorla L, Almqvist F, Bilenberg N, Bird HR, Chen WJ,
Dopfner M, Erol N, Fombone AFA, Grietens H, Hannesdottir H, Kanbayashi Y, Lambert MC,
Larsson B, Liu X, Leung P, Metzke CW, Minaei A, Mulatu MS, Novik TS, Oh KJ, Roussos A,
Sawyer M, Simsek Z, Steinhausen HC, Weintraub S, Wells KC, Weinsz J, Wolanczyk T, Yang HJ,
Zilber N, Zukauskiene R, Verhulst F. Testing the 8-Syndrome Structure of the CBC in 30 Societies.
in press
Jensen PS, Kettle L, Roper MT, Sloan MT, Dulcan MK, Hoven CW, Bird HR, Bauermeister JJ, Payne
JD. Are stimulants overprescribed? Treatment of ADHD in four U.S. communities. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1999a;38:797–804. [PubMed: 10405496]
Jensen PS, Rubio-Stipec M, Canino G, Bird HR, Dulcan MK, Schwab-Stone ME, Lahey BB. Parent and
child contributions to diagnosis of mental disorder: are both informants always necessary? J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1999b;38:1569–1579. [PubMed: 10596258]
Johnson, JH.; McKutcheon, M. Assessing Life Stress in Older Children and Adolescents: Premliminary
Findings with the Life Events Checklists. In: Johnson; McCutcheon, editors. Stress and anxiety. New
York: Hemisphere Publishing; 1980. p. 15-28.
Kataoka SH, Zhang L, Wells KB. Unmet need for mental health care among U.S. children: variation by
ethnicity and insurance status. Am J Psychiatry 2002;159:1548–1555. [PubMed: 12202276]
Lahey BB, Flagg EW, Bird HR, Schwab-Stone ME, Canino G, Dulcan MK, Leaf PJ, Davies M, Brogan
D, Bourdon K, Horwitz SM, Rubio-Stipec M, Freeman DH, Lichtman JH, Shaffer D, Goodman SH,
Narrow WE, Weissman MM, Kandel DB, Jensen PS, Richters JE, Regier DA. The NIMH Methods
for the Epidemiology of Child and Adolescent Mental Disorders (MECA) Study: background and
methodology. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1996;35:855–
864. [PubMed: 8768345]
Leslie LK, Canino GJ, Landsverk J, Wood PA, Chavez L, Hough R, Bauermeister JJ, Ramirez RR. ADHD
Treatment Patterns of Youth Served in Public Sectors in San Diego and Puerto Rico. Journal of
Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 2005;13:224–236.
Loeber, R.; Farrington, DP.; Stouthamer-Loeber, M.; Van Kammen, WB. Antisocial Behavior and Mental
Health Problems: Explanatory Factors in Childhood and Adolescence. New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc; 1998.
Miller L, Warner V, Wickramaratne P, Weissman M. Religiosity and depression: Ten-year follow-up of
depressed mothers and offspring. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997;36:1416–1425.

[PubMed: 9334555]
MTA Collaborative Group. National Institute of Mental Health Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD
follow-up: 24-month outcomes of treatment strategies for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Pediatrics 2004;113:754–761. [PubMed: 15060224]
Patterson GR, Stouthamer-Loeber M. The correlation of family management practices and delinquency.
Child Development 1984;55:1299–1307. [PubMed: 6488958]
Raia, JA. Perceived social support and coping as moderators of effects of children’s exposure to
community violence. Los Angeles: UCLA; 1995.
Research Triangle Institute. SUDAAN user’s Manual, Release 8.0. Research Triangle Park, NC: Research
Triangle Institute; 2001.
Ribera JC, Canino G, Rubio-Stipec M, Bravo M, Bauermeister JJ, Alegría M, Woodbury M, Huertas S,
Guevara LM, Bird HR, Freeman D, Shrout PE. The Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children
(DISC-2.1) in Spanish: reliability in a Hispanic population. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines 1996;37:195–204.

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

Richters JE, Martinez P. The NIMH community violence project: I. Children as victims of and witnesses
to violence. Psychiatry 1993;56:7–21. [PubMed: 8488215]
Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal
effects. Biometrika 1983;70:41–55.
Rowland AS, Umbach DM, Stallone L, Naftel AJ, Bohlig EM, Sandler DP. Prevalence of medication
treatment for attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder among elementary school children in Johnston
County, North Carolina. Am J Public Health 2002;92:231–234. [PubMed: 11818297]
Safer DJ, Malever M. Stimulant treatment in Maryland public schools. Pediatrics 2000;106:533–539.

[PubMed: 10969099]
Schwab-Stone M, Fallon T, Briggs M, Crowther B. Reliability of diagnostic reporting for children aged
6–11 years: a test-retest study of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children-Revised. Am J
Psychiatry 1994;151:1048–1054. [PubMed: 8010363]
Schwab-Stone M, Dulcan M, Bird H, Lahey B, Canino G, Jensen P, Shaffer D, Fisher P, Goodman S,
Lichtman J, Rubio-Stipec M, Rae DS. The NIMH methods for the epidemiology of child and
adolescent mental disorders (MECA) study: criterion validity of the NIMH Diagnostic Interview
Schedule for Children Version 2.3 (DISC 2.3). Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry 1996;35:7, 878–888.
Shaffer D, Fisher P, Lucas CP, Dulcan MK, Schwab-Stone ME. NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule
for Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV): description, differences from previous versions, and
reliability of some common diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2000;39:28–38.

[PubMed: 10638065]
Thoits PA. Stress, coping and social support processes: where are we? What next? Journal of health and
social behavior. 1995
Verhulst FC, van der Ende EJ. Factors associated with child mental health service use in the community.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997;36:901–909. [PubMed: 9204667]

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

_J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 December 15._


-----

