# Help-Seeking for Child Psychopathology: Pathways to Informal and Professional Services in The Netherlands

MARIEKE ZWAANSWIJK, PH.D., JAN VAN DER ENDE, M.S., PETER F. M. VERHAAK, PH.D.,
JOZIEN M. BENSING, PH.D., AND FRANK C. VERHULST, M.D.

ABSTRACT

Objective: To devise and test a model describing the process of help-seeking for child psychopathology in professional

and informal service settings. Method: Using structural equation modeling, associations between several help-seeking

stages, and the influence of child, family, and context characteristics on these stages were investigated in 246 Dutch chil
dren (4–11 years old) between April 2000 and July 2002. Children were selected for having emotional or behavioral prob
lems from a representative general practice sample; 68% of the selected children participated. Results: School personnel

played an important role in the process of help-seeking for child psychopathology, in both detecting service need and the

provision of and the referral for help. Although Dutch general practitioners are supposed to be gatekeepers of mental health

care, their role in help-seeking for child psychopathology was limited. Various family characteristics were shown to influ
ence service need and informal or professional help-seeking. The influence of child characteristics on the help-seeking

process was limited. Conclusions: Educating parents about child psychopathology and the availability and accessibility of

care, improving general practitioners’ skills in detecting child psychopathology, and direct contact of mental health pro
fessionals with general practitioners and schools may enhance access to care for children in need. J. Am. Acad. Child

Adolesc. Psychiatry, 2005;44(12):1292–1300. Key Words: mental health services, child, psychopathology, health be
havior, social support.


The pathway that leads to professional mental health
care for children with psychopathology is paved with
obstacles, causing a discrepancy between the number
of disordered children in the community and those receiving professional care (Burns et al., 1995; Flisher
et al., 1997; Leaf et al., 1996; Pavuluri et al., 1996; Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997). Understanding which

Accepted June 28, 2005.
Dr. Zwaanswijk is with the Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research
(NIVEL), Utrecht, the Netherlands and the Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Dr. Verhaak is with
NIVEL, and Dr. Bensing is with NIVEL and Utrecht University, the Netherlands; Dr. Verhulst and J. van der Ende are with the Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Supported by grant 2100.0064 from the Netherlands Organization for Health
Research and Development.
Article Plus (online only) materials for this article appear on the Journal’s Web
site: www.jaacap.com.
Reprint requests to Dr. Marieke Zwaanswijk, NIVEL, P.O. Box 1568, 3500
BN Utrecht, The Netherlands; e-mail: M.Zwaanswijk@nivel.nl.
0890-8567/05/4412–1292�2005 by the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry.
DOI: 10.1097/01.chi.0000181038.98712.c6


factors are involved in the help-seeking process may provide suggestions on how to increase service use for these
children. A fruitful way to integrate findings on helpseeking stages and their determinants is to include them
in one comprehensive model. Although many models
concerning the help-seeking process have been formulated (e.g., Andersen, 1995; Fischer et al., 1983; Goldberg and Huxley, 1980, 1992), few specifically apply to
help-seeking for child and adolescent psychopathology.
A first example is the model by Verhulst and Koot
(1992), who have adapted the Goldberg and Huxley
(1980, 1992) model to make it applicable for child
and adolescent help-seeking. In this model, help-seeking
is described as consisting of five subsequent levels, each
separated by a filter. The filters refer to (1) parental problem recognition and consultation of a general practitioner (GP), (2) problem recognition by the GP, (3)
referral to psychiatric care, and (4) referral to inpatient
psychiatric care. Because general practice is the formal
point of entry into mental health care in the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands, and GPs are supposed


1292 J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005


-----

to function as gatekeepers, a central role is attributed
to the GP.
Logan and King (2001) have expanded this model by
including parents’ initial awareness of child problems as
a stage preceding parental problem recognition. Their
definition of problem recognition explicitly involves
an evaluative element in which parents acknowledge
that the child’s problems are severe enough to require
help-seeking. In this respect, it resembles Andersen’s
(1995) construct of perceived need for help.
The focus on the parental side of the help-seeking
process is broadened by Costello et al. (1998), who
stressed the importance of family, school, and context
in their comprehensive model of access to child mental
health services.
To our knowledge, researchers have thus far only investigated particular help-seeking stages in isolation
from each other, without testing a help-seeking model
as a whole. Our aim is to combine several existing helpseeking models and findings on determinants of helpseeking into one comprehensive model (Fig. 1). Testing
this model will not only provide insight into the influence of several determinants on stages of the help-seeking
process but will also clarify the way in which the helpseeking stages influence one another.
Our focus is on the parent-mediated pathway to child
mental health care. This does not imply a disregard for
the roles that other adults can play in the help-seeking
process. By including several family- and context-based
determinants, we acknowledge the ecological nature of the
process. Our model does not include adolescent helpseeking because this is characterized by more autonomy
and is influenced by different factors than help-seeking
for child psychopathology (Zwaanswijk et al., 2003).
Following Logan and King (2001), the first step in
the help-seeking process is assumed to be parents’ initial
awareness that their child shows problematic behaviors
or emotions (parent report of child problems [Fig. 1]),
followed by parents’ need for services. Service need is
defined as the presence of parent-reported child psychopathology and associated functional impairment
(Brewin et al., 1987). This operationalization is somewhat more objective than previously used measures of
service need, in which parents were directly asked
whether their child was in need of help (e.g., Verhulst
and Van der Ende, 1997).
Based on previous research and theory (Logan and
King, 2001; Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997), the


HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

Fig. 1 Theoretical model of the help-seeking process and its determinants.

following variables are expected to be related to service
need: child chronic physical problems, family functioning, changes in family structure, single parenthood, the
presence of siblings, and the teacher’s perception of
child psychopathology.
Service need is hypothesized to precede help-seeking,
which is investigated in both professional (general practice, mental health care) and informal service settings
(teachers, friends/relatives). Because the threshold for
seeking help from friends or relatives is considered to
be lower than for any other kind of service, we assume
that this kind of help-seeking precedes the use of other
services. By including the GP as service provider, the
gatekeeping role of Dutch GPs in the provision of mental health care is acknowledged and explicitly examined.
Help-seeking is assumed to be influenced by a child’s
gender, age, academic problems, family functioning,
changes in family structure, single parenthood, and mental
health service use by a relative (Briggs-Gowan et al.,
2000; Feehan et al., 1994; Gunther et al., 2003; Jensen


J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005 1293


-----

ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.

et al., 1990; John et al., 1995; Lavigne et al., 1998;
Rickwood and Braithwaite, 1994; Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997; Zahner and Daskalakis, 1997).
Some differentiations regarding the influence of determinants on the various components of the help-seeking
process are included. First, based on previous results
concerning the importance of the school in the detection of children with coexisting academic problems and
the provision of care to these children (Verhulst and
Van der Ende, 1997; Zahner and Daskalakis, 1997),
academic problems are expected to affect service need
through teachers’ perceptions of child problems rather
than through parents’ reports of child symptoms and to
be related to school service use only.
Because the acquaintance with a relative who has used
mental health care has been suggested to sensitize parents
to perceive problems in their child (Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997), an association between this variable
and parental report of child problems is expected. Furthermore, mental health care use by a relative is assumed
to influence help-seeking from friends or relatives only
(Rickwood and Braithwaite, 1994; Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997).
Almost all Dutch inhabitants are registered within
general practices, which are accessible to all and close
to the community and provide generalist care. Because
every inhabitant is, in principle, covered by private or
public health insurance, no major financial constraints
hamper the availability of care in the Dutch health care
system. As was found for countries with comparable financial availability of health care (Gasquet et al., 1997,
1999; Sourander et al., 2001; Verhulst and Van der
Ende, 1997), the socioeconomic indicators included
in our model (education level, income, type of insurance) are expected not to affect service need or use directly. They are, however, hypothesized to affect the
presence of child psychopathology.
Because of differences between health care systems,
our theoretical model may not be directly applicable
to nations in which health care depends more heavily
on financial factors. In these countries, sociodemographic variables are likely to influence the help-seeking
process (Briggs-Gowan et al., 2000; Pavuluri et al.,
1996). Some systems also provide the opportunity of
consulting mental health care without GP referral.
Nevertheless, by testing a comprehensive help-seeking
model as a whole instead of investigating its separate
parts, we aim to provide a more generic method for


studying help-seeking, which can be adapted to different health care systems.

METHOD

Participants

Our study involved a two-stage procedure. An overview of the
study design and the numbers of respondents for the various stages
of the study is presented in Figure 2. The base population for the
study was derived from the Second Dutch National Survey of General Practice, which examined morbidity and treatment in a representative sample of 104 general practices with 195 GPs and 385,461
listed patients between April 2000 and January 2002. A random
sample of the practice population was asked to participate in an extensive health interview survey. The total response rate was 64.5%.
Participants of this survey were comparable to the practice population with respect to gender, age, and place of residence (Westert
et al., 2005).
As part of the interview, 1,319 parents completed the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991a). Parents were also
asked permission to send the Teacher’s Report Form (TRF; Achenbach, 1991b) to the teacher who was the most familiar with the
child’s functioning. Responses were received from 974 teachers
(180 respondents refused to give permission to contact the teacher,
64 teachers refused to cooperate, 96 teachers did not respond, and
5 children were too young to attend school). Children with available
and missing TRF data were comparable with respect to age, gender,
level of CBCL Total Problems scores, family constellation, and parental education level.
Parents of children scoring in the deviant range on CBCL or TRF
Total Problems (T ‡ 60) were selected for participation in the second stage of the study. The response rate was 68.0%. Children of secondstage respondents and nonrespondents were comparable with respect to

Fig. 2 Study design and numbers of respondents at various stages of the
study.


1294 J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005


-----

age, gender, and level of CBCL and TRF Total Problems scores. Nonparticipating parents were more likely to be living in single-parent families
(16% versus 8%; p = .03) and to have lower education levels (Z = –4.06;
p = .00).
In the second stage (January 2001–July 2002), a standardized psychiatric interview (Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children

[DISC-IV]; Shaffer et al., 2000) was administered to the child’s primary caregiver to obtain psychiatric diagnoses. Parents were also interviewed about their help-seeking actions.

Measures

CBCL. The CBCL (Achenbach, 1991a) was used to obtain standardized parents’ reports of children’s problem behaviors during the
preceding 6 months. The CBCL has good reliability and discriminative validity in both American (Achenbach, 1991a) and Dutch
(Verhulst et al., 1996) samples.
TRF. The TRF (Achenbach, 1991b) was used to obtain standardized teachers’ reports of children’s problems during the preceding
6 months. The good reliability and validity of the original TRF
(Achenbach, 1991b) were confirmed for the Dutch version (Verhulst et al., 1997).
NIMH DISC-IV. This structured interview (DISC-IV; Shaffer
et al., 2000) is designed to assess psychiatric disorders and associated
functional impairment in children, using DSM-IV criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). Sections concerning anxiety disorders, mood disorders, and disruptive behavior disorders were used
to obtain an indication of service need (see ‘‘Statistical Analyses’’).
Help-Seeking Interview. Help-seeking from professional and informal sources in the preceding 12 months and several child, family,
and sociodemographic variables thought to be relevant for understanding the help-seeking process (Table 1) were assessed. Parental
education level was scored on an 11-point scale, with 11 being the
highest level. The parent with the highest education level was used to
trichotomize the sample in low (scores 1–3), moderate (scores 4–8),
and high (scores 9–11) education level. Family income was scored
on a 5-point scale. Mean family income (V2,168) was comparable
to the income of the general Dutch population (http://statline.
cbs.nl).
McMaster Family Assessment Device. During the second-stage interview, family functioning was measured by the Family Assessment
Device (FAD) General Functioning scale (Epstein et al., 1983),
which constitutes a reliable and valid global indicator of family functioning (Byles et al., 1988).

Statistical Analyses

Structural equation modeling (AMOS 4.0; Arbuckle and
Wothke, 1999) was used to test the applicability of the theoretical
model (Fig. 1) to our data. Central to this method of analysis is the
notion that complex constructs (latent variables) can only be captured validly and reliably by using multiple indicators (observed variables). Our model contained six latent variables; all of the other
variables were included as observed variables. CBCL Internalizing
and Externalizing scores represented the latent variable Parent report
of child problems, whereas TRF Internalizing and Externalizing
scores represented the teacher’s report of child problems. For the
latent variable Family functioning, the 12 items of the FAD General
Functioning scale were treated as observed variables. High scores
reflect poor family functioning. The latent variable socioeconomic
status (SES) was measured by variables indicating education level,
family income, and type of insurance. Mental health service use


HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

TABLE 1
Characteristics of Participants
Participants Characteristics No.[a]

Child
Gender 43.9% girls (scored 0); 246
56.1% boys (scored 1)

Age 4–11; mean: 7.73; SD 2.32 246
Academic problems 38.9% 244
Chronic physical 38.4% 245
problems

Family
Presence of siblings 91.9% 246
Single parenthood 8.4% 237
Changes in
family structure 10.2% 245
Mental health
service use by relative 35.1% 245
Sociodemographic context
Type of insurance 53.5% public; 46.5% private 243
Parental education level 13.1% low; 51.0% 245
moderate; 35.9% high

Family income 27.2%, £ V1,849 235
19.1%, V1,850–2,249
26.0%, V2,250–2,649
26.8%, V2,650–3,149
0.9%, ‡ V3,150

a Numbers of respondents for whom data were available.

was operationalized by two variables indicating different types of
mental health service use.
The latent variable service need was operationalized by two
DISC-IV variables, which indicated whether the child had any psychiatric diagnosis plus impairment on, respectively, internalizing
(anxiety disorders and mood disorders) or externalizing (disruptive
behavior disorders) diagnoses. Impairment was considered to be
present when at least two of six diagnosis-specific DISC-IV impairment items indicating moderate or one item indicating severe
personal, social, or academic difficulties were present. This operationalization of need corresponds to the definition of impairment
as a global rather than diagnosis-specific concept (Bird et al., 2000).
Because x[2] tends to indicate a significant probability level as sample size increases (generally >200) (Schumacker and Lomax, 1996),
other fit indexes were also inspected. A more detailed description of
these indexes is available at www.jaacap.com via the Article Plus
feature. Values of the root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA) <0.05 were considered to indicate a close model fit
(Browne and Cudeck, 1993). Values of the non-normed fit index
(NNFI; Bentler and Bonett, 1980) or Tucker-Lewis coefficient
(TLI; Tucker and Lewis, 1973), close to 1 indicate a very good fit.

RESULTS

To gain insight into the severity of child problems in
our sample, numbers of children with CBCL and TRF
Internalizing and Externalizing scores in the deviant


J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005 1295


-----

ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.

range are reported in Table 2. Note that continuous
rather than dichotomous scores on these scales were
used in the structural equation model. Rates of service
need and service use are also reported in Table 2.
Figure 3 depicts, in a simplified version of Figure 1,
the percentages of parents at various stages of the helpseeking process, thereby including our assumptions
concerning the sequence of help-seeking stages. For
the sake of clarity, internalizing and externalizing disorders were combined. A total of 180 parents indicated
the presence of deviant internalizing and/or externalizing problems in their child. To do justice to the notion
that only some parents move from one help-seeking
stage to the next and others stay behind on a previous
level, the percentages in Figure 3 are hierarchically ordered. This means that 60 (33.3%) children, who were
regarded as having deviant internalizing and/or externalizing problems, were also considered to be in need
of help. Twenty percent of children in need of help used
mental health services without consulting a GP, thereby
passing by the gatekeeping role of the Dutch GP.
To increase our understanding of the GP’s gatekeeping role, we investigated pathways to mental health services from a retrospective point of view (i.e., with mental
health service use as starting point). Of the 38 parents
using mental health services for their children, 16 (43.2%)
were referred by their GP, whereas 21 (56.8%) ended
up obtaining mental health care for their children
through other pathways (information was not available

TABLE 2
Frequencies of Deviant Internalizing and Externalizing Problems,
Service Need, and Service Use
Rater % No.[a]

Internalizing problems P 58.1 143 (246)
T 33.3 69 (207)
Externalizing problems P 52.8 130 (246)
T 45.4 94 (207)
Internalizing + externalizing problems P 37.8 93 (246)
T 17.9 37 (207)
Internalizing service need P 15.0 37 (246)
Externalizing service need P 20.3 50 (246)
Internalizing + externalizing need P 6.9 17 (246)
General practice P 13.1 32 (245)
Mental health care P 15.4 38 (246)
Teacher P 28.6 70 (245)
Friends/relatives P 27.3 67 (245)

Note: P = parent; T = teacher.
a In parentheses are the numbers of respondents for whom data
were available.


Fig. 3 Percentages of parents at various stages of the help-seeking process.

for one child). Whereas one third of these parents
reached mental health care directly, two thirds got there
with the help of other service providers, the majority of
which came from school settings (e.g., school physicians, school psychologists, educational support services).

Evaluation of the Structural Equation Model

Our initial theoretical model as depicted in Figure 1
did not yield an adequate fit (model A; x[2] = 921.29; df =
496; p < .001; RMSEA = 0.059; NNFI/TLI = 0.957).
To increase model fit, some modifications were made.
Values of fit indexes for subsequent models in the process of improving fit are available at www.jaacap.com
via the Article Plus feature. First, because of the considerable percentage of parents consulting mental health
professionals directly rather than via the GP as gatekeeper (Fig. 3), the first modification included adding
a direct link between service need and mental health service use (model B). Consequently, nonsignificant paths
were deleted from the original model one by one (model
C). Finally, modification indexes were inspected and
only those with theoretical relevance and that resulted
in a considerable improvement of model fit were imputed. Because these indexes cannot be computed with
incomplete data, they were computed for the part of the
sample with complete data (N = 183). These indexes
suggested adding a path from child gender to teacher
report of child problems, and adding correlations between (1) child age and academic problems, (2) single
parenthood and changes in family structure, (3) single
parenthood and SES, and (4) mental health service use
by relative and family functioning. This significantly
increased model fit (model D; x[2] = 819.56; df = 516;
p < .001; RMSEA = 0.049; NNFI/TLI = 0.970).


1296 J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005


-----

Although a significant x[2] normally indicates an inappropriate model fit, we still perceive the model as appropriate, as indicated by other goodness-of-fit
measures.
The standardized regression weights and correlations
for the structural part of this final model are depicted
in Figure 4. To decrease the complexity of this figure,
parameters associated with the measurement model are
not included. Within the measurement model, factor
loadings for each observed variable were positive and
significant at p < .001. Standardized loadings ranged
from 0.35 to 0.85, with a median of 0.59 (see Article
Plus for more details).

DISCUSSION

This study was aimed at investigating in one comprehensive model the process of help-seeking for child

Fig. 4 Final structural model. Presented are correlations (double-headed arrows) and standardized regression weights (single-headed arrows). Parent report
of child problems, teacher report of child problems, family functioning, socioeconomic status (SES), and mental health service use were included as latent
variables. Parameters associated with the measurement model were not included
to decrease the complexity of the figure (see Article Plus). *p < .05; **p < .01.


HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

psychopathology in both professional and informal service settings. By means of structural equation modeling,
characteristics of the child, family, and context were investigated as determinants of various stages in the helpseeking process.
In general, structural equation modeling proved to be
a fruitful method for concurrently testing associations
between various stages in the help-seeking process and
their hypothesized determinants. We believe that the
merits of this method are not restricted to countries with
comparable health care systems, but consider it also useful as a more generic approach for clarifying the helpseeking processes in other countries. Although it is likely
to produce different results depending on the health
care systems in which it is used, a general use of this
approach will increase comparability of results.
Based on their gatekeeping role in the Dutch health
care system, GPs were expected to play a central role in
our model. Contrary to expectation, however, the percentages of parents at subsequent stages of the helpseeking process (Fig. 3), as well as the regression weights
in our help-seeking model (Fig. 4), indicated that only
a minority of children in need of help actually received
help from their GP. The GP’s role as gatekeeper of
mental health care was also limited. These findings
may be explained by GPs’ limitations in adequately recognizing psychopathology in young children (Sayal and
Taylor, 2004; Zwaanswijk et al., 2005).
As in many countries, demand for child mental
health care in the Netherlands exceeds supply. Although
the limited availability of mental health services can
partly explain the limited number of children with disorders receiving mental health care in general, it cannot
explain the limited gatekeeping role of the Dutch GP
because parents still managed to find their way into
child mental health care, either directly or with the help
of other service providers.
Another possible explanation for parents seeking help
from mental health services without GP referral could
be the fact that these help-seeking actions involved
follow-up consultations for persisting child problems.
In that case, GP referral may have taken place more than
1 year ago and have fallen outside the time range assessed in our study. Of the 21 children who entered
mental health care without GP referral, only 4
(19.0%) had used the same kind of mental health care
in the period before the year of assessment and were
therefore likely to be in long-term contact with these


J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005 1297


-----

ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.

services. For the remaining 81%, this possibility was
ruled out.
A considerable number of children entered mental
health care with the help of school-based service providers instead of the GP. During primary education,
most Dutch children are routinely screened for physical
and psychosocial problems by school physicians. This
screening apparently plays an important role in the detection and referral of child psychopathology. In addition to this, the teacher was found to be an important
source of help. These findings are in concordance with
previous studies, in which the education sector was indicated as the most commonly used source of help for
child psychopathology (Burns et al., 1995; Farmer et al.,
2003; Ford et al., 2003).
Several variables in child, family, and context were
investigated as determinants of the help-seeking process.
Remarkably, the impact of child characteristics appeared to be marginal. Some of these variables (child
gender and coexisting academic problems) did exert
their influence on the help-seeking process only indirectly through their impact on the teacher’s perception
of child problems, whereas child age influenced neither
service need nor help-seeking. The only child characteristic directly influencing the help-seeking process was
the presence of coexisting chronic physical problems,
which was associated with an increased service need
(see, e.g., Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997).
Family characteristics had a stronger impact on the
help-seeking process, although the previously found influence of family structure and size (i.e., single parenthood and the presence of siblings; Briggs-Gowan et al.,
2000; Jensen et al., 1990; Verhulst and Van der Ende,
1997) could not be detected in our data. Changes in
family structure were shown only to influence mental
health service use, without affecting service need or
help-seeking in other settings.
Remarkable is the differential effect of family functioning on service need and help-seeking. Although service need is significantly present in poorly functioning
families, parents in these families seem to experience
barriers in actually seeking teachers’ help. In contrast
with previous findings (Lavigne et al., 1998; Verhulst
and Van der Ende, 1997), family functioning was
not directly related to other types of help-seeking.
As expected (Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997), the
presence of a relative who had used mental health services increased the likelihood of parents perceiving


problems in their child without directly increasing service need. It also increased the chance of parents using
support of family and friends (see, e.g., Rickwood and
Braithwaite, 1994). The presence of a relative who has
consulted mental health services may indicate a certain
willingness to discuss mental health matters in the family system, which may facilitate help-seeking for child
psychopathology within this system.
An important context factor influencing the helpseeking process was the teacher’s perception of child
problems. This variable was almost as strongly related
to service need as the parents’ own report of child problems, which is remarkable considering the limited agreement between parent and teacher reports of child
problems (Achenbach et al., 1987). This finding again
indicates the influential role of teachers in the help-seeking
process.
Sociodemographic context variables (parental education level, family income, type of insurance) were
confirmed not to influence the help-seeking process directly. This finding can probably be ascribed to the
Dutch health care system in which major financial constraints to the availability of care are lacking.

Limitations

Because of differences between countries’ health care
systems, caution should be exercised in generalizing
these results to nations with systems that are not like
the Dutch (i.e., with financial constraints for receiving
care and without the GP as gatekeeper). We therefore
advocate using our method with help-seeking models
adapted to other health care systems. We believe our results concerning the importance of schools and schoolbased service providers in the help-seeking process for
child psychopathology to be of more general value.
Generalizability may be hampered by the relatively
low response rates at the two stages of the study. In addition, parents from single-parent families and lesseducated parents were less likely to participate in the
study. Because these characteristics have generally been
shown to be associated with elevated levels of child
problems, this study may underestimate the presence
of child psychopathology. The finding that CBCL
and TRF Total Problems scores did not differ between
participants and nonparticipants argues against this possibility, however. The fact that no confirmation was
found for the previously reported associations between


1298 J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005


-----

SES and child psychopathology and among single parenthood, service need, and service use may be the result
of the underrepresentation of less-educated and singleparent families in our sample.
Although the assumptions in our model were based
on theory and associations established in previous research, and our final model adequately fit the data,
we acknowledge the relatively data-driven nature of
model adjustment (e.g., removing nonsignificant associations and adding some associations suggested by
modification indexes). Therefore, future studies, preferably longitudinal ones, are needed to confirm our findings and establish causal directionality of the
associations found. Longitudinal studies, similar to that
of Farmer et al. (2003), could also shed more light on
the sequence of help-seeking stages.
The results of this study may be biased because of the
reliance on parent reports of service need and use. Our
indicator of service need is more objective than used in
previous studies, in which parents are directly asked
whether their child is in need of help. Whereas our measure corresponds better with formal diagnostic criteria,
a more direct reflection of parents’ need for services may
give a better view of parents’ own reality. The finding
that parents’ report of the presence of child problems
exerts its influence on the four help-seeking variables
only indirectly, through service need, suggests that
our measure of service need discriminates between parents who do experience problems in their child but are
able to manage these problems without help and parents
for whom the impact of child problems is strong enough
to require outside help.
With respect to the parent reports of service use, we
believe parents to be the best informants on service use
for this young age group. Previous evidence suggests
that parent reports are reasonably accurate compared
to administrative records (Fendrich et al., 1999).
Because parents may have difficulties discriminating
among multiple service settings (Bean et al., 2000),
however, rates of service use may be biased. Including additional sources of data may strengthen
our findings.
Help-seeking for child psychopathology is a complex
process, and although we tried to capture some of its key
aspects, others deserve attention in future research. Although the present study was primarily focused on
stages, actors, and determinants involved in the process
of help-seeking, parents’ reasons for not seeking help


HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

were not directly assessed. Progress on the pathway
to care can, for instance, also be hindered by characteristics of the health care system or by parents’ perceptions
of services or service providers (see, e.g., Pavuluri et al.,
1996).

Clinical Implications

Based on this study, several groups at which interventions to increase child mental health service use may be
directed were identified. First, educating parents about
the nature and prevalence of child psychopathology may
raise their awareness of the possible presence of such
problems. Parents who do not use services despite their
service needs may benefit from information on the availability and accessibility of care, and parents from poorly
functioning families may need a more actively outreaching approach to overcome barriers on the help-seeking
pathway.
Another way to increase child mental health service
use may be the improvement of GPs’ skills in detecting
child psychopathology. Direct contact between GPs and
mental health professionals may have a consultative
function, may facilitate referral, and may accelerate
access to services.
Improving the detection and referral of child problems is, however, only useful if services are sufficiently
available to meet the demands of children. Schools are
therefore encouraged to liaise with external professionals who may provide less-intensive forms of care within
schools. Direct contact between schools and mental
health care professionals may also ameliorate problem
detection within schools and shorten the pathway to
specialist care.
Clinicians should try to assess whether parents’ resources are sufficient to cope with the demands of having a disordered child. For some parents, offering
assistance for some of the additional stressors associated
with service need and use may be enough to avoid use of
more specialized services.

Disclosure: The authors have no financial relationships to disclose.

REFERENCES

Achenbach TM (1991a), Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/4–18
and 1991 Profiles. Burlington: University of Vermont Department of
Psychiatry


J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005 1299


-----

ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.

Achenbach TM (1991b), Manual for the Teacher’s Report Form and 1991
Profiles. Burlington: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry
Achenbach TM, McConaughy SH, Howell CT (1987), Child/adolescent
behavioral and emotional problems: implications of cross-informant
correlations for situational specificity. Psychol Bull 101:213–232
American Psychiatric Association (1994), Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association
Andersen RM (1995), Revisiting the behavioral model and access to medical
care: does it matter? J Health Soc Behav 36:1–10
Arbuckle JL, Wothke W (1999), Amos 4.0 User’s Guide. Chicago: SmallWaters
Bean DL, Leibowitz A, Rotheram-Borus MJ et al. (2000), False-negative
reporting and mental health services utilization: parents’ reports about
child and adolescent services. Ment Health Serv Res 2:239–249
Bentler PM, Bonett DG (1980), Significance tests and goodness of fit in the
analysis of covariance structures. Psychol Bull 88:588–606
Bird HR, Davies M, Fisher P et al. (2000), How specific is specific impairment? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 39:1182–1189
Brewin C, Wing J, Mangen S, Brugha T, MacCarthy B (1987), Principles
and practice of measuring needs in the long-term mentally ill: the MRC
Needs for Care Assessment. Psychol Med 17:971–981
Briggs-Gowan MJ, Horwitz S, Schwab-Stone M, Leventhal JM, Leaf PJ
(2000), Mental health in pediatric settings: distribution of disorders
and factors related to service use. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
39:841–849
Browne MW, Cudeck R (1993), Alternative ways of assessing model fit. In:
Testing Structural Equation Models, Bollen KA, Long JS, eds.Newbury
Park, CA: Sage Publications, pp 136–162
Burns BJ, Costello EJ, Angold A et al. (1995), Children’s mental health
service use across service sectors. Health Aff 14:147–159
Byles J, Byrne C, Boyle MH, Offord DR (1988), Ontario Child Health
Study: Reliability and validity of the General Functioning subscale of
the McMaster Family Assessment Device. Fam Proc 27:97–104
Costello EJ, Pescosolido BA, Angold A, Burns BJ (1998), A family networkbased model of access to child mental health services. Res Comm Ment
Health 9:165–190
Epstein NB, Baldwin LM, Bishop DS (1983), The McMaster Family Assessment Device. J Marital Fam Ther 9:171–180
Farmer EZ, Burns BJ, Phillips SD, Angold A, Costello EJ (2003), Pathways
into and through mental health services for children and adolescents.
Psychiatr Serv 54:60–66
Feehan M, Stanton W, McGee R, Silva P (1994), A longitudinal study of birth
order, help seeking and psychopathology. Br J Clin Psychol 33:143–150
Fendrich M, Johnson T, Wislar J, Nageotte C (1999), Accuracy of parental
mental health service reporting: results from a reverse record-check study.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 38:147–155
Fischer EH, Weiner D, Abramowitz S (1983), Seeking professional help for
psychological problems. In: New Directions in Helping, Vol. 3: Applied
Perspectives in Help-Seeking and Receiving, Nadler A, Fisher JD, DePaulo
BM, eds. New York: Academic Press, pp 163–212
Flisher AJ, Kramer RA, Grosser RC et al. (1997), Correlates of unmet need
for mental health services by children and adolescents. Psychol Med
27:1145–1154
Ford T, Goodman R, Meltzer H (2003), Service use over 18 months among
a nationally representative sample of British children with psychiatric
disorder. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 8:37–51
Gasquet I, Chavance M, Ledoux S, Choquet M (1997), Psychosocial factors
associated with help-seeking behavior among depressive adolescents.
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 6:151–159
Gasquet I, Ledoux S, Chavance M, Choquet M (1999), Consultation of
mental health professionals by French adolescents with probable psychiatric problems. Acta Psychiatr Scand 99:126–134
Goldberg D, Huxley P (1980), Mental Illness in the Community: The Pathway
to Psychiatric Care. New York: Tavistock


Goldberg D, Huxley P (1992), Common Mental Disorders: A Bio-social
Model. London: Routledge
Gunther N, Slavenburg B, Feron F, Van Os J (2003), Childhood social and
early developmental factors associated with mental health service use.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 38:101–108
Jensen PS, Bloedau L, Davis H (1990), Children at risk: II. Risk factors and
clinic utilization. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 29:804–812
John LH, Offord DR, Boyle MH, Racine YA (1995), Factors predicting use
of mental health and social services by children 6–16 years old: findings
from the Ontario Child Health Study. Am J Orthopsychiatry 65:76–86
Lavigne JV, Arend R, Rosenbaum D et al. (1998), Mental health service use
among young children receiving pediatric primary care. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 37:1175–1183
Leaf PJ, Alegria M, Cohen P, et al. (1996), Mental health service use in the
community and schools: results from the four-community MECA study.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 35:889–897
Logan DE, King CA (2001), Parental facilitation of adolescent mental health
service utilization: a conceptual and empirical review. Clin Psychol Sci
Pract 8:319–333
Pavuluri MN, Luk S, McGee R (1996), Help-seeking for behavior problems
by parents of preschool children: a community study. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 35:215–222
Rickwood DJ, Braithwaite VA (1994), Social-psychological factors affecting
help-seeking for emotional problems. Soc Sci Med 39:563–572
Sayal K, Taylor E (2004), Detection of child mental health disorders by
general practitioners. Br J Gen Pract 54:348–352
Schumacker RE, Lomax RG (1996), A Beginner’s Guide to Structural Equation Modeling. Mahwah, NJ: Lawarence J. Erlbaum Associates
Shaffer D, Fisher P, Christopher PL, Dulcan MK, Schwab-Stone ME
(2000), NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version
IV (NIMH DISC-IV): description, differences from previous versions,
and reliability of some common diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 39:28–38
Sourander A, Helstela L, Ristkari T, Ikaheimo K, Helenius H, Piha J (2001),
Child and adolescent mental health service use in Finland. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 36:294–298
Tucker LR, Lewis C (1973), A reliability coefficient for maximum likelihood
factor analysis. Psychometrika 38:1–10
Verhulst FC, Koot JM (1992), Child Psychiatric Epidemiology: Concepts,
Methods and Findings. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J (1997), Factors associated with child mental
health service use in the community. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
36:901–909
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J, Koot HM (1996), Handleiding voor de CBCL/
4–18 [Manual for the CBCL/4-18]. Rotterdam: Afdeling Kinder- en
Jeugdpsychiatrie, Sophia Kinderziekenhuis/Academisch Ziekenhuis Rotterdam/Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J, Koot HM (1997), Handleiding voor de Teacher’s Report Form (TRF) [Manual for the Teacher’s Report Form
(TRF)]. Rotterdam: Afdeling Kinder- en Jeugdpsychiatrie, Sophia
Kinderziekenhuis/Academisch Ziekenhuis Rotterdam/Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
Westert GP, Schellevis FG, De Bakker DH, Groenewegen PP, Bensing JM,
Van der Zee J (2005), Monitoring health inequalities through general
practice: the Second Dutch National Survey of General Practice. Eur
J Public Health 15:59–65
Zahner GP, Daskalakis C (1997), Factors associated with mental health,
general health, and school-based service use for child psychopathology.
Am J Public Health 87:1440–1448
Zwaanswijk M, Van der Ende J, Verhaak PM, Bensing JM, Verhulst FC
(2003), Factors associated with adolescent mental health service need
and utilization. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 42:692–700
Zwaanswijk M, Verhaak PM, Van der Ende J, Bensing JM, Verhulst FC
(2005), Consultation for and identification of child and adolescent psychological problems in Dutch general practice. Fam Pract 22:498–506


1300 J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005


-----

