Matern Child Health J (2009) 13:745–754 
DOI 10.1007/s10995-009-0467-0 
The Couple Context of Pregnancy and its Effects on Prenatal Care 
and Birth Outcomes 

Published online: 21 April 2009 
(cid:1) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2009 
Abstract The couple context of pregnancy and newborn 
health is gaining importance with the increase in births to 
unmarried couples, a disproportionate number of which 
were not intended. This study investigates the association 
of early prenatal care, preterm birth, and low birth weight 
with the couple relationship context, including partners’ 
joint intentions for the pregnancy, their marital status at 
conception, and the presence of relationship problems 
during pregnancy. Data are drawn from the ﬁrst wave of 
the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study––Birth Cohort, a 
representative study of births in 2001. The sample is 
composed of parents residing together with their biological 
child at the time the child is 9 months old, where both the 
mother and father completed the self-report 
interview 
(N = 5,788). Couple-level multivariate logistic regression 
models, weighted to account for the complex sampling 
design, were used in the analysis. Risk of inadequate pre- 
natal care and preterm birth was increased when partners 
did not share intentions or when neither partner intended 
the pregnancy. Couples were at additional risk of inade- 
quate prenatal care when the pregnancy was conceived 
nonmaritally and when the mother did not tell the father 
about 
the pregnancy, particularly when neither partner 
intended the pregnancy. The risk of premature birth was 
particularly high when the partners were unmarried and 
either or both did not intend the pregnancy. The couple 
context of pregnancy is important for a healthy pregnancy 
and birth. When the partner is present, practitioners and 
programs should maintain a focus on the couple, and 
B. Hohmann-Marriott (&) 
Department of Anthropology, Gender, and Sociology, University 
of Otago, 2C20 Richardson Building, Dunedin, New Zealand 
e-mail: bryndl.hohmann-marriott@otago.ac.nz 
researchers should make every effort to include the father’s 
own perspective. 
Keywords Prenatal care (cid:1) Preterm birth (cid:1) 
Low birthweight (cid:1) Pregnancy intentions (cid:1) 
Nonmarital fertility 
Inadequate prenatal care, preterm birth, and low birth 
weight can have long-term consequences for child health 
and wellbeing. To facilitate prevention of these health 
their contributing factors need to be better 
problems, 
understood. Maternal factors are clearly important, but the 
mother’s relationship with the father has not received 
sufﬁcient attention. A focus on couples is also relevant to 
current policies such as the Fatherhood Initiative, which 
emphasize the involvement of fathers. 
Most research on the couple context of pregnancy health 
focuses on the couple’s marital and residential status. Some 
research considers the mother’s support system, including 
fathers, and a few studies have examined the couple’s joint 
intentions for pregnancy. However, no research has yet 
considered these factors in the context of the quality of the 
couple’s relationship, or has examined their potential 
interactions with one another. 
These limitations can be overcome with a new dataset, 
the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study––Birth Cohort 
(ECLS-B), which includes interviews with both mothers 
and fathers detailing conception, pregnancy, and birth. This 
couple-level data allows the current study to focus on the 
relationship between the mother and father, including their 
joint intentions for the pregnancy, their marital status at the 
time the pregnancy was conceived, communication prob- 
lems during pregnancy, and interactions between these 
factors. The analysis examines couples residing with their 



9-month-old children, applying dyadic analysis techniques 
within regression models to investigate the association 
between the parents’ relationship and the chance of inad- 
equate prenatal care, preterm birth, and low birth weight. 

Fathers’ support of mothers during pregnancy can con- 
tribute to a healthier pregnancy and birth. An analysis of 
couples in the ECLS-Birth Cohort study found that father 
involvement during pregnancy increased the woman’s 
likelihood of receiving early prenatal care [1]. This cor- 
in a study of 101 mostly 
roborates an earlier ﬁnding, 
unmarried low-income women, that the mothers were more 
likely to obtain ﬁrst-trimester prenatal care when they 
reported receiving support from their partners [2]. 
Social support for the mother has been found to be an 
important inﬂuence on low birthweight [3]. In particular, 
support from the baby’s father may matter. An analysis 
using the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study, 
focusing on unmarried women with partners, found that the 
baby’s chances of being low birthweight were reduced 
when the mother reported that the father had contributed 
ﬁnancially during the pregnancy and when she reported 
living together with the father [4]. The social context also 
inﬂuences prematurity. Preterm birth has been found to be 
associated with maternal stress, including social stress from 
partners and relationships [5–7]. 
Thus, both early prenatal care and birthweight have been 
linked to the father’s actions, indicating that it is important 
to consider the father as well as the mother. What remains 
to be investigated is the relationship of the mother and 
father with one another, and how this impacts health across 
pregnancy and birth. The parental relationship is pro- 
foundly affected by the transition to parenthood [8]. During 
this time, relationships are placed under stress, and partners 
whose relationships were strained prior to the pregnancy 
may be unable to be supportive of one another [8]. Con- 
versely, couples in a higher-quality relationship may be 
able to cope more effectively with stressful transitions [9]. 
to lead to poorer health outcomes for children, both at birth 
and long-term [11, 12]. These health risks begin before 
birth, as mothers with unintended pregnancies are less 
likely to obtain timely prenatal care, and more likely to use 
tobacco and alcohol during the pregnancy [13]. Unintended 
tend to occur disproportionately among 
pregnancies 
women who are young, minority, low-income, and less- 
educated [10]. 
Partners do not necessarily share pregnancy intentions, 
making it important to consider the intentions of fathers as 
well as mothers. One of the few studies to consider men’s 
intentions did so using the mother’s report of her partner. 
Using the National Survey of Family Growth, one study 
found that 69% of women reported the pregnancy as 
wanted by both partners, 18% as wanted by neither partner, 
5% as wanted by only the man, and 5% as wanted by only 
the woman, with a further 2% of women who did not know 
their partner’s preference [14]. Partners are most likely to 
have a shared intended pregnancy if the mothers are mar- 
ried, White, and more-educated. A study of couples in the 
Philippines which used each partner’s own report found 
that in 56% of couples both partners reported a wanted 
pregnancy, 11% both reported the pregnancy as unwanted, 
8% were only wanted by the mother, and 27% were only 
wanted by the father [15]. 
The father’s intentions may be particularly important 
when they contrast with the mother’s intentions. A study 
using the ECLS-Birth Cohort to measure pregnancy wan- 
tedness found that when fathers wanted the pregnancy, 
even if mothers did not, then mothers were more likely to 
receive early prenatal care [1]. A smaller study of 300 
Hispanic women also found that women with unwanted 
pregnancies were more likely to seek timely prenatal care 
if they reported that their partner wanted the pregnancy 
than if they reported that he did not [16]. These studies 
suggest 
to which intentions are shared 
provides a key indicator of the relational context of the 
pregnancy. 




The strain on couples may be exacerbated when the preg- 
nancy was not intended, particularly if the parents disagree 
on the intentions for pregnancy. In 2001, approximately 
half of all pregnancies in the United States were unintended 
by the mother, with the unintended birthrate increasing 
between 1994 and 2001 [10]. This can have important 
consequences for the health and wellbeing of these chil- 
dren. Pregnancies unintended by the mother are more likely 
Parents’ marital status is also an important indicator of 
their relationship. Rates of unintended pregnancies among 
unmarried women are increasing, as are the proportion of 
births to unmarried parents [10, 17]. Further, unmarried 
women are less likely than married women to report that 
both they and their partners wanted the pregnancy [14]. 
Unmarried parents face particular risk factors, including 
high rates of union dissolution in the ﬁrst years after the 
baby’s birth, as well as a greater likelihood than married 
couples of being lower-income, 
lower-educated and 
minority [18, 19]. Children born to unmarried parents are at 



risk of low birthweight as well as more long-term conse- 
quences, although the characteristics of the couple’s rela- 
tionship may be more important than their marital status 
[20]. 

This study brings together multiple indicators of the couple 
context of pregnancy, including relationship quality, mar- 
ital status, and joint pregnancy intentions, and investigates 
their impact across pregnancy and birth. To this end, the 
ﬁrst aim is to describe the relationship of the couple, par- 
ticularly the extent to which partners share intentions for 
the pregnancy. The second aim is to investigate the asso- 
ciation between the couple context and negative pregnancy 
outcomes. It is expected that lack of early prenatal care, 
preterm birth, and low birthweight will be associated with 
unintended pregnancy, dissimilar pregnancy intentions, 
relationship problems, and nonmarital conception. As 
pregnancy intentions have been shown in prior studies to 
make a strong contribution to outcomes, the third aim will 
investigate the moderating effects of relationship status and 
problems on the association between unintended pregnancy 
and negative pregnancy outcomes. It is expected that this 
association will be stronger when partners are unmarried 
and have more relationship problems. 


The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study––Birth Cohort 
(ECLS-B) is a nationally-representative survey of children 
born in the United States in 2001 [21]. This analysis relies 
on the ﬁrst ECLS-B parent interview, conducted when the 
children were about 9 months old. In addition to the mother 
interview, fathers completed a self-administered question- 
naire. Questions on the parental relationship during preg- 
nancy were only asked of resident fathers, making it 
necessary to restrict the sample to parents residing with 
their biological child at the time the child was 9 months 
old. In ECLS-B there are 10,495 total families with at least 
a biological mother present, and of these, 8,282 (79%) also 
these biological 
father present. Of 
have a biological 
mother–father families, 2,120 (26%) fathers and 768 (9%) 
mothers did not complete the self-response questionnaire 
and thus could not be included in the analysis. The sample 
thus comprises 5,788 cases. 
The ECLS-B data includes both mothers and fathers, 
making it ideal for dyadic analysis. By including both 
members of the couple, the analysis will have a greater 
level of reliability and validity in measuring couple pro- 
cesses [22]. However, as with all large-scale surveys, fewer 
men are interviewed than women, meaning that the inclu- 
sion of fathers in the study carries a potential for selection 
bias. Fathers with increased risk factors may be more likely 
to be excluded, making the current analysis a conservative 
test of the hypotheses. Other missing data are imputed 
using single imputation prior to the creation of couple-level 
variables, and all analyses use weights created explicitly 
for use with father and mother data. The couple is the unit 
of analysis, and independent variables are coded to take 
both partners into account. 

The mother’s self-report is coded dichotomously to reﬂect 
receiving no prenatal care in the ﬁrst trimester. Birth out- 
comes use birth certiﬁcate data and are also coded 
dichotomously to reﬂect preterm birth (prior to 37 weeks 
gestation) and low or very low birthweight (less than 
2500 g). 

Mothers and fathers were each asked about the wantedness 
and the timing of pregnancy at the time of conception. 
Respondents were asked ‘‘At the time [you/your partner] 
became pregnant with your baby, did you yourself actually 
want 
to have a(nother) baby at some time?’’ If they 
responded yes, they were further asked ‘‘Did [you/your 
partner] become pregnant sooner than you wanted, later 
than you wanted, or at about the right time?’’ The preg- 
nancy was coded for each partner as being intended if they 
responded that it was wanted and on-time or late, and as 
unintended if they responded either that it was not wanted 
or that it was wanted but early. 

Wanted but mistimed is an imprecise category, as 
women interpret it in a wide variety of ways [23]. Because 
of 
this study groups all pregnancies with more 
ambiguous beginnings (i.e. wanted but mistimed, unwan- 
ted) to distinguish them from pregnancies which were more 
clearly intended (i.e. wanted and on-time). 

intentions were coded by cross-classifying the 
mother’s and father’s codings, which created four (2 9 2) 
mutually exclusive categories: The pregnancy was for (1) 
both partners intended, (2) both unintended, (3) intended 
by the mother and unintended by the father, or (4) intended 
by the father and unintended by the mother. 

Marital status was assessed at the time of conception by 
questions asking mothers to identify their marital status and 



date of marriage. Date of conception was calculated by 
subtracting gestational age at birth from the date of birth. If 
the marriage date was at or prior to the date of conception, 
the couple was coded as married at the time of conception. 
If the marriage date was later or the mother reported being 
unmarried, the couple was coded as unmarried at the time 
of conception. 

Problems in the couple’s relationship during the pregnancy 
were assessed through characteristics of the relationship 
during the pregnancy. Each of the three measures is coded 
dichotomously to indicate a problematic relationship. First, 
mothers’ reports of how soon she told the father that she 
was pregnant are coded as within one day of ﬁnding out 
herself versus more than one day later. Second, fathers 
were asked whether or not they discussed the pregnancy at 
any time with the mother. Third, 
the accuracy of the 
mother’s report of the father’s pregnancy intentions, an 
indicator of partner communication, was assessed by 
comparing the father’s response (described above) with the 
mother’s response to a set of questions asking her to report 
the father’s wantedness and timing of the pregnancy. 

Sociodemographic status variables focus on characteristics 
which apply to the time of the pregnancy, and use the 
mother’s response as well as an additional variable indi- 
cating the difference between the mother’s and father’s 
responses. Variables for mother’s age, age difference 
between partners, mother’s race/ethnicity, whether part- 
ners’ race/ethnicity differed, mother’s education, differ- 
ence between partners, socioeconomic status, and whether 
the pregnancy is the ﬁrst for the mother and for the father 
are included in all models. Models predicting birth out- 
comes include additional controls for smoking any ciga- 
rettes in the ﬁrst trimester and a pregnancy with twins/ 
multiples. 

The ﬁrst aim of describing the couple relationship will be 
tested by comparing couples by pregnancy intention. The 
second aim will use logistic regression models to assess the 
association of no early prenatal care, low birthweight, and 
preterm birth with couple and relationship characteristics. 
Logistic regression tests the likelihood of an event occur- 
ring and is ideal for use with dichotomous variables. 
Finally, the third aim will test for moderating effects of 
marital status and relationship quality on intentionality. 
intentions and marital 
Interaction terms between joint 

status and between joint intentions and each relationship 
problem indicator will be included in the models to test for 
these effects. 

Table 1 details the couple context and sociodemographic 
characteristics of the entire sample. The age of mothers 
ranged from 15 to 51, with an average of 30, and fathers 
ranged from 16 to 73, with an average of 32. A majority of 
both mothers and fathers reported White, non Hispanic 
race/ethnicity, with a further ﬁfth reporting Hispanic eth- 
nicity (any race), and 12% of couples reporting differing 
race/ethnicities. The average education of mothers and 
fathers was just over high school, at 14 years. One-quarter 
of households has an SES in the lowest quintile, and only 
13% had an SES in the highest quintile. For 38% of 
mothers and 38% of fathers this was their ﬁrst child, 
although when considered together (not shown in table), in 
32% of the couples it was a ﬁrst child for both parents. 
Only 6% of the mothers reported smoking in the ﬁrst tri- 
mester. Three percent of the births were multiples. Only 
6% of the mothers reported no prenatal care in the ﬁrst 
trimester. Just over 10% of the babies were born preterm, 
and 6% were at low or very low birthweight. 


The ﬁrst aim is to describe the partners’ relationship, 
including quality, 
the 
beginning of the pregnancy. Most mothers reported telling 
the father about the pregnancy as soon as they found out 
themselves, but seven percent reported hesitating before 
telling the father. Likewise, most fathers reported talking to 
the mother about the pregnancy, but eight percent did not. 
Fully one-third of mothers had inaccurate perceptions of 
their partner’s intentions. Of the parents in the sample, over 
one-quarter were not married at the time of conception. In 
just under half of the couples, both the mother and the 
father reported that the pregnancy was intended. In about 
one-quarter of the couples only the mother reported an 
intended pregnancy, and in just over one-quarter of the 
couples only the father reported an intended pregnancy. 
A further indication of the partners’ pregnancy inten- 
tions is the extent of their concordance. A measure of the 
proportion of concordance between mothers and fathers 
can be calculated by taking the n who responded similarly 
divided by the total n. The proportion of speciﬁc concor- 
the 
dance was calculated separately for responses that 
pregnancy was intended and responses that the pregnancy 
was unintended. This proportion of speciﬁc concordance is 
calculated by taking the n who respond similarly on the 












Neither 
Relationship problems 


Inaccurate perception 
Marital status at conception 
Married 
Unmarried 
Age 
Mother 
Fathera 
Difference 
Race 









Black (non-Hispanic) 
Hispanic (any race) 



Different races 
Education in years 
Mother 
Fathera 
Difference 
SES of household 




5th quintile 
Pregnancy characteristics 

















73 
27 







9 
22 




















Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study––Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 
9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident couples with 9-month-old 
children 
Note: All percentages are weighted 
a Father characteristics are not included in regression models 
Fig. 1 Proportion of concordance for 
intended and unintended 
pregnancies, by marital status. Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal 
Study—Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident 
couples with 9-month-old children 
speciﬁc response divided by the total n where either partner 
gave the response. Further information about agreement 
and concordance indices can be found in Fleiss [24]. 
Concordance of pregnancy intentions is presented in 
Fig. 1. The clusters of bars show the proportion of couples 
who are in concordance that the pregnancy was intended 
and unintended, respectively. Comparing the concordance 
of married and unmarried couples, it is clear that married 
couples have a higher proportion of concordance than do 
unmarried couples. This is particularly notable for pro- 
portion of concordance on intended pregnancies, where 
three-quarters of married couples share a view but less than 
half of unmarried couples share their views. 
Intentions differ markedly by couples’ 
relationship 
quality and marital status, as detailed in Table 2. Couples 
where both partners intended the pregnancy had the fewest 
relationship problems and were the most 
likely to be 
married. Couples where only the mother intended the 
pregnancy were less often married. A particularly high 






























N, F [ B 
N [ M 
N, M, F [ B 
N, M, F [ B 
M, F [ N 
M [ F 
N, M, F [ B 
N, F [ M 





Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident couples with 9-month-old children 
Note: All percentages are weighted. Unweighted N’s are rounded to the nearest 10. Comparisons between groups represent signiﬁcant chi-square 
tests 
B Both; N Neither; M Mother; F Father 
percentage of these mothers did not tell the father imme- 
diately, and these fathers were the least likely to talk about 
the pregnancy with the mothers. Mothers’ perceptions of 
fathers’ 
intentions were the least accurate when she 
intended the pregnancy but the father did not. 

The second aim investigates the association between the 
couple relationship and pregnancy outcomes. Table 3 gives 
the results of logistic regressions predicting adverse out- 
comes: no early prenatal care, preterm birth, and low 
birthweight. To facilitate interpretation, odds ratios (the 
exponentiated coefﬁcient) are presented, along with the 
signiﬁcance level of the coefﬁcient. 
When pregnancy outcomes are examined in the context 
of the couple’s relationship during pregnancy, the patterns 
of inﬂuence differ by outcome. Compared with couples 
where both partners intended the pregnancy, the odds of 
receiving no early prenatal care were one and one-half 
times higher when the mother did not intend the pregnancy, 
even if the father did, and almost two times higher if nei- 
ther partner intended the pregnancy. Couples who were not 
married at the time of conception also had higher odds of 
receiving no early prenatal care. Odds were also higher for 
couples with problematic relationships, particularly when 
the mother did not tell the father about the pregnancy. 
The birth was more likely to be preterm when one or 
both partners did not 
intend the pregnancy. When the 
mother only, the father only, or neither partner intended the 
pregnancy, odds of prematurity were 1.3–1.4 times higher 
than when both the mother and father intended the preg- 
nancy. Risk of low birthweight, by contrast, was not 
associated with intentions but was associated with the 
father not having discussed the pregnancy with the mother. 

The third aim is focused on the interactions of pregnancy 
intention with relationship problems and marital status. 
These interactions were investigated in the models pre- 
dicting no early prenatal care and preterm birth. Because 
pregnancy intentions were not associated with low birth 
weight, interactions for this model were not tested. Logistic 
regressions including interactions are given in Table 4. 
For early prenatal care, Fig. 2 illustrates that the mother 
was particularly unlikely to receive early prenatal care 
when she did not tell the father of a pregnancy which 
neither wanted or which both wanted. For mothers who did 
tell the father, early prenatal care was unlikely when only 
the father or neither partner wanted the pregnancy. 
Figure 3 shows that the risk of premature birth increases 
sharply for unmarried parents when only the father or 
neither parent intended the pregnancy, as compared with 
couples where both partners intended the pregnancy. The 
risk of premature birth is also higher for married couples in 
these groups, but it represents a more modest increase. 

When considering multiple aspects of the couple context of 
pregnancy, intentions for the pregnancy emerged as having 
the strongest association with prenatal health and birth 
outcomes. The risk of no early prenatal care was increased 
when mothers did not intend the pregnancy, and this risk 



Table 3 Odds ratios of the 
association of couple 
relationship with health 
behaviors and outcomes 
Data: Early Childhood 
Longitudinal Study––Birth 
Cohort (ECLS-B) 9-month 
wave, N = 5,788 coresident 
couples with 9-month-old 
children 
* p \ .05; ** p \ .01; 
*** p \ .001 





Nonmarital conception 
Relationship problems 


Inaccurate perception 
Age 

Difference 
Education 
Mother 
Difference 
SES 




Fifth quartile (Reference) 
Race/ethnicity of mother 






Different from father 
Pregnancy characteristics 

















1.03 
0.95 





















1.03 
1.05 

























1.01 
1.03 



















was further exacerbated when fathers also did not intend 
the pregnancy. Thus, fathers’ intentions had a particularly 
strong inﬂuence when mothers did not intend the preg- 
nancy. Conﬁrming the ﬁndings of Martin et al. [1] and 
Schafer and Lia-Hoagberg [2], mothers who did not intend 
the pregnancy and were at risk of not getting ﬁrst-trimester 
prenatal care were nevertheless more likely to do so when 
the father intended the pregnancy than when the father also 
did not intend the pregnancy. It is possible that fathers with 
an intended pregnancy provided more support and 
encouragement to the mother to obtain care than did fathers 
who did not intend the pregnancy. 
This study also found that pregnancy intentions were 
associated with preterm birth. In this case, a pregnancy 
unintended by either the mother or the father was associ- 
ated with a greater risk of preterm birth. Maternal stress is a 
contributing factor to preterm birth [5–7], and an unin- 
tended pregnancy appears to be an important source of 
stress. This study indicates that a mother may experience 
stress not only when she herself does not intend the preg- 
nancy, but also when her intentions for the pregnancy 
conﬂict with her partner’s intentions. 
Of the couples who did not share intentions, couples 
where only the mother intended the pregnancy appear to 



Table 4 Logistic regressions with interactions between pregnancy 
intention and relationship characteristics 







Unmarried at conception 
Relationship problems 


Did not discuss pregnancy 
Interactions 
































Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 
9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident couples with 9-month-old 
children 
Note: Models control for age, education, race/ethnicity, SES, parity, 
and (for preterm birth) twin status and maternal smoking 
* p \ .05 ** p \ .01 *** p \ .001 
Fig. 2 Predicted odds of no early care by relationship problems and 
pregnancy intention. Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study— 
Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident couples 
with 9-month-old children 
have particularly problematic relationships. These mothers 
more often waited to inform the father of the pregnancy, 
and the fathers more often reported not talking about the 

Fig. 3 Predicted odds of preterm birth by marital status and 
pregnancy intention. Data: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study— 
Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 9-month wave, N = 5,788 coresident couples 
with 9-month-old children 
pregnancy. Discordant intentions were also observed more 
frequently among couples who were not married at the time 
of conception. 
Although pregnancy intentions were strongly associated 
with outcomes, relationship problems and marital status 
were also an important relational context to pregnancy 
health and outcomes. When the couple was not married at 
the time of conception, and when the mother hesitated to 
tell the father about the pregnancy, the mother was less 
likely to obtain early prenatal care. In addition, couples 
where the father did not talk to the mother about the 
pregnancy were more likely to have a low-birthweight 
baby. This result extends prior research showing that social 
support plays a role in birthweight by speciﬁcally indicat- 
ing the importance of the quality of the relationship 
between the mother and father [3, 4]. The measures of 
relationship problems in this study focused on communi- 
cation between the partners, and their association with 
health outcomes emphasizes the importance of effective 
communication within relationships. 

This analysis is unique in considering multiple aspects 
of the relational context of pregnancy as well as multiple 
aspects of pregnancy outcomes. Considering multiple 
aspects of 
is advantageous, as 
intentions and relationship quality are closely intertwined. 
For example, a pregnancy may be considered mistimed 
because the individual wants children, but not necessarily 
with this partner. Likewise, the indicators of relationship 
problems used here, such as when the mother tells the 
father of the pregnancy, and whether the father talks with 
the mother about the pregnancy, are inﬂuenced by whether 
the pregnancy was a welcome event or a point of conten- 
tion. The inclusion of both intentions and quality together 


in the model enables an observation of their effects net of 
each other. 
Considering outcomes across both pregnancy and birth 
helps to identify the differential processes leading up to 
these outcomes. Whereas no early prenatal care is associ- 
ated both with intentions for the pregnancy as well as with 
relationship problems during pregnancy, preterm birth is 
more closely associated with intentions and low birth- 
weight more closely associated with relationship problems. 
The comparison of these processes can be helpful to pro- 
grams and policies aimed at preventing problematic birth 
outcomes. 
It is clear that the father’s intentions play an important 
part in the health of the pregnancy and the wellbeing of his 
child. This analysis heeds calls for the inclusion of the 
father’s perspective [25, 26], and conﬁrms that the best 
source of the father’s view is the father himself. It is 
revealing that one-third of all mothers did not accurately 
report the father’s view. Not surprisingly, inaccuracy was 
particularly high when the partners did not share expecta- 
tions. This underscores the importance of obtaining this 
critical information directly from the father, rather than 
relying on the mother’s proxy report. 
This study focuses on those couples who are in an 
ongoing relationship with one another. This focus allowed 
for the inclusion of the father’s perspective, but does mean 
that couples whose relationships ended either before the 
baby’s birth or shortly after were not considered. At the 
time of the survey, 20% of the mothers reported the pres- 
ence of a nonresident biological father. As these relation- 
ships most 
likely were more at-risk than those of the 
couples in the study, the effects of relationship context may 
be even stronger than found by the current analysis. An 
additional limitation of the current study is that the ques- 
tions about pregnancy intention were asked retrospectively. 
Recall of intentions is colored by the experience of preg- 
nancy and the relationship with the new infant. To the 
extent that those with more positive experiences have more 
positively-biased recall of intentions, this analysis may be 
underestimating the extent to which positive relationship 
quality mediates between unintended pregnancy and 
problematic birth outcomes. 
By examining the couple context of pregnancy, this 
analysis found that joint intentions for pregnancy, marital 
status at conception, and the quality of the parental rela- 
tionship during pregnancy each contribute to pregnancy 
and newborn health. These results underscore the impor- 
tance of including men in family planning, as couples 
where both the man and the woman intended the pregnancy 
and 
had 
researchers working to achieve healthy pregnancies and 
healthy newborns need to ensure that, when a partner is 
present, a couple perspective of pregnancy is maintained. 




An important goal should be to help the father be sup- 
portive of the mother, encouraging her healthy behaviors 
and minimizing relational stress. Learning to support one 
another and to communicate effectively can have beneﬁts 
which extend beyond pregnancy, creating a supportive 
family environment for the new child. 

1. Martin, L. T., McNamara, M. J., Milot, A. S., Halle, T., & Hair, 
E. C. (2007). The effects of father involvement during pregnancy 
on receipt of prenatal care and maternal smoking. Maternal and 
Child Health Journal, 11, 595–602. doi:10.1007/s10995-007- 
0209-0. 
2. Schafer, M. A., & Lia-Hoagberg, B. (1997). Effects of social 
support on prenatal care and health behaviors of low-income 
women. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nurs- 
ing, 26, 433–440. doi:10.1111/j.1552-6909.1997.tb02725.x. 
3. Feldman, P. J., Dunkel-Schetter, C., Sandman, C. A., & Wadhwa, 
P. D. (2000). Maternal social support predicts birth weight and 
fetal growth in human pregnancy. Psychosomatic Medicine, 62, 
715–725. 
4. Padilla, Y., & Reichman, N. (2001). Low birthweight: Do unwed 
fathers help? Children and Youth Services Review, 23, 505–530. 
doi:10.1016/S0190-7409(01)00136-0. 
5. Messer, L. C., Dole, N., Kaufman, J. S., & Savitzl, D. A. (2005). 
Pregnancy intendedness, maternal psychosocial factors and pre- 
term birth. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 9, 403–412. doi: 
10.1007/s10995-005-0021-7. 
6. Hobel, C. J. (2004). Stress and preterm birth. Clinical Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, 47, 856–880. doi:10.1097/01.grf.0000142512. 
38733.8c. 
7. Dole, N., Savitz, D. A., Hertz-Picciotto, I., Siega-Riz, A. M., 
McMahon, M. J., & Buekens, P. (2003). Maternal stress and 
preterm birth. American Journal of Epidemiology, 157, 14–24. 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwf176. 
8. Cowan, C. P., & Cowan, P. A. (1992). When partners become 
parents: The big life change for couples. New York: Basic Books. 
9. Bradbury, T. N., Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2000). 
Research on the nature and determinants of marital satisfaction: 
A decade in review. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 
964–980. doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2000.00964.x. 
10. Finer, L. B., & Henshaw, S. K. (2006). Disparities in rates of 
unintended pregnancy in the United States, 1994 and 2001. 
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 38, 90–96. doi: 
10.1363/3809006. 
11. Brown, S. S., & Eisenberg, L. (Eds.). (1995). The best intentions: 
Unwanted pregnancy and the well-being of children and families. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
12. Axinn, W. G., Barber, J. S., & Thornton, A. (1998). The long- 
term impact of parents’ childbearing decisions on children’s self- 
esteem. Demography, 35, 435–443. doi:10.2307/3004012. 
13. Altﬁeld, S., Handler, A., Burton, D., & Berman, L. (1998). 
Wantedness of pregnancy and prenatal health behaviors. Women 
and Health, 26, 29–43. doi:10.1300/J013v26n04_03. 
14. Williams, L. B. (1994). Determinants of couple agreement in U.S. 
fertility decisions. Family Planning Perspectives, 26, 169–173. 
doi:10.2307/2136242. 
15. Williams, L., & Sobieszczyk, T. (2003). Couple attitudes and 
agreement regarding pregnancy wantedness in the Philippines. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 65, 1019–1030. doi: 
10.1111/j.1741-3737.2003.01019.x. 



16. Sangi-Haghpeykar, H., Mehta, M., Posner, S., Poindexter, A. N., 
& II, I. (2005). Paternal inﬂuences on the timing of prenatal care 
among Hispanics. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 9, 159– 
163. doi:10.1007/s10995-005-3012-9. 
17. Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., & Ventura, S. J. (November 21, 
2006). Births: Preliminary data for 2005. National Center for 
Health Statistics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/ 
hestats/prelimbirths05/prelimbirths05.htm). 
18. Carlson, M., McLanahan, S., & England, P. (2004). Union for- 
mation in fragile families. Demography, 41, 237–261. doi:10. 
1353/dem.2004.0012. 
19. Smock, P. J. (2000). Cohabitation in the United States: An 
appraisal of research themes, ﬁndings, and implications. Annual 
Review of Sociology, 26, 1–20. doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.26.1.1. 
20. Bird, S. T., Chandra, A., Bennett, T., & Harvey, S. M. (2000). 
Beyond marital status: Relationship type and duration and the 
risk of low birth weight. Family Planning Perspectives, 32, 281– 
287. doi:10.2307/2648196. 
21. National Center for Education Statistics. (2004). User’s manual 
for the ECLS-B nine-month restricted-use data ﬁle and electronic 
code book. Washington, DC. 
22. Thompson, L., & Walker, A. J. (1982). The dyad as the unit of 
issues. Journal of 
analysis: Conceptual and methodological 
Marriage and the Family, 44, 889–900. doi:10.2307/351453. 
23. Stanford, J. B., Hobbs, R., Jameson, P., DeWitt, M. J., & Fischer, 
R. C. (2000). Deﬁning dimensions of pregnancy intendedness. 
Maternal and Child Health Journal, 4, 183–189. doi:10.1023/ 
A:1009575514205. 


25. Becker, S. (1994). Couples and reproductive health: A review of 
couple studies. Studies in Family Planning, 27, 291–306. doi: 
10.2307/2138025. 
26. Greene, M. E., & Biddlecom, A. E. (2000). Absent and prob- 
lematic men: Demographic accounts of male reproductive roles. 
Population and Development Review, 26, 81–115. doi:10.1111/ 
j.1728-4457.2000.00081.x. 

