

Pregnancy Intentions and Maternal and Child Health: An 
Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Oklahoma 
Laura Lindberg, 
Guttmacher Institute, llindberg@guttmacher.org 
Isaac Maddow-Zimet, 
Guttmacher Institute, imaddowzimet@guttmacher.org 
Kathryn Kost, and 
Guttmacher Institute, kkost@guttmacher.org 
Alicia Lincoln 
Maternal and Child Health Service, Oklahoma Department of Health, AliciaL@health.ok.gov 

Objectives—Better understanding of the impact of unintended childbearing on infant and early 
childhood health is needed for public health practice and policy. 
Methods—Data from the 2004-2008 Oklahoma Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System 
(PRAMS) survey and The Oklahoma Toddler Survey (TOTS) from 2006-2010 were used to 
examine associations between a four category measure of pregnancy intentions (intended, 
mistimed<2 years, mistimed>=2 years, unwanted) and maternal behaviors and child health 
outcomes up to age two. Propensity score methods were used to control for confounding. 
Results—Births mistimed by two or more years (OR =.58) and unwanted births (OR=.33) had 
significantly lower odds than intended births of having a mother who recognized the pregnancy 
within the first 8 weeks; they were also about half as likely as intended births to receive early 
prenatal care, and had significantly higher likelihoods of exposure to cigarette smoke during 
pregnancy. Breastfeeding was significantly less likely among unwanted births (OR=.68); 
breastfeeding for at least six months was significantly less likely among seriously mistimed births 
(OR=.70). We find little association between intention status and early childhood measures. 
Conclusions—Measured associations of intention status on health behaviors and outcomes were 
most evident in the prenatal period, limited in the immediate prenatal period, and mostly 
insignificant by age two. In addition, most of the negative associations between intention status 
and health outcomes were concentrated among women with births mistimed by 2 or more years or 
unwanted births. Surveys should incorporate questions on the extent of mistiming when measuring 
pregnancy intentions. 


HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Matern Child Health J. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01. 



National public health policy is strongly influenced by the expectation that unintended 
childbearing has significant negative effects on the behavior of mothers both during 
pregnancy and afterward, and that such behaviors directly affect the health and wellbeing of 
the child [1,2]. However, recent reviews highlight weak and often inconsistent research 
findings on the relationship of pregnancy intentions on maternal behaviors and infant health 
[3,4]; the handful of studies on early childhood health and development also show mixed 
findings [5-9]. With unintended births making up about two-fifths of all births that occur 
each year in the U.S. and little improvement in the past three decades [10], better 
understanding of the potential impact of unintended childbearing on infant and early 
childhood health is needed for public health practice and policy. 
Some of the ambiguity of prior research reflects methodological challenges in this area. Is it 
the background characteristics of mothers of intended, mistimed and unwanted births that 
account for any observed differences in health behaviors and outcomes, or the intention 
status of the birth? In many studies, bivariate differences in outcomes by intention status are 
diminished or washed out completely when controls for background characteristics are 
added [3]. Second, limited attention has been given to the effect of intention status past 
infancy, into early childhood [11]. Third, problems with the measurement and 
conceptualization of childbearing intentions further hamper research [12, 13]. Generally, 
studies of the consequences of unintended pregnancy have only distinguished between two 
(intended or unintended) or three (intended, mistimed, or unwanted) categories of intention 
status. Yet these categories may be too broad; newer research has found significant 
differences in the maternal characteristics of pregnancies that were mistimed by less than 
two years and pregnancies mistimed by two or more years [14-16]. These distinctions in the 
timing of pregnancy may be related to women’s willingness or ability to engage in health- 
promoting behaviors. 
This paper uses linked longitudinal data from the 2004-2008 Oklahoma Pregnancy Risk 
Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS) and The Oklahoma Toddler Survey (TOTS) from 
2006-2010 to examine the association between pregnancy intentions and health in the 
prenatal and postnatal periods and early childhood. These data are integral parts of the MCH 
monitoring system in Oklahoma [17, 18]. We employ propensity score analysis and an 
expanded measure of pregnancy intentions to disentangle childbearing intentions from 
maternal background characteristics and assess the impact of unintended childbearing on 
health behaviors and outcomes during pregnancy, infancy and early childhood. 


We examined survey data for 2004-2008 collected in the annual Oklahoma PRAMS, a 
random sample of postpartum women who delivered live births in Oklahoma, and data 
linked from a follow-back survey sent to PRAMS respondents when their child was two 
years old (TOTS 2006-2010).* The PRAMS and TOTS are mixed-mode surveillance 
systems; in each, two mail surveys are sent, followed by telephone surveillance for 




nonrespondents; all cases are linked to the formal birth certificate as well. Both surveys were 
approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Oklahoma State Department of Health; 
detailed methodology is documented elsewhere [19, 20]. No additional IRB approval was 
required as our study involves only secondary data analysis. 
From 2004 to 2008, 9,829 mothers completed the PRAMS questionnaire within 2-6 months 
of the birth of their infant; 6,648 of these mothers (68%) completed the TOTS survey when 
their child was two years old. We found no significant differences in the distributions of 
intention status or socio demo graphic measures between PRAMS and TOTS respondents. 
Pregnancy intentions—All state-level PRAMS surveys include a question on pregnancy 
intentions that allows for the construction of a three-category measure: intended, mistimed 
or unwanted. Pregnancy intention is based on women’s self-reports of their desire to become 
pregnant right before the conception occurred. The survey asked all women, “Thinking back 
to just before you got pregnant with your new baby, how did you feel about becoming 
pregnant?” possible response categories were “I wanted to be pregnant sooner, I wanted to 
be pregnant later, I wanted to be pregnant then, I didn’t want to be pregnant then or at any 
time in the future.” The Oklahoma PRAMS added a follow-up question for women reporting 
they wanted to be pregnant later; “How much later did you want to become pregnant?”†,‡ 
We combined responses to these two questions into a four-category measure of intention 
status: intended, mistimed by less than two years, mistimed by two or more years (referred 
to as seriously mistimed), and unwanted. The retrospective reporting period for pregnancy 
intentions is only 2–6 months after delivery, likely improving accurate reporting in contrast 
to surveys with retrospective recall periods extending years after the pregnancy, such as the 
National Survey of Family Growth [15]. 
Outcome measures—Based on the measures available in the two surveys, we 
constructed dichotomous measures of key indicators of health behaviors and outcomes 
during the prenatal, infancy and early childhood periods [2, 21, 22]. 







*Oklahoma is one of only four states with data avaible from follow-up interviews of PRAMS mothers; the others are Alaska, Rhode 
Island, and Oregon. 
†Only one other state (Utah) included such a question in the PRAMS survey during the same period. 
‡Response categories were less than 1 year, 1 year to less than 2 years, 2 years to less than 3 years, 3 years to less than 4 years, 4 years 
or more. 
§Mothers slightly overestimate early entry into prenatal care on the PRAMS survey (Oklahoma State Department of Health, 
PRAMSGRAM Initiation of Prenatal Care Among Women Having a Live Birth in Oklahoma, 1995, 5(2) http://www.ok.gov/health2/ 
documents/PRAMSInitiation%20of%20PNC95.pdf.pdf, accessed 11/21/13); however, these small overestimates are unlikely to affect 
our final estimates substantially. 


















Child had four days or more of limited activity due to health in the past three 
months 

Child was injured seriously enough in the past year to require medical treatment or 
advice 

The early childhood measures and breastfeeding at six months are measured in TOTS; all 
other measures are from PRAMS. 

We excluded 294 births from PRAMS and 75 births from TOTS because of missing data on 
intention status; more births were excluded due to missing values on key covariates, 
resulting in an analytical sample of 8,446 births in PRAMS and 5,808 births in TOTS. 
Sample sizes vary slightly across outcomes due to small numbers of missing cases. We first 
examine bivariate associations between pregnancy intentions and health behaviors and 
outcomes. We then investigate the extent to which births differ in their background 
characteristics across the four intention status groups. Finally, we use propensity score 
methods to examine the effect of pregnancy intentions on health behaviors and outcomes 
after accounting for variation in background characteristics. 
Propensity score methods are increasingly being used with observational data to disentangle 
confounding and causal factors. These methods account for differences between treatment 
and control groups that affect both group assignment and the outcome under study by 
modeling the selection process into each group [23, 24], Although matching is most 
commonly used for propensity analyses, this approach is most appropriate for dichotomous 
treatment conditions (a single treatment versus a single control) [25]. 
Since our “treatment”–intention status–has four categories, we used an alternate approach of 
inverse probability weighting (IPW) [26, 27]. We estimated a multinomial logistic 
regression model with intention status as the dependent variable (intended births were the 
reference category), which was then used to calculate predicted propensity scores. We 
**This measure was drawn from the linked birth certificate. 
††Defined as diarrhea lasting at least three days, an ear infection, or a cold or runny nose with a fever or cough. 



included any available covariates in the model known to be predictors of both pregnancy 
intentions and our other dependent measures [28]. Prior research suggested three sets of 
confounding measures in the survey: life course status (including maternal age, union status 
at conception, parity), socioeconomics (including household poverty level, race/ethnicity, 
education), and access to health care and orientation towards health promotion (including 
health insurance, maternal alcohol and cigarette use prior to pregnancy). We assessed the 
adequacy of the propensity score estimation process by comparing the distribution of 
covariates across the intention status groups before and after the inverse propensity score 
weighting using the Pearson χ2 test. When no significant differences remained, we 
considered the intention status groups “balanced” with respect to the background 
characteristics of the mothers. This process was iterative as we developed a multinomial 
logistic regression model that increased balance; covariates were included regardless of 
statistical significance. The process was conducted separately for the PRAMS and the TOTS 
samples. 
Finally, we tested for a relationship between intention status and each of the outcome 
measures using logistic regression with each observation weighted by the inverse of its 
propensity score. For the outcomes measured at age two, we also estimated multivariate 
models with controls for potential mediating factors that occurred temporally between the 
pregnancy–when intention status was determined–and age two that might directly influence 
the outcomes; available measures included infant in ICU following birth, LBW, preterm, 
union status at birth (married, cohabiting, other), and household poverty level at time of 
TOTS interview; in preliminary analyses, each of these measures had a significant bivariate 
association with one or more of the toddler outcomes at p<.05. 
We performed the analyses using svy commands in STATA 13.0 to account for the complex 
sampling designs of the surveys. All analyses were performed using data weighted by the 
population weights provided in the data. When using propensity weights, we multiplied each 
observation’s inverse propensity weight by the population weight in order to obtain unbiased 
effects based on the population of all births [29]. We excluded two cases from the PRAMS 
sample and three cases from the TOTS sample where the propensity values were extreme 
outliers. 


Table 1 presents the estimated proportion of births experiencing each outcome, by intention 
status of the birth, for the unbalanced data. At baseline, 51% of births were reported as 
intended, 16% as mistimed by less than two years, 22% as mistimed by two or more years, 
and 11% as unwanted. Overall, high proportions of women recognized their pregnancy 
within eight weeks (88%) and received prenatal care during the first trimester (86%). 
Twenty percent of women reported smoking during the last trimester and 40% reported 
other exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy. Seven percent of infants were classified 
as LBW and 12% as preterm. About three-quarters of infants had mothers who initiated 
breastfeeding; among this group, 56% were breastfed for at least six months. At age two, 



recent illness was common (58%), while rates of limited activity (13%), recent injury (13%) 
or exposure to cigarette smoke (15%) were substantially lower. 
In the unbalanced data, most outcomes varied significantly by intention status. Mothers of 
intended births were significantly more likely to engage in health promoting prenatal 
behaviors and to breastfeed than mothers of births in the unintended groups. Unwanted 
births were slightly but significantly more likely to be LBW as compared to intended births 
(8% versus 7%). The proportion preterm did not vary significantly by intention status. 
Toddlers whose birth had been mistimed–whether by less than two years or by two or more 
years–were significantly less likely than toddlers whose birth had been intended to have 
been breastfed to at least six months of age; they were also significantly more likely to be 
exposed to cigarette smoke and to have had a recent illness. For toddlers whose birth was 
seriously mistimed, a significantly greater proportion had their activity limited due to health- 
related issues than did toddlers from intended births (16% vs. 12%). Toddlers from intended 
and unwanted births did not differ significantly on any measure except for higher rates of 
exposure to cigarette smoke among the latter (11% vs. 17%). Injury and intention status 
were not associated in the unbalanced sample. 

In the unbalanced data, intention status in the PRAMS sample varied significantly on life 
course, socioeconomic and health orientation measures (Table 2). Statistically significant 
differences in the distribution of characteristics across intention status groups are indicated 
by the p-value of the overall chi-square test. Intended births were more likely to occur to 
older or married women. Seriously mistimed births were most likely to be a first birth 
(54%), while unwanted births were the least likely to be a first birth (21%). Intention status 
groups also varied significantly by race/ethnicity, education, and household poverty status. 
Additionally, births whose mothers were on Medicaid at the time they became pregnant 
were least likely to be found among intended births (6%), and most likely among seriously 
mistimed births (17%). Finally, mistimed and unwanted births had mothers with higher 
levels of drinking and smoking prior to the pregnancy than did intended births. 
Compared with births mistimed by less than two years, births that were seriously mistimed 
were more likely to have teen mothers, to be conceived outside of marriage, to be first 
births, to be living in a household below the poverty line and to have mothers with low 
education.‡‡ Also of note are differences in the characteristics of seriously mistimed births 
and unwanted births; the latter are less likely to be a first birth and more likely to have older 
or married mothers. 
Key to this analysis, after weighting the observations by the inverse of the propensity scores 
derived from multinomial regression, distributions of the characteristics of births in the 
intention status groups were balanced on all of the variables examined (p>.05; final column, 
‡‡Paired comparisons of differences in the size of the proportions for intention status groups for individual attributes were tested for 
statistical significance using t-tests. Only statistically significant differences are mentioned in the text (p<.05). 



Table 2). The covariates were also balanced as assessed by the standardized bias approach 
(results not shown) [25]. 

Table 3 presents results of bivariate logistic regressions estimating the association between 
intention status and the prenatal and postnatal measures, weighting the data by the inverse 
propensity scores to balance the sample on background characteristics. Women with 
seriously mistimed births (OR =.58) or unwanted births (OR=.33) had significantly lower 
odds than women with an intended birth of recognizing the pregnancy early; they were also 
about half as likely as women with intended births to obtain early prenatal care, and had 
significantly higher likelihoods of exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy. Maternal 
smoking was not associated with intention status. 
After balancing, we found no significant differences across the intention status groups in 
either the likelihood of LBW or preterm births. Compared to women with intended births, 
only women with an unwanted birth were significantly less likely to initiate breastfeeding 
(OR=.68). 
After balancing the data, few significant differences by intention status in the early 
childhood measures remain (Table 4) in models without (Model 1) or with controls for 
potential mediating variables (Model 2). In both models, among women who initiated 
breastfeeding, continuing for at least six months was significantly less likely among women 
with births mistimed by less than two years than women with intended births. Additionally, 
a toddler was significantly more likely to have an activity limitation (OR=1.57) if the birth 
was seriously mistimed as compared to intended, but only after controlling for mediating 
variables. Intention status was not significantly associated with exposure to cigarette smoke, 
recent illness, or recent injury in either set of models. 

Unintended childbearing is very common in Oklahoma, accounting for nearly half of all live 
births, as compared with 39% nationally [30]. Our analysis offers four central findings. First, 
echoing recent studies, we found substantial demographic and socioeconomic differentials in 
unintended childbearing [10, 15, 31]. Second, we found that while intention status was 
significantly associated at the bivariate level with many health behaviors and outcomes, 
these relationships were weakened when background characteristics were adjusted through 
propensity score analysis. Even so, a number of significant associations remained in the 
balanced models, such that intended births were associated with better health behaviors and 
outcomes. Third, most of the negative associations between mistimed childbearing and the 
health outcomes were concentrated among women with seriously mistimed or unwanted 
births. (Breastfeeding for at least six months is the one exception, as this health behavior 
was significantly less likely for women with births mistimed by less than two years.) 
Finally, we found that the associations of intention status with health behaviors and 
outcomes were most evident in the prenatal period, limited in the post-natal period, and 
mostly insignificant by age two. 



Oklahoma was one of the first states to incorporate the extent of mistiming in the PRAMS 
survey, allowing us to identify four categories of pregnancy intentions. As of 2012, revised 
PRAMS surveys for all participating states include the additional question on extent of 
mistiming. Our findings highlight the value of this effort; distinguishing among mistimed 
births delineates important differentiation in many of the associations with the health 
behaviors and outcomes under study. Intended, mistimed <2 years, mistimed more than 2 
years and unwanted likely reflect different aspects of fertility preferences related to the 
starting, spacing and stopping of childbearing [32], The health consequences of unintended 
childbearing appear concentrated among seriously mistimed and unwanted births. Long- 
acting reversible contraceptives, such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and implants, seem 
particularly well-suited to reducing seriously mistimed births [33, 34], and access needs to 
be facilitated, especially for low-income women [35]. 
This analysis took advantage of unique data to examine the effect of pregnancy intentions at 
three distinct points in time–the prenatal period, the immediate postpartum period, and the 
early childhood period. Estimated effects were strongest in the prenatal period, and 
diminished by age two, suggesting that over time mothers adjust to unintended births and are 
responsive to the health needs of their young child regardless of intention status. In the 
prenatal period, women with seriously mistimed and unwanted pregnancies were less likely 
to engage in health-promoting behaviors than women with intended pregnancies. These 
early effects are important, as behaviors during the prenatal period can be the foundation for 
later health and well-being over the life course [36]. 
A number of prenatal and infant measures were not associated with intention status in the 
balanced model. While maternal smoking prior to pregnancy was strongly associated with 
intention status in the unbalanced results, in the balanced data this association disappeared, 
indicating that socio demo graphic factors, not pregnancy intention, are the main drivers of 
smoking behavior. The weak associations in even the unbalanced data between intention 
status and infant health outcomes (preterm, LBW,) stand in contrast to a recent meta- 
analysis finding consistent evidence of a bivariate relationship between intention status and 
these outcomes [37]. However, most studies able to control for background characteristics 
have found little evidence of a relationship between mistimed or unwanted births and these 
outcomes [38-41]. 
Although intended births had significantly better health outcomes at age two in the bivariate 
measures, these differences were almost entirely explained by confounding factors, adjusted 
in the propensity models. Other recent research in early childhood, focused on 
developmental and cognitive outcomes, also finds the effects of intention status greatly 
diminished after controlling for background characteristics of mothers [8, 41]. Although 
women appear to accommodate an unintended birth over time, so that by two years the 
health and well-being of children is equalized across intention statuses, background 
inequalities at the time of pregnancy have longer-term influences on the lives of young 
children. Policies and programs that help women achieve their desired fertility levels and 
timing would likely shift the socioeconomic distribution of childbearing and reduce 
inequalities, as women postpone births until a time of greater economic and life course 
stability. 



Several limitations to this study should be noted. The data are retrospective, creating the 
potential for recall bias [42, 43]; however, the retrospective recall period is shorter than in 
many other surveys. Furthermore, as in any self-reports, responses are open to social 
desirability, whether underreporting of negative health behaviors or overreporting of 
positive behaviors; all of the outcome measures other than low birth weight are self- 
reported. Additionally, the available health measures in the survey at age two are limited, 
and the findings might be different with additional measures. One example would be a 
maternal rating of overall child health, which may be more robust than the health indicators 
currently available in the TOTS [44], Additionally, measures of cognitive or other 
developmental markers might be used to assess if intention status influences how mothers 
interact with their child and any subsequent consequences. Overall, further research is 
needed to identify specific pathways between pregnancy intentions, maternal behaviors, and 
child outcomes. 
We hypothesize that some of the weak relationships observed in this study reflect the 
relatively severe economic challenges among childbearing women in Oklahoma. For 
example, 37% of births in the Oklahoma PRAMS were to women living below the federal 
poverty line, a level far higher than the national average (27%) [15]. And in 2008, 61% of 
births in Oklahoma were publicly funded (through programs such as Medicaid and the 
Indian Health Service), compared to 48% of US births overall [30]. Indeed, available 
sociodemographic measures are likely only part of an otherwise unmeasured constellation of 
economic and life course constraints. Substantial challenges of motherhood may exist for 
many of these women, regardless of their pregnancy intentions. Ethnographic research 
highlights the less salient influence of intention status as compared to other constraints for 
women in contexts in which unintended childbearing is common [45]. This phenomenon 
may be reflected in our findings such that the effects of intention status have less of an 
impact than the socioeconomic context of a birth. 

This study was supported by grant R40 MC 25692 from the Maternal and Child Health Research Program, 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau (Title V, Social Security Act), Health Resources and Services Administration, 
Department of Health and Human Services and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & 
Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01HD068433. The content is 
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National 
Institutes of Health or the Department of Health and Human Services 

1. Institute of Medicine. Report of the Committee on Preventive Services for Women. National 
Academy of Sciences Press; Washington, DC: 2011. Clinical preventive services for women: 
Closing the gaps. 
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2020 topics & objectives. 2010. 
Available from: http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/objectiveslist.aspx? 
topicid=13 

parental health: a review of the literature. Studies in Family Planning. 2008; 39(1):18–38. [PubMed: 
18540521] 




white paper. Child Trends and The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy; 
Washington, DC: 2007. 





retrospective reports of attitude and contraceptive use. Population Research and Policy Review. 
2005; 24(6):593–615. 

children at ages 3 and 5: longitudinal cohort study. BMJ. 2011; 343:d4473. [PubMed: 21791498] 
9. Hummer RA, Hack KA, Raley RK. Retrospective reports of pregnancy wantedness and child well- 









14. Pulley L, Klerman LV, Tang H, Baker BA. The extent of pregnancy mistiming and its association 
with maternal characteristics and behaviors and pregnancy outcomes. Perspectives on Sexual and 
Reproductive Health. 2002; 34(4):206–11. [PubMed: 12214911] 


16. Lindberg, LD.; Finer, LB.; Stokes-Prindle, C. Refining measures of pregnancy intention: Taking 
timing into account; 2008 Annual meetings of the Population Association of America; New 
Orleans, LA. 2008; 

from: http://www.ok.gov/health2/documents/PRAMS_Unintended_Pregnancy_06.pdf.pdf 
18. Oklahoma State Department of Health.. TOTS Brief: The Oklahoma Toddler Survey. 2010. 
Available from: http://www.ok.gov/health2/documents/Imm_Brief_final_Dec_2010.pdf 
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. PRAMS model surveillance protocol, 2009 CATI 





22. Hagan, JF.; Shaw, JS.; Duncan, PM., editors. Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health Supervision of 
Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Third Edition. American Academy of Pediatrics; Elk Grove 
Village, IL: 2008. 



observational studies. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2011; 46(3):399–424. [PubMed: 
21818162] 









28. Lunceford JK, Davidian M. Stratification and weighting via the propensity score in estimation of 
causal treatment effects: a comparative study. Statistics in Medicine. 2004; 23(19):2937–60. 
[PubMed: 15351954] 



programs in paying for pregnancy and infant care: Estimates for 2008. Guttmacher Institute; New 
York: 2013. 


32. D’Angelo DV, et al. Differences between mistimed and unwanted pregnancies among women who 
have live births. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health. 2004; 36(5):192–7. [PubMed: 
15519961] 
33. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee on Gynecologic 
Practice & Long-Acting Reversible Contraception Working Group. Increasing use of 
contraceptive implants and intrauterine devices to reduce unintended pregnancy. Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 2009; 114(6):1434–8. [PubMed: 20134301] 
34. Speidel JJ, Harper CC, Shields WC. The potential of long-acting reversible contraception to 
decrease unintended pregnancy. Contraception. 2008; 78(3):197–200. [PubMed: 18692608] 
35. Baldwin MK, Rodriguez MI, Edelman AB. Lack of insurance and parity influence choice between 
long-acting reversible contraception and sterilization in women postpregnancy. Contraception. 
2012; 86(1):42–7. [PubMed: 22240179] 




38. Durousseau S, Chavez GF. Associations of intrauterine growth restriction among term infants and 
maternal pregnancy intendedness, initial happiness about being pregnant, and sense of control. 
Pediatrics. 2003; 111(5 Part 2):1171–1175. [PubMed: 12728133] 

infant care.”. Family Planning Perspectives. 1998; 30(5):223–230. [PubMed: 9782045] 
40. Joyce TJ, Kaestner R, Korenman S. The effect of pregnancy intention on child development. 

41. McCrory C, McNally S. The effect of pregnancy intention on maternal prenatal behaviours and 
parent and child health: results of an Irish cohort study. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. 
2013; 27(2):208–15. [PubMed: 23374066] 



maternal behaviors. Maternal and Child Health Journal. 2000; 4(3):171–8. [PubMed: 11097504] 
44. Lewis CC, Pantell RH, Kieckhefer GM. Assessment of children’s health status: field test of new 









 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Proportionate distribution of mother’s background characteristics by intention status group, and p-values for χ- 
square tests of significance across intention status groups for unbalanced and balanced samples; Oklahoma 
PRAMS 2004-2008. 




Mistimed 
<2 years 
Mistimed 
>=2 years Unwanted 



















































































































































































































Mistimed 
<2 years 
Mistimed 
>=2 years Unwanted 




Frequency of drinking 5+ drinks 
in one sitting *** 
































scores: abuse by partner in 12 months prior to birth (yes/no), Spanish questionnaire (yes/no), all sources of income, stressful life events in year 
before birth, number of dependents in household, visited dentist in past year (yes/no), dieting in order to lose weight 3 months prior to pregnancy 
(yes/no), heard or read about benefits of folic acid (yes/no), and tested for HIV (yes/no). Interaction terms between several of the above variables, 
as well as for the year of survey administration, were also included in the propensity model but are not listed here due to space constraints. 









