This article was downloaded by: [University of Hawaii at Manoa] 
On: 06 January 2015, At: 00:47 
Publisher: Routledge 
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK 
Women & Health 
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wwah20 
Severity of Intimate Partner Abuse Indicators as 
Perceived by Women in Mexico and the United States 
Corinne Peek-Asa PhD a , Lorena Garcia MS and MPH b , David McArthur PhD and MPH b & 
Roberto Castro PhD c 
a University of Iowa Injury Prevention Research Center 
b Southern California Injury Prevention Research Center, UCLA School of Public Health 
c Centro Regional de Investigaciones Multidisciplinarias, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de 
Mexico 
Published online: 21 Oct 2008. 
To cite this article: Corinne Peek-Asa PhD , Lorena Garcia MS and MPH , David McArthur PhD and MPH & Roberto Castro PhD 
(2002) Severity of Intimate Partner Abuse Indicators as Perceived by Women in Mexico and the United States, Women & 
Health, 35:2-3, 165-180, DOI: 10.1300/J013v35n02_11 


Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained 
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no 
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the 
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and 
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and 
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for 
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever 
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of 
the Content. 
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic 
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any 
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// 
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions 
Severity 
of Intimate Partner Abuse Indicators 
as Perceived by Women 
in Mexico and the United States 
Corinne Peek-Asa, PhD 
Lorena Garcia, MS, MPH 
David McArthur, PhD, MPH 
Roberto Castro, PhD 
SUMMARY. Objective: Women in Cuernavaca, Mexico and Los An- 
geles, California were surveyed to examine differences in their percep- 
tions of the severity of domestic violence indicators. 
Methods: One hundred twenty women in each country rated the severity 
of 26 domestic violence indicators which were part of an abuse screen 
used for an ongoing study of the prevalence of abuse. Rasch analysis was 
Corinne Peek-Asa is affiliated with the University of Iowa Injury Prevention Re- 
search Center. Lorena Garcia and David McArthur are affiliated with the Southern Cal- 
ifornia Injury Prevention Research Center, UCLA School of Public Health. Roberto 
Castro is affiliated with the Centro Regional de Investigaciones Multidisciplinarias, 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. 
Address correspondence to: Corinne Peek-Asa, University of Iowa College of 
Public Health, 100 Oakdale Boulevard, #114 IREH, Iowa city, IA 82241 (E-mail: 
corinne-peek-asa@uiowa.edu). 
Support for this research was provided by the Southern California Injury Prevention 
Research Center, which is funded by a grant from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (#CCR 903622). This project was approved by the Human Subject Protec- 
tion Committee of the University of California, Los Angeles. 
[Haworth co-indexing entry note]: “Severity of Intimate Partner Abuse Indicators as Perceived by Women 
in Mexico and the United States.” Peek-Asa, Corinne et al. Co-published simultaneously in Women & Health 
(The Haworth Medical Press, an imprint of The Haworth Press, Inc.) Vol. 35, No. 2/3, 2002, pp. 165-180; and: 
Domestic Violence and Health Care: Policies and Prevention (ed: Carolina Reyes, William J. Rudman, and 
Calvin R. Hewitt) The Haworth Medical Press, an imprint of The Haworth Press, Inc., 2002, pp. 165-180. Sin- 
gle or multiple copies of this article are available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Service 
[1-800-HAWORTH, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. (EST). E-mail address: getinfo@haworthpressinc.com]. 




conducted to determine the linear relationship in the perceptions of the 
severity of each event between the two countries. 
Results: The Rasch calibrated logit values show that women in the US 
rated 24 of the 26 events as more severe than women in Mexico. How- 
ever, items were ranked in similar order and a clear linear pattern was es- 
tablished. In both countries, being shot with a gun was the most severe 
event and a partner becoming jealous was the least severe. 
Conclusion: The country of origin did not dictate which events were 
most severe but did influence how severe these events were perceived. 
[Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Ser- 
vice: 1-800-HAWORTH. E-mail address: <getinfo@haworthpressinc.com> 
2002 by The Haworth Press, Inc. 
Website: <http://www.HaworthPress.com> 
All rights reserved.] 


Violence against women is a major public health problem garnering 
increased recognition in many different cultures and countries (ACOG, 
1995; Bash, 1994; Campbell et al., 1995). Declarations made at the In- 
ternational Conference on Population and Development in Cairo (1994) 
and the IV World Conference on Women in Beijing (1995) clearly es- 
tablished the need to better understand and reduce this problem (Duarte, 
1994). Violence against women, especially violence perpetrated against 
a woman by an intimate partner, was recognized to have many ethnic 
and cultural contexts. The recent National Conference on Violence and 
Reproductive Health: Science, Prevention and Action identified as a 
central theme the need to better understand the perspectives of women 
involved in violent intimate relationships in order to improve screening, 
prevention, and services (Spitz and Marks, 2000; Campbell et al., 
2000). 
In countries that collect violence-related data, intimate partner vio- 
lence has been found to occur at all income levels and among all occu- 
pations, social classes, and ethnic and cultural groups (Straus and 
Smith, 1990; Torres, 1991; Wilt and Olson, 1996), although percep- 
tions of what constitutes abuse may differ (Torres, 1991). Cultural dif- 
ferences are an important predictor of perceptions and reactions to 
abuse, and are especially important when designing intervention poli- 
cies and practices (Straus and Smith, 1990; Ghazal and Hoyt, 1993; 


Perilla et al., 1994; Torres, 1987). While some research has focused on 
differences among racial groups, limited research has examined ethnic 
or cultural differences (Kaufman et al., 1994; Sorenson and Telles, 
1991). These differences may be particularly crucial when adapting to a 
new cultural environment, which can occur in many situations such as 
immigration or intra-culture marriage. The role of cultural perceptions 
of partner abuse is especially important in Southern California, which 
has one of the largest immigrant populations in the world. Southern Cal- 
ifornia is home to the largest Mexican-American population, and be- 
cause of proximity and economic ties, remains closely related to Mexican 
culture and customs. 
Prevalence estimates of partner abuse in the United States range from 
11% to 65% of women and in Mexico range from 33% to 61% of 
women (Arbuckle et al., 1995; Abbot et al., 1996; Diaz-Olavarrieta and 
Sotelo, 1996). In both countries, intimate partners are the most common 
perpetrators of female homicide. Reasons for the variance in prevalence 
estimates have not yet been adequately explained, and thus differences 
in the prevalence and risk factors for abuse in different populations of 
women are largely unknown. Research into the prevalence of abusive 
events has been challenged by a lack of definition regarding what con- 
stitutes abuse and how this perception differs among groups of women 
(Spitz and Marks, 2000; Campbell et al., 2000). This lack of knowledge 
may lead to underestimates of abusive relationships among certain 
groups because of either a lack of trust in divulging experiences or the 
perception that certain events are not abusive within certain cultures. 
Research in Southern California found that Mexican-born Latinas 
had a lower lifetime prevalence of partner abuse than American-born 
Latinas and Anglos (Sorenson and Telles, 1991), but may also have dif- 
fering perceptions about what constitutes abuse. Further research found 
that Anglo-American women perceived more behaviors to be abusive 
than did Mexican-American women (Wilt and Olson, 1996). Spe- 
cifically, emotional abuse, such as failure to provide adequate food and 
shelter, was perceived as abusive by a larger proportion of Anglo- 
American women than Mexican-American women (Wilt and Olson, 
1996). Cumulative research findings indicate that cultural and social 
factors, including stressors associated with acculturation and migration, 
may be important predictors of intimate partner abuse for the Mexican 
woman. Acculturation has been related to risk factors in partner abuse 
including social support structure, access to extended family networks, 
substance use, socioeconomic status, and access of medical care (Grif- 
fith and d’Villacencio, 1985; Caetano and Medina Mora, 1988; Holck 


et al., 1984; Rodriguez, 1999). Acculturation is a particularly vulnera- 
ble period because tensions in gender relations may occur with stresses 
of moving and adapting to a new cultural environment, especially when 
gender relations in the country of origin were patriarchal or asymmetri- 
cal (Dasgupta and Warrier, 1996). However, the relationship between 
partner abuse and cultural competence is complicated, and could lead to 
either an increase or decrease in abuse (Dasgupta and Warrier, 1996). 
A more complete understanding of attitudes about what constitutes 
an abusive event and how perceptions of the severity of these events 
vary will enable health care providers to better identify and assist 
women suffering abuse and will also help researchers better describe 
cultural differences in risk. The purpose of this research was to examine 
differences in the perceptions of intimate partner abuse indicators 
among women in the United States and in Mexico to determine if sys- 
tematic differences in the perception of abusive events is present. This 
perception survey was conducted as part of a larger study examining the 
prevalence of abuse in the two countries. 

The sample population was drawn from women in Los Angeles 
County, California, United States and the cities of Cuernavaca and 
Cuautla, Morelos, Mexico. Respondents were asked to assign a level of 
perceived severity to 26 indicators of intimate partner abuse. The 26 in- 
dicators were from a screen used in the Domestic Violence in Mexican 
and Mexican American Women study (DVMMAW) to assess the fre- 
quency and severity of intimate partner abuse during pregnancy. The 
abuse screen was adapted from the Conflict Tactics Scale by research- 
ers in Mexico (Castro) for use in both countries (Straus et al., 1996). 
The 26 questions on the survey represent physical, sexual, and emo- 
tional abuse, and range from less severe events (being insulted) to very 
severe events (being shot with a firearm). The responses from this per- 
ception survey will be used as weights to derive an index of abuse sever- 
ity among women participating in the DVMMAW. For this analysis, 
differences in perceived severity as reported by women from each 
country will be examined. 
The sample included 120 women from five groups in each country: 
20 professional level researchers, 20 clerical workers, 20 graduate stu- 
dents, 20 undergraduate students, and 40 women recruited from health 
clinics participating in the DVMMAW study. Respondents in the first 


four groups were identified at large universities in each country. The 
sample was not randomly drawn, but the study protocol was duplicated 
exactly in each country. Thus, although the sample is small and non- 
random, groups in the two countries are comparable. 
The mean age of women sampled in the US was 29.2 years, which 
was significantly younger than the mean age of 33.2 years in Mexico. 
Educational levels were similar for women in the professional, gradu- 
ate, and undergraduate student groups, but among clerical workers and 
clinic patients a higher proportion of women in the US reported having 
a college education than women in Mexico. Women in the US were 
more likely to report being single than women in Mexico for all groups 
sampled. There were no differences based on occupational status. 
Women were approached by a study researcher and asked to partici- 
pate in a written survey about attitudes towards intimate partner vio- 
lence. Women were not asked about their experiences with abuse. 
Participation was voluntary and anonymous in both countries, and no 
incentives were provided. Women were invited to participate without 
regard to race/ethnicity. Among the US sample, 81% were born in the 
US and 91% were raised in the US. 
Participants were instructed to report their perceptions about the rela- 
tive severity of each of the 26 events. Table 3 lists these events in the 
order they were presented to respondents, which represents a randomly- 
drawn ordering. Respondents were instructed to read the 26 items and 
identify the item they felt to be the least severe. This item was assigned 
a severity level of one. On a scale from one to 100, women were then in- 
structed to assign a severity score to each of the other items in relation to 
the item scored as one. Women could chose the same severity level for 
multiple events. This protocol was chosen after several pilot tests which 
explored multiplicative scales with and without lower and upper bound- 
aries. This method was the only protocol found to yield comparable, 
calibrated responses. 
The mean severity score rank order was determined for each of the 26 
items and for each group of women sampled. When analyzing women 
by respondent group, items were categorized into physical, sexual, and 
emotional abuse. The overall mean of items in each category was calcu- 
lated as the severity index for each type of abuse. Student’s t-tests were 
used to test statistical significance of differences between women in the 
US and Mexico by item. 
Rasch analysis, a psychometric analytic technique developed explic- 
itly to interpret this type of survey, was used to determine the internal 
consistency of respondents and to form a calibrated scale representing 


perceptions of severity (Rasch, 1996; Wright, 1979). The Rasch method 
follows the principle that each respondent should have consistent re- 
sponses based on their individual attitudes and opinions, even if respon- 
dents disagree with one another (Thorndike, 1904; Guttman, 1944). 
Thus, a respondent who views abuse as severe will be more likely to as- 
sign higher weights to each item, despite the protocol which encouraged 
respondents to use the entire range of 1 to 100. Similarly, the most se- 
vere event in the 26-item index will have a correspondingly higher 
probability of receiving a higher weight than less severe events. 
In mathematical terms, two parameters govern the calibrated weight 
of each item. The first, Bn, is the perception of severity of respondent n. 
The second, Db, is the overall weight of item I relative to other weights. 
The simplest equation denoting the probability of responses using B 
and D is: 

where theta (θ) is a probability function that allows the parameters B 
and D to be estimated from observed data (Andrich, 1988). A linear so- 
lution for the probability function is: 









in which β 
i are the logarithms of Bn (respondents) and Di (items), 
respectively. This equation generalizes to the entire matrix of N respon- 
dents and I items, and enables the items to be calibrated, i.e., placed on a 
continuum using the logit scale (Tucker, 1953). The resulting model 
provides logit scores that represent a linear calibration scale with a mid- 
point of zero. In the model for this study, larger negative values indicate 
an increasing perception of severity. Rasch analysis was applied to the 
survey responses to determine ranking and weights by item, country, 
and respondent group. This study was analyzed using FACETS soft- 
ware (Linacre, 1989). 

The calibrated logit, which presents severity scores on a logit scale, 
indicates that the US women rated the overall severity of all events on 
the index to be twice as severe as women in Mexico (Table 1). The error 


reported for each sample was low, and the reliability was very high at 
0.98. On an average scale of 1 to 100, women in the US assigned an av- 
erage severity of 76.1 per item, which was significantly higher than the 
average of 66.4 for women in Mexico (Table 2). 
Responses by Sampling Group and Type of Violence. Table 2 shows 
the average of the severity scores by sampling group and type of vio- 
lence. For each sampled group, physical violence was ranked as most 
severe, followed by sexual and then emotional violence. US women in 
every group rated each type of violence as more severe than women in 
Mexico. Differences were greatest for physical violence and smallest 
for emotional violence, but most of these differences were not signifi- 

Overall 
Calibrated Score 


Mean Square 
Error 


Mexico 
US 

Professional 
Graduate 
Undergrad 
Clerical 
Clinic 
21746 
24432 
7199 
7939 
8094 
7543 
15403 
0.06 
20.06 
0.05 
0.00 
20.02 
0.06 
20.10 
.01 
.01 
.02 
.02 
.02 
.02 
.01 




TABLE 2. Average of Severity Rankings by Sample Group and Type of Vio- 
lence 





Professional 
Graduate 
Undergrad 
Clerical 
Clinic 


Professional 
Graduate 
Undergrad 
Clerical 
Clinic 

88.1 
89.41 
86.2 
89.81 
88.41 
88.41 
83.6 
76.2 
80.4 
74.9 
73.7 
77.1 
78.0 
86.51 
82.7 
77.5 
81.5 
81.3 
66.3 
67.5 
77.5 
72.9 
73.4 
71.8 
67.1 
69.71 
64.6 
71.41 
68.1 
68.2 
61.9 
55.6 
63.6 
54.9 
59.8 
59.3 
75.1 
77.71 
73.8 
77.61 
76.11 
76.11 
69.8 
64.0 
70.3 
63.8 
65.3 
66.4 



cant. Graduate students in the US, however, rated each type of violence 
as significantly more severe than graduate students in Mexico. Women 
in clerical positions in the US rated physical and emotional violence as 
significantly more severe than their counterparts in Mexico, and women 
in the participating clinics in the US rated physical violence as signifi- 
cantly more severe than women in participating clinics in Mexico. 
Overall, group ratings within each country were similar. In the US, 
graduate students and clerical workers had the highest severity ratings, 
followed by clinic patients, professionals, and undergraduates. Women 
in clerical positions had the highest severity scores for both physical 
and emotional violence, but the lowest scores of all groups for sexual 
violence. Undergraduates had the lowest severity scores for physical 
and emotional violence, but had the second highest severity scores for 
sexual violence. However, the only within-country contrast that reached 
statistical significance was a higher rating for sexual violence among 
graduate compared to professional women (p = .047). 
In Mexico, undergraduates had the highest severity ratings, followed 
by professionals, clinic patients, graduate students, then clerical work- 
ers. This pattern is almost directly opposite to the pattern in the US. Un- 
dergraduates had the highest ratings for sexual and emotional violence 
and the second highest ratings for physical violence. Only two contrasts 
reached statistical significance: undergraduates rated sexual violence as 
significantly higher than graduates (p = 0.05); and professionals rated 
physical violence as more severe than clinic patients (p = 0.04). 
Responses to Individual Items. Table 3 summarizes for each item the 
mean severity score on a scale of one to 100, the calibrated logit value, 
and each item’s rank with one indicating the item ranked as most severe 
by the Rasch model. For the calibrated logit values, increasing negative 
values indicate increasing severity. Women in the US assigned a higher 
average severity score than women in Mexico to 23 of the 26 domestic 
abuse indicators, and among these 23 items 20 of the differences were 
statistically significant. When adjusted by the Rasch model, calibrated 
logit scores indicate that US women rated 24 of the 26 items as more se- 
vere than women in Mexico. Differences in comparisons between aver- 
age and logit values occur because the calibrated values control for 
respondent consistency. The logit values thus remove error due to aber- 
rant or highly influential responses. 
Women from both the US and Mexico ranked being shot with a gun 
as the most severe event, although US women assigned this event a 
higher severity value (US logit = 23.1; Mexico logit = 21.20). Being 
attacked with a switchblade, knife, or machete was ranked as the second 































most severe event in both countries, and US women again assigned a 
higher severity value (US logit = 22.59; Mexico logit = 20.89). The 
item with the third highest ranking among US women was being choked 
(logit = 21.74) and among Mexican women was being threatened with 
a gun (logit = 20.87). 
A partner becoming jealous or suspicious of friends was ranked as 
the least severe item by women in both countries, but this was one of 
only two items with a higher severity value among women in Mexico 
(US logit = 0.29; Mexico logit = 0.24). Being insulted by a partner was 
ranked as the second least severe event among US women and was the 
only other event to receive a higher severity value among women in 
Mexico (US logit = 0.01; Mexico logit = 20.01). Mexican women 
ranked a partner hitting a wall or furniture as the second least severe 
event. 
Being kicked by a partner led to the greatest difference in ranking. 
Although this event was ranked as 5th most severe among Mexican 
women but 12th most severe among US women, US women assigned a 
higher severity value (US logit = 21.20; Mexico logit = 20.81). Items 
with rank order differences of five or greater that were ranked as more 
severe by Mexican than US women include being humiliated or scorned 
(US rank = 23; Mexico rank = 17) and a partner demanding sex against 
their partner’s will (US rank = 14; Mexico rank = 8). Items with rank or- 
der differences of five or greater but assigned a higher rank by US than 
Mexican women include being hit in the abdomen (US rank = 6; Mex- 
ico rank = 12), being hit with a stick, belt, or domestic object (US rank = 
6; Mexico rank = 10), and using physical force to have sex against their 
partner’s will (US rank = 4; Mexico rank = 9). However, US women as- 
signed a higher severity value for each of these items with differences in 
rank order of five or more. 
Figure 1 shows the calibrated Rasch logit scores from the US plotted 
against those from Mexico. The solid diagonal line represents agree- 
ment in the severity value between the two countries. The calibrated 
values which lie in the bottom right half of the graph indicate a higher 
severity value among women in the US and those in the upper left indi- 
cate a higher severity value among women in Mexico. The figure 
clearly demonstrates that women in the US consistently assigned higher 
calibrated severity values to most of the items. The exceptions to this 
trend are a partner who becomes jealous or suspicious of friends and be- 
ing insulted. 
The responses show a distinct linear trend represented by the dotted 
line, which is a regression of the plotted values. This regression indi- 
cates that there is agreement among women in both countries in the rela- 
tive ranking of severity among the items, but that as the perceived 
severity increases, the calibrated value assigned by women in the US 
becomes proportionately higher than those assigned by women in Mex- 
ico. 

This survey indicates that women in the US perceived intimate part- 
ner violence indicators as more severe than women in Mexico, although 
women in both countries generally ranked the items in similar patterns. 
In each country, physical violence was perceived as the most severe, 
followed by sexual and then emotional violence. 
Overall, patterns of responses by the different groups of women were 
similar between the two countries. The exceptions to this were graduate 
students (in which US graduate students ranked each type of violence as 
more severe than Mexican graduate students) clerical workers (in which 



k 
i 
l 
l 
k 
i 
h 
i 
h 
i 
h 
i 
h 
i 




















US women rated physical and emotional violence as more severe), and 
clinic patients (in which US women rated physical violence as more se- 
vere). Comparisons of group responses within countries showed very 
few differences. These group patterns indicate that differences between 
countries are not driven by any specific group, although graduate stu- 
dents may have the strongest role in predicting differences, and that 
group responses within countries are consistent. 
Intimate partner violence, as a public health issue, is not as widely 
discussed among the general public in Mexico as it is in the US (Diaz 
Olavarrieta and Sotelo, 1996: Ramirez Rodriguez and Patino Guerra, 
1996). Investigators in Mexico have noted that the combination of a 
scarcity of information and lack of recognition on behalf of public insti- 
tutions have created an environment with little or no social supports for 
victims (Bedregal et al., 1991; Duarte and Gonzaalez, 1994; Riiquer et 
al., 1996). This lack of information could account in part for the large 
variation in severity scores as well as lower perceptions of severity. 
Los Angeles, with the largest Mexican population outside of Mexico 
City, is highly influenced by Mexican social and cultural norms. Yet 
these norms must mix with different public messages and a different 
structure of social and health services. Health care and service providers 
must take cultural beliefs and perceptions into account when assessing 
and treating victims of abuse (Campbell et al., 2000; Spitz and Marks, 
2000). Screening surveys and tools that are used in multicultural set- 
tings should be adequately calibrated to be appropriate for a range of 
abuse perceptions. If one culture’s general set of beliefs assigns lower 
severity to events indicating abuse, it is possible that health care provid- 
ers may underestimate the actual level of abuse suffered by individuals. 
For example, this study indicates that women from Mexico may per- 
ceive events of abuse as less severe, and in turn may report them as less 
severe when responding to screening tools. One approach to sensitizing 
such tools would be to set a range of thresholds indicating abuse which 
can be adjusted according to known cultural perceptions of abuse. 
Researchers and policymakers must also be aware of how cultural 
contexts may affect responses to abuse and access of services. Women 
from cultures that fail to recognize intimate partner violence as a public 
health issue or that have a high tolerance for abuse against women may 
be less likely to seek services. Providers should work within cultural 
groups to find appropriate avenues to introduce interventions in these 
populations, and information about the perceptions of abuse within cul- 
tural groups will aid in this process (Rodriguez, 1999). 


This study includes a small sample of women from both sampled ar- 
eas and cannot be generalized to all women. The sample was not ran- 
domly drawn, which further weakens the ability to extrapolate to larger 
populations. These data do not represent regional variations within each 
country. Although the sample is limited, this is the first systematic ex- 
amination of differences in the perception of abuse among women. The 
methodologic approach is appropriate for such a sample, and the Rasch 
model indicates a high degree of internal validity and consistency 
within the responses. 
These findings indicate that there are differences in the overall per- 
ception of severity of abuse in the sample included in this study. Future 
research within the Mexican and Mexican-American population, as 
well as research including other cultural groups, would be valuable to 
further describe the relationship between culture and perceptions of 
abuse. Studies examining the relationship between acculturation, vic- 
timization, and perceptions of abuse could further clarify the role of cul- 
ture in intimate partner violence. 

Abbott J., Johnson R., Koziol-McLain J., Lowenstein S.R. 1995. Domestic violence 
against women. Incidence and prevalence in an emergency department population. 
JAMA 273(22):1763-1767. 


Andrich D. Rasch Models for Measurement. 1988. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Arbuckle J., Olson L., Howard M., Brillman J., Anctil C., Sklar D. 1996. Safe at home? 
Domestic violence and other homicides among women in New Mexico. Annals of 
Em Med 27(2):210-215. 
Bash K.L., Jones F. 1994. Domestic violence in American. NCMJ, 55(9): 400-403. 
Bedregal X., Saucedo I., Ríquer F. 1991. Hilos, nudos y colores en la lucha contra la 

Caetano R., Medina Mora M.E. 1988. Acculturation and drinking among people of 
Mexican descent in Mexico and the United States. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
49(5):462-471. 


Campbell J.C., Moracco K.E., Saltzman L.E. 2000. Future directions for violence 
against women and reproductive health: Science, prevention and action. Maternal 
and Child Health Journal 4(2):149-154. 










Griffith J., Villavicencio S. 1985. Relationships among acculturation, sociodemo- 
graphic characteristics and social supports in Mexican American adults. Hispanic 
Journal of Behavioral Sciences 7(1):75-92. 
Guttman L. 1944. A basis for scaling qualitative data. Amer Sociological Rev 9:139-150. 
Holck S.E., Warren C.W., Smith J.C., Rochat R.W. 1984. Alcohol consumption 
among Mexican American and Anglo women: Results of a survey along the U.S.- 
Mexico border. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 45(2):149-154. 
Kaufman Kantor G., Jasinski J.L., Aldarondo E. 1994. Sociocultural status and inci- 
dence of marital violence in Hispanic families. Violence and Victims 9(3):207-222. 
Masters G.M. 1982. A Rasch model for partial credit scoring. Psychometrika 47: 









Ríquer F., Saucedo I., Bedolla P. 1996. Violencia hacia la mujer: un asunto de salud 
pública. In: Langer, Ana (ed). La salud de la mujer mexicana. Mexico City: The 
Population Council. pp. 316-328. 






Straus M.A., Smith C. 1990. Violence in Hispanic Families in the United States: Inci- 
dence Rates and Structural Interpretations. In Straus M.A. & Gelles R.J. (eds): 
Physical Violence in American Families. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Pub- 
lishers, pp. 341-367. 




Torres S. 1987. Hispanic-American battered women: Why consider cultural differ- 
ences? Response. Nursing Network on Violence Against Women 10(3):20-21. 
Torres S. 1991. A comparison of wife abuse between two cultures: Perceptions, atti- 



Tucker L.R. 1953. Scales minimizing the importance of reference groups. In Proceed- 
ings of the 1952 Invitational Conference on Testing Problems. Princeton, NJ: Edu- 
cational Testing Service. 


Wright B.D., Stone M.H. 1979. Best Test Design. Chicago: MESA Press. 
Wright B.D., Masters G.N. 1982. Rating Scale Analysis. Chicago: MESA Press. 
