Matern Child Health J (2012) 16:1820–1827 
DOI 10.1007/s10995-011-0928-0 
Assessing Pregnancy Intention and Associated Risks in Pregnant 
Adolescents 

Published online: 10 December 2011 
(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011 
Abstract Unintended pregnancy and associated behav- 
iors may play a substantial role in the increased risk of 
adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes associated with 
teen pregnancy. We evaluate a multi-dimensional measure 
of pregnancy intention among pregnant adolescents and 
quantify the association between intention dimensions and 
adverse outcomes and risk behaviors. Pregnancy intention 
measures were examined in a cohort of 300 pregnant 
adolescent women. We considered 18 items assessing 
elements of pregnancy intention including pregnancy 
planning, timing, emotional response, and readiness. Latent 
class analysis was performed to identify dimensions of 
pregnancy intention. Parsimonious scores were created by 
minimizing the number of covariates while maintaining 
substantial agreement with the latent class. Associations 
between intention measures and prenatal care, risk behav- 
iors, and pregnancy outcomes were quantiﬁed using mul- 
tivariable logistic regression. Two constructs of pregnancy 
intention were identiﬁed: planning and emotional readi- 
ness. Compared with emotionally ready adolescents, ado- 
lescents categorized as not emotionally ready had an 
increased odds of inadequate prenatal care (OR = 2.70, 
95% CI:1.27–5.72), delayed prenatal care (OR = 2.54, 
the 
95% CI:1.27–5.09), and self-reported depression at 
M. G. Phipps (cid:2) A. P. Nunes 
Departments of Community Health and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA 
M. G. Phipps (&) (cid:2) A. P. Nunes (&) 
Women and Infants Hospital, 101 Dudley Street, Providence, 
RI 02905, USA 
e-mail: mphipps@wihri.org 
A. P. Nunes 
e-mail: apnunes@wihri.org 


time of 
(OR = 2.21, 95% 
CI:1.03–4.77). Pregnancy planning was not associated with 
adverse pregnancy risk factors or outcomes. Among preg- 
nant adolescents, emotional readiness for pregnancy and 
parenting was inversely associated with known risk factors 
for adverse pregnancy outcomes, suggesting that emotional 
readiness rather than pregnancy planning may be the more 
pertinent intention construct for adolescents. 
Keywords Adolescent (cid:2) Pregnancy in adolescence (cid:2) 
Pregnancy unplanned (cid:2) Pregnancy unwanted (cid:2) 
Pregnancy intention 

Despite a decline in the rates of teen pregnancy from 1991 
to 2005, teen birth rates rose in two consecutive years, 
2006 and 2007 [1], and the United States continues to rank 
highest among industrialized countries for births to teen 
mothers [2–4]. Risks associated with adolescent pregnancy 
include poor maternal weight gain, preterm birth, preg- 
nancy induced hypertension, low birth weight, and neo- 
natal death [2, 5–8]. Within the population of childbearing 
adolescents, risks vary by age, with the youngest mothers 
having the highest risks of preterm delivery and infant 
mortality [5, 9–12]. Unintended pregnancy, a signiﬁcant 
risk factor for adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes [6], 
may play a substantial role in the increased risks associated 
with teen pregnancy. Although most teen pregnancies are 
considered unplanned or unintended [2, 4, 13], the concept 
of ‘‘unintended pregnancy’’ has been variably deﬁned and 
quantiﬁed [14]. Pregnancy intention is recognized as a 
multi-dimensional construct including elements of ‘‘tim- 
ing,’’ ‘‘planning,’’ ‘‘happiness,’’ and ‘‘wantedness’’ [14, 


15]; however, prior studies have not assessed risks asso- 
intention among 
ciated with speciﬁc dimensions of 
adolescents. 
In this study, we evaluate multiple constructs of preg- 
nancy intention in a group of pregnant adolescents 
attending their ﬁrst prenatal care visit. To strengthen and 
validate our understanding of these measures, we examine 
the association between measures of pregnancy intention 
and demographic, health behavior, and pregnancy history 
relevance is assessed through 
characteristics. Clinical 
quantifying associations between pregnancy intention 
measures and adverse pregnancy outcomes and risk factors. 

We assessed pregnancy intention measures in a cohort of 
300 pregnant adolescent women [16]. This study was 
approved by the Women and Infants Hospital Institutional 
Review Board in December 2001. Informed consent was 
obtained from the participant and if the participant was 
younger than 18 years old, consent was obtained from her 
guardian with assent of the minor (participant). Participant 
recruitment occurred during their ﬁrst prenatal care visit to 
the Women and Infants Hospital Women’s Primary Care 
Center, Providence, RI between March 2002 and February 
2005. To be eligible for inclusion, women had to be less 
than 24 weeks gestation at recruitment, have an estimated 
date of delivery before their 20th birthday, be able to 
provide informed consent, and be able to speak and read 
English or Spanish. Trained research assistants interviewed 
all participants in a private setting. The 30-min structured 
interview included questions about 
the participant’s 
life plans, social supports, 
demographic characteristics, 
peer and family relationships, ﬁnancial support, behavioral 
risks, and medical history. In cases where a participant’s 
answers raised a concern about safety or depression, the 
participant was referred to social services for evaluation 
and management. This notiﬁcation practice was clearly 
explained to the participant as part of the informed consent 
process. 
We considered 18 items assessing elements of preg- 
nancy intention including planning, timing, wantedness, 
emotional response, and readiness. The survey included 
validated questions where available and where not avail- 
able content-relevant questions were assessed for face 
validity. The surveys underwent a process of review and 
revision that included both clinical experts and age-rele- 
vant volunteers. Pregnancy planning was assessed by ask- 
ing participants to indicate their level of agreement with 
the following statements: ‘‘I wanted to get pregnant’’, ‘‘I 
have been trying to get pregnant for a while’’, and ‘‘I have 
been hoping to get pregnant’’. Desired timing of pregnancy 
was assessed by asking ‘‘When did you want to be preg- 
nant?’’ (coded as now, later, never), ‘‘How do you feel 
about being pregnant now?’’ (coded as wanted pregnancy 
now or sooner, do not know, wanted pregnancy later or 
never) and ‘‘What did you think the best age would be for 
you to have your ﬁrst child?’’(coded as current age or 
younger, 1–2 years older, or greater than 2 years older). 
Pregnancy wantedness was assessed by asking respondents 
to report 
their level of agreement with the following 
statements: ‘‘For me, in my life, this is a good time to be 
pregnant’’ and ‘‘I want 
this time’’. 
Emotional response was assessed by asking participants 
‘‘How did you feel emotionally?’’ (angry, happy, scared, 
confused, excited, worried, or sad), ‘‘How do you feel 
about having a baby at this time?’’ (very glad, somewhat 
glad, do not know, a little unhappy, or very unhappy), and 
‘‘How do you feel about having a baby?’’ (scale from 1 to 
10; 1 being unhappy and 10 being happiest ever). Preg- 
nancy readiness was assessed by asking respondents to rate 
their level of agreement with the following statement: ‘‘I 
am ready to have a baby now’’. 

We conducted exploratory latent class analyses to 
identify dimensions of pregnancy intention using SAS Proc 
LCA [17]. The number of classes was determined through 
minimization of the Bayesian Information Criterion. The 
LCA procedure estimated latent class parameters using the 
expectation–maximization algorithm where the conver- 
gence criterion was deﬁned as a maximum absolute devi- 
ation of 0.000001. We created parsimonious scores to 
capture the dimensions identiﬁed using the latent class 
analysis with a stepwise elimination process. The process 
was initiated by quantifying responses to individual ques- 
tions and obtaining the sum of all relevant intention vari- 
ables to produce a saturated score. Next, we eliminated the 
variable which least 
impacted the observed agreement 
between the saturated scores and the latent class dimen- 
sions. We repeated the elimination step to minimize the 
number of variables in the scores while maintaining a 
substantial 
level of agreement with the latent classes. 
Substantial agreement was deﬁned as a weighted kappa 
exceeding 0.7. 
Adverse pregnancy outcomes for the prospective anal- 
ysis of pregnancy intention included preterm delivery 
(gestational age \37 weeks), low birth weight (\2,500 g), 
pregnancy complications, and operative delivery. Trained 
research assistants reviewed prenatal and delivery records 
to identify gestational age at delivery, birth weight, preg- 
nancy complications, and mode of delivery. Operative 
delivery included vacuum-assisted vaginal, forcep-assisted 
vaginal, and cesarean delivery (primary or repeat). Pres- 
ence of a pregnancy complication was identiﬁed by med- 
ical record indication of pregnancy induced hypertension, 
pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, preterm delivery, 



preterm premature rupture of membrane, 
intrauterine 
growth restriction, or spontaneous abortion. We had 
insufﬁcient power to examine individual pregnancy com- 
plications, consequently we created a binary indicator 
representing the occurrence of at least one complication. 
In addition to the adverse pregnancy outcomes, we 
examined the following potential risk factors: inadequate 
prenatal care, delayed ﬁrst prenatal care visit, no prenatal 
vitamin use prior to ﬁrst prenatal care visit, recent smoking, 
drinking since pregnant, recent drug use, and self reported 
depression. Prenatal and delivery records were reviewed to 
determine the number of prenatal care visits and the gesta- 
tional age at ﬁrst visit. The Kotelchuck Adequacy of Prenatal 
Care Utilization Index was calculated from the month of ﬁrst 
prenatal visit, the number of visits, and gestational age at 
delivery [18]. For the purpose of this analysis, the adequacy 
of prenatal care was coded as adequate or inadequate. 
Delayed prenatal care was deﬁned as a ﬁrst prenatal care visit 
occurring after 13 weeks of gestation. Recent smoking was 
deﬁned as smoking at least one cigarette within the 6-months 
prior to the interview. Drinking since pregnant was deter- 
mined by comparing self reported weeks since last drink to 
the gestational age at the time of interview. If the last drink 
was consumed after 2 weeks of gestation, participants were 
categorized as drinking since pregnant. Recent drug use was 
assessed by asking ‘‘Just before you found out you were 
pregnant, were you using any drugs?’’ Assessment of 
depression was based on participants’ response to the ques- 
tion ‘‘Do you feel you are depressed?’’ 
All analyses were performed with SAS version 9.1 (SAS 
Institute; Cary, NC). Descriptive covariates were summarized 
by pregnancy intention dimensions using cross tabulations 
and omnibus chi-square tests. To assess construct validity of 
the parsimonious scores, we examined the associations 
between intention and contraceptive use near the time of 
conception (yes/no) and consideration of abortion. Associa- 
tions between pregnancy intention dimensions and adverse 
pregnancy risk factors and outcomes were quantiﬁed using 
odds ratios from unadjusted and multivariable adjusted 
logistic regressions. Adjusted regressions simultaneously 
modeled each of the identiﬁed intention dimensions. Addi- 
tional covariates were selected for inclusion in the multivar- 
iable model if their inclusion altered the pregnancy intention 
measures of association by more than 10%. Due to the het- 
erogeneity of the outcomes assessed in this study, separate 
multivariable models were developed for each outcome. 

The participants ranged in age from 12 to 19 years old, 
with 21% under 16 years of age. Most were currently 
enrolled in school (53%) and unmarried (93%) at the time 

of their ﬁrst prenatal visit. For analyses of preterm birth, 
twenty-four 
low birth weight, and operative delivery, 
adolescents were excluded due to pregnancy loss or ter- 
mination (n = 7), delivery at an outside hospital (n = 13), 
or being lost to follow-up (n = 4). 
The latent class analysis identiﬁed four classes of 
pregnancy intention. Based on the response probabilities 
within latent class categories and review of response pat- 
terns, we characterized the classes as a 2-level measure of 
planning and timing (hereafter referred to as planning) and 
a 3-level measure of emotional response and readiness 
(hereafter referred to as emotional readiness). Observed 
classes included (1) planned and emotionally ready, (2) 
unplanned and emotionally ready, (3) unplanned and dis- 
crepant emotional readiness, and (4) unplanned and not 
emotionally ready. The parsimonious score for ‘‘planning’’ 
had substantial agreement with the latent class planning 
dimension (kappa = 0.84) and included the items ‘‘when 
did you want to get pregnant?’’ and ‘‘I have been trying to 
get pregnant’’. Pregnancies were categorized as unplanned 
if respondents disagreed with the statement ‘‘I have been 
trying to get pregnant’’, reported that they never wanted to 
become pregnant, or were unsure how to respond to the 
statement 
‘‘I have been trying to get pregnant’’ and 
reported that they wanted to get pregnant at later time. The 
parsimonious score for emotional readiness had substantial 
agreement with the latent class dimensions of emotional 
readiness (weighted kappa = 0.74) and included items 
‘‘How did you feel emotionally?’’ and ‘‘I am ready to have 
a baby.’’ Participants were identiﬁed as ‘‘emotionally 
ready’’ if they reported being happy in response to preg- 
nancy and agreed with the statement ‘‘I am ready to have a 
baby’’. Those who were unhappy and agreed with being 
ready or happy and disagreed with being ready were cat- 
egorized as ‘‘discrepant emotional readiness’’. Those who 
reported being unhappy in response to their pregnancy and 
disagreed or were unsure about the statement ‘‘I am ready 
to have a baby’’ were categorized as being ‘‘not emotion- 
ally ready’’. Using the parsimonious scores allowed us to 
assess both classes of pregnancy intention using only 4 of 
the 18 questions included in the latent class analysis. 
Demographic, reproductive, and behavioral covariate 
distributions were examined by level of the planning and 
readiness scores (Table 1). Participants with pregnancies 
characterized as ‘‘planned’’ (n = 41) were older than par- 
characterized as 
ticipants whose pregnancies were 
‘‘unplanned’’ (n = 259). Prior pregnancy was reported by 
51% of those with planned pregnancies and 26% of those 
with unplanned pregnancies. Participants with planned 
pregnancies also reported more sexual partners and sexu- 
ally transmitted diseases as compared to those with 
unplanned 
as 
‘‘emotionally ready’’ (n = 133) reported greater reliance 






















Planned 
(n = 41) 
n (%) 
Unplanned 
(n = 259) 
n (%) 

































































2–3 
[3 









10–50 
[50 
































Ready 
(n = 133) 
n (%) 
Discrepant 
(n = 111) 
n (%) 
Not Ready 
(n = 56) 
n (%) 
































































































0.002 
\0.001 







0.529 
\0.001 







on self or partner’s earnings as compared to those who 
were categorized as ‘‘discrepant emotional 
readiness’’ 
(n = 111) or ‘‘not emotionally ready’’ (n = 56). 
We examined the distributions of responses to the 
questions ‘‘have you considered having an abortion’’ and 
‘‘Were you using birth control when you became pregnant’’ 



to assess the construct validity of the planning and emo- 
tional readiness metrics. None of the adolescents catego- 
rized as a planned and 25% (n = 64) of those categorize as 
an unplanned pregnancy reported considering an abortion. 
Emotional readiness was similarly associated with con- 
sidering abortion; 8% (n = 11) of emotionally ready, 26% 
(n = 29) of discrepant, and 43% (n = 24) of not emo- 
tionally ready considered abortion. Birth control use at the 
time of pregnancy was reported by 7% (n = 3) of planned 
pregnancies and 25% (n = 64) of unplanned pregnancies. 
We present unadjusted and multivariable adjusted odds 
ratios for the association between our intention measures 
and known risk factors for adverse pregnancy outcomes 
(Table 2). After adjustment for potential confounders, the 
estimates for the associations between pregnancy planning 
and the known risk factors were not statistically signiﬁcant; 
however, a suggestive association was observed between 
planning and delayed prenatal care (OR = 2.36, 95% 
CI = 1.00–5.61). 
The analysis of emotional readiness and risk factors 
revealed signiﬁcant associations. When compared with 
those categorized as emotionally ready, pregnant teens who 
were not emotionally ready had 2.7 (95% CI = 1.27–5.72) 
times the odds of having inadequate prenatal care and 2.5 
(95% CI = 1.27–5.09) times the odds of having delayed 
prenatal care. The measures of association for recent 
smoking and drug use were not stable enough to precisely 
quantify the magnitude of the effect; however, the mag- 
nitudes of the observed associations suggest that those 
categorized as not emotionally ready had increased odds of 
recent smoking and drinking. Participants who were not 
emotionally ready had 2.2 times the odds of reporting to be 
depressed as compared to those who were ready (95% 
CI = 1.03–4.77). None of the effect estimates in the 















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORa 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 

















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORc 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 


Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 

























Sample size varies between analyses due to availability of outcome data 
a Models include planning, readiness, age, STD history, and number of sexual partners 
b Models include planning, readiness, and age 
c Models include planning, readiness, age, and number of sexual partners 

















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORa 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORb 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORa 
















Unadjusted OR 
Adjusted ORc 










a Models include planning, readiness, age, and STD history 
b Models include planning, readiness, and age 
c Models include planning, readiness, age, and education 
analysis of adverse pregnancy outcomes approached sta- 
tistical signiﬁcance (Table 3). 

Previous studies have suggested that current measures of 
pregnancy intention do not adequately capture emotional 
and psychological aspects of pregnancy intention [15, 19]. 
In our study investigating pregnancy intention among 
adolescents, we took a broad approach to pregnancy 
intention and delineated two signiﬁcant dimensions of 
intention representing emotional readiness and planning. 
The dimensions were distilled into accessible component 
questions that have the potential to be used in clinical 
settings after they have been further evaluated. While 
neither of these dimensions of pregnancy intention were 
statistically associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes in 
our cohort, we did observe signiﬁcant associations between 
our pregnancy intention metrics and known risk factors for 
poor outcomes. Of the two dimensions of pregnancy 
readiness was more 
intention we assessed, emotional 
strongly associated with risk factors for adverse pregnancy 
outcomes. Pregnant 
teens identiﬁed as not emotionally 
ready were at increased risk for delayed prenatal care, 
inadequate prenatal care utilization, delayed use of prenatal 
vitamins, recent smoking, recent drinking, recent drug use 
and depression. This suggests that a traditional concept of 
pregnancy intention may be less important than emotional 
readiness among adolescents. 
Regardless of pregnancy planning or emotional readi- 
ness, the majority of adolescents included in this study 
were not using contraception at the time of pregnancy. The 
most common reasons for not contracepting among our 
study participants included ‘‘I didn’t think I could get 
pregnant’’ (46%) and ‘‘I didn’t want to use birth control’’ 
(52%). Though not directly asked, we believe that most had 
access to contraception based on the observation that 80% 
reported using contraception in the past. Reduction of 
unintended pregnancies in this adolescent population may 
be attained through providing further education on fertility 
and by better understanding factors contributing to the 
large percentage of adolescents who reported that they did 
not want to use birth control. 
The pregnancy intention dimensions evaluated in this 
study were intended to help develop component questions 
that could be used to screen high-risk teens in a clinical 
setting. Though the initial 
intention dimensions were 
identiﬁed using a total of 18 questions, we were able to 
develop parsimonious scores relying on a smaller subset of 
questions. To assess pregnancy planning and emotional 
readiness, patients need only to respond to four questions 
(‘‘When did you want to get pregnant?’’, ‘‘I have been 
trying to get pregnant’’, ‘‘How did you feel emotionally?’’, 
and ‘‘I am ready to have a baby.’’). Measures of planning 
and readiness were correlated with use of birth control and 
consideration of abortion, providing an indication of the 
validity of these constructs. Future work should aim to 
replicate the identiﬁed dimensions in other adolescent 
populations. 
The adolescent women included in this study may not be 
representative of all adolescents at risk for pregnancy. This 
study only enrolled pregnant teens attending prenatal care 
prior to 24 weeks of gestation, thus this study does not 



capture pregnant teens intending to terminate their preg- 
nancy, pregnant teens with delayed prenatal care, or non- 
pregnant teens. Prior studies in the general population of 
adolescent women have reported that 
less than 5% of 
adolescents want to become pregnant [20]. In our study 
among adolescents seeking prenatal care, we observed that 
approximately 15% of pregnancies were planned and 40% 
of pregnant adolescents were emotionally ready. In addi- 
tion to focusing on a study population in which intention 
and readiness are likely to be higher than in the general 
population, participants may have selected response 
options which were most socially appropriate. If this 
occurred, we hypothesize that this would lead to an over- 
estimation of pregnancy intention while biasing the asso- 
ciation between adverse outcomes and pregnancy intention 
towards the null. The perception of intention and the 
association between pregnancy intention and adverse out- 
comes may differ by ethnicity. Our study sample was 
drawn from a source population in which a large proportion 
of teen mothers were Hispanic in origin. We believe that 
the metrics and associations reported in this paper are 
informative to external populations; however, caution 
should be taken when making inference to populations with 
notably different ethnicity distributions. 


Our analyses provides some evidence to support the 
hypothesis that adolescents who are not emotionally ready 
for their pregnancy have an increased risk of prenatal 
depression. However, 
to note that our 
assessment of this association is cross-sectional in nature 
and that both depression and readiness are assessed relying 
on self reported measures. Given these limitations, the 
reported association between readiness and depression 
needs to be interpreted with some caution. Future studies 
should aim to assess this association in a prospective 
design with diagnosed depression to conﬁrm our results. 
Our ability to detect associations between the intention 
dimensions and adverse pregnancy outcomes may have 
been hindered by unmeasured confounding and a lack of 
outcome speciﬁcity. We observed that adolescents cate- 
gorized as having a planned pregnancy were more likely to 
have had a prior miscarriage. This observation is consistent 
with what has been observed in population based studies 
[21] and suggests that adolescents with planned and 
unplanned pregnancies may differ in their baseline risk for 
adverse pregnancy outcomes in the current pregnancy. We 
considered prior miscarriage as a potential confounder; 
however, data on other prior adverse pregnancy outcomes 
were not available. Additionally, we had insufﬁcient power 
to examine individual adverse pregnancy outcomes such as 
low birth weight, pre-eclampsia, IUGR, fetal anomalies, 
spontaneous abortion, or low Apgar score. We combined 
several events to create the pregnancy complications out- 
come; however, the heterogeneity of events included in our 

combined pregnancy complications outcome may limit our 
ability to observe a valid measure of association. 
This study identiﬁed emotional readiness as a signiﬁcant 
predictor of risk factors related to prenatal care, social 
behaviors, and mental health. Furthermore, we observed 
the majority of adolescents reporting unintended 
that 
pregnancy were not using any method of contraception. 
Identifying those adolescents who are not emotionally 
ready may be an important screening tool in identifying 
and intervening in high risk adolescent pregnancies. Future 
research is needed with sufﬁcient power to assess the 
association between these pregnancy intention measures 
and adverse pregnancy outcomes and to further validate 
these measures in other adolescent populations. Further- 
more, subsequent studies should aim to extend the methods 
implemented in this paper to non-pregnant adolescents and 
pregnant adolescents intending to terminate their preg- 
nancy. Contributions to our understanding of the relevant 
components of pregnancy intention in teens may reveal 
intervention opportunities to reduce high risk behaviors 
and prevent adverse maternal and birth outcomes. 
Acknowledgments This study was partially funded through a grant 
from the Brown University Ofﬁce of the Vice President of Research 
and the Rhode Island Foundation. 
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to 
report. 

1. Heron, M., Sutton, P. D., Xu, J., Ventura, S. J., Strobino, D. M., 
& Guyer, B. (2007). Annual summary of vital statistics. Pediat- 
rics, 125(1), 4–15. 


3. Darroch, J. E., Frost, J. J., Singh, S. S., & The Study Team. 
(2001). Teenage sexual and reproductive behavior in devel- 
oped countries: Can more progress be made. New York, NY: 
Guttmacher Institute. Retrieved November 28, 2011, from http:// 
www.guttmacher.org/pubs/eurosynth_rpt.pdf. 
4. Boonstra, H. (2002). Teenage pregnancy: Trends and lessons learned. 
New York, NY: Guttmacher Institute. Retrieved November 28, 2011, 
from http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/tgr/05/1/gr050107.html. 
5. Fraser, A. M., Brockert, J. E., & Ward, R. H. (1995). Association 
of young maternal age with adverse reproductive outcomes. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 332(17), 1113–1117. 
6. Brown, S. S., Eisenberg, L., & Institute of Medicine (U.S.). 
(1995). Committee on Unintended Pregnancy. The best inten- 
tions: unintended pregnancy and the well-being of children and 
families. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
7. Felice, M. E., Feinstein, R. A., Fisher, M. M., et al. (1999). 
Adolescent pregnancy—Current trends and issues: 1998. Pedi- 
atrics, 103(2), 516–520. 
8. Joyce, T., Kaestner, R., & Korenman, S. (2000). The stability of 
pregnancy intentions and pregnancy-related maternal behaviors. 
Maternal and Child Health Journal, 4, 171–178. 
9. Menacker, F., Martin, J., MacDorman, M. F., & Ventura, S. J. 
(2004). Births to 10–14 year old mothers, 1990–2002: Trends and 


health outcomes. In: National vital statistics report. Hyattsville, 
MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 
10. Reichman, N. E., & Pagnini, D. L. (1997). Maternal age and birth 
outcomes: Data from New Jersey. Family Planning Perspectives 
29, 268–272, 295. 
11. DuPlessis, H. M., Bell, R., & Richards, T. (1997). Adolescent 
pregnancy: Understanding the impact of age and race on out- 
comes. Journal of Adolescent Health, 20, 187–197. 
12. Phipps, M. G., & Sowers, M. F. (2002). Deﬁning early adolescent 
childbearing. American Journal of Public Health, 92(1), 
125–128. 

teenage pregnancy statistics with 
comparative statistics for women aged 20–24. New York, NY: 
The Alan Guttmacher Institute. 
14. Santelli, J., Rochat, R., Hatﬁeld-Timajchy, K., et al. (2003). The 
measurement and meaning of unintended pregnancy. Perspec- 
tives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 35(2), 94–101. 
15. Santelli, J. S., Lindberg, L. D., Orr, M. G., Finer, L. B., & Spe- 
izer, I. (2009). Toward a multidimensional measure of pregnancy 
intentions: Evidence from the United States. Studies in Family 
Planning, 40(2), 87–100. 
16. White, E., Rosengard, C., Weitzen, S., Meers, A., & Phipps, M. 
G. (2006). Fear of inability to conceive in pregnant adolescents. 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 108(6), 1411–1416. 
17. Lanza, S. T., Collins, L. M., Lemmon, D. R., & Schafer, J. L. 
(2007). PROC LCA: A SAS procedure for latent class analysis. 
Structural Equation Modeling, 14(4), 671–694. 
18. Kotelchuck, M. (1994). The adequacy of prenatal care utilization 
index: its US distribution and association with low birthweight. 
American Journal of Public Health, 84(9), 1486–1489. 
19. Sable, M. R. (1999). Pregnancy intentions may not be a useful 
measure for research on maternal and child health outcomes. 
Family Planning Perspectives, 31(5), 249–250. 
20. Rocca, C. H., Hubbard, A. E., Johnson-Hanks, J., Padian, N. S., & 
Minnis, A. M. (2010). Predictive ability and stability of adoles- 
cents’ pregnancy intentions in a predominantly Latino commu- 
nity. Studies in Family Planning, 41(3), 179–192. 
21. Dott, M., Rasmussen, S. A., Hogue, C. J., & Reefhuis, J. (2010). 
Association between pregnancy intention and reproductive-health 
related behaviors before and after pregnancy recognition, 
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2002. Maternal 
and Child Health Journal, 14, 373–381. 

