Help-Seeking for Child Psychopathology: Pathways to
Informal and Professional Services in The Netherlands
MARIEKE ZWAANSWIJK, PH.D., JAN VAN DER ENDE, M.S., PETER F. M. VERHAAK, PH.D.,
JOZIEN M. BENSING, PH.D., AND FRANK C. VERHULST, M.D.
ABSTRACT
Objective: To devise and test a model describing the process of help-seeking for child psychopathology in professional
and informal service settings. Method: Using structural equation modeling, associations between several help-seeking
stages, and the inﬂuence of child, family, and context characteristics on these stages were investigated in 246 Dutch chil-
dren (4–11 years old) between April 2000 and July 2002. Children were selected for having emotional or behavioral prob-
lems from a representative general practice sample; 68% of the selected children participated. Results: School personnel
played an important role in the process of help-seeking for child psychopathology, in both detecting service need and the
provision of and the referral for help. Although Dutch general practitioners are supposed to be gatekeepers of mental health
care, their role in help-seeking for child psychopathology was limited. Various family characteristics were shown to inﬂu-
ence service need and informal or professional help-seeking. The inﬂuence of child characteristics on the help-seeking
process was limited. Conclusions: Educating parents about child psychopathology and the availability and accessibility of
care, improving general practitioners’ skills in detecting child psychopathology, and direct contact of mental health pro-
fessionals with general practitioners and schools may enhance access to care for children in need. J. Am. Acad. Child
Adolesc. Psychiatry, 2005;44(12):1292–1300. Key Words: mental health services, child, psychopathology, health be-
havior, social support.
The pathway that leads to professional mental health
care for children with psychopathology is paved with
obstacles, causing a discrepancy between the number
of disordered children in the community and those re-
ceiving professional care (Burns et al., 1995; Flisher
et al., 1997; Leaf et al., 1996; Pavuluri et al., 1996; Ver-
hulst and Van der Ende, 1997). Understanding which
factors are involved in the help-seeking process may pro-
vide suggestions on how to increase service use for these
children. A fruitful way to integrate ﬁndings on help-
seeking stages and their determinants is to include them
in one comprehensive model. Although many models
concerning the help-seeking process have been formu-
lated (e.g., Andersen, 1995; Fischer et al., 1983; Gold-
berg and Huxley, 1980, 1992), few speciﬁcally apply to
help-seeking for child and adolescent psychopathology.
A ﬁrst example is the model by Verhulst and Koot
(1992), who have adapted the Goldberg and Huxley
(1980, 1992) model to make it applicable for child
and adolescent help-seeking. In this model, help-seeking
is described as consisting of ﬁve subsequent levels, each
separated by a ﬁlter. The ﬁlters refer to (1) parental prob-
lem recognition and consultation of a general practi-
tioner (GP), (2) problem recognition by the GP, (3)
referral to psychiatric care, and (4) referral to inpatient
psychiatric care. Because general practice is the formal
point of entry into mental health care in the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands, and GPs are supposed
Accepted June 28, 2005.
Dr. Zwaanswijk is with the Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research
(NIVEL), Utrecht, the Netherlands and the Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Dr. Verhaak is with
NIVEL, and Dr. Bensing is with NIVEL and Utrecht University, the Nether-
lands; Dr. Verhulst and J. van der Ende are with the Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Supported by grant 2100.0064 from the Netherlands Organization for Health
Research and Development.
Article Plus (online only) materials for this article appear on the Journal’s Web
site: www.jaacap.com.
Reprint requests to Dr. Marieke Zwaanswijk, NIVEL, P.O. Box 1568, 3500
BN Utrecht, The Netherlands; e-mail: M.Zwaanswijk@nivel.nl.
0890-8567/05/4412–12922005 by the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry.
DOI: 10.1097/01.chi.0000181038.98712.c6
1292
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005

to function as gatekeepers, a central role is attributed
to the GP.
Logan and King (2001) have expanded this model by
including parents’ initial awareness of child problems as
a stage preceding parental problem recognition. Their
deﬁnition of problem recognition explicitly involves
an evaluative element in which parents acknowledge
that the child’s problems are severe enough to require
help-seeking. In this respect, it resembles Andersen’s
(1995) construct of perceived need for help.
The focus on the parental side of the help-seeking
process is broadened by Costello et al. (1998), who
stressed the importance of family, school, and context
in their comprehensive model of access to child mental
health services.
To our knowledge, researchers have thus far only in-
vestigated particular help-seeking stages in isolation
from each other, without testing a help-seeking model
as a whole. Our aim is to combine several existing help-
seeking models and ﬁndings on determinants of help-
seeking into one comprehensive model (Fig. 1). Testing
this model will not only provide insight into the inﬂu-
ence of several determinants on stages of the help-seeking
process but will also clarify the way in which the help-
seeking stages inﬂuence one another.
Our focus is on the parent-mediated pathway to child
mental health care. This does not imply a disregard for
the roles that other adults can play in the help-seeking
process. By including several family- and context-based
determinants, we acknowledge the ecological nature of the
process. Our model does not include adolescent help-
seeking because this is characterized by more autonomy
and is inﬂuenced by different factors than help-seeking
for child psychopathology (Zwaanswijk et al., 2003).
Following Logan and King (2001), the ﬁrst step in
the help-seeking process is assumed to be parents’ initial
awareness that their child shows problematic behaviors
or emotions (parent report of child problems [Fig. 1]),
followed by parents’ need for services. Service need is
deﬁned as the presence of parent-reported child psycho-
pathology
and
associated
functional
impairment
(Brewin et al., 1987). This operationalization is some-
what more objective than previously used measures of
service need, in which parents were directly asked
whether their child was in need of help (e.g., Verhulst
and Van der Ende, 1997).
Based on previous research and theory (Logan and
King, 2001; Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997), the
following variables are expected to be related to service
need: child chronic physical problems, family function-
ing, changes in family structure, single parenthood, the
presence of siblings, and the teacher’s perception of
child psychopathology.
Service need is hypothesized to precede help-seeking,
which is investigated in both professional (general prac-
tice, mental health care) and informal service settings
(teachers, friends/relatives). Because the threshold for
seeking help from friends or relatives is considered to
be lower than for any other kind of service, we assume
that this kind of help-seeking precedes the use of other
services. By including the GP as service provider, the
gatekeeping role of Dutch GPs in the provision of men-
tal health care is acknowledged and explicitly examined.
Help-seeking is assumed to be inﬂuenced by a child’s
gender, age, academic problems, family functioning,
changes in family structure, single parenthood, and mental
health service use by a relative (Briggs-Gowan et al.,
2000; Feehan et al., 1994; Gunther et al., 2003; Jensen
Fig. 1 Theoretical model of the help-seeking process and its determinants.
HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005
1293

et al., 1990; John et al., 1995; Lavigne et al., 1998;
Rickwood and Braithwaite, 1994; Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997; Zahner and Daskalakis, 1997).
Some differentiations regarding the inﬂuence of de-
terminants on the various components of the help-seeking
process are included. First, based on previous results
concerning the importance of the school in the detec-
tion of children with coexisting academic problems and
the provision of care to these children (Verhulst and
Van der Ende, 1997; Zahner and Daskalakis, 1997),
academic problems are expected to affect service need
through teachers’ perceptions of child problems rather
than through parents’ reports of child symptoms and to
be related to school service use only.
Because the acquaintance with a relative who has used
mental health care has been suggested to sensitize parents
to perceive problems in their child (Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997), an association between this variable
and parental report of child problems is expected. Fur-
thermore, mental health care use by a relative is assumed
to inﬂuence help-seeking from friends or relatives only
(Rickwood and Braithwaite, 1994; Verhulst and Van
der Ende, 1997).
Almost all Dutch inhabitants are registered within
general practices, which are accessible to all and close
to the community and provide generalist care. Because
every inhabitant is, in principle, covered by private or
public health insurance, no major ﬁnancial constraints
hamper the availability of care in the Dutch health care
system. As was found for countries with comparable ﬁ-
nancial availability of health care (Gasquet et al., 1997,
1999; Sourander et al., 2001; Verhulst and Van der
Ende, 1997), the socioeconomic indicators included
in our model (education level, income, type of insur-
ance) are expected not to affect service need or use di-
rectly. They are, however, hypothesized to affect the
presence of child psychopathology.
Because of differences between health care systems,
our theoretical model may not be directly applicable
to nations in which health care depends more heavily
on ﬁnancial factors. In these countries, sociodemo-
graphic variables are likely to inﬂuence the help-seeking
process (Briggs-Gowan et al., 2000; Pavuluri et al.,
1996). Some systems also provide the opportunity of
consulting mental health care without GP referral.
Nevertheless, by testing a comprehensive help-seeking
model as a whole instead of investigating its separate
parts, we aim to provide a more generic method for
studying help-seeking, which can be adapted to differ-
ent health care systems.
METHOD
Participants
Our study involved a two-stage procedure. An overview of the
study design and the numbers of respondents for the various stages
of the study is presented in Figure 2. The base population for the
study was derived from the Second Dutch National Survey of Gen-
eral Practice, which examined morbidity and treatment in a repre-
sentative sample of 104 general practices with 195 GPs and 385,461
listed patients between April 2000 and January 2002. A random
sample of the practice population was asked to participate in an ex-
tensive health interview survey. The total response rate was 64.5%.
Participants of this survey were comparable to the practice popula-
tion with respect to gender, age, and place of residence (Westert
et al., 2005).
As part of the interview, 1,319 parents completed the Child Be-
havior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991a). Parents were also
asked permission to send the Teacher’s Report Form (TRF; Achen-
bach, 1991b) to the teacher who was the most familiar with the
child’s functioning. Responses were received from 974 teachers
(180 respondents refused to give permission to contact the teacher,
64 teachers refused to cooperate, 96 teachers did not respond, and
5 children were too young to attend school). Children with available
and missing TRF data were comparable with respect to age, gender,
level of CBCL Total Problems scores, family constellation, and pa-
rental education level.
Parents of children scoring in the deviant range on CBCL or TRF
Total Problems (T ‡ 60) were selected for participation in the sec-
ond stage of the study. The response rate was 68.0%. Children of second-
stage respondents and nonrespondents were comparable with respect to
Fig. 2 Study design and numbers of respondents at various stages of the
study.
ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.
1294
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005

age, gender, and level of CBCL and TRF Total Problems scores. Non-
participating parents were more likely to be living in single-parent families
(16% versus 8%; p = .03) and to have lower education levels (Z = –4.06;
p = .00).
In the second stage (January 2001–July 2002), a standardized psy-
chiatric interview (Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children
[DISC-IV]; Shaffer et al., 2000) was administered to the child’s pri-
mary caregiver to obtain psychiatric diagnoses. Parents were also in-
terviewed about their help-seeking actions.
Measures
CBCL. The CBCL (Achenbach, 1991a) was used to obtain stan-
dardized parents’ reports of children’s problem behaviors during the
preceding 6 months. The CBCL has good reliability and discrim-
inative validity in both American (Achenbach, 1991a) and Dutch
(Verhulst et al., 1996) samples.
TRF. The TRF (Achenbach, 1991b) was used to obtain standard-
ized teachers’ reports of children’s problems during the preceding
6 months. The good reliability and validity of the original TRF
(Achenbach, 1991b) were conﬁrmed for the Dutch version (Ver-
hulst et al., 1997).
NIMH DISC-IV. This structured interview (DISC-IV; Shaffer
et al., 2000) is designed to assess psychiatric disorders and associated
functional impairment in children, using DSM-IV criteria (Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 1994). Sections concerning anxiety dis-
orders, mood disorders, and disruptive behavior disorders were used
to obtain an indication of service need (see ‘‘Statistical Analyses’’).
Help-Seeking Interview. Help-seeking from professional and in-
formal sources in the preceding 12 months and several child, family,
and sociodemographic variables thought to be relevant for under-
standing the help-seeking process (Table 1) were assessed. Parental
education level was scored on an 11-point scale, with 11 being the
highest level. The parent with the highest education level was used to
trichotomize the sample in low (scores 1–3), moderate (scores 4–8),
and high (scores 9–11) education level. Family income was scored
on a 5-point scale. Mean family income (V2,168) was comparable
to the income of the general Dutch population (http://statline.
cbs.nl).
McMaster Family Assessment Device. During the second-stage in-
terview, family functioning was measured by the Family Assessment
Device (FAD) General Functioning scale (Epstein et al., 1983),
which constitutes a reliable and valid global indicator of family func-
tioning (Byles et al., 1988).
Statistical Analyses
Structural equation modeling (AMOS 4.0; Arbuckle and
Wothke, 1999) was used to test the applicability of the theoretical
model (Fig. 1) to our data. Central to this method of analysis is the
notion that complex constructs (latent variables) can only be cap-
tured validly and reliably by using multiple indicators (observed var-
iables). Our model contained six latent variables; all of the other
variables were included as observed variables. CBCL Internalizing
and Externalizing scores represented the latent variable Parent report
of child problems, whereas TRF Internalizing and Externalizing
scores represented the teacher’s report of child problems. For the
latent variable Family functioning, the 12 items of the FAD General
Functioning scale were treated as observed variables. High scores
reﬂect poor family functioning. The latent variable socioeconomic
status (SES) was measured by variables indicating education level,
family income, and type of insurance. Mental health service use
was operationalized by two variables indicating different types of
mental health service use.
The latent variable service need was operationalized by two
DISC-IV variables, which indicated whether the child had any psy-
chiatric diagnosis plus impairment on, respectively, internalizing
(anxiety disorders and mood disorders) or externalizing (disruptive
behavior disorders) diagnoses. Impairment was considered to be
present when at least two of six diagnosis-speciﬁc DISC-IV impair-
ment items indicating moderate or one item indicating severe
personal, social, or academic difﬁculties were present. This opera-
tionalization of need corresponds to the deﬁnition of impairment
as a global rather than diagnosis-speciﬁc concept (Bird et al., 2000).
Because x2 tends to indicate a signiﬁcant probability level as sam-
ple size increases (generally >200) (Schumacker and Lomax, 1996),
other ﬁt indexes were also inspected. A more detailed description of
these indexes is available at www.jaacap.com via the Article Plus
feature. Values of the root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA) <0.05 were considered to indicate a close model ﬁt
(Browne and Cudeck, 1993). Values of the non-normed ﬁt index
(NNFI; Bentler and Bonett, 1980) or Tucker-Lewis coefﬁcient
(TLI; Tucker and Lewis, 1973), close to 1 indicate a very good ﬁt.
RESULTS
To gain insight into the severity of child problems in
our sample, numbers of children with CBCL and TRF
Internalizing and Externalizing scores in the deviant
TABLE 1
Characteristics of Participants
Participants
Characteristics
No.a
Child
Gender
43.9% girls (scored 0);
56.1% boys (scored 1)
246
Age
4–11; mean: 7.73; SD 2.32
246
Academic problems
38.9%
244
Chronic physical
problems
38.4%
245
Family
Presence of siblings
91.9%
246
Single parenthood
8.4%
237
Changes in
family structure
10.2%
245
Mental health
service use by relative
35.1%
245
Sociodemographic context
Type of insurance
53.5% public; 46.5% private
243
Parental education level
13.1% low; 51.0%
moderate; 35.9% high
245
Family income
27.2%, £ V1,849
235
19.1%, V1,850–2,249
26.0%, V2,250–2,649
26.8%, V2,650–3,149
0.9%, ‡ V3,150
a Numbers of respondents for whom data were available.
HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005
1295

range are reported in Table 2. Note that continuous
rather than dichotomous scores on these scales were
used in the structural equation model. Rates of service
need and service use are also reported in Table 2.
Figure 3 depicts, in a simpliﬁed version of Figure 1,
the percentages of parents at various stages of the help-
seeking process, thereby including our assumptions
concerning the sequence of help-seeking stages. For
the sake of clarity, internalizing and externalizing disor-
ders were combined. A total of 180 parents indicated
the presence of deviant internalizing and/or externaliz-
ing problems in their child. To do justice to the notion
that only some parents move from one help-seeking
stage to the next and others stay behind on a previous
level, the percentages in Figure 3 are hierarchically or-
dered. This means that 60 (33.3%) children, who were
regarded as having deviant internalizing and/or exter-
nalizing problems, were also considered to be in need
of help. Twenty percent of children in need of help used
mental health services without consulting a GP, thereby
passing by the gatekeeping role of the Dutch GP.
To increase our understanding of the GP’s gatekeep-
ing role, we investigated pathways to mental health serv-
ices from a retrospective point of view (i.e., with mental
health service use as starting point). Of the 38 parents
using mental health services for their children, 16 (43.2%)
were referred by their GP, whereas 21 (56.8%) ended
up obtaining mental health care for their children
through other pathways (information was not available
for one child). Whereas one third of these parents
reached mental health care directly, two thirds got there
with the help of other service providers, the majority of
which came from school settings (e.g., school physi-
cians, school psychologists, educational support services).
Evaluation of the Structural Equation Model
Our initial theoretical model as depicted in Figure 1
did not yield an adequate ﬁt (model A; x2 = 921.29; df =
496; p < .001; RMSEA = 0.059; NNFI/TLI = 0.957).
To increase model ﬁt, some modiﬁcations were made.
Values of ﬁt indexes for subsequent models in the pro-
cess of improving ﬁt are available at www.jaacap.com
via the Article Plus feature. First, because of the consid-
erable percentage of parents consulting mental health
professionals directly rather than via the GP as gate-
keeper (Fig. 3), the ﬁrst modiﬁcation included adding
a direct link between service need and mental health ser-
vice use (model B). Consequently, nonsigniﬁcant paths
were deleted from the original model one by one (model
C). Finally, modiﬁcation indexes were inspected and
only those with theoretical relevance and that resulted
in a considerable improvement of model ﬁt were im-
puted. Because these indexes cannot be computed with
incomplete data, they were computed for the part of the
sample with complete data (N = 183). These indexes
suggested adding a path from child gender to teacher
report of child problems, and adding correlations be-
tween (1) child age and academic problems, (2) single
parenthood and changes in family structure, (3) single
parenthood and SES, and (4) mental health service use
by relative and family functioning. This signiﬁcantly
increased model ﬁt (model D; x2 = 819.56; df = 516;
p < .001; RMSEA = 0.049; NNFI/TLI = 0.970).
TABLE 2
Frequencies of Deviant Internalizing and Externalizing Problems,
Service Need, and Service Use
Rater
%
No.a
Internalizing problems
P
58.1
143 (246)
T
33.3
69 (207)
Externalizing problems
P
52.8
130 (246)
T
45.4
94 (207)
Internalizing + externalizing problems
P
37.8
93 (246)
T
17.9
37 (207)
Internalizing service need
P
15.0
37 (246)
Externalizing service need
P
20.3
50 (246)
Internalizing + externalizing need
P
6.9
17 (246)
General practice
P
13.1
32 (245)
Mental health care
P
15.4
38 (246)
Teacher
P
28.6
70 (245)
Friends/relatives
P
27.3
67 (245)
Note: P = parent; T = teacher.
a In parentheses are the numbers of respondents for whom data
were available.
Fig. 3 Percentages of parents at various stages of the help-seeking process.
ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.
1296
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005

Although a signiﬁcant x2 normally indicates an inap-
propriate model ﬁt, we still perceive the model as ap-
propriate,
as
indicated
by
other
goodness-of-ﬁt
measures.
The standardized regression weights and correlations
for the structural part of this ﬁnal model are depicted
in Figure 4. To decrease the complexity of this ﬁgure,
parameters associated with the measurement model are
not included. Within the measurement model, factor
loadings for each observed variable were positive and
signiﬁcant at p < .001. Standardized loadings ranged
from 0.35 to 0.85, with a median of 0.59 (see Article
Plus for more details).
DISCUSSION
This study was aimed at investigating in one compre-
hensive model the process of help-seeking for child
psychopathology in both professional and informal ser-
vice settings. By means of structural equation modeling,
characteristics of the child, family, and context were in-
vestigated as determinants of various stages in the help-
seeking process.
In general, structural equation modeling proved to be
a fruitful method for concurrently testing associations
between various stages in the help-seeking process and
their hypothesized determinants. We believe that the
merits of this method are not restricted to countries with
comparable health care systems, but consider it also use-
ful as a more generic approach for clarifying the help-
seeking processes in other countries. Although it is likely
to produce different results depending on the health
care systems in which it is used, a general use of this
approach will increase comparability of results.
Based on their gatekeeping role in the Dutch health
care system, GPs were expected to play a central role in
our model. Contrary to expectation, however, the per-
centages of parents at subsequent stages of the help-
seeking process (Fig. 3), as well as the regression weights
in our help-seeking model (Fig. 4), indicated that only
a minority of children in need of help actually received
help from their GP. The GP’s role as gatekeeper of
mental health care was also limited. These ﬁndings
may be explained by GPs’ limitations in adequately rec-
ognizing psychopathology in young children (Sayal and
Taylor, 2004; Zwaanswijk et al., 2005).
As in many countries, demand for child mental
health care in the Netherlands exceeds supply. Although
the limited availability of mental health services can
partly explain the limited number of children with dis-
orders receiving mental health care in general, it cannot
explain the limited gatekeeping role of the Dutch GP
because parents still managed to ﬁnd their way into
child mental health care, either directly or with the help
of other service providers.
Another possible explanation for parents seeking help
from mental health services without GP referral could
be the fact that these help-seeking actions involved
follow-up consultations for persisting child problems.
In that case, GP referral may have taken place more than
1 year ago and have fallen outside the time range as-
sessed in our study. Of the 21 children who entered
mental health care without GP referral, only 4
(19.0%) had used the same kind of mental health care
in the period before the year of assessment and were
therefore likely to be in long-term contact with these
Fig. 4 Final structural model. Presented are correlations (double-headed ar-
rows) and standardized regression weights (single-headed arrows). Parent report
of child problems, teacher report of child problems, family functioning, socio-
economic status (SES), and mental health service use were included as latent
variables. Parameters associated with the measurement model were not included
to decrease the complexity of the ﬁgure (see Article Plus). *p < .05; **p < .01.
HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005
1297

services. For the remaining 81%, this possibility was
ruled out.
A considerable number of children entered mental
health care with the help of school-based service pro-
viders instead of the GP. During primary education,
most Dutch children are routinely screened for physical
and psychosocial problems by school physicians. This
screening apparently plays an important role in the de-
tection and referral of child psychopathology. In addi-
tion to this, the teacher was found to be an important
source of help. These ﬁndings are in concordance with
previous studies, in which the education sector was in-
dicated as the most commonly used source of help for
child psychopathology (Burns et al., 1995; Farmer et al.,
2003; Ford et al., 2003).
Several variables in child, family, and context were
investigated as determinants of the help-seeking process.
Remarkably, the impact of child characteristics ap-
peared to be marginal. Some of these variables (child
gender and coexisting academic problems) did exert
their inﬂuence on the help-seeking process only indi-
rectly through their impact on the teacher’s perception
of child problems, whereas child age inﬂuenced neither
service need nor help-seeking. The only child character-
istic directly inﬂuencing the help-seeking process was
the presence of coexisting chronic physical problems,
which was associated with an increased service need
(see, e.g., Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997).
Family characteristics had a stronger impact on the
help-seeking process, although the previously found in-
ﬂuence of family structure and size (i.e., single parent-
hood and the presence of siblings; Briggs-Gowan et al.,
2000; Jensen et al., 1990; Verhulst and Van der Ende,
1997) could not be detected in our data. Changes in
family structure were shown only to inﬂuence mental
health service use, without affecting service need or
help-seeking in other settings.
Remarkable is the differential effect of family func-
tioning on service need and help-seeking. Although ser-
vice need is signiﬁcantly present in poorly functioning
families, parents in these families seem to experience
barriers in actually seeking teachers’ help. In contrast
with previous ﬁndings (Lavigne et al., 1998; Verhulst
and Van der Ende, 1997), family functioning was
not directly related to other types of help-seeking.
As expected (Verhulst and Van der Ende, 1997), the
presence of a relative who had used mental health serv-
ices increased the likelihood of parents perceiving
problems in their child without directly increasing ser-
vice need. It also increased the chance of parents using
support of family and friends (see, e.g., Rickwood and
Braithwaite, 1994). The presence of a relative who has
consulted mental health services may indicate a certain
willingness to discuss mental health matters in the fam-
ily system, which may facilitate help-seeking for child
psychopathology within this system.
An important context factor inﬂuencing the help-
seeking process was the teacher’s perception of child
problems. This variable was almost as strongly related
to service need as the parents’ own report of child prob-
lems, which is remarkable considering the limited agree-
ment between parent and teacher reports of child
problems (Achenbach et al., 1987). This ﬁnding again
indicates the inﬂuential role of teachers in the help-seeking
process.
Sociodemographic context variables (parental educa-
tion level, family income, type of insurance) were
conﬁrmed not to inﬂuence the help-seeking process di-
rectly. This ﬁnding can probably be ascribed to the
Dutch health care system in which major ﬁnancial con-
straints to the availability of care are lacking.
Limitations
Because of differences between countries’ health care
systems, caution should be exercised in generalizing
these results to nations with systems that are not like
the Dutch (i.e., with ﬁnancial constraints for receiving
care and without the GP as gatekeeper). We therefore
advocate using our method with help-seeking models
adapted to other health care systems. We believe our re-
sults concerning the importance of schools and school-
based service providers in the help-seeking process for
child psychopathology to be of more general value.
Generalizability may be hampered by the relatively
low response rates at the two stages of the study. In ad-
dition, parents from single-parent families and less-
educated parents were less likely to participate in the
study. Because these characteristics have generally been
shown to be associated with elevated levels of child
problems, this study may underestimate the presence
of child psychopathology. The ﬁnding that CBCL
and TRF Total Problems scores did not differ between
participants and nonparticipants argues against this pos-
sibility, however. The fact that no conﬁrmation was
found for the previously reported associations between
ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.
1298
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005

SES and child psychopathology and among single par-
enthood, service need, and service use may be the result
of the underrepresentation of less-educated and single-
parent families in our sample.
Although the assumptions in our model were based
on theory and associations established in previous re-
search, and our ﬁnal model adequately ﬁt the data,
we acknowledge the relatively data-driven nature of
model adjustment (e.g., removing nonsigniﬁcant asso-
ciations and adding some associations suggested by
modiﬁcation indexes). Therefore, future studies, prefer-
ably longitudinal ones, are needed to conﬁrm our ﬁnd-
ings
and
establish
causal
directionality
of
the
associations found. Longitudinal studies, similar to that
of Farmer et al. (2003), could also shed more light on
the sequence of help-seeking stages.
The results of this study may be biased because of the
reliance on parent reports of service need and use. Our
indicator of service need is more objective than used in
previous studies, in which parents are directly asked
whether their child is in need of help. Whereas our mea-
sure corresponds better with formal diagnostic criteria,
a more direct reﬂection of parents’ need for services may
give a better view of parents’ own reality. The ﬁnding
that parents’ report of the presence of child problems
exerts its inﬂuence on the four help-seeking variables
only indirectly, through service need, suggests that
our measure of service need discriminates between pa-
rents who do experience problems in their child but are
able to manage these problems without help and parents
for whom the impact of child problems is strong enough
to require outside help.
With respect to the parent reports of service use, we
believe parents to be the best informants on service use
for this young age group. Previous evidence suggests
that parent reports are reasonably accurate compared
to administrative records (Fendrich et al., 1999).
Because parents may have difﬁculties discriminating
among multiple service settings (Bean et al., 2000),
however, rates of service use may be biased. In-
cluding additional sources of data may strengthen
our ﬁndings.
Help-seeking for child psychopathology is a complex
process, and although we tried to capture some of its key
aspects, others deserve attention in future research. Al-
though the present study was primarily focused on
stages, actors, and determinants involved in the process
of help-seeking, parents’ reasons for not seeking help
were not directly assessed. Progress on the pathway
to care can, for instance, also be hindered by character-
istics of the health care system or by parents’ perceptions
of services or service providers (see, e.g., Pavuluri et al.,
1996).
Clinical Implications
Based on this study, several groups at which interven-
tions to increase child mental health service use may be
directed were identiﬁed. First, educating parents about
the nature and prevalence of child psychopathology may
raise their awareness of the possible presence of such
problems. Parents who do not use services despite their
service needs may beneﬁt from information on the avail-
ability and accessibility of care, and parents from poorly
functioning families may need a more actively outreach-
ing approach to overcome barriers on the help-seeking
pathway.
Another way to increase child mental health service
use may be the improvement of GPs’ skills in detecting
child psychopathology. Direct contact between GPs and
mental health professionals may have a consultative
function, may facilitate referral, and may accelerate
access to services.
Improving the detection and referral of child prob-
lems is, however, only useful if services are sufﬁciently
available to meet the demands of children. Schools are
therefore encouraged to liaise with external professio-
nals who may provide less-intensive forms of care within
schools. Direct contact between schools and mental
health care professionals may also ameliorate problem
detection within schools and shorten the pathway to
specialist care.
Clinicians should try to assess whether parents’ re-
sources are sufﬁcient to cope with the demands of hav-
ing a disordered child. For some parents, offering
assistance for some of the additional stressors associated
with service need and use may be enough to avoid use of
more specialized services.
Disclosure: The authors have no ﬁnancial relationships to disclose.
REFERENCES
Achenbach TM (1991a), Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/4–18
and 1991 Proﬁles. Burlington: University of Vermont Department of
Psychiatry
HELP-SEEKING FOR CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005
1299

Achenbach TM (1991b), Manual for the Teacher’s Report Form and 1991
Proﬁles. Burlington: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry
Achenbach TM, McConaughy SH, Howell CT (1987), Child/adolescent
behavioral and emotional problems: implications of cross-informant
correlations for situational speciﬁcity. Psychol Bull 101:213–232
American Psychiatric Association (1994), Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association
Andersen RM (1995), Revisiting the behavioral model and access to medical
care: does it matter? J Health Soc Behav 36:1–10
Arbuckle JL, Wothke W (1999), Amos 4.0 User’s Guide. Chicago: Small-
Waters
Bean DL, Leibowitz A, Rotheram-Borus MJ et al. (2000), False-negative
reporting and mental health services utilization: parents’ reports about
child and adolescent services. Ment Health Serv Res 2:239–249
Bentler PM, Bonett DG (1980), Signiﬁcance tests and goodness of ﬁt in the
analysis of covariance structures. Psychol Bull 88:588–606
Bird HR, Davies M, Fisher P et al. (2000), How speciﬁc is speciﬁc impair-
ment? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 39:1182–1189
Brewin C, Wing J, Mangen S, Brugha T, MacCarthy B (1987), Principles
and practice of measuring needs in the long-term mentally ill: the MRC
Needs for Care Assessment. Psychol Med 17:971–981
Briggs-Gowan MJ, Horwitz S, Schwab-Stone M, Leventhal JM, Leaf PJ
(2000), Mental health in pediatric settings: distribution of disorders
and factors related to service use. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
39:841–849
Browne MW, Cudeck R (1993), Alternative ways of assessing model ﬁt. In:
Testing Structural Equation Models, Bollen KA, Long JS, eds.Newbury
Park, CA: Sage Publications, pp 136–162
Burns BJ, Costello EJ, Angold A et al. (1995), Children’s mental health
service use across service sectors. Health Aff 14:147–159
Byles J, Byrne C, Boyle MH, Offord DR (1988), Ontario Child Health
Study: Reliability and validity of the General Functioning subscale of
the McMaster Family Assessment Device. Fam Proc 27:97–104
Costello EJ, Pescosolido BA, Angold A, Burns BJ (1998), A family network-
based model of access to child mental health services. Res Comm Ment
Health 9:165–190
Epstein NB, Baldwin LM, Bishop DS (1983), The McMaster Family Assess-
ment Device. J Marital Fam Ther 9:171–180
Farmer EZ, Burns BJ, Phillips SD, Angold A, Costello EJ (2003), Pathways
into and through mental health services for children and adolescents.
Psychiatr Serv 54:60–66
Feehan M, Stanton W, McGee R, Silva P (1994), A longitudinal study of birth
order, help seeking and psychopathology. Br J Clin Psychol 33:143–150
Fendrich M, Johnson T, Wislar J, Nageotte C (1999), Accuracy of parental
mental health service reporting: results from a reverse record-check study.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 38:147–155
Fischer EH, Weiner D, Abramowitz S (1983), Seeking professional help for
psychological problems. In: New Directions in Helping, Vol. 3: Applied
Perspectives in Help-Seeking and Receiving, Nadler A, Fisher JD, DePaulo
BM, eds. New York: Academic Press, pp 163–212
Flisher AJ, Kramer RA, Grosser RC et al. (1997), Correlates of unmet need
for mental health services by children and adolescents. Psychol Med
27:1145–1154
Ford T, Goodman R, Meltzer H (2003), Service use over 18 months among
a nationally representative sample of British children with psychiatric
disorder. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 8:37–51
Gasquet I, Chavance M, Ledoux S, Choquet M (1997), Psychosocial factors
associated with help-seeking behavior among depressive adolescents.
Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 6:151–159
Gasquet I, Ledoux S, Chavance M, Choquet M (1999), Consultation of
mental health professionals by French adolescents with probable psychi-
atric problems. Acta Psychiatr Scand 99:126–134
Goldberg D, Huxley P (1980), Mental Illness in the Community: The Pathway
to Psychiatric Care. New York: Tavistock
Goldberg D, Huxley P (1992), Common Mental Disorders: A Bio-social
Model. London: Routledge
Gunther N, Slavenburg B, Feron F, Van Os J (2003), Childhood social and
early developmental factors associated with mental health service use.
Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 38:101–108
Jensen PS, Bloedau L, Davis H (1990), Children at risk: II. Risk factors and
clinic utilization. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 29:804–812
John LH, Offord DR, Boyle MH, Racine YA (1995), Factors predicting use
of mental health and social services by children 6–16 years old: ﬁndings
from the Ontario Child Health Study. Am J Orthopsychiatry 65:76–86
Lavigne JV, Arend R, Rosenbaum D et al. (1998), Mental health service use
among young children receiving pediatric primary care. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 37:1175–1183
Leaf PJ, Alegria M, Cohen P, et al. (1996), Mental health service use in the
community and schools: results from the four-community MECA study.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 35:889–897
Logan DE, King CA (2001), Parental facilitation of adolescent mental health
service utilization: a conceptual and empirical review. Clin Psychol Sci
Pract 8:319–333
Pavuluri MN, Luk S, McGee R (1996), Help-seeking for behavior problems
by parents of preschool children: a community study. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 35:215–222
Rickwood DJ, Braithwaite VA (1994), Social-psychological factors affecting
help-seeking for emotional problems. Soc Sci Med 39:563–572
Sayal K, Taylor E (2004), Detection of child mental health disorders by
general practitioners. Br J Gen Pract 54:348–352
Schumacker RE, Lomax RG (1996), A Beginner’s Guide to Structural Equa-
tion Modeling. Mahwah, NJ: Lawarence J. Erlbaum Associates
Shaffer D, Fisher P, Christopher PL, Dulcan MK, Schwab-Stone ME
(2000), NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version
IV (NIMH DISC-IV): description, differences from previous versions,
and reliability of some common diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 39:28–38
Sourander A, Helstela L, Ristkari T, Ikaheimo K, Helenius H, Piha J (2001),
Child and adolescent mental health service use in Finland. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 36:294–298
Tucker LR, Lewis C (1973), A reliability coefﬁcient for maximum likelihood
factor analysis. Psychometrika 38:1–10
Verhulst FC, Koot JM (1992), Child Psychiatric Epidemiology: Concepts,
Methods and Findings. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J (1997), Factors associated with child mental
health service use in the community. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
36:901–909
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J, Koot HM (1996), Handleiding voor de CBCL/
4–18 [Manual for the CBCL/4-18]. Rotterdam: Afdeling Kinder- en
Jeugdpsychiatrie, Sophia Kinderziekenhuis/Academisch Ziekenhuis Rot-
terdam/Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
Verhulst FC, Van der Ende J, Koot HM (1997), Handleiding voor de Teach-
er’s Report Form (TRF) [Manual for the Teacher’s Report Form
(TRF)]. Rotterdam: Afdeling Kinder- en Jeugdpsychiatrie, Sophia
Kinderziekenhuis/Academisch Ziekenhuis Rotterdam/Erasmus Univer-
siteit Rotterdam
Westert GP, Schellevis FG, De Bakker DH, Groenewegen PP, Bensing JM,
Van der Zee J (2005), Monitoring health inequalities through general
practice: the Second Dutch National Survey of General Practice. Eur
J Public Health 15:59–65
Zahner GP, Daskalakis C (1997), Factors associated with mental health,
general health, and school-based service use for child psychopathology.
Am J Public Health 87:1440–1448
Zwaanswijk M, Van der Ende J, Verhaak PM, Bensing JM, Verhulst FC
(2003), Factors associated with adolescent mental health service need
and utilization. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 42:692–700
Zwaanswijk M, Verhaak PM, Van der Ende J, Bensing JM, Verhulst FC
(2005), Consultation for and identiﬁcation of child and adolescent psy-
chological problems in Dutch general practice. Fam Pract 22:498–506
ZWAANSWIJK ET AL.
1300
J. AM. ACAD. CHILD ADOLESC. PSYCHIATRY, 44:12, DECEMBER 2005

