


Five patients with diagnosed breast cancer who developed meningiomas are reported. The literature contains 
reports of an additional 25 such patients. Some authors have noted hormonal sensitivity and the presence 
of hormone receptors in some meningiomas. Because breast cancer is a common tumor of women, it is 
probable that any association between breast cancer and meningioma is fortuitous. Two patients in this 
small series each had a sister with breast cancer, one of them also had three other first-degree relations 
with colon cancer. Three of the patients had other tumors as well as breast cancer. It is important to fully 
investigate brain lesions in patients with breast cancer so that potentially curable meningiomas are not 
mistaken for metastases. 



and possible epidemiologic and hormonal relationships 
have been ~uggested.’-~ Meningioma is a common intra- 
cranial tumor accounting for 19% of all central nervous 
system tumors.’ Meningiomas occur twice as often in 
women as in men, usually in the fifth and sixth decades. 1,4 
Our interest in the coincidence of these diseases was 
prompted by five patients with breast cancer, who also 
had proven meningiomas. We discuss the potential sig- 
nificance of this observation. 


A 43-year-old woman had a left radical mastectomy for an 
intraductal comedocarcinoma that demonstrated one area of 











microinvasion. Histopathologic examination of the lymph nodes 
was negative. Loss of vision in her right eye after an injury 6 to 
8 weeks previously had resulted in her hospital admission, when 
a breast lump was found on routine examination. A skull ra- 
diograph was said to be normal then, as was a right carotid 
angiogram 1 year later. The vision in the right eye subsequently 
improved spontaneously. Sixteen years later, she was admitted 
to hospital complaining of headaches and a seizure. A computed 
tomography (CT) scan and angiography suggested a diagnosis 
of meningioma. Craniotomy 9 months later revealed a supra- 
sellar mass described as a “huge tumor involving the right optic 
nerve, very adherent”. A sub-total excision was done. Pathologic 
review revealed the tumor to be a histologically benign menin- 
gioma of meningothelial type with numerous psammoma bodies. 
She refused radiation therapy and is still being followed 1 year 
later with no symptoms. 

A 43-year-old woman had a right radical mastectomy with 
postoperative radiotherapy for infiltrating adenocarcinoma with 
negative nodes. Seven years later she developed severe headaches. 
A radionuclide brain scan with skull radiographs suggested a 
diagnosis of meningioma in the right parietal region. Craniotomy 
was performed a month later with total excision of a meningioma 
in the right parietal region. Pathologic review confirmed it to be 
of mixed meningothelial and fibroblastic type with many psam- 
moma bodies. The tumor was histologically benign. 
Three years later, she had a right radical nephrectomy for 
renal cell carcinoma. Up to her last follow-up visit, 9 years later, 
she was symptom-free. There was no family history of cancer. 





A 66-year-old woman had a right total mastectomy followed 
by radiotherapy for a breast cancer, staged T4B N2 MO (Inter- 
national Union Against Cancer [UICC] TNM staging, 1973), 
estrogen receptor (ER) = 28, progesterone receptor (PR) = 17. 
During investigations to exclude metastases, grossly abnormal 
skull appearances were detected on radiographs. A radionuclide 
bone scan showed a large, lobulated mass just above the lesser 
wing of the right sphenoid. A CT scan suggested the diagnosis 
of a meningioma. 
Three months later, the patient had a right frontal craniotomy 
with total removal of a “huge” medial sphenoid wing menin- 
gioma. Unfortunately, hormone receptor assays were not done 
on the tissue. Pathologic review revealed it to be a meningioma 
of mixed meningothelial and fibroblastic type. Up to the time 
of her craniotomy she claimed to have been totally asymptomatic 
and results of a neurological examination were said to be normal. 
This patient has since developed widespread disease with bone 
and soft tissue metastases. Fifteen years earlier, she had had a 
left sub-total thyroidectomy for “low grade follicular thyroid 
carcinoma”, followed by thyroid ablation with radioactive iodine. 
Her family history included a sister who died of breast cancer 
shortly after diagnosis at age 36. 

This 46-year-old woman underwent a left total mastectomy 
and prophylactic oophorectomy for breast carcinoma. Three 
months later, she had a right prophylactic total mastectomy. 
Histopathologic examination of the left breast was reported as 
showing “multi-focal lobular carcinoma of borderline malig- 
nancy, and areas of florid sclerosing adenosis.” The right breast 
revealed severe adenosis only. 
For the next decade, this patient complained of a facial “tic” 
limited to her left eye-lid and left cheek. Numerous investigations 
and consultations, including electroencephalogram and radio- 
nuclide brain scans had been reported as negative when, for the 
first time, she had a CT scan of her brain, reported as possibly 
revealing a meningioma. A craniotomy confirmed a right fron- 
toparietal meningioma, which was then totally removed. His- 
topathologic examination revealed it to be of meningothelial 
type with many psammoma bodies and foci of calcification. She 
has remained well up to 3 years later, when she was last seen. 
At the time of the left mastectomy, a coin lesion on a routine 
chest radiograph resulted in a right lobectomy, the tissue re- 
vealing a bronchial adenoma, carcinoid type, as well as a sarcoid- 
like granuloma. Her family history included breast cancer in an 
identical twin who had bilateral mastectomies (treated in another 
country, with details not available), and colon cancer in her 
father, brother, and another sister. 

In 1976, a 57-year-old woman had a craniotomy for menin- 
gioma (details not available) and was still taking phenytoin in 
1979 when she was treated for carcinoma of her right breast 
(Grade 111 infiltrating adenocarcinoma) by wide excision and 
radiotherapy. 
In 1980, she presented with a history of continuing seizures 
and recent visual loss. A CT scan of brain a year later revealed 
substantial recurrent meningioma confirmed by craniotomy. 
Histopathologic review revealed it to be a meningioma with ev- 
idence of malignant degeneration and cerebral cortical invasion. 
This patient was followed by letters of enquiry only, up to 
August 1984, when she died of meningioma, although no details 
are available of her investigations from 198 1 to 1984. As far as 
can be ascertained there was no spread of her breast cancer up 
to the date of her death. Her family history is unknown. She 
was registered in 1972 with carcinoma in situ of the cervix. 

Between 1967 and 1984 registration of breast cancer 
by the Alberta Cancer Registry was 98% of the total breast 
cancer patients in northern Alberta. Although menin- 
giomas are not routinely registered by the Alberta Cancer 
Registry unless malignant, we assume that the five patients 
reported here, represent most of the patients with breast 
cancer and meningioma, as 90% of all breast cancer pa- 
tients are seen at the Cross Cancer Institute and their 
charts are regularly reviewed. During this time, approxi- 
mately 4000 women were registered in northern Alberta 
with breast cancer, giving a 1 to 800 ratio between me- 
ningioma and breast cancer, which is considerably less 
than the 1.2% reported by Smith et al.7 from the Memorial 
Hospital, and probably less than “the excess of observed 
to expected cases, k3.37” reported by Schoenberg et al.’ 
The mean ages at diagnosis of breast cancer (5 1 years) 
and of meningioma (57 years) in the five patients described 
are similar to those in other reported series.’031’ 
The occurrence of other tumors as well as meningioma 
and breast cancer in three of the patients appears consis- 
tent with the observation of Schoenberg and colleagues 
that there is a higher percentage of meningioma in patients 
with multiple primary tumors.’ 
A possible hormonal relationship has been suggested 
by Donne1 et aL3 They showed a very high concentration 
of ER in two of six patients with meningiomas. Coumere 
et aL2 have reported positive PR in 10 of 20 meningiomas, 
but none had positive ER. The increased frequency of 
meningiomas in women compared with men and the rap- 
idly progressive course of these tumors in pregnant pa- 
tients also suggest a hormonal r e l a t i ~ n s h i p . ~ . ~ , ~ , ’ ~ 
No such hormonal relationship was evident in our pa- 
tients, most of whom were at or beyond menopause. Re- 
ceptor assays were done on tissue from only one of the 
breast carcinomas and on none of the meningiomas be- 
cause facilities for such assays were not available at the 
time of diagnosis. 
Mehta et al.,4 recommend that hormonal receptor as- 
says should be done on all meningiomas and especially 
in patients already known to have breast carcinoma, as 



it is possible that hormonal therapy may be useful in some 
cases. Another potential role for hormonal manipulation 
might be in advanced recurrent meningiomas after surgery 
and radiation therapy have failed. 
The relative frequency of metastatic breast cancer versus 
meningioma as a symptomatic intracranial lesion in the 
patients treated for breast cancer during the years of this 
study was 54 to 1. Breast carcinoma is very common and 
frequently metastasizes to the brain. It is important not 
to assume that all intracranial lesions in these patients are 
metastatic. Because most meningiomas are resectable, 
such lesions should not be treated palliatively until full 
investigation has been undertaken. 

1. Schoenberg BS, Christine BW, Whisnant JP. Nervous system neo- 
plasms and primary malignancies of other sites. Neurology 1975; 35: 
705-712. 
2. Coumere P, Tremolet M, Eche N, Armand JP. Hormonal steroid 
receptors in intracranial tumors and their relevance in hormone therapy. 
Eur JCancer Clin Oncol 1985; 21:711-714. 










8. BickentaEER, Small JM, Guest IA. The relapsing course of certain 
meningiomas in relation to pregnancy and menstruation. J Neurol Neu- 
rosurg Psychiatry 1958; 21:89-91. 
9. Weyand RD, MacCarty CS, Wilson RW. The effect of pregnancy 
on intracranial meningiomas occumng about the optic chiasm. Surg 
Clin North A m 1951; 31:1225-1233. 






