Female Patients With Meningioma of the Sphenoid Ridge and 
Additional Primary Neoplasms of the Breast and Genital Tract 

Of 283 meningioma patients seen at the University of Kansas from 1948 to 1984, eight women acquired 
two primary extraneural cancers in addition to their meningiomas. Of these eight patients, six (75%) 
had sphenoid ridge meningiomas compared with 15% of meningioma patients overall (P < 0.001). Seven 
(87.5%) had at least one breast or genital cancer ( P < 0.001). Of the six with sphenoid ridge menin- 
giomas, five (83.3%) had both of their additional tumors in these two organ systems, and the sixth had 
one such tumor. It is proposed that this grouping of sphenoid ridge meningioma, breast cancer, and 
genital cancer represents a unique constellation of neoplasms in women. 



meningiomas often contain progesterone receptor pro- 
tein and may also contain estrogen receptor p r ~ t e i n . ~ - ~ 
Because meningioma has long been known to be more 
common in women than men, it is appropriate to study 
the associations between meningiomas and other neo- 
plasms in women. In this study we analyzed the syn- 
chronous and metachronous occurrence of cancers in 
meningioma patients, focusing particularly on breast 
and female genital cancers and the distribution of men- 
ingiomas among various subsites. 

The records of 283 intracranial meningioma patients 
were reviewed. These cases include 177 women and 106 
men diagnosed with meningiomas at the University of 
Kansas Medical Center from 1948 to 1984. The diag- 
noses were confirmed from the hospital records and the 
pathology reports contained therein, the Kansas Univer- 
sity Medical Center Tumor Registry, and the Cancer 
Data Service (the regional cancer registry). Data on the 
occurrence of second or third tumors in these menin- 
gioma patients were obtained from existing records. 
Both metachronous and synchronous second and third 
neoplasms were identified. In order to test the possibility 


Supported by the Kansas University Cancer Center, the Kansas 
State Department of Health, and the Kansas University Medical 
Center Hospital. 


Address for reprints: Frederick F. Holmes, MD, Department of 
Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center. Kansas City. KS 
66 103. 

of chance occurrence of sphenoid ridge meningiomas 
with multiple malignancies involving the breast or fe- 
male genital tract, chi-square tests were performed. 
Results 
Of the 283 patients with meningiomas, 42 had 50 
additional malignant tumors (Table 1). These included 
12 breast cancers, five uterine corpus cancers, three 
uterine cervix cancers, and one vaginal cancer. Forty- 
three patients ( 15%) had meningiomas on the sphenoid 
ridge; this group included 29 women and 14 men. 
Forty-nine individuals had meningiomas on the con- 
vexity, 35 in the parasagittal area, I8 in multiple sites, 17 
in the parasellar region, 16 in the falx, and the re- 
mainder in other sites (Table 2). 
Eight women (19% of those with additional tumors) 
had two cancers in addition to their meningiomas 
(Table 3). Breast cancers were reported in five of these 
eight patients, uterine corpus cancers in three, and uter- 
ine cervix cancers in two. Altogether, seven of these 
eight women had at least one lesion in the breast or 
genital organs and five had lesions in both sites. No 
patient had more than three tumors. 
In six of the eight women with two additional cancers 
(75%) the meningiomas were found on the sphenoid 
ridge. A seventh patient had a parasellar meningioma, 
and the eighth had an olfactory groove meningioma. Of 
these six sphenoid ridge meningiomas, five occurred on 
the medial or middle third, and one occurred on the 
lateral third, the pterion. Compared with all menin- 
gioma patients, those with two additional tumors were 
more likely to have sphenoid ridge meningiomas than 
meningiomas at other sites ( P < 0.001; they were also 
more likely to be women ( P < 0.05). Compared with 
patients with meningioma and one additional tumor, 
those with two additional tumors were more likely to 




TABLE 1. Sites of 50 Malignant Primary Tumors Occumng 
Synchronously or Metachronously in Association With Meningioma 
TABLE 2. Sites of Occurrence of 283 Intracranial Meningiomas, 
Universitv of Kansas Medical Center. 1948-1984 
Breast 
Female genital 
Gastrointestinal 
Brain 
Thyroid 
Lung 
Hematopoietic 
Melanoma 
Prostate 
Unknown 

12 
10 
10 
6 
3 
3 
2 
2 
I 
1 





Convexity 
Sphenoid ridge 
Parasagittal 
Multiple sites 
Parasellar 
Falx cerebri 
Olfactory groove 
Other 

49 
43 
35 
18 
17 
16 
1 1 
94 

27 
29 
23 
13 
12 
13 
9 
51 

22 
14 
12 
5 
5 
3 
2 
43 

have an associated breast or genital cancer than cancer 
with a different primary focus (P c 0.00 1). 
Of the eight patients with two additional cancers, the 
subgroup of six with sphenoid ridge meningiomas in- 
cluded the five patients whose additional tumors were 
breast cancer(s) (P c 0.05) and the three whose lesions 
were uterine corpus cancer (not significant). This sub- 
group of six with sphenoid ridge meningiomas also in- 
cluded the five patients who developed both of their 
additional extraneural neoplasms in the breast and gen- 
ital tract ( P c 0.05). Table 3 lists the neoplasms and ages 
at diagnosis in these eight patients. 
The eight meningioma patients were categorized by 
the histologic subtype of the meningioma if available. 
Three meningiomas were classified as meningothelial, 
two as fibroblastic, and one as transitional. The remain- 
ing two meningiomas were not classified. Five of the 
eight patients had family histories of cancer. Two pa- 
tients had four first-degree relatives with malignancies, 
two had three such relatives, and one had two affected 
relatives. 
The eight patients developed a total of 16 tumors in 
addition to their meningiomas; nine of these neoplasms 
were diagnosed before the meningioma, three after, and 
four synchronously. The earliest neoplasm was discov- 
ered 29 years before the meningioma, and the latest one 
was found 20 years after the development of the menin- 
gioma. 
Discussion 
We have described a subset of female meningioma 
patients at high risk for acquiring additional neoplasms. 
Seven of 17 patients (41%) with meningioma and either 
breast or female genital cancer developed a third tumor 
compared with one of 25 with meningioma and a sec- 
ond lesion in a site other than the breast or genitals (P 
-= 0.00 1). Moreover, sphenoid ridge meningiomas oc- 
curred more frequently in patients with three tumors (P 
c 0.00 1 ). Because the associated tumors can precede or 
follow the meningiomas by 20 or more years, affected 
women remain at risk throughout their adult lives. 
Endocrine factors may be operative in the occurrence 
of this unusual pattern of three neoplasms. Three lines 
of evidence support the idea that the sphenoid ridge may 
be more susceptible to the effects of endogenous female 
sex steroids than other sites of occurrence of menin- 
gioma. First, intracranial meningiomas have a two-to- 
TABLE 3. Female Patients With Multiple Primary 
Malignancies Plus Meningioma 

Age at 
diagnosis 



daughter and brother; 
breast cancer in two 
sisters 

primary site in four 
siblings 


Meningioma recurred at 
age 38; corpus uteri 
cancer in two sisters; 
breast cancer in 
mother 



79 
81 
71 
58 
66 
79 
79 
79 
67 
57 
59 
30,38 
43 
50 
45 
34 
32 
68 
39 
51 
58 
5 1 
58 
Sphenoid ridge 
(pterion)? 
Breast 
Corpus uteri 
Sphenoid ridget 
Breast 
Corpus uteri 
Olfactory groove1 
Gall bladder 
Hodgkin's disease 
Sphenoid ridget 
Uterine cervix 
Breast 
Sphenoid ridget 
Corpus uteri 
Lung 
Parasellart 
Thyroid 
Cervix 
Sphenoid ridget 
Breast 
Breast 
Sphenoid ridget 
Breast 
Cystadenoid 
basal cell 
carcinoma of 
breast 
(different 
locus) with 
metastasis to 
meningioma 








one predilection for women, but meningiomas en 
plaque of the sphenoid ridge occur almost exclusively in 
women. lo Second, meningiomas have been reported to 
enlarge with pregnancy, regress subsequently, and recur 
with subsequent pregnancies. These meningiomas tend 
to occur on the medial aspect of the sphenoid wing"-'3 
and in the parasellar area contiguous to the sphenoid 
ridge.'"'7 Third, investigators have correlated clinical 
findings from meningioma patients with studies of the 
intensity and incidence of progestin binding to receptors 
on the t ~ m o r . ' , ~ . ' ~ They found an increase in the inten- 
sity of progestin binding in meningiomas of the sphe- 
noid wing and olfactory groove as compared with me- 
ningiomas at other sites. The same is true for meningo- 
thelial meningiomas as compared with those of other 
histologic classifications. '' However, incidence of posi- 
tivity in progestin receptor assays could not be corre- 
lated with the site of meningioma despite the presence of 
positivity in a majority of sphenoid wing menin- 
g i ~ m a s . ~ . ~ 
Genetic factors may also play a role in the occurrence 
of these tumors. The patients we described developed 
multiple neoplasms at various unrelated sites through- 
out their adult lives. The family histories showed that 
similar neoplasms occurred in at least two first-degree 
relatives in a majority of these patients. These features 
typify family cancer syndrome^.'^-*^ However, these 
family cancer syndromes have not been previously re- 
ported for meningiomas. 
Because the numbers of tumors are small, the tumors 
are relatively common, and survival after diagnosis 
varies widely among patients affected by these several 
tumors, we cannot absolutely exclude the possibility 
that the association of meningiomas, breast, and genital 
cancers has occurred only by chance. The fact that six of 
the 29 women with sphenoid ridge meningiomas had 
two additional neoplasms-quite separate from the as- 
sociation with breast and genital tract tumors-makes 
the association by chance quite unlikely when only two 
of the 148 women with meningioma at sites other than 
the splenoid ridge had two additional neoplasms (P 
< 0.001). Further studies should be done with a much 
larger data base, preferably a population-based registry 
such as one of the SEER registries, comparing the actual 
incidence of second and third tumors in women with 
sphenoid ridge meningiomas and women with menin- 
giomas of the other intracranial sites. 
The clinical ramifications of these findings are two- 
fold. First, women with a history of multiple tumors 
involving the breast, genital tract, and sphenoid menin- 
ges may benefit from serial screening for additional ma- 
lignancies. Second, patients who have had breast or en- 
dometrial cancer and who present with lesions of the 
sphenoid ridge may have meningiomas that are opera- 
ble, rather than metastases of their primary neoplasms 
that are probably not operable. 
That breast and genital malignancies occur with sphe- 
noid ridge meningiomas suggests the possibility that 
tumors are responsive to female sex steroids. However, 
the clinical importance of the presence of estrogen and 
progesterone receptor protein in meningiomas is at 
present moot. This, along with evidence that supports a 
genetic basis for the tumors, indicates the need for fur- 
ther investigation into the etiology of this combination 
of lesions. 

1 . Schoenberg BS, Christine BW, Whisnant JP. Nervous system 
neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites: The unique associ- 
ation between meningiomas and breast cancer. Neurology 1975; 
25~705-712. 
2. Smith Fp, Slavik M, MacDonald JS. Association of breast cancer 
with meningioma: Report of two cases and review of the literature. 
Cancer 1978; 42:1992-1994. 
3. Mehta D, Khatib R, Patel S. Carcinoma of the breast and me- 
ningioma: Association and management. Cancer 1983; 51:1937-1940. 
4. Fenyes G, Kepes JJ. Uber des gemeinsame Vorkommen von 
Meningomen und Geschwulsten anderen Typs in Gehirn. Zeniralbl 
Narochir 1956; 16~25 1-260. 
5. Burns PE, Naresh JHA, Bain GO. Association of breast cancer 
with meningioma: A report of five cases. Cancer 1986; 58: 1537-1539. 
6. Tilzer LL, Plapp FV, Evans JP, Stone D, Alward K. Steroid 
receptor proteins in human meningiomas. Cancer 1982; 49:4:633- 
636. 
7. Markwalder TM, Zava DT, Goldhirsch A, Markwalder RV. Es- 
trogen and progesterone receptors in meningiomas in relation to clini- 
cal and pathologic features. Surg Neurol 1983; 20:42-47. 
8. Magdenalat H, Pertuiset BF, Poisson M et al. Progestin and es- 
trogen receptors in meningiomas: Biochemical characterization, clini- 
cal and pathologic correlations in 42 cases. Acta Neurochir 1982; 
64: 199-2 13. 




1 I. Bickerstaff ER, Small JM, Guest IA. The relapsing course of 
certain meningiomas in relation to pregnancy and menstruation. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychialry 1958; 2 I :89-9 I. 






15. Weyand RD, MacCarty CS, Wilson RB. The effect of pregnancy 
on intracranial Meningiomas occurring about the optic chiasm. Surg 
CIin Norlh Am 1951; 31:1225-1233. 




18. Markwalder TM, Markwalder CV, Zava DT. Estrogen and pro- 
gestin receptors in meningiomas: Clinicopathologic correlations. Clin 
Neuropharmacol 1984; 7:368-374. 




2 1 . Li FP, Fraumeni JF. Soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancer, and 
other neoplasms: A familial syndrome? Ann fnrern hfed 1969; 
7 1~747-752. 


