
Association of Breast Cancer with Meningioma: Report of a Case and 
Review of the Literature 

1Breast Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo and 2Pathology Division, National Cancer Center 
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan 

We report a case of meningioma subsequently developed in a patient with primary breast car- 
cinoma. A 53-year-old woman received a left modified radical mastectomy because of stage IIA 
breast carcinoma. Histologically, the tumor was a predominantly intraductal carcinoma with 
negative lymph node metastasis. Estrogen receptor (ER) was negative but progesterone 
receptor (PR) of the left tumor was positive by immunohistochemistry. Four years later, cranial 
bone and/or brain metastasis was suspected from a routine follow-up bone scintigram. The 
patient showed no symptoms or signs at that time. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
angiography revealed that the right parasagittal mass was suspicious of meningioma. A com- 
plete tumor removal was performed. On histological examination, this brain tumor was a tran- 
sitional-type meningioma (meningotheliomatous and fibrous type) without malignant findings. 
ER was negative but PR was positive also in this tumor. She is currently well 6 years after the 
initial surgery. A review of the literature is presented with emphasis on the association between 
breast cancer and meningioma, which indicates a possible hormonal relationship. The 
knowledge of this association is important in the differential diagnosis of patients with breast 
cancer who develop central nervous manifestations. 



It has been reported that the incidence of meningioma is 
increased in patients with breast cancer (1). The increased risk 
of developing meningioma was reported to be 1.57–1.90 times 
after breast cancer according to data from the Swedish Cancer 
Registry and from the United States Surveillance, Epidemiol- 
ogy and End Results (SEER) Program (2,3). It is therefore 
important to differentiate a solitary brain metastasis from a 
meningioma, which is a potentially curable disease. Hormonal 
relationships between meningioma and breast cancer have also 
been suggested (4,5). The pregnancy and/or menstrual cycle is 
sometimes related to the rapid increase of meningiomas (6). 
We report here a case of meningioma subsequently developed 
in a patient with primary breast carcinoma. 
For reprints and all correspondence: Takashi Fukutomi, Department of 
Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, 1–1, Tsukiji 5-chome, 
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan 
A 53-year-old postmenopausal woman with a left primary 
breast carcinoma (T2N0M0: stage IIA) was referred to our 
hospital. She had no past or family history of malignancies. 
The tumor size was 3.1 cm in diameter at the first consultation. 
As for the diagnostic procedures, mammography (MMG: 
Mammomat 3, Siemens, Germany) revealed an ill-defined, 
spiculated tumor shadow with diffuse microcalcifications in 
the left breast. An irregular hypoechoic–tumorous lesion could 
be detected in the upper-outer quadrant of the left breast by 
ultrasonography (US: EUB-515 with a 7.5 MHz transducer; 
Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). A modified radical mastectomy of the 
left breast was carried out in July 1995. Histological examina- 
tion revealed that the left breast tumor was a predominantly 
intraductal carcinoma, histological grade 3, with negative 
lymph node metastasis (0/14) (Fig. 1). Estrogen receptor (ER) 
was negative but progesterone receptor (PR) of this tumor was 
positive by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 2). Whereas the size 
of the invasive component was only 1.7 × 1.0 cm in diameter 
(20%), the size of the intraductal component was 6.2 × 3.0 cm 





Figure 2. Immunohistochemical examination of the left breast cancer by 
progesterone receptor (PR). 
in diameter (80%). Lymphatic invasion by tumor cells was 
negative but vascular invasion by tumor cells was positive. 
Positive p53 nuclear immunoreaction (RSp53, Nichirei, Tokyo, 
Japan) and strongly positive HER-2 overexpression (Dako 
Japan, Tokyo, Japan) by immunohistochemical staining were 
observed in this tumor. No adjuvant chemotherapy was given 
to the patient. Four years later, cranial bone and/or brain metas- 
tasis was suspected from a routine follow-up bone scintigram. 
The patient showed no symptoms or signs at that time. No other 
metastatic lesion was detected by abdominal ultrasonography 
and chest X-ray. Bone X-ray of the skull revealed no abnormal- 
ities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a cir- 
cumscribed lesion in the right parasagittal region with low 
signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging and with weakly high 
intensity on T2-weighted imaging. The tumor was homo- 
geneously enhanced by gadolinium, whereas a metastatic 
tumor is not homogeneously enhanced. Angiography demon- 
strated a hypervascular mass in the same region. These imag- 
ings revealed that the tumor was suspicious of meningioma of 
the right parasagittal region. However, there was a possibility 
of a solitary brain metastasis. Tumor markers (CEA, CA15-3, 
ST-439) were all within the normal ranges. A complete tumor 
removal was performed in June 2000. Histologically, this brain 
tumor was composed of spindle cell proliferation and increas- 
ing collagen bundles. It was a transitional-type meningioma 
(meningotheliomatous type and fibrous type) without malig- 
nant findings (Fig. 3). ER was negative but PR was positive 
also in this tumor (Fig. 4). The patient is currently well 6 years 
after the initial surgery for breast cancer. 

We have two other patients with probable meningiomas sub- 
sequently developed after primary breast carcinoma. One of 
these two breast cancers was PR-positive despite the lack of 
ER, just as in the present case. Course observation was selected 
for these two patients because of the meningioma-like masses 
with stable size by imaging modalities and no symptoms or 
signs. Also seven (8.3%), including this patient, of 84 patients 
whose meningiomas were removed at our hospital from May 
1981 to June 2000 had undergone surgical treatment for breast 
cancer. The remaining six patients except for this one had been 
the data were not 
treated at another hospital. Therefore, 
available in detail. The clinicopathological characteristics of 
the three patients with breast cancer and meningioma treated at 
our hospital are summarized in Table 1. 






Age (years)/ 
gender 
TNM clinical 
classification 


Immunological finding 
sHER-2/p53† 
Hormone 
receptor ER/PR‡ 
Treatment for 
meningioma 









Invasive ductal carcinoma 
Predominantly intraductal 
Poorly differentiated 
Adenosquamous cell carcinoma 
Well differentiated 
Invasive lobular carcinoma 
Intraductal 












F, female; (–), negative; (+), positive. *Histological grade (nuclear–structure–mitosis). †HER-2 overexpression/p53 nuclear immunoreaction. ‡ER, estrogen recep- 
tor; PR, progesterone receptor. 
It has been reported that breast cancer is the second most 
common cause of intracranial metastases (4). We previously 
reported seven cases of breast cancer recurrence limited to the 
central nervous system (CNS) without other visceral metas- 
tases (5). In that study, premenopausal patients with negative 
hormone receptor status were more likely to develop this kind 
of recurrence, regardless of the histological type. 
As we reported here, a patient who has symptoms and signs 
suggesting a space-occupying lesion of the central nervous 
system after treatment for breast cancer does not always have 
brain metastases. Many case reports have suggested an associ- 
ation between breast cancer and meningioma (1,4,7–9). On the 
other hand, Backhouse et al. reported a case with optic nerve 
breast cancer metastasis mimicking meningioma (10). 
Meningiomas occur twice as frequently in women as in men 
(4). In addition, some of the meningiomas were reported to 
express more PRs than ERs (11). Grunberg et al. reported the 
usefulness of anti-progesterone for recurrent meningiomas 
(12). Rona et al. reported that 64% of 33 meningiomas exam- 
ined showed some level of progesterone receptor messenger 
RNA expression with which the immunohistochemistry data 
correlated well (13). Also, the resected meningioma in this 
report expressed weakly positive PRs in spite of the ER nega- 
tivity, just like the hormone receptor status of the primary 
breast cancer in the present patient. Blankenstein et al. reported 
estrogen receptor-independent expression of progesterone 
receptor in human meningioma (14). Only one group described 
the ER and PR status of both breast cancer and meningioma 
of nine patients who developed meningioma diagnosed by 
surgical materials after resection of breast cancers (15). They 
reported two initial breast cancers and four subsequent menin- 
giomas in nine of their cases that were positive for PR assay. In 
their report, all patients were alive after 1–11 years follow-up. 
Based on these findings, a hormonal interrelationship, particu- 
larly progesterone, is suggested for breast cancers and menin- 
giomas. Meanwhile, alterations of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes are not common pathogenetic events in the development 
of meningiomas (16). There was no evidence for PTEN 
mutations in families with breast cancer and brain tumors 
(17). Further studies will be required to clarify the hormonal 
relationships between breast cancers and meningiomas. 
The onset and types of neurological symptoms of metastatic 
breast cancer and intracranial meningioma are so similar that it 
is difficult to differentiate them (15). As in this case, Lee et al. 
documented two meningiomas detected incidentally by bone 
scintigraphy (18). Computed tomography (CT), magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography may be the useful 
diagnostic imaging modalities for this type of tumor (15,19). 
It is important to differentiate a CNS metastasis from a menin- 
gioma, which is a curable condition. 



2. Malmer B, Tavelin B, Henriksson R, Grönberg H. Primary brain tumors 
as second primary: a novel association between meningioma and colorec- 
tal cancer. Int J Cancer 2000;85:78–81. 




5. Higashi H, Fukutomi T, Watanabe T, Adachi I, Narabayashi M, Shibui S, 
et al. Seven cases of breast cancer recurrence limited to the central nervous 
system without other visceral metastases. Breast Cancer 2000;7:153–6. 
6. Bickerstaff ER, Small JM, Guest IA. The relapsing course of certain men- 
ingiomas in relation to pregnancy and menstruation. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 1958;21:89–91. 




9. Jacobs DH, McFarlane MJ, Holmes FF. Female patients with meningioma 
of the sphenoid ridge and addition primary neoplasms of the breast and 
genital tract. Cancer 1987;60:3080–2. 
10. Backhouse O, Simmons I, Frank A, Cassels-Brown A. Optic nerve breast 
metastasis mimicking meningioma. Aust NZ J Ophthal 1998;26:247–9. 
11. Blankenstein MA, Verheijen FM, Jacobs JM, Donker TH, van Dujin- 
hoven MW, Thijssen JH. Occurrence, regulation and significance of pro- 
gesterone receptors in human meningioma. Steroids 2000;65:795–800. 
12. Grunberg SM, Weiss MH, Spitz IM, Ahmadi J, Sadun A, Russell CA, et 
al. Treatment of unresectable meningiomas with the antiprogesterone 
agent mifepristone. J Neurosurg 1991;74:861–6. 


14. Blankenstein MA, Koehorst SG, van der Kallen CJ, Jacobs HM, van Spiel 
AB, Donker GH, et al. Oestrogen receptor independent expression of 
progestin. Biochem Mol Biol 1995;53:361–5. 
15. Salvati M, Cervoni L. Association of breast carcinoma and meningioma: 
the literature. Tumori 
report of nine new cases and review of 
1996;82:491–3. 


17. Lauge A, Lefebre C, Laurent-Puig P, Caux V, Gad S, Eng C, et al. No 
evidence for germline mutations in families with breast and brain tumors. 
Int J Cancer 1999;84:216–9. 
18. Lee GK, Coel M, Ko J, Tom B. Two meningiomas detected incidentally 
by Tc-99m HDP bone scitigraphy during a work-up for breast cancer. Clin 
Nucl Med 1999;24:525–6. 




