


An association between carcinoma of the breast and meningioma has been recognized recently. Three 
more cases are added to the few previously reported in the literature. An awareness of this association 
together with modern techniques of investigation, particularly CAT scanning, may permit earlier di- 
agnosis and treatment of more cases. Meningioma as well as carcinoma of the breast is more common 
in women and the incidence of both tumors reaches a peak in the fifth and sixth decades. Both are 
related to pregnancy and have an estrogen-receptor protein. Lesions of the central nervous system 
following the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer are usually presumed to be metastatic. Therefore, 
these lesions may be irradiated without complete clinical investigation. If the clinician is aware of this 
association, appropriate diagnostic procedures could lead to the surgical removal of a benign menigioma. 
Skull x-rays, bone scan, brain scan, CAT scan, and cerebral angiograms are useful in making a diagnosis. 
Besides surgery, radiation therapy and hormonal therapy may play a role in the management. 



Three more cases are added to the few previously re- 
ported in the literature. Lesions of the central nervous 
system following the diagnosis and treatment of a breast 
cancer may be presumed to be metastatic and irradiated 
without complete clinical investigation. An awareness 
of this association with modem techniques of investi- 
gation, particularly CAT scanning, may permit more 
cases to be diagnosed and treated earlier. 


A 57-year-old woman was admitted to The Brooklyn Hos- 
pital for the first time in December 1972, with a complaint of 
imbalance for a period of two months. There was no mass on 
breast examination. X-ray of the skull revealed demineraliza- 


t Chief, Neurological Surgery, The Brooklyn Hospital and Assistant 
Professor, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center. 
$ Surgical Resident, The Brooklyn Hospital, Brooklyn, New York. 
Address for reprints: Dwiref Mehta, MD, The Brooklyn Hospital, 

The authors thank H. Robert Freund, MD, Chairman, Department 
of Surgery, The Brooklyn-Cumberland Medical Center; Sherman 
Stein, MD, Assistant Professor, Downstate Medical Center; Mr. Ar- 
mando Loney, Photographer; Ms. Maritza Miranda, Medical Secre- 
tary; and Ms. Yvonne Pena for providing their services in completing 
this report. 

tion ofthe dorsum sella and the posterior clinoid process. Brain 
scan showed a well defined midline lesion with increased ac- 
tivity. Bilateral carotid angiogram demonstrated a large 
subfrontal mass with intensive and persistent tumor staining 
and prominent vascular supply from the right ophthalmic ar- 
tery. A diagnosis of an olfactory groove meningioma was 
made. In January 1973 a craniotomy was performed with re- 
moval of an olfactory groove meningioma. She was discharged 
two weeks after surgery without any neurological deficit. In 
October 1973 she was readmitted for excision of a leptomen- 
ingeal cyst at the site of previous craniotomy and was dis- 
charged in satisfactory condition. In December 1974 she was 
found to have carcinoma of the breast and a left radical mas- 
tectomy was performed. In March 1976 the patient was read- 
mitted with low back pain due to metastasis to the lumbar 
spine. She received 3000 rad of Cobalt 60, in two weeks, lo- 
cally. Systemic chemotherapy of 5-flurouracil(5 FU), Cytoxan 
(cyclophosphamide) and methotexrate was also started. In 
May 1977 she had a total hip replacement following a patho- 
logic fracture of the left hip. In December 1978 she died due 
to visceral metastasis. She had no evidence of central nervous 
system metastasis. 

A 76-year-old woman underwent a left radical mastectomy 
in October 1977 at The Brooklyn Hospital for carcinoma of 
the breast. In June 198 1 she was readmitted for an episode of 
seizure and history of an occasional headache. She was inves- 
tigated for a possible metastatic lesion to the brain. Brain scan 
revealed a large round tumor mass in the left posterior parietal 
region. CAT scan showed a smoothly marginated well defined 
mass of high density in the same area. Left selective carotid 





TABLE I . Differential Diagnosis of Meningioma 
from Metastatic Lesions 





















arteries prolonged 
staining 
Randomly distributed cortical 
arteries early drainage of 
veins 
angiogram demonstrated the presence of large mass in the left 
posterior parietal region. In June 198 1 a craniotomy was per- 
formed with total excision of the mass which was subsequently 
reported as meningioma by histopathologic study. She has 
been free of symptoms since with no recurrence of the breast 
cancer. 

A 73-year-old woman underwent right radical mastectomy 
in August 1980 at The Downstate Medical Center for carci- 
noma of the breast. In November of 198 I she was readmitted 
with complaints of headache, unsteady gait, and poor memory 
of three weeks duration. On admission, neurological exami- 
nation revealed her to be alert and oriented but somewhat 
forgetful and confused. Her speech was normal. There was 
bilateral papilledema, mild dysarthria, nystagmus on right lat- 
eral gaze, and truncal ataxia. General examination revealed 

a healed mastectomy incision and some enlarged lymph nodes 
in the left supraclavicular region. Routine blood and urine 
tests were normal. Brain scan revealed a large mass in the right 
posterior fossa. CAT scan revealed a very large tumor in the 
posterior fossa to the right of the midline, which was regular, 
more dense than brain, surrounded by edema and intense en- 
hancing. A cerebral arteriogram performed showed a very 
large, mostly avascular tumor with some blood supply from 
the right posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries. On 
November 4, 1981, a left ventriculoperitoneal shunt and left 
supraclavicular lymph node biopsy were performed. The bi- 
posy specimen showed only inflammation. The shunt worked 
well and eventually her status improved considerably. On 
November 13, 1981, she underwent a craniotomy with total 
excision of the mass in the posterior fossa which was subse- 
quently reported as meningioma by histopathologic study. She 
had an uneventful postoperative recovery and since then has 
been asymptomatic. 


Carcinoma of the breast is more common in women, 
the peak age between 45-60 years. A history of breast 
cancer in the immediate family places a woman at a 
greater risk.' Hormonal factors play an important role 
in the incidence and development of breast cancer. 
MacMahon has stated that the ovaries clearly are the 
prime target for etiologic investigations in breast cancer.' 
Estrone and Estradiol are carcinogenic. Estriol, the pro- 
duction of which increases during pregnancy, is non- 
carcinogenic. Estrogen-receptor proteins present in car- 
cinoma of the breast are primarily of the 8s variety when 
measured by the surcrose gradient m e t h ~ d . ~ Sixty per- 
cent of breast cancer cases have estrogen-receptor pro- 
tein. 
Meningiomas occur twice as frequently in women 
than men and usually manifest symptoms in the fifth 
and sixth d e ~ a d e . ~ The relationship between pregnancy 
and rapid progression of symptoms in patients with 
meningioma was described by Cushing and Eisenhardt 
in 1929.5 Since that time many authors have postulated 
that an acceleration in the growth rate of the tumor may 
occur perhaps secondary to hormonal changes.6-8 The 
epidemiologic factors and clinical course of some me- 
ningiomas suggest that these tumors may be hormonally 
sensitive. Donnell et aL9 reported the presence of the 4s 
and 8s fraction of estrogen-receptor protein in their 
study. Posner," in an autopsy based retrospective study 
of 324 patients with end stage breast cancer, found four 
cases of meningioma, and incidence of 1.2% which is 
significantly higher than in the general population. Two 
additional breast cancer patients under his care under- 
went successful excision of meningiomas. '' Menin- 
giomas are benign curable lesions accounting for 12- 



20% of all intracranial tumors. Although usually solitary 
lesions, they may be multiple in up to 3.4% of all cases." 
About 8-10% of Stage IV breast cancer patients have 
central nervous system involvement. A physician find- 
ing a lesion of the central nervous system, in association 
with carcinoma of the breast is likely to presume that 
it is metastatic and complete clinical investigation may 
not be camed out. Schoenberg et aL8 in a retrospective 
study of nervous system neoplasms and primary malig- 
nancies of other sites found a unique association be- 
tween meningiomas and breast cancer. Among eight 
cases reported, five had breast cancer first and menin- 
gioma was subsequently diagnosed, and three patients 
with meningioma subsequently developed breast can- 
cer.8 Seventy-five percent of the meningiomas in their 
study were symptomatic. Smith et al.' 
in 1978 reported 
two cases of meningioma following breast cancer. In the 
first case, central nervous system manifestations devel- 
oped two weeks after mastectomy. A brain scan revealed 
two lesions for which she was irradiated under the 
impression of a metastatic lesion. However, the neu- 
rologic symptoms did not improve. After one year, fur- 
ther investigations and craniotomy revealed menin- 
giomas which were excised and the patient became 
asymptomatic. Autopsy in the second case, in which the 
patient had central nervous system manifestations be- 
fore her death, showed diffuse metastatic disease. How- 
ever, the brain was free of metastasis, but as well cir- 
cumscribed meningioma was present." Since then, three 
more patients with breast cancer under his care under- 
went successful excision of meningi~mas.'~ A review of 
the literature shows that prior diagnosis of either me- 
ningioma or breast cancer does not preclude the pos- 
sibility of developing the other lesion at a later date. An 
awareness of this association could lead to the removal 
of a benign meningioma. Therefore, a patient with me- 
ningioma should be closely followed-up for subsequent 
development of breast cancer which can then be treated 
in an earlier stage. No data is available as to the inci- 
dence of breast cancer in patients with a prior diagnosis 
of meningioma. 


Table 1 lists the investigations which are useful in 
diagnosis and management. In the CAT scan, menin- 
giomas (Fig. 1) appear as a well-defined mass of density 
equal to or slightly higher than that of the adjacent brain 
tissue. Their density usually enhances homogenously 
after contrast medium inje~tion.','~ Meningiomas are 
usually in the midline. Metastasis (Fig. 2) from breast 
cancer appears as a low density lesion due to the large 
amount of edematous fluid in the tumor and surround- 

ing tissue. There is enhancement after injection of con- 
trast medium with no change in the density of peripheral 
edema." The accuracy of CAT scanning in making a 
specific diagnosis of meningioma is as high or higher 
than any of the other methods, including the invasive 
ones, 96%. 
Cerebral angiogram is invasive and makes a specific 
diagnosis in 75% of the meningiomas. ' I Meningiomas 
are usually found in the midline, supplied mainly by 
meningeal arteries and may have a diffuse, homogenous, 
and prolonged staining in the early and late phases. 
Tumor staining is not seen in every case. Metastatic 
lesions are randomly distributed, usually fed by cortical 
arteries, and show tumor vessels and early draining 
veins. Periodic physical examination and mammogra- 
phy should be done in patients with prior meningioma. 

Carcinoma of the breast: Depending on the stage and 
estrogen-receptor protein studies breast cancer can be 
treated with surgery, irradiation chemotherapy, or hor- 
monal ablation. 
Meningioma: Surgical excision is the treatment of 
choice. In some cases radiation therapy might be help- 
ful: 
If hormonal therapy were found to be successful 
in slowing or halting the growth of some meningiomas 
it could have some clinical importance.' 
Before designating a patient with carcinoma of the 
breast as having a metastatic lesion to the brain, the 
above described investigation should aid in making a 
diagnosis. However, to be certain of the exact pathology 
one has to proceed with excisional biopsy of the mass, 



particularly if it is a solitary lesion following carcinoma 
of the breast. Multiple lesions to the brain should also 
be completely investigated before labeling them meta- 
static. 

There seems to be a possible epidemiologic and hor- 
monal relationship between carcinoma of the breast and 
meningioma. Meningiomas may be multiple in 3.4% of 
all cases." About 8-10% of Stage IV breast cancer have 
central nervous system metastatic involvement. Hence, 
lesions of the central nervous system following the di- 
agnosis and treatment of breast cancer are usually pre- 
sumed to be metastatic. The majority of these lesions 
are irradiated without complete investigation. If the cli- 
nician is aware of this association, proper diagnostic 
procedures could lead to the removal of a benign me- 
ningioma in some cases. Likewise, a patient with me- 
ningioma should be closely followed for subsequent de- 
velopment of breast cancer which can then be treated 
in an earlier stage. Screening of relatives of these patients 
might detect some lesions earlier. Estrogen-receptor 
studies in cases of meningioma might be helpful. With 
modem techniques of investigation, particularly CAT 
scan, cases will be diagnosed earlier. Besides surgery, 
irradiation and hormonal therapy might be helpful in 
a small number of cases. 

First European Seminar on Computerized Axial Tomography in Clin- 
ical Practice. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer, 1977; 1 11-1 17. 
2. MacMahon B, Cole P, Brown J. Etiology of human breast cancer 





5. Cushing J, Eisenhardt L. Meningiomas arising from the tuber- 
culum sellae with the syndrome of primary optic atrophy and bitem- 
poral field defects combined with normal sella turcisa in a middle aged 
person. Arch Ophlhamol 1929; 1:1-41, 168-206. 
6. Bicherstaff ER, Small JM, Guest IA. The relapsing course of 
certain meningiomas in relation to pregnancy and menstruation. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatary 1958; 2 I :89-9 I . 


8. Schoenberg BS, Christine BW, Whisnant JP. Nervous system 
neoplasms and primary malignancies of other sites: The unique as- 
sociation between meningiomas and breast cancer. Neurology 1975; 
25:705-7 12. 

tein in intracranial meningiomas. J Neurosurg 1979; 50:499-502. 
10. Posner JB. Personal communication (January 24, 1982). 
I I. Claveria LE, Sutton D, Tress BM. The radiological diagnosis 
of meningiomas: The impact of EM1 Scanning. Br J Radio1 1977; 
50: 15-22. 
12. Smith Fp, Slark M, MacDonald JS. Association of breast cancer 
with meningiomas: Report of two cases and review of literature. Can- 
cer 1978; 4211992-1994. 
13. Smith FP. Personal communication (January 24, 1982). 
14. Sulton D, Claveria LE. Meningioma diagnosed by scanning: A 
review of 100 intracranial cases. In: Boulay GH du, Moseley IF, eds. 
The First European Seminar in Computerized Axial Tomography in 
Clinical Practice. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer, 1977; 102- 
110. 
1. Wends S, Aulich A, Schindler E el al. A german multicenter 
study of intracranial tumors. In: Boulay GH du, Moseley IF, eds. The 


