JournalofHospitalInfection(2003)55,8–13
www.elsevierhealth.com/journals/jhin
Telephone call contact for post-discharge
surveillance of surgical site infections. A pilot,
q
methodological study
E.W. Taylora,*, K. Duffyb, K. Leec, A. Nooned, A. Leanorde, P.M. Kingf,
P. O’Dwyerb
aInverclyde Royal Hospital, Greenock PA16 0XN, UK
bWestern Infirmary, Glasgow, UK
cScottish Centrefor Infection and EnvironmentalHealth, Glasgow, UK
dSCIEH,Glasgow, UK
eMonklands Hospital,Airdrie,Lanarkshire, UK
fAberdeen Royal Infirmary, UK
Received2December2002;receivedinrevisedform9May2003
KEYWORDS Summary Accurate determination of superficial surgical-site infection (SSI) requires
Telephonecalls;Post- post-discharge surveillance (PDS) for up to 30 days. To be useful for regional or
dischargesurveillance; nationalauditthemethodmustbeeffective,inexpensive,andacceptabletopatients.
Postoperativeinfection; WeassessedtheroleoftelephonecallstopatientsinPDSofSSIin3150patientsin32
Herniarepair Scottishhospitalsundergoinggroinherniarepairduringoneyear.Overall,104(3.3%)
patientsoptedoutoftheauditbydecliningtogiveacontacttelephonenumber,96
(3.0%) could not provide a personal telephone contact number, and 12 could not be
contacted,acompliancerateof93.3%.Twothousand,ninehundredandthirty-eight
patients were contacted at one or all of the call points, i.e. 10, 20, or 30 days
postoperatively, from a single call centre by medical records clerks, working to a
pilotedprotocol.Contactdata,includingcontactatallthreetimepointsareavailable
on2665(84.6%)patients.Allpatientswhobelievedtheirwoundtobeinfectedwere
seen by a healthcare worker (HCW) to confirm or refute the diagnosis. Of the 2665
patients in whom complete data are available, 140 (5.3%) patients developed
confirmedwoundinfectionandafurther57(2.1%)thoughttheirwoundwasinfected,
butthiswasnotconfirmedbytheHCW.Patientsappearedtowelcometheconceptof
telephonecontact.Methodsforidentifyingallpatientseligibleforsurveillanceneedto
be improved. However, we believe this method of patient contact could be
appropriateforPDSinregionalornationalaudit.
Q 2003 The Hospital Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights
reserved.
Introduction
qThisworkwasundertakenattheWesternInfirmary,Glasgow
andathospitalsthroughoutScotland.
Infection remains a common complication after
*Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress:eric.taylor@irh.scot.nhs.uk most forms of surgery. In ‘clean’ operations no
0195-6701/03/$-seefrontmatterQ2003TheHospitalInfectionSociety.PublishedbyElsevierScienceLtd.Allrightsreserved.
doi:10.1016/S0195-6701(03)00217-2
Telephonecallsfor SSI Surveillance 9
bacterially colonized tract of the body is opened
Table I Methods of post-discharge surveillance (adapted
and any postoperative wound infection might be
fromBruceetal.4)
seenasareflectionoftheenvironmentalconditions
in which the operation was performed, or as an Method Rangeofresponserates
(%)
indicator of surgical technique and expertise. The
incidenceofpostoperative,‘clean’woundinfection
Directobservationofwounds 67–85
could, therefore, be advocated as an indicator of
bymedical,nursingor
hospital performance and a possible form of infectioncontrolstaff
assessment for clinicalgovernance. Postalquestionnairetopatients 30–79
The incidence of surgical-site infection (SSI) HCWs/surgeon 50–79
Diarycards 54–65
recorded in the course of audit depends on the
Telephonecontactwithpatients, 38–92
definition of SSI adopted, on the intensity of
GPsorotherHCWs
surveillance, and on the prevalence of risk factors
for SSI in the patient group being audited. The HCW,healthcareworker;GPs,generalpractitioners.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
definitions of infection1 have been developed and
validated over the past 20 years and are the
afterthepatienthasbeendischargedfromhospital
definitions most commonly used for diagnosis of
wouldberepeated,frequentreviewofpatientsbya
SSI in audit and research worldwide. In addition
other work has shown that most postoperative, trained HCW.7,8 This approach is likely to be too
superficial SSIs present within 30 days of oper- labour intensive and expensive for a national audit
ation,2andthishasbecometheacceptedperiodof after operations where a low incidence of SSI is
surveillance for SSI after operations that do not anticipated.
involve prosthetic implantation. With the increas- Currently 93% of households have a land-line
ing trend towards day-care or short-stay hospital- telephoneand73%oftheadultpopulationnowown
ization for many clean wound operations, a mobile telephone (Annual Market Information
surveillance of the patient in the community, 1996/7 to 2000/1. Dec 2001. www.oftel.gov.uk,
post-discharge surveillance (PDS), is an important Chapter 4). We have undertaken a study to assess
part of the audit of postoperative complications.3 the feasibility and effectiveness of telephone
Todeterminetheincidenceofinfectionaccurately, interviews to screen patients for the presence of
all patients undergoing the procedure must be SSIafterdischargefollowinga‘clean’procedure,a
surveyed for the same duration and using the groin hernia repair. Groin hernias were considered
same definition of infection. suitable for thispilot methodologicalstudy as they
There is no international consensus on the areday-caseorshort-stayoperations,andthiswork
optimal method of PDS. Many approaches have wouldbeafollow-ontotheScottishHerniaAudit,9
been reported including patient review by a inwhichallcomplications after groin herniarepair
healthcare worker (HCW) at follow-up clinics or by had been audited by a group based in the Western
questionnaire,contactingpatientsbyquestionnaire Infirmary, Glasgow, and which had suggested the
orbytelephone.Thesemethodsarethesubjectofa incidence of infection was 8%.
systematic critical analysis by Bruce et al.4 who
report a range in the effectiveness of follow-up
from 30% to over 90% (Table I). The comparative
costs of these methodsis not reported. Method
Diagnosis of the presence of an SSI is also
problematical. Different definitions of infection
have beenappliedand thevalidityofthe diagnosis
Patients studied
of wound infection during PDS is not often
reported.5 In some studies the diagnosis has been
madebyaHCWandintheothers thediagnosis has Patientsundergoinggroinherniarepairinmainland
beenmadebythepatient.Theabilityofthepatient Scottish hospitals between October 2000 and
todiagnoseinfectionaccuratelyhasbeenshown,in September 2001 were included in the audit. All
anumberofstudies,tobepoor.6,7Howeverthereis surgeonsinvolvedgavepermissionfordataontheir
some evidence to suggest that the patient is much patients to be utilized in this audit. In view of the
more accurate in determining when their wound is fact that this was an audit of SSI, and nonew form
not infected.5,6 of treatment was being investigated, Ethics Com-
The most accurate method of diagnosing SSI mitteeapprovalwas not considered necessary.
10 E.W. Taylor et al.
Data collection training in the use of a standardized, piloted
telephone questionnaire and were made at a time
The audit centre that the patient had previously indicated would be
Astudyco-ordinatingcentrewasestablishedatthe convenient. The audit centre staff worked flexibly
Western Infirmaryin Glasgow. Three staff based at to permitawiderange of call times.
thecentrecoordinatedthestudy,beingresponsible
for liaison with hospitals, for patient recruitment Confirmation of the diagnosis of SSI by aHCW
data entry, making telephone calls to patients, Patients who reported a wound problem during a
arranging for HCWs to inspect suspect wounds, telephone interview were referred to a HCW who
collecting additional data from case notes, and assessed whether the wound was infected and
entering all the study data on to the database. In institutedtreatmentifnecessary.Itwaslogistically
addition, the project co-ordinator visited each difficult to arrange training in SSI diagnosis against
participatinghospitaltocollectdataonriskfactors the definition for all HCWs in this national study,
for infection, duration of operation, etc. but the definition was sent to the HCW every time
an assessment was requested and staff were asked
Recruitmentof patients to make the assessment against this diagnosis.
Onadmissiontothehospital,localmedicalrecords Arrangementsweremadeforthepatienttobeseen
staff were asked to give each patient undergoing
assoonaspossible,eitherinprimarycareoratthe
groin hernia repair a written explanation of the
hospital where the operation was performed. A
study,aninvitationtotakepartandaquestionnaire
‘Details of Infection’ form was faxed to the HCW
tocompletewhichwouldindicatetheirhome,work
who was to see the patient for completion.
and/or mobile telephone numbers. If a patient
Diagnosis of infection was made according to the
declined to take part, by not giving contact CDC definition of superficial SSI1 and a copy of this
telephone numbers, this was documented. The
definition was included with the ‘Details of Infec-
completed questionnaires were transmitted elec-
tion’formforusebytheHCWmakingthediagnosis.
tronically to the audit centre established at the
The HCW was asked to complete the form and to
Western Infirmary, Glasgow, and entered onto the
take a microbiological wound culture swab if this
study database.
was appropriate. The completed form was trans-
mitted back to the audit centre for entry onto the
Telephone calls topatients
study database.
Thestudydatabasewasprogrammedtoalertcentre
staff to contact the patients at 10, 20 and 30 days
Costing of telephone calls
after operation to ascertain whether they thought
The duration of all calls where this was recorded
they had a wound infection and to ask about their
was summed and this was costed at British Tele-
symptoms. The questions asked at each telephone
com’s call per minute rate at peak time
contact are given in Table II. The questions asked
(£0.08/min). Faxes were costed at £0.08each.
were intended to detect superficial SSIs only, not
deep or organ/space infections.
All follow-up telephone calls were made by one
Results
of three members of staff, who had received
Theauditwasconductedfrom1October2000to30
TableII Questionnairefortelephonecontacts September 2001. Details of 3150 patients were
received by the audit centre, of whom 104 (3.3%)
Doyouthinkyouhavedevelopedawoundinfection?
Howmanydaysagodidyoufirstnoticeanysignsofinfection? declined to give contact details. Twenty-five (24%)
Istheareaaroundthewoundredandinflamed? of these patients were in one hospital. Overall,
Isthewoundswollenorpainful? 2938 patients were contacted by telephone at one
Doyouhaveanyfluidleakingfromyourwound?
ormoreofthecontacttimepointsduringthestudy,
IfYES,isit:(a)clear?(b)pus/cloudyyellow?(c)pink,redor
blood? givingaresponserateof93.3%.Completefollow-up
Isthewoundgapingopen? data,withcontactat10,20and30days,aswellas
Doyouhaveatemperature? the data required from the operation notes, were
Hasanyoneseenthewound,e.g.districtnurseorGP?IfYES,
availableon2665patients.Theremaining381were
who?
excluded because the patient was not contactable
Hasawoundswabbeentaken?
Areyoutakinganyantibioticsforawoundinfection?IfYES, by telephone on one or more of the three contact
givename(s) dates (N¼116); only the general practitioner’s
(GP)contacttelephonenumberwasgivenðN¼96Þ,
Telephonecallsfor SSI Surveillance 11
the HCW record was missing ðN¼6Þ; and required Audit Group (CRAG) of the Scottish Executive. The
data from operation notes were missing ðN¼163Þ costsadditionaltoroutineclinicalpracticewereas
(Figure 1). follows: computer programming and data analysis
Up to four attempts were made to contact each £10 000; telephone calls/faxes £959; project co-
patient at each time point. A total of 104 patients ordinator and medical records staff salaries
couldnotbecontactedatoneormoreofthethree £62 942; travel expenses £6327; supplies £2960;
call points. In addition, 12 patients were not total£83 188.Nochargewasmadeforthefacilities
contacted at any point. The number of calls made used in which to conduct the audit.
was 11 502, with a median of one call to each The cost of a hospital consultant outpatient
patient at each time point. Three quarters of all consultation is currently £63, and £19 for a GP
calls (8787/11502) resulted in successful data consultation (NHS Executive ‘The New NHS—Refer-
collection. The duration of the call was recorded ence Costs 2001’. www.doh.gov.uk/nhsexec/
for 83% of these calls, which averaged about 1min refcosts.htm).Thirtypatientswereseenforreview
(range 1–23min). Calls were made between 05.58 in hospital, at a cost of up to £1890, and the other
and 21.15h, with the majority (91%) being made 167patientsseeninprimarycareatacostofupto
during ‘peaktime’ (08.00 to 18.00). £3173. Therefore the total cost for this audit is
£88 251, which is £28.97 for each of the 3146
SSI patients participating.
Of the 2665 patients for whom complete data are
available, 197 (7.4%) reported that they thought
Discussion
they had a wound infection. SSI was confirmed by
the HCW in 140 (71%) of these patients; 59 (42%)
In an era of clinical governance, it is increasingly
presentedbetween0and10days,55(39%)between
important that surgeons and hospital management
11 and 20 days, and 26 (19%) between 21 and 30
are aware of the incidence of healthcare-associ-
days. The overall confirmed incidence of infection
ated infection and other complications of hospital
was 5.3%. Further details of the results from this
audit and the influence of the risk factors for care, and are thus able to take steps to minimize
infectionwill be published elsewhere. thesecomplications.However,withthediminishing
The majority (80%) of patients who suspected duration of postoperative inpatient stay and the
thattheyhadaSSIwereseeningeneralpracticeby increasing trend towards day-care or short-stay
aGPorbyanurse,andaninfectionwasconfirmed surgery, the incidence of infection after operation
in77%(121/158).Surgicalwardstaffconfirmedthe becomesdifficulttodetermine.Thereis,asyet,no
presenceofaSSIin47%(14/30)ofpatientsseenby agreement on the optimal method of PDS. In an
them. Other hospital-based HCWs, including acci- article in 1999 entitled ‘Guidelines for the preven-
dent and emergency doctors and nurses, and an tionofsurgicalsiteinfection’Mangrametal.state
audit nurse, reviewed the remainder of patients, ‘At this time, no consensus exists on which post-
diagnosinginfection in 67% (5/9). discharge surveillance methods are the most
sensitive, specific, and practical’.10 Monitoring for
Costs SSI after the patient has left hospital presents two
challenges, first to follow-up all eligible patients,
The audit was funded by the Clinical Research and andsecondtodiagnosewoundinfectionaccurately
in these patients.
In view of the wide availability of telephone
communicationsintheUK,webelievedthismethod
ofcontactingpatientstoscreenforthepresenceof
SSI should be reassessed. The study has demon-
stratedthatthismethodofcontactisbothfeasible
andeffective.Only3.3%ofpatientsdeclinedtogive
a contact telephone number, and one quarter of
these were in one hospital, which may reflect the
approachorenthusiasmofthestaffmembermaking
the request at that hospital. Ninety-three percent
of those who agreed to take part could be
contacted by telephone. This compares very
Figure 1 Studyprofile. favourably with other methods of PDS (Table I).4
12 E.W. Taylor et al.
Mostpatientswerehappytobecontactedaboutthe differenceintheproportionofinfectionsconfirmed
stateoftheirwound,andtheaveragedurationofa in hospital and in general practice. It was not
successful call was very short at 1min. The possible to validate the accuracy of the diagnoses
increasing prevalence and availability of mobile thatweremadebytheseHCWs.Inanyfuturestudy
telephonesmakescontactingpatientsmucheasier, it would be essential to ensure that all HCWs
particularly in those age groups and in those areas undertaking diagnosis ofSSIaretrainedindiagnos-
of the country where there is a high level of ing infection according to the CDC definition, and
workforcemobility.Ifthismethodweretobeused for quality checks to be undertaken to ensure that
inareasofthecountrywhereEnglishisnotthefirst woundinfections are being accurately diagnosed.
language of a proportion of the population appro- We were unable to ensure that all patients
priatearrangements would need to be considered. undergoing groin hernia repair were invited to
Weigeltetal.2havedemonstratedthat96%ofall participate in this study and, from the previous
superficialwoundinfectionsareevidentbythe28th ScottishHerniaAudit,9weareawarethatthetotal
postoperative day and 30 days has become the number of patients undergoing groin hernia repair
accepteddurationoffollow-upforSSIswherethere in Scottish hospitals each year is in the region of
is no prosthetic implant. We attempted to contact 5500.Thereforeweestimatethatthisauditisbased
allpatientsat10,20and30dayspostoperatively,as on55–60%ofthetotaleligiblepopulation,buthave
it was not clear when in this period the infection no reason to believe that failure to invite patients
usuallypresentsandwhetherallthreecontactsare to participate in this prospective audit was other
necessary. We found that patients presented with than ona random basis.
confirmed infection throughout the 30-day surveil- It was not possible to establish an efficient or
lanceperiod.Asinglecallat30dayswouldnotbea consistent method of identification of all eligible
satisfactory method of audit, as diagnosis will patients and we had to rely on a variety of local
depend on the patient’s recall of the presence of arrangements.Thisapproachreliedonthegoodwill
signs and symptoms of infection. Further, if only a ofvariousmembersofstaffandontheiravailability
singlecallweretobemadeat30days,thepresence andmemoryratherthanonestablishedprocedures.
of infection could not always be confirmed by a Ifnationalauditistobeundertakenbythismethod
HCW. in the future, efficient recruitment of patients can
The method we have studied is suitable for the onlytakeplaceifdataareavailablethatenablethe
diagnosis of superficial wound infection but we identification of the eligible patient group, and
found that only 140 (71.2%) of the 197 patients robust organization ensures recruitment of all
reporting problems were correctly diagnosed as eligible patients. Obtaining telephone contact
infection by the patient. This figure is consistent details needs to be done in accordance with
with the results of other studies.5,6 Deep SSIs and guidance on the confidentiality of patient
infectionsassociatedwithimplantsusuallyresultin information.
contactwithaHCWand/orreadmissiontohospital. WebelievethismethodofauditofSSIisfeasible
Other methods of ascertainment, for example and financially viable. This audit has cost less than
through linkage of inpatient records, may need to £30perhead,whereastohavepatientsreviewedin
be used in the surveillance of these more severe primary care or in hospital at the same intervals
postoperative infections. would have been greatly more expensive and, we
Previous studies have demonstrated that believe, less acceptable to the patient. We have
patients accurately diagnose the absence of a used a telephone call centre concept with clerical
wound complication,5,6 but are less accurate in staff contacting the patients, working to a piloted
diagnosingthepresenceofinfection.Screeningfor protocol and have only reviewed, physically, those
woundinfectionthroughtelephonecallstopatients patients where there appeared to be a wound
identified the small proportion (197 or 7% of 2665) complication.Adedicatedcallcentrehasanumber
who needed to be seen by a HCW to confirm or of benefits, which include standardizing the con-
refute the patient’s diagnosis of SSI. The HCW was tent and tone of the telephone contact. It also
provided with a copy of the CDC definitions of permits flexible, out-of-hours working, which
superficialSSIeachtimeapatientwasreferredfor improves the likelihood of successful contact with
examination of a suspect wound and was asked to the patient.
report whether a wound infection was present Collection of appropriate data for audit should
according to that definition. The majority of become part of the admission routine of the
patients had their wounds assessed in primary patient. Linkage and integration of operating
care. However a large number of different HCWs theatre data to hospital admission and discharge
wereinvolvedindiagnosis,andtherewasamarked data, and to laboratory data is essential before
Telephonecallsfor SSI Surveillance 13
meaningful audit can be conducted on a national definitions of nosocomial surgical site infections, 1992: a
basis using standardized data collection sets. modificationofCDCdefinitionsofsurgicalwoundinfection.
InfectControlHospEpidemiol1992;13:606—608.
Previous studies have indicated a wide variation in
2. WeigeltJA,DryerD,HaleyRW.Thenecessityandefficiency
the effectiveness of telephone call contact to
ofwoundsurveillanceafterdischarge.ArchSurg1992;127:
identify possible postoperative infection. This
77—82.
study has demonstrated that using a dedicated 3. Mishriki SF, Law DJ, Jeffery PJ. Factors affecting the
callcentreinaneraofwidetelephoneavailability, incidence of postoperative wound infection. J Hosp Infect
contact can be made with a high proportion of 1990;16:223—230.
4. Bruce J, Russell EM, Mollison J, Krukowski ZH. The
patients by this method and is acceptable to the
measurement and monitoring of surgical adverse events.
majority of patients. It has permitted the identifi-
Health Technology Assessment, Vol 5.; 2001. Number 22
cationofthesmallproportionofpatientswhoneed
p.29—53.
to be seen by a HCW to document the presence of 5. Barratt E, Fuller A, Hollyoak V. An evaluation of post
infection. We would commend this method of dischargesurveillancemethodsforsurgicalsiteinfection:
patientcontactforauditasamodelforthefuture, PhaseII.2000.PHLSCDSC.NorthernandYorkshire.
indeedthecallcentreconceptcouldbebroadened 6. Whitby M, McLaws M-L, Collopy B, et al. Post-discharge
surveillance:canpatientsreliablydiagnosesurgicalwound
to include audit of other medical and surgical
infections?JHospInfect2002;52:155—160.
outcomes.
7. ReillyJS,BairdD,HillR.Theimportanceofdefinitionsand
methods in surgical wound infection audit. J Hosp Infect
2001;47:64—66.
Acknowledgements 8. BaileyIS,KarranSE,ToynK,BroughP,RanaboldoC,Karran
SJ. Community surveillance of complications after hernia
surgery.BMJ1992;304:469—471.
The audit was supported by funding from the
9. Hair A, Duffy K, McLean J, et al. Groin hernia repair in
Clinical Research and Audit Group (CRAG) of the Scotland.BrJSurg2000;87:1722—1726.
ScottishExecutive. 10. MangramAJ,HoranTC,PearsonML,TheHospitalInfection
ControlPracticesAdvisoryCommittee,etal.Guidelinesfor
prevention of surgical site infection. Am J Infect Control
1999;27:97—132.
References
1. HoranTC,GaynesRP,MartoneWJ,JarvisWR,EmoriTG.CDC
