JOURNAL OF PALLIATIVE MEDICINE 
Volume 9, Number 1, 2006 
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. 
Outcome Evaluation of a Randomized Trial of the 
PhoenixCare Intervention: Program of Case Management 
and Coordinated Care for the Seriously Chronically Ill 
LEONA S. AIKEN, Ph.D.,1 JONATHAN BUTNER, Ph.D.,2 CAROL A. LOCKHART, Ph.D.,3 
BARBARA E. VOLK-CRAFT, Ph.D.,4 GILLIAN HAMILTON, M.D., Ph.D.,4 
and FRANK G. WILLIAMS, Ph.D.5 

Objective: To document outcomes of a randomized trial of the PhoenixCare demonstration 
program of palliative care and coordinated care/case management for seriously chronically ill 
individuals who simultaneously received active treatment from managed care organizations 
(MCOs). 


Setting: Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona. 
Participants: Participants were 192 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

Intervention: Intensive home-based case management provided by registered nurse case- 
managers, in coordination with patients’ existing source of medical care, comprised the in- 
tervention. Program foci included disease and symptom management, patient self-manage- 
ment of illness and knowledge of illness-related resources, preparation for end-of life, 
physical and mental functioning, and utilization of medical services. 
Outcome measures: Outcomes, assessed every 3 months by telephone interview, included 
measures related to all program foci; the SF-36™ was used to evaluate physical and mental 
functioning; emergency department visits exemplified medical service utilization. 
Results: Compared to controls, PhoenixCare patients exhibited significantly better outcomes 
on self-management of illness, awareness of illness-related resources, and legal preparation 
for end of life. They reported lower symptom distress, greater vitality, better physical func- 
tioning and higher self-rated health than randomized controls. Emergency department uti- 
lization was equivalent across groups. Patients with COPD showed stronger responsiveness 
to the intervention. 
Conclusion: A novel model of patient care that combined greatly enhanced palliative care- 
focused case management with ongoing MCO-based treatment was associated with improved 
functioning of chronically severely ill patients in the last years of life. 
1Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona. 
2Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
3Lockhart Associates, Tempe, Arizona. 
4Hospice of the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona. 
5Professor Emeritus, Department of Health Administration and Policy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona. 




OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE OF 
THE PHOENIXCARE PROGRAM 

end-of-life are matters of great concern to the 
health care delivery system.1–3 Patients with se- 
rious advanced illness experience undertreat- 
ment of symptoms while they receive aggressive 
life-prolonging treatments that are both physi- 
cally burdensome and costly.4 By design of 
Medicare funding for the hospice benefit, these 
patients gain access to palliative care focused 
on alleviation of symptoms, support for care- 
givers/families, and preparation for end of life 
only after they have relinquished disease-modi- 
fying or curative treatment. Palliative care fund- 
ing through Medicare is available only for the 
final 6 months of life. Yet many patients and fam- 
ilies may face unmet clinical needs for a longer 
period of time than the hospice benefit allows.4 
To address these issues of quality and cost of 
care The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 
in 1999 
funded 22 demonstration projects 
through a national initiative, Promoting Excel- 
lence at End-of-Life Care. The initiative sought to 
support novel care delivery models that “ex- 
tend(ed) palliative care upstream in the course of 
illness, concurrent with ongoing life-extending 
care”2 (p. 311) with the aim of identifying suc- 
cessful models and approaches. Among the 22 
projects was the PhoenixCare program, a demon- 
stration program of palliative care and coordi- 
nated care/case management services designed 
specifically for seriously chronically ill individu- 
als who were simultaneously receiving active dis- 
ease treatment through managed care plans. The 
demonstration project was funded to Hospice of 
the Valley, Phoenix, Arizona, one of the largest 
community-based hospice providers in the coun- 
try. 
This paper provides the outcome evaluation of 
a randomized trial to assess the impact of the 
PhoenixCare program. From the perspective of 
outcome evaluation, randomized trials to evalu- 
ate community models of enhanced case man- 
agement and palliative care for individuals are 
rare. Programs have been documented with case 
studies,5,6 demonstration projects showing effects 
in treated groups in the absence of untreated 
comparison groups7 or in nonequivalent control 
group designs.8–10 Meier et al.,11 describe the im- 
plementation of a randomized trial of an inter- 
vention to integrate formal palliative care with 
case management. 

PhoenixCare was a freestanding program of 
home-based palliative care case management de- 
veloped specifically for The Robert Wood John- 
son initiative.12 Distinct from the hospice model, 
it was designed to reach patients receiving treat- 
ment from one of multiple managed care organi- 
zations (MCOs). Participants were home-resid- 
ing, were diagnosed with congestive heart failure 
(CHF) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), and had a life expectancy of up to 2 years 
from time of enrollment (rather than the 6-month 
window of Medicare hospice). The goal of the 
PhoenixCare program was to expand the scope 
of patient care and to improve patient quality of 
life relative to a comparable group of managed 
care patients not receiving 
the additional 
PhoenixCare intervention services. PhoenixCare 
delivered home-based services focused on dis- 
ease and symptom management, patient and 
caregiver education on disease management, and 
social and psychological support.12 Registered 
nurse case managers delivered the primary 
PhoenixCare services and assumed a leadership 
role in coordinating PhoenixCare services with 
the patient’s primary care physician, with any 
case managers provided by the patient’s MCO, 
and with community agencies. Patients’ health 
care was funded by Arizona’s alternative to Med- 
icaid, by Medicare (cid:1) Choice (Medicare Risk con- 
tracts), or by commercial health insurance plans. 

The rationale for the PhoenixCare approach to 
integration of palliative care with treatment de- 
livery through MCOs was fivefold in nature. 
First, at the time of study design, Arizona had the 
greatest proportion of its health care delivered 
by MCOs.12 Second, in 1998, the year before the 
grant initiative, the federal government initiated 
the managed care Medicare model (Medicare (cid:1) 
Choice) as an alternative to fee-for-service; the 
model rapidly proliferated. A substantial portion 
of chronically ill patients whom PhoenixCare 
aimed to reach were Medicare or Medicaid eligi- 
ble. Third, most individuals with life-limiting ill- 
nesses reside at home rather than in care facili- 
ties.11 Home-based palliative care for individuals 


who were seriously ill but neither institutional- 
ized nor imminently dying would reach the 
largest population needing palliation. Fourth, the 
ability to link a single effective program of pal- 
liative care to a multiplicity of MCOs was ex- 
pected to yield efficiency in providing palliative 
care services while treatment continued. Fifth, it 
appeared that the MCOs would provide a natural 
referral stream of clients to the study. In sum- 
mary, partnering with MCOs was expected to cre- 
ate the combination of treatment and palliation 
that might best serve a large population of pa- 
tients with life-limiting illnesses who were still 
actively living. It was theorized that the Phoenix- 
Care intervention would lead to better physical 
and mental functioning, at less or no more cost 
to the health care system. Lockhart et al.12 pro- 
vide an in-depth description of the PhoenixCare 
program content, its delivery, patient recruit- 
ment, provider and patient reaction, and the gen- 
eralizability of the PhoenixCare model to broad 
medical contexts. 
FOUR PROGRAM FOCI 
AND HYPOTHESES 


Focus 1. Self-management of illness and 
knowledge of resources 
First, the PhoenixCare program aimed to in- 
crease patient self-management of illness and 
knowledge of health-related resources by pro- 
viding information and education to patients and 
caregivers. 

Second, the PhoenixCare program aimed to im- 
prove patients’ preparedness for end of life by 
promoting the acquisition of appropriate legal 
documents and discussion of legal documents 
with significant others. 

Third, the PhoenixCare program aimed to en- 
hance the physical and mental functioning of 
clients through intensive case management by 
PhoenixCare staff, as well as patient education for 
self-management of illness. 

Fourth, the PhoenixCare program aimed to 
shift from utilization of high cost emergency 
medical services and inpatient acute hospitaliza- 
tion to proactive management of disease in out- 
patient settings, through intensive management 
and patient education on self-management of dis- 
ease. 
It was hypothesized that the PhoenixCare par- 
ticipants, compared to controls, would achieve 
better self-management, preparation for end of 
life, and physical and mental functioning (Foci 1 
through 3), with lower utilization of costly emer- 
gency and inpatient services, specifically fewer 
emergency department visits and reduced length 
of stay (LOS) in hospitals (Focus 4). 


By design, all participants were residing at 
home and were members of one of seven MCOs 
in the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area that 
agreed to partner with the PhoenixCare demon- 
stration project. Enrollment occurred during the 
period July 1, 1999 through March 31, 2001. Pa- 
tients could be referred by community agencies, 
hospitals, the MCOs, physicians, family/friends, 
or by self-referral. Over the course of the enroll- 
ment period, 965 individuals were referred for 
evaluation of eligibility for participation, 365 met 
eligibility criteria, and 240 agreed to participate. 
Of the 240 individuals, 192 were diagnosed 
with either COPD (n (cid:2) 62) or CHF (n (cid:2) 130) and 
served as participants in the outcome evaluation. 
The remaining 48 patients had metastatic cancer; 
they were originally included but were elimi- 
nated because of structural changes in the insti- 
tution housing the project. All participants met 
specific criteria designed to enroll patients who 
might live for up to 2 years beyond enrollment, 
based on expert judgment that drew on available 
prognostic data.13–18 
All participants were required to be 18 years of 
age or older. Patients with CHF were required to 
be diagnosed with either class IIIB heart failure 
(i.e., symptoms with any activity) or class IV heart 
failure (i.e., symptoms at rest). Patients with 
COPD were required to have oxygen saturations 
of less than 88% on room air, or baseline pO2 less 
than 55 on room air, and to be on continuous oxy- 


gen. Across the two diseases, all patients were re- 
quired to exhibit marked limitation of physical 
functioning, in that any activity resulted in fa- 
tigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or angina. All pa- 
tients were required to have exhibited recent ex- 
acerbation of their conditions as evidenced by 
treatment in an emergency department, urgent 
care facility, or hospital within the 3 months prior 
to enrollment. For purposes of data collection by 
telephone interview, patients were required to 
have a telephone in the home, and to either speak 
English or have a translator present in the home. 
Participation in PhoenixCare was completely vol- 
untary. Patients were not paid; nor did they or 
their MCO pay for any services provided by the 
program. Patients did not relinquish any health 
care services for which they were otherwise eli- 
gible. 

Eligibility evaluation, randomization to condition, 
and initial data collection. Randomization was car- 
ried out within diagnosis, in blocks of 30 patients 
(15 PhoenixCare, 15 control) by a member of the 
project administration staff. Sealed envelopes, 
color-coded by diagnosis and containing the as- 
signment to condition, were shuffled and as- 
signed to participants in order of shuffling. 
A PhoenixCare staff Enroller completed an ini- 
tial eligibility evaluation interview and intake 
session. In this initial session, eligible patients 
were informed (1) that there were two interven- 
tion conditions, PhoenixCare and control, (2) that 
assignment to condition was random, and (3) that 
all study participants in both conditions would 
receive telephone interviews every three months. 
Patients who agreed to participate gave written 
informed consent and completed the initial in- 
terview that constituted the baseline (time 0) data 
point. Finally, the Enroller, blinded to condition, 
opened the sealed envelope that identified the pa- 
tient’s study condition. All study procedures 
were approved by the Institutional Review Board 
of Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center, a 
collaborating organization. 
Measurement points. Every 3 months all partic- 
ipants received a 30- to 45-minute telephone in- 
terview administered by a professional inter- 
viewing 
to 
condition and diagnosis. Up to 5 callbacks were 
attempted. Patients not interviewed were re- 


tained for future interviews. During the inter- 
view, proxy respondents could read or translate 
for patients. Proxy responses were not accepted, 
because they do not represent patients’ self-per- 
ceived health well.19,20 
Tracing procedures. PhoenixCare staff contacted 
control participants monthly to verify managed 
care enrollment, required for eligibility, docu- 
ment changes in address and in living situation, 
and to verify continued participation. Registered 
nurse case managers updated this information on 
an ongoing basis for PhoenixCare intervention 
participants. 
PhoenixCare intervention. PhoenixCare pallia- 
tive intervention services were added to treat- 
ment services provided by the MCOs to consti- 
tute the PhoenixCare intervention. The complete 
PhoenixCare intervention is described in Lock- 
hart et al.12 Registered nurse case managers, each 
with a caseload of 30–35 patients, provided ser- 
vice. A medical director, social worker, and pas- 
toral counselor provided support to case man- 
agers, who coordinated “care planning with 
PhoenixCare team members, primary care physi- 
cian, health plan case manager (if there were one), 
patient/family, and community agencies.”12 (pp. 
1003–1004). Three distinct care protocols ad- 
dressed phases of service delivery: (1) admission 
and initial case management of medically unsta- 
ble patients, (2) management of stable patients 
following stabilization, and (3) support of unsta- 
ble patients experiencing an exacerbation epi- 
sode. All three protocols provided disease and 
symptom management, educational services, and 
support services. At admission, the disease and 
symptom protocol included assessing current 
health status, identifying immediate symptom 
management needs, establishing communication 
with the MCO contact and attending physician, 
developing an emergency response plan and co- 
ordinating this plan with attending physician. 
Educational services included development of 
advance care plans, providing education to pa- 
tient and family about the disease, about patient 
self-monitoring and self-management of disease. 
Support services included assessing psychologi- 
cal and spiritual needs, assisting with access to 
community resources that might provide custo- 
dial care, transportation, and help with finances. 
During periods of patient stability, the three 
classes of services continued as needed, with 


evaluation of compliance with medication 
regimes, assessment of new symptoms, rein- 
forcement of educational activities including ad- 
vance care planning, and ongoing monitoring of 
need for support services. During illness exacer- 
bation episodes, the registered nurse case man- 
agers took an active role in assessing medical 
status and implementing a symptom control in- 
tervention, and in communicating with the at- 
tending physician and MCO contact concerning 
the exacerbation episode. They also provided ed- 
ucation concerning new symptoms or conditions 
and use of new medications, developed new pa- 
tient goals, supported patient decision making, 
assessed psychological, spiritual, and emotional 
needs of the patient and family, and made coun- 
seling referrals when required. 
monitoring, weight/blood pressure and blood 
glucose monitoring, and implementation of prior 
authorization mechanisms. Services were deliv- 
ered via telephone by all seven MCOs and, in ad- 
dition, through occasional home visits in five 
MCOs. Other support services included disease 
and symptom education, nutrition and psycho- 
logical counseling, transportation and coordina- 
tion of medical service. Each MCO provided its 
own individual case management to some por- 
tion of their clients. 

Four broad classes of measures, summarized 
in detail in Table 1, informed the four foci of the 
intervention. 
Control condition. Usual care provided by the 
MCOs, including medication and technical treat- 
ment, constituted the control condition. The fo- 
cus of MCO case management was medical and 
disease oriented, including medication and lab 
Intake interview and every-three–month follow-up 
interview (Focus 1–3). Questions addressing the 
first three program foci were integrated into a sin- 
gle l12-item questionnaire, of which 56 items, 
summarized in Table 1, formed the basis of the 





2. Illness self-management: information to manage illness at home, in emergency (k (cid:2) 2 items) 
3. Patient experienced an event in 4 weeks immediately preceding the interview for which he/she felt 









Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22 Patient identifies most troublesome symptom within the four 
weeks just prior to the interview and then rates the frequency, severity, and distress associated with the 
symptom. Up to three symptoms are considered with separate rating of frequency, severity, distress for each 
symptom (k (cid:2) 9 items) 
3. Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36™, Ware et al.23) which assesses “health-related 
quality-of-life outcomes, namely, those known to be most directly affected by disease and treatment” (op.cit, 
p.2:3). Eight subscales include Physical Functioning, General Health, Vitality, Social Functioning, Role- 
Physical, Bodily Pain, Role-Emotional, Mental Health. Scale scores are derived as weighted sums of items 
following Ware et al.19 and then are converted to 100 point scales (k (cid:2) 8 scale scores). 

1. Number of emergency department visits in six months prior to study enrollment 
2. Number of stand alone emergency department visits (not followed immediately by hospitalization) during 



1. Number of months in program 
2. Reasons for withdrawal from study 


present evaluation. Two existing scales were in- 
tegrated into the questionnaire. First, we incor- 
porated the symptom control items from the 
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale,21 which 
previously had been integrated into the Surrogate 
Integrated Care System Afterdeath Interview.22 
Second, we assessed functional status and well- 
being with the SF-36™ Health Survey23 that char- 
acterizes “health-related quality of life outcomes, 
namely, those known to be most directly affected 
by disease and treatment”23 (p. 2:3). The SF-36™ 
is sensitive to chronic conditions that Phoenix- 
Care targeted. A population of patients enrolled 
in Medicare (cid:1) Choice exhibited declining scores 
on the SF-36™ in response to chronic condi- 
tions.24 The remaining items of the questionnaire 
were developed specifically for this evaluation. 
Utilization of medical services: Claims information 
records (Focus 4). MCOs furnished utilization data 
on each participating patient for the duration of 
his/her enrollment in the study, as well as for the 
6 months prior to enrollment (or all the time that 
the patient had been enrolled in the MCO up to 
6 months prior to enrollment in the study).a 
We considered emergency department visits as 
stand-alone events and LOS in the hospital. For 
our enumeration of emergency department vis- 
its, we considered only those emergency depart- 
ment visits that did not result in an immediate 
hospitalization. Emergency department visits re- 
sulting in hospitalizations were not counted. In 
determining which emergency department visits 
to count, we established that if a patient’s condi- 
tion was so severe and medically compromised 
that a hospitalization was required subsequent to 
an emergency department treatment, then that 
patient could not have managed his/her own 
symptoms adequately with the PhoenixCare in- 
dividualized treatment plan at home. We derived 
two emergency department counts: (1) number of 
emergency department visits in the 6 months 
prior to entry into PhoenixCare, to characterize 
normative emergency department use pattern by 
the patient, and (2) total number of emergency 
department visits during PhoenixCare enroll- 
ment. Multiple medical claims were possible for 
aA fifth class of measures assessed program imple- 
mentation, characterizing the extent, timing, and type of 
service provided to patients throughout the intervention. 
This last stream of data supported the evaluation of pro- 
gram implementation, reported in Lockhart et al.12 
a single emergency department visit; we thus 
counted only one emergency department visit per 
24-hour period. We had originally intended to 
characterize hospitalizations as discrete events, to 
compute the LOS for each hospitalization, and 
then to compute the cumulative LOS across hos- 
pitalizations over the same time period as for 
emergency department visits. Inadequately re- 
ported hospital claims data did not permit calcu- 
lation of length of stay. In a notable number of 
instances, admission date/discharge date pairs 
could not be unambiguously established from 
streams of MCO claims data; such pairs are re- 
quired for each hospitalization episode for com- 
putation of the LOS of that hospitalization.b Be- 
yond this, an extensive line-by-line review of 
medical claims data by the PhoenixCare Medical 
Director and Project Director revealed that hos- 
pitalizations could not be sorted into those di- 
rectly related to the PhoenixCare target diagnoses 
(CHF, COPD) versus those related to other ancil- 
lary conditions, because all hospitalizations were 
identified by the primary diagnosis regardless of 
the treatment provided. 

We refer to the intake interview as time 0, the 
first 3-month follow-up interview as time 3, the 
next, as time 6, etc. All analyses of intervention 
outcomes examined effects as a function of ex- 
perimental condition (PhoenixCare, control), di- 
agnosis (CHF, COPD), and their interaction. In 
these analyses, we controlled for any pretest dif- 
ferences by including the corresponding time 0 
score as a covariate. We report both the overall 
effect of the intervention and any differential pat- 
tern of intervention effects within diagnoses. The 
number of patients available for analysis dropped 
from 192 at intake (time 0) to 112 at time 3, 92 at 
time 6. Our analytic strategies included as many 
cases as possible for the analysis of each aspect 
of the intervention. We examined outcomes at 
bWe devoted extensive effort to rendering the streams 
of claims data from the MCOs amenable to computation 
of LOS. There was no consistent method for reporting of 
claims data across MCOs. In our attempt to capture ad- 
mission/discharge pairs, we found some measurements 
so anomalous from the perspective of medical utilization 
that we ultimately judged that the claims data could not 
be used to compute LOS (e.g., pairs of admissions and 
discharges that were separated by a year and would have 
led to computation of 365-day hospitalizations.) 


time 3 for all cases with time 3 data and outcomes 
at time 6 for all participants with time 6 measures. 
We used analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for 
analysis of continuous variables; logistic regres- 
sion, for binary variables; and Poisson regres- 
sion,25 for counts of number of emergency de- 
partment visits. 
Growth curve modeling of functional status over 
time. We expected that changes in functional sta- 
tus, as measured on the SF-36™, might accrue 
gradually over time, even beyond the first 6 
months of the intervention. We thus applied 
growth curve modeling in the multilevel frame- 
work26 to each of the eight scales of the SF-36™ 
to test hypotheses concerning the impact of the 
PhoenixCare intervention and to characterize 
whether groups improved, remained level, or de- 
clined over time. For each SF-36™ scale, we fit a 
linear trajectory to all available data from each in- 
dividual. Each individual’s trajectory was char- 
acterized by its intercept and slope. Intercepts 
and slopes then became dependent variables for 
analysis as a function of condition, diagnosis, and 
the condition by diagnosis interaction. The aver- 
age intercept of the individuals in a particular 
group (e.g., patients with COPD in the Phoenix- 
Care group) measures the overall level of func- 
tioning of the group at one point in time. Differ- 
ences in intercepts across groups represent 
differences in level of functioning. By moving the 
intercept across the time scale in a series of analy- 
ses,27 we could detect the point in time, if any, at 
which differences in levels of functioning be- 
tween groups emerged. The average slope in a 
group characterizes the overall trend (decline, 
stability, improvement) for physical and mental 
health over time. Differences in slopes across 
groups indicate that groups are changing differ- 
entially over time. Each trajectory began at the 
time 3 data point; trajectories continued through 
the full complement of data for each case. The Ini- 
tial Interview point (time 0) was used as a co- 
variate to control for any differences between 
groups in their intercepts at the outset of the in- 
tervention. 
Treatment effect size estimates. We report a stan- 
dardized effect size estimate for each observed dif- 
ference between the PhoenixCare and control con- 
ditions (i.e., the number of standard deviations of 
difference between the groups). We use Hedges’ 
g (cid:2) [(PhoenixCare mean-Control mean)/pooled 
standard deviation] for continuous outcomes and 
Hedges’ h (cid:2) [(PhoenixCare estimated propor- 
tion—Control estimated proportion)/pooled stan- 
dard deviation] for binary outcomes.28 We chose 
standardized effect size estimates for two reasons. 
First, with the exception of SF-36™, there are no 
norms on which to compare differences on our 
scales. Second, these effect size estimates are used 
in meta-analyses of treatment outcome research.29 
Effect sizes of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 are considered small, 
moderate, and large, respectively30; these effect 
sizes have been supported in analyses of treatment 
outcomes.29 
Pretest equivalence. To evaluate the success of 
randomization, we compared PhoenixCare and 
control at time 0 on all outcome measures. We 
used one-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
for continuous outcome measures and (cid:1)2 tests of 
independence for binary outcome measures. 
Attrition analysis. We used the Jurs and Glass31 
procedure to examine attrition. For each depen- 
dent variable listed in Table 1, initial data (time 
0) were examined in a two-factor analysis of con- 
dition (PhoenixCare versus control) by retention 
(retained, attrited). A main effect of retention re- 
flects difference between participants who re- 
mained in versus left the study. An interaction 
between condition and retention signals differ- 
ential attrition across conditions. Our statistical 
power to detect a small interaction accounting for 
4% of variance at (cid:2) (cid:2) 0.05 ranged between 0.79 
and 0.84 depending on variance accounted for by 
main effects.30 

Participant characteristics and outcome 
of randomization 
Participant characteristics. Of the 192 patients 
enrolled, 101 (or 53%) were randomized to the 
PhoenixCare 
intervention; the remaining 91 
(47%) served as controls. Immediately after intake 
and before the outset of treatment, 1 intervention 
and 1 control case dissenrolled. Analyses of out- 
comes are based on these 190 cases. There were 
67 CHF and 33 COPD PhoenixCare participants, 
and 62 CHF and 28 COPD controls. Participants 
were on average 68.5 years of age; 64% were fe- 
male; 82% were Caucasian; 42% had greater than 


TABLE 2. DEMOGRAPHICS CHARACTERISTICS 
OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS 

Mean 
SD 
Percent female 
Percent Caucasian 
Percent married 
Education 
Percent (cid:4) HS degree 
Percent HS degree 
Percent (cid:5) HS degree 
Percent having someone 
to help with illness 
Intervention 
n (cid:2) 100 
Control 
n (cid:2) 90 
68 years 
14 
58% 
80% 
40% 
44% 
42% 
14% 
87% 
70 years 
13 
70% 
84% 
48% 
41% 
35% 
24% 
88% 

a high school degree; 44% were married; 87% re- 
ported having someone to help them with their 
illness. Table 2 summarizes demographic charac- 
teristics by experimental condition (PhoenixCare, 
control). 
Pretest equivalence. PhoenixCare and control 
participants did not differ significantly (at p (cid:3) 
0.10) on any outcome measures related to Focus 
1, Focus 2, or Focus 4 (i.e., emergency department 
visits in the 6 months prior to enrollment.) With 
regard to Focus 3, PhoenixCare participants 
tended to have higher scores on the SF-36™ So- 
cial Functioning Scale, F(1,189) (cid:2) 3.45, p (cid:2) 0.07, 
g (cid:2) 0.27, and on the SF-36™ Mental Health Scale, 
F(1,190) (cid:2) 3.35, p (cid:2) 0.07, g (cid:2) 0.26. 
Delivery of the PhoenixCare intervention and 
control case management services 
PhoenixCare intervention. The PhoenixCare in- 
tervention remained constant in design over the 
course of the study. Delivery of service by regis- 
tered nurse case managers combined home visits 
and telephone calls. Patients averaged 44 contacts 
over the course of the intervention. Average 
monthly frequency of these services per patient 
(visits plus calls) were 6.3, 4.9, 3.9, 3.9, 3.4, 3.3, in 
the first 6 months of participation, of which 3.9, 
2.2, 1.8, 1.5, 1.4, and 1.4 contacts were home vis- 
its. These services were stable beyond the first 6 
months. Visits included seeing patients at home 
and accompanying patients to the physician’s of- 
fice to discuss patient progress and treatment op- 
tions. The number of registered nurse contacts 
per month did not differ by diagnosis or by 
whether the participant lived alone or with some- 
one else. The PhoenixCare social worker con- 
tacted 45% of patients; this subset of patients re- 
ceived an average of 6 contacts from the social 
worker. 
Control case management services. PhoenixCare 
staff monitored the provision of MCO case man- 
agement services through quarterly interviews 
with MCO directors of case management. In all, 
MCOs assigned their own case managers to 62% 
of all control participants and to 51% of Phoenix- 
Care patients, (cid:1)2(1) (cid:2) 2.36, p (cid:2) 0.12. Over the 
course of the study, the MCOs greatly narrowed 
criteria for enrollment into case management and 
diminished the services provided, in response to 
financial pressures. Home visits and other sup- 
port services were terminated by all MCOs; 
phone monitoring was maintained by only two 
MCOs throughout the study. Only medical and 
disease management was maintained throughout 
the study by all MCOs, albeit to an increasingly 
narrow range of patients. Three MCOs began to 
reinstate some services in the last quarter of the 
study, when actual enrollment into the Phoenix- 
Care study was sparse. 
Retention, and reasons for attrition, and 
attrition effects by condition 
Retention. Potential length of stay in the pro- 
gram depended on enrollment date; participants 
enrolled from July 1, 1999 through March 31, 
2001, but all data collection terminated on Sep- 
tember 30, 2001. Of the 101 PhoenixCare partici- 
pants, 62%, 55%, and 43% provided time 3, time 
6, and time 9 interviews, respectively. Of the 91 
control participants, corresponding percentages 
were 54%, 38%, and 33% at time 3, 6, and 9, re- 
spectively. 
Reasons for attrition. At the end of data collec- 
tion 44% of the PhoenixCare participants and 25% 
of control patients were still participating. Before 
time 3, 6% of all PhoenixCare and 8% of all con- 
trol participants had died; 8% versus 9%, respec- 
tively, had entered hospice; and 1% versus 1% 
had entered skilled nursing facilities (SNFs). Cor- 
responding percentages across the whole study 
for PhoenixCare versus controls, respectively, 
were 16% versus 13%, death; 12% versus 13%, 
hospice; 1% versus 3%, SNF. In all 6% of Phoenix- 


Care and 11% of controls declined to continue 
participation; another 10% and 14%, respectively, 
disqualified by leaving their MCO. In sum, 
PhoenixCare and control participants appeared 
to have left the study at equal rates for medical 
causes (death, hospice, SNF), but controls left 
more often for other reasons. 
Attrition effects. Participants who were retained 
had better physical and mental functioning (Fo- 
cus 3) than those who left, because attrition in- 
cluded transfer to a skilled nursing facility, to a 
hospice, or death. Specifically, those retained at 
time 3 reported better General Health on the 
SF-36™ during the 3-month preenrollment pe- 
riod, F(1,188) (cid:2) 12.26, p (cid:5) 0.001, g (cid:2) 0.51; the 
same result held for those retained versus lost at 
time 6, F(1,188) (cid:2) 12.03, p (cid:5) 0.001, g (cid:2) 0.50. 
Those retained at time 6 reported significantly 
lower bodily pain during preenrollment, 
F(1,187) (cid:2) 7.93, p (cid:5) 0.01, g (cid:2) 0.41, and also were 
more likely to have resumed a pleasant activity 
during preenrollment, (cid:1)2(1) (cid:2) 13.09, p (cid:5) 0.001, 
OR (cid:2) 3.25, [CI: 1.72, 6.16], with 48% and 23% 
among retained and attrited participants, respec- 
tively, h (cid:2) 0.57. With regard to end-of-life prepa- 
ration (Focus 2) those retained were less likely to 
have discussed illness and death related legal 
documents with a physician during preenroll- 
ment, (cid:1)2(1) (cid:2) 4.95, p (cid:5) 0.05, OR (cid:2) 0.51, [CI: 0.28, 
0.92] , with 37% and 54% among retained and at- 
trited participants, respectively, h (cid:2) 0.34. 
Only one condition by retention interaction 
was detected that signaled differential attrition, 
that for having been given sufficient information 
and education to manage illness at home, 
F(1,183) (cid:2) 3.93, p (cid:5) 0.05. Among those retained, 
PhoenixCare patients had received less informa- 
tion than had controls during pre-enrollment, 
F(1,87) (cid:2) 3.225, p (cid:5) 0.08; g (cid:2) 0.39. The reverse 
was true for those who attrited, F(1,96) (cid:2) 1.071, 
p (cid:4) 0.20; g (cid:2) 0.21. 
Focus 1: Outcomes for self-management of illness 
and knowledge of resources 
Table 3 summarizes the means on the five in- 
dividual items measuring management of illness 
and awareness of resources at time 0 and at times 
3 and 6, adjusted for time 0. In all 10 comparisons 
of PhoenixCare versus control outcomes (5 items 
at time 3 and at time 6), the PhoenixCare mean 
exceeded the control mean. As shown in AN- 
COVA, at time 3, PhoenixCare patients reported 
having received more education concerning com- 
munity resources than controls, F(1,107) (cid:2) 5.80, 
p (cid:5) 0.05, g (cid:2) 0.45. At 6 months PhoenixCare pa- 
tients also exceeded controls in reporting that 
they had information about whom to speak con- 
cerning medical problems, F(1,78) (cid:2) 5.12, p (cid:5) 
0.05, g (cid:2) 0.50, and had sufficient information to 
handle illness emergencies, F(1,86) (cid:2) 8.19, p (cid:5) 
0.05, g (cid:2) 0.59. 
After 3 months in the program, PhoenixCare 
participants were less likely than controls to have 
had an experience for which they were unpre- 
pared (see Table 3). In logistic regression of time 
3 outcomes, the Condition by Diagnosis interac- 
tion, p (cid:5) 0.05, OR (cid:2) 6.07, [CI: 1.01, 36.53] re- 
flected that COPD PhoenixCare patients were 
much less likely to have had such an experience 
than were COPD controls, p (cid:5) 0.05, OR (cid:2) 0.23, 
[CI: 0.05, 0.97], 32% and 58% in PhoenixCare and 
control respectively, h (cid:2) 0.73. At time 6, a condi- 
tion main effect, p (cid:5) 0.05, OR (cid:2) 3.22, [CI: 1.10, 
9.44] reflected less preparedness overall of pa- 
tients in the PhoenixCare condition, 42% and 21% 
in PhoenixCare and control respectively, h (cid:2) 
(cid:6)0.45. 
In summary, the PhoenixCare participants re- 
ported a sense of having greater information for 
self-management of illness, a greater appreciation 
of resources available to help with their illness. 
In the early months of intervention only, they re- 
ported better preparedness for daily experiences, 
an effect that reversed at time 6. 

The percentages of affirmative responses to the 
four binary indicators (yes/no) reflecting prepa- 
ration for end of life are given in Table 4 (Focus 
2) as a function of condition and time. In logistic 
regression of time 3 outcomes, PhoenixCare par- 
ticipants showed a higher rate of having a living 
will or advance directive than did controls, p (cid:5) 
0.05, OR (cid:2) 4.47, [CI: 1.10, 18.18], with 71% com- 
pliance in PhoenixCare, 65% in control, h (cid:2) 0.67. 
This represented a substantial gain for Phoenix- 
Care patients (from 52% to 71%; see Table 4). No 
further effects of condition emerged. 

Participation in enjoyable activities. By the time 3 
measurement point, patients in PhoenixCare re- 


TABLE 3. OUTCOMES FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT OF ILLNESS, KNOWLEDGE OF RESOURCES FOR MANAGEMENT, AND 
PREPAREDNESS (FOCUS 1) AT INITIAL INTERVIEW, TIME 3 (THREE MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY) AND AT TIME 6 
(SIX MONTHS FOLLOWING TREATMENT ENTRY) 
Initial interview 
(unadjusted means) 











and knowledge of resources 
Focus 1: Self-management of illness 
Participant has received sufficient 
information to manage illness 
at home 
Participant has received sufficient 
information to handle illness 
emergency 
Focus 1: Resources 


Participant has received information 
about how family and friends 
can assist 

about who to talk to about a 
medical problem 
Focus 1: Preparedness (percent 

Participant had an experience which 
they were unprepared for in the 
last 4 weeks 




































Note: All items are on 4-point scales, where 1 (cid:2) mostly false and 4 (cid:2) mostly true. 
aMeans reported are adjusted means from an analysis of covariance with response to the item at the initial time 0 

bThree-month data include all cases with data at time 3. 
cSix-month data include all cases with data at time 6. 
dCorresponding adjusted means for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p (cid:5) 0.05). 
eProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p (cid:5) 0.05). 
fProportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p (cid:5) 0.05). 
ported having been able to initiate or resume an 
activity they enjoyed (see Table 4, Focus 3). As 
shown in logistic regression of time 3 outcomes, 
the condition by diagnosis interaction reached 
significance, (cid:1)2(1) (cid:2) 6.84, p (cid:5) 0.01, OR (cid:2) 8.5, [CI: 
1.69, 39.28]. In COPD, fully 63% of PhoenixCare 
patients responded “yes” as opposed to only 16% 
of controls, z (cid:2) 3.38, p (cid:5) 0.01, h (cid:2) 1.00. This dif- 
ference was not retained at time 6 for patients 
with COPD. There was no effect at either time 
point for patients with CHF. 
Symptom control. At each interview participants 
identified, in open-ended fashion, up to three 
troublesome symptoms; symptoms identified 
could vary across time points. In all, 78%, 90%, 
and 92% of patients reported at least one symp- 
tom at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively.c At time 0, 
the symptom mentioned as most troubling with 
the greatest frequency was difficulty breathing 
(by 64% of all participants); pain and fatigue were 
also frequently mentioned. Mean ratings of the 
frequency, severity, and distress associated with 
the most troublesome symptom are given in 
Table 5. In a series of ANOVAs of time 0 symp- 
cThe non-reporting of symptoms at time 0 by 22% of 
patients was attributable to difficulties in initial intake in- 
terview administration by one case manager. Whether or 
not she had administered any particular interview that 
contained this difficulty in administration was unrelated 
to diagnosis (CHF, COPD) or to condition (PhoenixCare, 
control). Therefore, the lack of response weakened statis- 
tical power but did not affect conclusions about differ- 
ences between conditions, the focus of the analyses. 











































Focus 2: Preparation for end of life 
Participant has living will or advance 







Focus 3: Physical and mental functioning 
Participant has been able to begin or 
resume an enjoyable activity in the 
last 4 weeks 


aPatients who remained in the program for 3 months. 
bPatients who remained in the program for 6 months. 
cAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p (cid:5) 0.05). 
dAdjusted proportions for PhoenixCare versus control differ significantly (p (cid:5) 0.05). 
tom frequency, severity, and distress ratings as a 
function of condition and diagnosis, conditions 
were equivalent at outset. In a parallel series of 
ANOVAs of Time 3 data,d only symptom distress 
showed an effect, specifically in the form of an 
interaction between condition and diagnosis, 
F(1,99) (cid:2) 4.89, p (cid:5) 0.05. PhoenixCare patients 
with COPD reported lower symptom distress 
than did COPD controls (p (cid:5) 0.05), g (cid:2) 0.81. The 
interaction effect held at time 6, F(1,82) (cid:2) 6.19, 
p (cid:5) 0.05, and reflected that PhoenixCare patients 
with COPD again tended to have lower (but not 
significant) distress ratings than did COPD con- 
trols, F(1,22) (cid:2) 1.97, p (cid:2) 0.07, g (cid:2) 0.58. However, 
for clients with CHF, the reverse was true, with 
PhoenixCare participants reporting higher dis- 
tress, F(1,60) (cid:2) 5.26, p (cid:5) 0.05, g (cid:2) 0.60. 
Trajectories of physical and mental functioning on 
the SF-36™. The eight subscales of the SF-36™ 
provided the main characterization of function- 
ing over time. Table 6 gives the mean transformed 
scores on a 100-point scale at initial measurement 
(time 0) for all participants in the PhoenixCare 
study; high scores reflect better functioning. 
These mean scores are far below those of com- 
parably aged participants in the Medical Out- 
comes Study (MOS), who were diagnosed with 
CHF and COPD.23 The average score across the 
eight 100-point scales for PhoenixCare partici- 
pants was 29. This reflects exceptionally low func- 
tioning compared to average scores of 55 and 56, 
respectively, for CHF and COPD patients in the 
MOS. 
Table 6 summarizes the growth analyses. The 
slope of each of the four groups (condition (cid:7) di- 
agnosis) is reported. For the intercept, the mea- 
surement point (month), if any, at which differ- 
ences among groups emerged is reported, along 
with a brief description of the difference. 
dFor the ANOVAs of symptom frequency, severity, and 
distress at time 3 and time 6, we did not covary out time 
0 scores, since patients often reported different symptoms 
at time 0, time 3 and time 6. However, there were no dif- 
ferences in these ratings as a function of Condition and 
Diagnosis at time 0 that would have led to bias in out- 
comes, if ignored, at time 3 and 6. 
Condition effects. As shown in Table 6, effects of 
the PhoenixCare intervention emerged on three 
scales: (1) Physical Functioning, a measure of ac- 
tivities of daily living, (2) General Health, a self- 
assessment of current health and expectation of 
future health, and (3) Vitality, a measure of level 
of energy. On Physical Functioning, PhoenixCare 


TABLE 5. MEAN FREQUENCY, SEVERITY, AND DISTRESS 
RATINGS OF THE MOST TROUBLESOME SYMPTOM (FOCUS 3) 




2.83 
2.90 
3.08 
3.23 
2.90 
2.68 
3.35 
3.35 
2.87 
3.00 
3.08 
2.90 




2.35 
2.24 
2.54 
2.50 
2.18 
2.18 
2.35 
2.29 
2.20 
2.13 
2.08 
2.20 




4.19 
3.81 
4.38 
4.35 
3.72 
3.32 
3.41d 
4.29d 
4.03d 
3.30d 
2.85e 
3.80e 
CHF 
PhoenixCare 
Control 
COPD 
PhoenixCare 
Control 
CHF 
PhoenixCare 
Control 
COPD 
PhoenixCare 
Control 
CHF 
PhoenixCare 
Control 
COPD 
PhoenixCare 
Control 


aFrequency measured on a 4-point scale: 1 (cid:2) occasion- 
ally; 2 (cid:2) some of the time; 3 (cid:2) most of the time; 4 (cid:2) all 
of the time. 


cDistress measured on a 5-point scale: 1 (cid:2) not at all; 
2 (cid:2) a little bit; 3 (cid:2) somewhat; 4 (cid:2) quite a bit; 5 (cid:2) very 
much. 
dp (cid:5) 0.05 for difference between means. 
ep (cid:2) 0.07 for difference between means. 
patients in both diagnoses remained the same 
over time (CHF) or improved (COPD) over time 
(as reflected in their slopes), while control pa- 
tients declined over time, z (cid:2) 2.50, p (cid:5) 0.05 for 
the difference in average slope as a function of 
Condition. At the 9-month point, the Phoenix- 
Care patients’ physical functioning exceeded that 
of controls, as shown by the intercept difference, 
z (cid:2) 2.16, p (cid:5) 0.05, g (cid:2) 0.41. Similarly, on the Gen- 
eral Health Scale, the average slope for Phoenix- 
Care was higher than for controls, z (cid:2) 2.16, p (cid:5) 
0.05, and the PhoenixCare intercept exceeded that 
of controls at 9 months, z (cid:2) 2.51, p (cid:5) 0.05, g (cid:2) 
0.47. On the Vitality scale at the 3-month time 
point the interaction between condition and di- 
agnosis was significant, z (cid:2) 2.52, p (cid:5) 0.05. Specif- 
ically, there was an intercept difference for 
COPD, with PhoenixCare having higher Vitality 
scores than controls, z (cid:2) 2.36, p (cid:5) 0.05, g (cid:2) 0.76; 
no difference between conditions was observed 
for CHF. 
In summary, the PhoenixCare intervention was 
associated with maintained or improved Physi- 
cal Functioning and General Health, such that 
PhoenixCare patients exceeded controls by 9 
months. PhoenixCare patients with COPD exhib- 
ited enhanced Vitality relative to controls. 

In the 6 months prior to the outset of the 
PhoenixCare intervention, PhoenixCare partici- 
pants averaged 0.12 emergency department vis- 
its per month (SD (cid:2) 0.18). Control participants 
averaged 0.11 emergency department visits per 
month (SD (cid:2) 0.20). This level of utilization re- 
mained essentially unchanged during the inter- 
vention, with averages of 0.11 (SD (cid:2) 0.34) and 
0.10 (SD (cid:2) 0.31) visits per month for PhoenixCare 
and control participants, respectively. 
In an overdispersed Poisson 
regression 
model25 we predicted number of emergency de- 
partment visits during enrollment from condi- 
tion, diagnosis, and their interaction, controlling 
for total number of days in the program and num- 
ber of preenrollment emergency department vis- 
its; there were no significant effects of condition. 
Neither were there any effects of condition on 
emergency department utilization for a subgroup 
of participants we identified as being at high risk 
for emergency department utilization. 


tests of pretest equivalence, 
PhoenixCare participants tended to exceed con- 
trols (p (cid:5) 0.10) on two SF-36™ scales, Social Func- 
tioning and Mental Health. We repeated all 
analyses, statistically controlling these differ- 
ences. All effects we have reported were main- 
tained. 


Evaluation outcomes supported an association 
between participation in PhoenixCare and posi- 


TABLE 6. GROWTH MODELING ANALYSIS OF SF-36™ TRAJECTORIES OF 
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FUNCTIONING OVER TIME (FOCUS 3) 









functioningd 
General healthe 
Vitality 
Social functioning 
Role-physical 
Bodily painf 
Role emotional 
Mental health 

17.4 
18.8 
33.9 
12.7 
48.5 
31.3 
53.6 




0.16 
0.02 
(cid:6)0.80 
(cid:6)0.51 
(cid:6)0.57 
0.00 
0.54 (cid:6)0.17 (cid:6)1.67 
9 
0.09 (cid:6)0.91 
3 
0.61 
1.09 (cid:6)2.15 
3 
3.72 
1.60 (cid:6)0.14 — 
0.57 
2.98 (cid:6)0.09 (cid:6)0.45 — 
1.77 (cid:6)0.24 
3.08 — 
(cid:6)0.69 (cid:6)0.37 (cid:6)1.77 (cid:6)0.10 — 
PhxCare Clients (cid:4) Control (COPD & CHF) 
PhxCare Clients (cid:4) Control (COPD only) 
CHF (cid:4) COPD 
Note: All scores on the SF-36™ are transformed scores according to Ware et al.19, (p. 6.17) that range from 0 to 100, 
as calculated by the formula: Transformed score (cid:2) {[actual raw score-lowest possible score]/highest possible raw 
score} (cid:7) 100. 


bIntercept difference reflects difference in overall elevation of trajectories across groups at a particular time (month). 
cMonth is month since enrollment in program; 3 months is at Time 3, and 9 months is at Time 9. 
dOverall control slope is declining while overall PhoenixCare slope is rising (p (cid:5) 0.05) 
eControl slope is declining while PhoenixCare functioning remains stable (p (cid:5) 0.05) 
fHigh scores on the bodily pain scale represent freedom from pain, (i.e., lower experience of pain). 
CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
tive outcomes. In support of Focus 1, Self-Man- 
agement of Illness, PhoenixCare patients re- 
ported having received more information about 
both management of illness and about resources 
than did controls. In addition, after the first three 
months (time 3) PhoenixCare patients reported 
being less likely to have experienced health re- 
lated events for which they were unprepared 
(though this effect reversed at time 6). In support 
of Focus 2, Legal Preparation for End-of-Life, 
PhoenixCare patients were more likely to have a 
living will or advance directive by time 3. With 
regard to Focus 3, Physical and Mental function- 
ing, more PhoenixCare COPD patients than con- 
trols had returned to an enjoyable activity by time 
3. PhoenixCare COPD patients also reported 
lower symptom distress time 3 (although the op- 
posite was observed for PhoenixCare patients 
with CHF at time 6). On the SF-36™ scales, 
PhoenixCare patients with COPD reported 
greater vitality (level of energy versus fatigue) 
than COPD controls by time 3. Control patients 
declined in both Physical Functioning and Gen- 
eral Health while PhoenixCare patients did not. 
At 9 months after treatment onset superior Phys- 
ical Functioning and General Health emerged 
among PhoenixCare above control participants. 
Across program foci there were more positive ef- 
fects associated with PhoenixCare for patients 
with COPD. Successful management of the symp- 
toms of COPD has long been associated with 
adaptive psychological functioning and emo- 
tional stability of the patient.32,33 All the effect 
sizes associated with the PhoenixCare interven- 
tion are moderate to large. 
For Focus 4, Utilization of Emergency Medical 
Services, there was no reduction in standalone 
emergency department visits associated with 
PhoenixCare. Study participants apparently ex- 
perienced extreme exacerbations of their condi- 
tions that could not be handled at home. The 
illness level of participants cannot be overesti- 
mated. On the SF-36™ Physica1 Functioning 
scale, which measures activities of daily living, 
the mean scale score was 13 for PhoenixCare par- 
ticipants, a remarkably low level of functioning, 
as compared to mean scale scores of 48 and 57 for 
patients with CHF and patients with COPD, re- 
spectively, in the MOS.19 

We experienced difficulties with recruitment of 
eligible participants, yielding fewer cases than 
planned.12 The prognostication criteria we em- 
ployed to predict life expectancy, while based on 


the best available data, were limited. We sought 
participants expected to live for 2 years. One third 
of all participants died or transferred to hospice 
in the first 3 months, resulting in diminished sta- 
tistical power to detect effects associated with the 
PhoenixCare intervention. Statistical power to de- 
tect moderate effect size differences between 
PhoenixCare and control participants fell from 
0.93 to 0.74 to 0.64 at time 0, 3, and 6, respectively. 
We may have failed to detect small, yet mean- 
ingful, outcomes. 
The quality of medical claims data put severe 
limitations on our ability to explore shifts in uti- 
lization. Hospitalization claims could not be 
meaningfully explored, as previously explained. 
Moreover, we were unable to characterize po- 
tential shifts to less costly aspects of care (e.g., of- 
fice visits) because these services were not docu- 
mented by all plans. 
We experienced from 0% to 2% missing data 
on individual items, evenly distributed across 
conditions. If this minimal nonresponse to indi- 
vidual items reflected greater patient illness, then 
our data would be very slightly biased toward 
healthier overall responding. 
We carried out multiple statistical tests, in- 
creasing the probability of collective type I error. 
Yet, the pattern of results is favorable to Phoenix- 
Care. Of 14 effects reported, 12 favored Phoenix- 
Care. If there were no difference between condi- 
tions in the population, the probability of 
observing this pattern of results by chance alone 
would be less than or equal to 0.004. 
With regard to generality of findings, our re- 
sults in general apply to those participants whom 
we retained for at least three months. Results for 
physical functioning pertain to those retained for 
nine months. Retained individuals had better 
health than those lost to the study. Our analysis 
of differential attrition across the PhoenixCare 
and control conditions suggests that the outcomes 
associated with PhoenixCare are not caused by 
differential health status across conditions. 
In contrast, palliative care services include estab- 
lishing treatment goals in concert with patient 
and caregivers; pain and symptom relief; psy- 
chological support, and coordination of care.4 The 
PhoenixCare staff, particularly the registered 
nurse case managers, engaged in all these pallia- 
tive care activities. These registered nurse case 
managers also advocated for care to be delivered 
by the MCOs, and assumed a leadership role in 
coordination of care with MCO case managers 
(where they existed), physicians, family, and 
community organizations. Because PhoenixCare 
participants were approaching death but at the 
same time were actively living and pursuing 
treatment, PhoenixCare registered nurse case 
managers had both their own role in palliation 
and an administrative role in bringing together 
palliation and treatment services. 

The potential mechanisms by which the 
PhoenixCare intervention was associated with 
beneficial outcomes bear exploration.e One pos- 
sibility is that the PhoenixCare intervention pro- 
vided an excess of usual care. PhoenixCare staff, 
particularly the registered nurse case managers, 
delivered specific palliative services focused on 
education and patient empowerment, services 
designed to complement, not duplicate, MCO- 
based treatment. A second possibility is that the 
PhoenixCare staff were exceptionally skilled at 
service delivery. PhoenixCare staff were selected 
to have experience in both chronic disease man- 
agement and end-of-life care. They received spe- 
cialized training in how to deliver the intensive 
PhoenixCare palliative care protocol. We at- 
tribute any positive impacts associated with 
PhoenixCare to delivery of the PhoenixCare pal- 
liation protocol, including advocacy for treat- 
ment, by experienced registered nurse case man- 
agers. We believe that the staff training and the 
PhoenixCare program can be exported to other 
settings. 

As characterized by Meier et al.11 case man- 
agement programs delivered by MCOs for those 
with life-threatening illnesses “typically focus 
primarily on service coordination, to a lesser ex- 
tent on medical evaluation and decision making, 
and only rarely incorporate standard palliative 
care assessment and interventions. . . . “ (p. 120). 

The PhoenixCare program delivered home- 
based palliative care to individuals expected to 
eWe thank an anonymous reviewer for suggestions as 
to potential mechanisms that stimulate this discussion, as 
well as the discussion of limitations of the study. 


live for 2 years who were still actively pursuing 
treatment through one of seven different MCOs. 
PhoenixCare provided palliative care as an add- 
on to the treatment services, including treatment- 
oriented case management, provided by the 
MCOs. In contrast, Meier et al.11 furnished home- 
based palliative care by training case manage- 
ment nurses to add palliative case management 
to treatment oriented case management they usu- 
ally provided; an outcome evaluation of this pro- 
gram is forthcoming. Alternative models of pal- 
liation funded through The Robert Wood Johnson 
initiative3 included integrating hospice into a 
hospital setting and adding palliative care ser- 
vices in outpatient treatment settings. We de- 
signed our PhoenixCare model specifically to test 
whether a stand-alone organization especially de- 
voted to delivery of high-quality home-based pal- 
liative care could partner with a variety of health 
care plans. We chose individualized case man- 
agement in order to reach an essentially home- 
bound population of seriously ill individuals. 

Patients with severe illnesses who were still ac- 
tively pursuing treatment appeared to benefit 
from the palliative services provided by the 
PhoenixCare intervention. Our findings lend sup- 
port to the concept of palliation as integral to 
treatment for severe life limiting disease.4 

This is a project of The Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation: Promoting Excellence in End-of-Life 
Care Program, which provided funding. It was 
also supported in part by the Flinn Foundation, 
Phoenix, Arizona, and St. Luke’s Health Initia- 
tives, Phoenix, Arizona, which provided funding 
for both clinical and research project staff. 
PhoenixCare was housed at Hospice of the Val- 
ley, Phoenix, Arizona; the support of Executive 
Director Susan Goldwater-Levine is gratefully ac- 
knowledged. 



2. Byock IR: End-of-life care: A public health crisis and 
an opportunity for managed care. Am J Manag Care 
2001;7:1123–1132. 
3. Beresford, L, Byock, I., Twohig, JS: Financial implica- 
tions of promoting excellence in end-of-life care. 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2002. 


5. Armes PJ, Addington-Hall JM: Perspectives on symp- 
tom control in patients receiving community pallia- 
tive care. Palliat Med 2003;17:608–615. 
6. Bixby MB, Knoick-McMahon J, McKenna CG: Ap- 
plying the transitional care model to elderly patients 
with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2000;14:53–63. 
7. Rosenfeld K, Rasmussen J: Palliative care manage- 
ment: A Veterans Administration demonstration proj- 
ect. J Palliat Med 2003;6:831–839. 
8. Bakitas M, Stevens M, Ahles T, Kirn M, Skalla K, Kane 
N, Greenberg R: Project ENABLE: A palliative care 
demonstration project for advanced cancer patients in 
three settings. J Palliat Med 2004;7:363–372. 
9. Brumley RD, Enguidanos S, Cherin DA: Effectiveness 
of a home-based palliative care program for end-of- 
life. J Palliat Med 2003;6:715–724. 
10. Stuart B, D’Onofrio CN, Boatman S, Feigelman G: 
CHOICES: promoting early access to end-of-life care 
through home-based transition management. J Palliat 
Med 2003;6:671–683. 
11. Meier DE, Thar W, Jordan A, Goldhirsch SL, Siu A, 
Morrison RS: Integrating case management and pal- 
liative care. J Palliat Med 2004;7:119–134. 
12. Lockhart CA, Volk-Craft BE, Hamilton G, Aiken LS, 
Williams FG: The PhoenixCare Program: Teaching the 
seriously chronically ill skills for living and dying. J 
Palliat Med 2003;6:1001–1012. 
13. Christakis NAL: Predicting patient survival before 
and after hospice enrollment. Hosp J 1998;13:71–87. 
14. Connor SR: New initiatives transforming hospice 

15. Finne-Soveri UH, Tilvis RS: How accurate is the ter- 
minal prognosis in the minimum data set? J Am Geri- 
atr Soc 1998;46:8,1023–1024. 
16. Fox E, Landrum-McNiff K, Zhong Z, Dawson NV, Wu 
AW, Lynn J: Evaluation of prognostic criteria for de- 
termining hospice eligibility in patients with advanced 
lung, heart, or liver disease. SUPPORT Investigators. 
Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for 
Outcomes and Risks of Treatments. JAMA 1999;282: 
17,1638–1645. 
17. Luchins DJ, Hanrahan P, Murphy K: Criteria for en- 
rolling dementia patients in hospice. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1997;45:9,1054–1059. 
18. Stuart B: The NHO Medical Guidelines for Non-Can- 
cer Disease and local medical review policy: Hospice 
access for patients with diseases other than cancer. 
Hosp J 1999;14:3–4, 139–154. 


20. Yip JY, Wilber KH, Myrtle RC, Grazman DN: Com- 
parison of older adult subject and proxy responses on 


the SF-36 health-related quality of life instrument. Ag- 
ing Ment Health 2001;5:136–142. 
21. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, Lepore JM, 
Friedlander-Klar H, Kiyasu E, Sobel K, Coyle N, Ke- 
meny N, Norton L, Scher H: The memorial symptom 
assessment scale: An instrument for the evaluation 
of symptom prevalence, characteristics, and distress. 
Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1326–1336. 
22. Teno J: Surrogate Integrated Care System Afterdeath 
Interview. In: Toolkit of Instruments to Measure End of 
Life. Washington, DC: Center to Improve Care of the 
Dying. George Washington University, 1997. (http:// 
www.gwu.edu/(cid:1)cicd/toolkit/toolkit.htm) (cid:2)Last ac- 
cessed 12/06/05.(cid:3) 
23. Ware JE Jr, Snow KK, Kosinski M, Gandek B: SF-36 
Health Survey: Manual and Interpretation Guide. Boston 
MA: The Health Institute, New England Medical Cen- 
ter, 1993. 
24. Ellis BH, Shannon ED, Cox JK, Aiken LS, Fowler BM: 
Chronic conditions: Results of the Medicare Health 
Outcomes Survey. Health Care Financing Rev 
2004;25:75–91. 


26. Singer JD, Willett JB: Applied Longitudinal Data Anal- 
ysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
27. Mehta PD, West SG: Putting the individual back into 
individual growth curves. Psychol Methods 2000; 
5:23–43. 


29. Lipsey MW, Wilson DW: The efficacy of psychologi- 
cal, educational, and behavioral treatment. Am Psy- 
chol 1993;48:1181–1209. 
30. Cohen J: Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral 
Sciences, 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1988. 
31. Jurs SG, Glass GV: The effect of experimental mor- 
tality on the internal and external validity of the ran- 
domized comparative experiment. J Exper Educ 
1971;40:62–66. 
32. Dowson CA, Town GI, Frampton C, Mulder RT: Psy- 
chopathology and illness beliefs influence COPD self- 
management. J Psychosom Res 2004;56:333–340. 
33. McCathie HC, Spence, Tate RL: Adjustment to chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: The importance of 
psychological factors. Eur Respir J 2002;19:47–53. 
Address reprint requests to: 
Leona S. Aiken, Ph.D. 
Department of Psychology 
Arizona State University 
Box 871104 
Tempe, AZ 85287-1104 

