explain this observed variation in exercise-induced cog- 
nitive benefits in terms of costs and consequences. 
Jennifer C. Davis, MSc, PhD 
Carlo A. Marra, PharmD, PhD 
B. Lynn Beattie, MD 
M. Clare Robertson, PhD 
Mehdi Najafzadeh, MSc 
Peter Graf, PhD 
Lindsay S. Nagamatsu, MA 
Teresa Liu-Ambrose, PT, PhD 
Author Affiliations: The Centre for Hip Health and Mo- 
bility (Drs Davis and Liu-Ambrose) and The Brain Re- 
search Centre (Drs Beattie, Graf, and Liu-Ambrose and 
Ms Nagamatsu), Vancouver Coastal Health Research In- 
stitute, Collaboration for Outcomes Research and Evalu- 
ation (CORE), Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences (Drs 
Davis and Marra and Mr Najafzadeh), Department of 
Physical Therapy (Dr Liu-Ambrose), Department of Psy- 
chology (Dr Graf), and Division of Geriatric Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine (Dr Beattie), University of British Co- 
lumbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; and Otago 
School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand (Dr Robertson). 
Correspondence: Dr Liu-Ambrose, Department of Phys- 
iotherapy, University of British Columbia, 311-2647 Wil- 
low St, Vancouver, BC V5Z 3P1, Canada (tlambrose 
@exchange.ubc.ca). 
Author Contributions: All authors had full access to all 
of the data (including statistical reports and tables) in the 
study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data 
and the accuracy of the data analysis. Study concept and 
design: Marra, Beattie, Graf, and Liu-Ambrose. Acquisition 
of data: Nagamatsu and Liu-Ambrose. Analysis and inter- 
pretation of data: Marra, Beattie, Robertson, Najafzadeh, 
Nagamatsu, and Liu-Ambrose. Drafting of the manuscript: 
Liu-Ambrose. Critical revision of the manuscript for impor- 
tant intellectual content: Marra, Beattie, Robertson, Na- 
jafzadeh, Graf, Nagamatsu, and Liu-Ambrose. Statistical 
analysis: Marra, Najafzadeh, and Liu-Ambrose. Obtained 
funding: Beattie, Graf, and Liu-Ambrose. Administrative, tech- 
nical, and material support: Nagamatsu and Liu-Ambrose. 
Study supervision: Marra, Robertson, and Liu-Ambrose. 
Financial Disclosure: None reported. 
Funding/Support: The Vancouver Foundation (BCMSF, 
operating grant to Dr Liu-Ambrose) and the MSFHR (es- 
tablishment grant to Dr Liu-Ambrose) provided funding 
for this study. The Canada Foundation for Innovation 
funded essential infrastructure used in this study (new op- 
portunities fund to Dr Liu-Ambrose). 
Trial Registration: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: 
NCT00426881 
Additional Information: Drs Marra and Liu-Ambrose are 
Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research Schol- 
ars. Dr Marra is a Canada Research Chair in Pharmaceu- 
tical Outcomes. Dr Davis is a Canadian Institutes for 
Health Research Canada Graduate Scholarship PhD 
trainee. 
Additional Contributions: We thank the Vancouver South 
Slope YMCA management and members who enthusi- 
astically supported the study by allowing access to par- 
ticipants for the training intervention and the instruc- 
tors for their commitment to the participants’ health and 
safety. 
1. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among elderly per- 
sons living in the community. N Engl J Med. 1988;319(26):1701-1707. 
2. van Dijk PT, Meulenberg OG, van de Sande HJ, Habbema JD. Falls in demen- 

3. Liu-Ambrose T, Donaldson MG, Ahamed Y, et al. Otago home-based strength 
and balance retraining improves executive functioning in older fallers: a ran- 
domized controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56(10):1821-1830. 
4. Liu-Ambrose T, Nagamatsu LS, Graf P, Beattie BL, Ashe MC, Handy TC. 
Resistance training and executive functions: a 12-month randomized con- 
trolled trial. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(2):170-178. 
5. Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, et al. Cardiovascular fitness, cortical 
plasticity, and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(9):3316-3321. 
6. Cassilhas RC, Viana VA, Grassmann V, et al. The impact of resistance exer- 
cise on the cognitive function of the elderly. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39 
(8):1401-1407. 
7. Davis JC, Marra C, Robertson MC, et al. Economic evaluation of dose- 
response resistance training in older women: a cost effectiveness and cost util- 
ity analysis [published online August 4, 2010]. Osteoporos Int. doi:10.1007 
/s00198-010-1356-5. 



Hospital-Based Palliative 
Medicine Consultation: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial 

vices increase patient and family satisfac- 
tion,1,2 improve quality of life,3 reduce inten- 
sive care unit length of stay,4 and decrease costs.2,5 Clear 
evidence of the effectiveness of palliative care consulta- 
tion services in improving symptoms has been more elu- 
sive.2,3,6 We conducted a randomized trial to evaluate the 
impact of a proactive palliative medicine consultation 
(PMC) on the care of chronically ill, hospitalized el- 
derly patients. 
Methods. The study setting was a 560-bed academic medi- 
cal center. We included patients 65 years or older with 
heart failure, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis- 
ease, or cirrhosis, who were able to give informed con- 
sent and who spoke English 
This study was a randomized, prospective, clinical trial. 
The intervention group received a PMC on enrollment 
and every weekday during hospitalization. Four physi- 
cians shared PMC duties. The PMC physician saw inter- 
vention patients daily, routinely assessed symptoms and 
psychosocial and spiritual needs, discussed treatment pref- 
erences, and consulted a pharmacist and chaplain as 
needed. The PMC physician communicated findings and 
recommendations to the patient’s team via a medical chart 
note and by telephone. The usual care group received a 
brief visit from the PMC physician who gave them a packet 
of information on diet and exercise. 
On admission, we used the Activities of Daily Living 
(ADL)7 and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) 
scales8 to categorize each subject as dependent or inde- 
pendent. Participants reporting the need for assistance 





Figure. Worst pain (A), dyspnea (B), and anxiety (C) in the past 24 hours. 
Data are given as mean (95% confidence interval). PMC indicates palliative 
medicine consultation. 
Comment. Consistent with previous research, our PMC 
intervention was not better than usual care in reducing 
the severity of symptoms among chronically ill inpa- 
tients. In addition, most patients in both groups rated their 
care highly, while only a minority of patients, even in the 
intervention group, reported discussions of preferences 
or prognosis even though such conversations were a core 
component of our PMC. 
A number of factors may have contributed to these re- 
sults. First, our subjects were not those otherwise re- 
ferred for PMC and thus may have lacked issues that a 
PMC would affect. We thought that clinicians would re- 
sist randomizing patients they referred for PMC and there- 
fore recruited inpatients unlikely to be referred. Despite 
consensus that patients at any stage of illness should re- 
with any 1 of 13 tasks were categorized as dependent. 
We used the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS- 
15) to assess depression.9 Responses were scored 1=“no” 
and “don’t know” and 0=“yes” and summed. Total scores 
of 6 or higher indicated the patient may be depressed. 
Pain, dyspnea, and anxiety were assessed daily by a re- 
search assistant who was blinded to group assignment 
and asked patients to rate each symptom at its worst level 
in the past 24 hours from 0 (“none”) to 10 (“the worst 
you can imagine”). Patients were randomly assigned to 
the intervention or usual care group. All patients com- 
pleted a telephone survey 2 weeks after discharge to re- 
assess symptoms, rate physician and nursing care, and 
recall discussions of preferences. We reviewed medical 
records to determine patients’ primary diagnosis on ad- 
mission. This study was undertaken between January 2002 
and December 2003 and approved by the University of 
California, San Francisco Committee on Human Re- 
search. All participants gave written informed consent. 
Frequencies, means, and standard deviations were used 
to examine the distribution of measures. We used (cid:2)2 analy- 
sis to test for bivariate associations between categorical 
variables. Repeated-measures analysis of variance was used 
to investigate the impact of the intervention on symp- 
tom severity over different assessment periods. We used 
the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) for 
Mac (version 17; SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois; March 11, 
2009). 
Results. We enrolled 107 patients (intervention, n=54; 
usual care, n=53); 81 patients (76%; intervention, n=41; 
usual care, n=40) completed follow-up surveys. Most pa- 
tients were male (62%) and white (71%) and had some 
college education (56%). The mean (SD) age was 76 (7.5) 
years, and 45% were married or partnered. The primary 
diagnoses were heart failure (51%; mean ejection frac- 
tion, 23%); cancer (22%; type: prostate, 22%; lung, 18%; 
and bladder, 13%); chronic obstructive pulmonary dis- 
ease (20%; mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
of 1.5 L); and cirrhosis (6%; mean Model for Endstage 
Liver Disease score, 16). The mean (SD) hospital length 
of stay was 5.5 (5.8) days. Most participants were de- 
pendant in 1 or more ADL (71%), and 21% had a GDS-IS 
score of 6 or higher. The groups differed in mean age (77 
and 74 years in the intervention and usual care groups, 
respectively; P=.007) but not in other characteristics. 
Symptom scores for all subjects improved from base- 
line to follow-up for pain (4.2 vs 2.3; P(cid:3).001), dyspnea 
(3.8 vs 2.0; P (cid:3).001), and anxiety (4.8 vs 2.4; P(cid:3).001). 
There was no additional improvement in pain (P=.30), 
dyspnea (P = .50), or anxiety (P = .08) for patients as- 
signed to the intervention at any assessment period 
(Figure). 
At follow-up, most patients believed that the staff un- 
derstood what they were going through and that physi- 
cians and nurses listened to their hopes, fears, and be- 
liefs (Table). However, a minority of patients reported 
that the physician discussed their preferences for care 
(43%), their chance of surviving hospitalization (42%), 
or their religious beliefs (31%). There were no differ- 
ences between groups for any of these items. 






























F = 1.1 
P = .30 



Usual Care 
PMC 


F = 0.7 
P = .50 









F = 2.9 
P = .08 




ceive palliative care, at earlier stages palliative care may 
have an impact on different outcomes or require ongo- 
ing engagement.10 Second, a truly interdisciplinary team, 
as we have now, may have had an impact, whereas the 
physician-focused PMC did not. 
The following limitations temper our results. Find- 
ings from 1 institution may not be generalizable, though 
patients enrolled had common conditions. Although we 
relied on self-report measures, such reporting is stan- 
dard and would not account for lack of effect. Prior de- 
scriptive and other rigorous studies have demonstrated 
benefits of PMC. Therefore, the lack of positive findings 
in our randomized trial should not dissuade clinicians 
from referring to a palliative care consultation service 
but highlights the need for further rigorously designed 
research to demonstrate which approach to palliative 
care provided to which patients would improve patient 
outcomes. 
Steven Z. Pantilat, MD 
David L. O’Riordan, PhD 
Suzanne L. Dibble, DNSc, RN 
C. Seth Landefeld, MD 
Author Affiliations: Palliative Care Program (Drs Panti- 
lat and O’Riordan), Institute for Health and Aging (Dr 
Dibble), and Division of Geriatrics (Dr Landefeld), Uni- 
versity of California, San Francisco, and San Francisco, 
VA Medical Center (Dr Landefeld). 
Correspondence: Dr Pantilat, Palliative Care Program, 
University of California, San Francisco, 521 Parnassus 
Ave, Ste C-126, San Francisco, CA 94143-0903 (stevep 
@medicine.ucsf.edu). 
Financial Disclosure: Dr Landefeld has received grants 
from the National Institute on Aging, the John A. Hart- 
ford Foundation, and the S. D. Bechtel Jr Foundation. 
Funding/Support: This study was funded and Dr Panti- 
lat supported by grant 1-K23-AG01018-01 from the Na- 
tional Institute on Aging. 
Additional Contributions: We thank all patients and fami- 
lies who participated in this study and the PMC physi- 
cians, pharmacist, and chaplain who helped care for them. 
Joanne Batt, BA, Wrenn Levenberg, BA, and Emily Phil- 
ipps, BA, research assistants for the Palliative Care Pro- 
gram at University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), 
contributed to the development of resources and the col- 
lection and management of data. Stephen J. McPhee, MD 
(UCSF), and Bernard Lo, MD (UCSF), provided input 
on the design of the study. 
1. Dy SM, Shugarman LR, Lorenz KA, Mularski RA, Lynn J; RAND-Southern 
California Evidence-Based Practice Center. A systematic review of satisfac- 
tion with care at the end of life. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56(1):124-129. 
2. Gade G, Venohr I, Conner D, et al. Impact of an inpatient palliative care team: 



4. Back AL, Li YF, Sales AE. Impact of palliative care case management on re- 
source use by patients dying of cancer at a Veterans Affairs medical center. 
J Palliat Med. 2005;8(1):26-35. 
5. Morrison RS, Penrod JD, Cassel JB, et al; Palliative Care Leadership Cen- 
ters’ Outcomes Group. Cost savings associated with US hospital palliative 
care consultation programs. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(16):1783-1790. 
6. Bakitas M, Lyons KD, Hegel MT, et al. Effects of a palliative care interven- 
tion on clinical outcomes in patients with advanced cancer: the Project 
ENABLE II randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;302(7):741-749. 
7. Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, Jackson BA, Jaffe MW. Studies of illness 
in the aged: the index of ADL: a standardized measure of biological and psy- 
chosocial function. JAMA. 1963;185:914-919. 
8. Lawton MP, Brody EM. Assessment of older people: self-maintaining and 
instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist. 1969;9(3):179-186. 
9. Schreiner AS, Hayakawa H, Morimoto T, Kakuma T. Screening for late life 
depression: cut-off scores for the Geriatric Depression Scale and the Cor- 
nell Scale for Depression in Dementia among Japanese subjects. Int J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2003;18(6):498-505. 
10. Rabow MW, Dibble SL, Pantilat SZ, McPhee SJ. The comprehensive care team: 
a controlled trial of outpatient palliative medicine consultation. Arch Intern 
Med. 2004;164(1):83-91. 

Medical Devices and the Approval 
Processes: United States vs France 

ministration (FDA) for medical devices.1 The 
approval process from the US Food and Drug Ad- 
FDA has announced it will significantly strengthen its 
premarket clearance process (which is under review by 
the Institute of Medicine) and the process for develop- 
ing and reviewing postmarket data.1 The FDA also has 
announced a new transparency initiative requiring that 
clinical data be publicly available. Indeed, a prudent policy 
is warranted before approval: high-quality clinical data 
must show that the benefits outweigh the risks. 
Sadly, the ASTRAL (Angioplasty and Stent for Renal 
Artery Lesions) trial will not be the last one to remind 




Table. Patient Ratings for Follow-up Questions Regarding 
Care, Preferences, Prognosis, and Spiritual Care Comparing 
Usual Care and Intervention Groups 








Did you have specific wishes 
or plans about the types of 
medical treatment that you 
wanted? (Yes) 


P 
Value 






about the chances that you 
would survive the last 
hospitalization? (Yes) 
Did someone on the health 
care team talk with you 
about your religious beliefs? 
(Yes) 







team suggest seeing a 
religious leader? (Yes) 
Did you feel that anyone at the 
hospital really understood 
what you and your family 
were going through? (Yes) 
Did a doctor really listen to you 
about your hopes, fears, and 
beliefs as much as you 
wanted? (Yes) 










you about your hopes, fears, 
and beliefs as much as you 
wanted? (Yes) 

