


The Palliative Care in Heart Failure (PAL-HF) Randomized, 
Controlled Clinical Trial 
Joseph G. Rogers, MDa,b, Chetan B. Patel, MDa,b, Robert J. Mentz, MDa,b, Bradi B. Granger, 
PhD, MSN, RNc, Karen E. Steinhauser, PhDa,d, Mona Fiuzat, PharmDa, Patricia A. Adams, 
BSN, CCRCa, Adam Speck, BSa, Kimberly S. Johnson, MDa,b, Arun Krishnamoorthy, MDe, 
Hongqiu Yang, PhDb, Kevin J. Anstrom, PhDb,f, Gwen C. Dodson, MSNa, Donald H. Taylor 
Jr., PhD, MPAa,g,h, Jerry L. Kirchner, BS, CCRPb, Daniel B. Mark, MDa,b, Christopher M. 
O’Connor, MDa,i, and James A. Tulsky, MDj,k 
aDepartment of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 


dCenter for Health Services Research and Development in Primary Care, Durham VA Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 





jDepartment of Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
MA 
kDivision of Palliative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
MA 

Address for Correspondence: Joseph G. Rogers, MD Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Duke University, Box 3034 
DUMC, Durham, NC 27710, Telephone: 919-681-1370, Fax: 919-681-7755, joseph.rogers@duke.edu. 
Disclosures: Robert J. Mentz receives research support from the National Institutes of Health (U10HL110312 and 
R01AG045551-01A1), Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead, Medtronic, Novartis, Otsuka, and 
ResMed; honoraria from HeartWare, Janssen, Luitpold Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, ResMed, and Thoratec/St Jude; and has served on 
an advisory board for Luitpold Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Boehringer Ingelheim. Kimberly Johnson received research support from 
projects funded by the NIA (RO1AG042130; K08AG028975). Arun Krishnamoorthy reports working on projects funded by research 
grants to the Duke Clinical Research Institute from the NIH, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, and Eli Lilly, and support to attend educational 
conferences from HeartWare, Thoratec, and Medtronic. James Tulsky receives research funding from PCORI (SC 14-1403-13975). 
None of the remaining authors have any disclosures to report. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
HHS Public Access 
Author manuscript 
Am Coll Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 18. 
J 
 
 


BACKGROUND—Advanced heart failure (HF) is characterized by high morbidity and mortality. 
Conventional therapy may not sufficiently reduce patient suffering and maximize quality of life. 
OBJECTIVES—. We investigated whether an interdisciplinary palliative care intervention in 
addition to evidence-based HF care improves certain outcomes. 
METHODS—We randomized 150 patients with advanced HF between August 15, 2012, and June 
25, 2015, to usual care (UC; n =75) or UC plus a palliative care intervention (UC+PAL; n =75) at 
a single center. Primary endpoints were 2 quality-of-life measurements, the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ) overall summary and the Functional Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy - Palliative Care scale (FACIT-Pal), assessed at 6 months. Secondary 
endpoints included assessments of depression and anxiety (measured via the Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale [HADS]), spiritual well-being (measured via the FACIT - Spiritual Well-Being 
scale [FACIT-Sp]), hospitalizations, and mortality. 
RESULTS—Patients randomized to UC+PAL versus UC alone had clinically significant 
incremental improvement in KCCQ and FACIT-Pal scores from randomization to 6 months 
(KCCQ difference =9.49 points, 95% CI 0.94 to 18.05, p =0.030; FACIT-Pal difference =11.77 
points, 95% CI 0.84 to 22.71, p =0.035). Depression improved in UC+PAL patients (HADS- 
depression difference =−1.94 points; p =0.020) versus UC-alone patients, with similar findings for 
anxiety (HADS-anxiety difference =−1.83 points; p =0.048). Spiritual well-being was improved in 
UC+PAL versus UC-alone patients (FACIT-Sp difference =3.98 points; p =0.027). Randomization 
to UC+PAL did not affect rehospitalization or mortality. 
CONCLUSIONS—An interdisciplinary palliative care intervention in advanced HF patients 
showed consistently greater benefits in quality of life, anxiety, depression, and spiritual well-being 
compared with UC alone. 




Important progress has been made over the last 25 years in the identification and use of 
prognosis-modifying therapies for patients with heart failure (HF) (1). Unfortunately, over 
time these therapies often fail to prevent disease progression. Acute decompensated HF 
remains the most common cause of hospitalization in the Medicare population, highlighting 
the public health importance of the problem (2,3). Further, HF progression is a frightening 
and uncomfortable experience for patients, with both physical and psychological sequelae. 
Regarding the latter, patients with HF commonly experience depression, poor quality of life, 
and spiritual distress (4,5). The high mortality rates and poor quality of life in HF patients, 
despite use of contemporary therapies, suggest that new thinking is required in the 
management of these patients (6–8). One approach that has shown promise for patients with 
advanced cancer and other serious illnesses is palliative care (9), an interdisciplinary 
approach designed to improve symptoms, pain, and quality of life. Assessing the added 


 


value of palliative care in patients with HF requires a clear focus on patient-centered 
outcomes, particularly relief of suffering and improving quality of life as the disease 
advances (10). 
We conducted the Palliative Care in Heart Failure (PAL-HF) trial to assess the impact of an 
interdisciplinary palliative care intervention combined with usual HF management on HF- 
related and overall quality of life in patients with advanced HF (Central Illustration). 


The design of the PAL-HF trial has been described previously (11). Briefly, PAL-HF was a 
prospective, 2-arm, single-center clinical trial, enrolling patients with advanced HF and a 
high 6-month mortality risk based on covariates measured at enrollment. Enrolled patients 
were randomized in a 1:1 allocation to usual care (UC) alone or UC plus palliative care 
intervention (UC+PAL) using a complete randomization scheme. The trial was unblinded, 
since blinding of the intervention was not feasible. 
The duration of the intervention phase of the trial was 6 months, but patients in both groups 
were followed until death or end of the study. 

Our interdisciplinary, guideline-driven, multicomponent palliative care intervention was 
administered in combination with contemporary HF management as previously detailed 
(11). In brief, the study team assessed and managed the multiple domains of quality of life 
for patients with advanced HF, including physical symptoms, psychosocial and spiritual 
concerns, and advance care planning. A certified palliative care nurse practitioner 
coordinated these aspects of the patient’s care in collaboration with a hospice and palliative 
medicine board-certified physician. The intervention was performed in collaboration with 
each patient’s clinical cardiology team and focused on shared goal-setting to combine HF 
symptom amelioration with palliative care goals. Following hospital discharge, the PAL-HF 
nurse practitioner actively participated in the ongoing management of the patients in the 
outpatient environment. 
Patients were screened for depression and anxiety with the Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (HADS) (12). Patients who screened positive for these symptoms were considered for 
referral to a mental health provider as well as for possible use of symptomatic medical 
therapies, including anti-depressants, anxiolytics, stress management resources, and 
psychotherapy. Spiritual concerns were assessed by the study nurse practitioner using the 
FICA (Faith and Belief, Importance, Community, Address in Care) Spiritual History Tool, 
and these details were shared with the intervention team (13,14). Goals of care were 
iteratively assessed by the intervention nurse practitioner using communication techniques 
described in the VitalTalk Curriculum (vitaltalk.org). After the 6-month intervention period 
was completed, the nurse practitioner continued to contact the patients in the intervention 
arm every 3 months to provide ongoing support and clinical care. 


 



Patients in the UC-alone arm were managed by a cardiologist-directed team with HF 
expertise. Inpatient care was focused on symptom relief and use of evidence-based therapies 
as detailed in current guidelines (1). Inpatient palliative care consultation was not denied to 
UC-alone patients. After discharge, these patients received outpatient follow-up with their 
general practitioners as well as an HF cardiologist or nurse practitioner with care focused on 
guidelines-based medication titration and serial monitoring of end-organ function. 

PAL-HF screened and enrolled both hospitalized patients (n =148) and recently discharged 
patients (n =2) who were at high risk of rehospitalization and mortality based on their 
ESCAPE (Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery 
Catheterization Effectiveness) risk score (11,15). The most common reason for trial 
exclusion was failure to meet severity of illness criteria in the ESCAPE risk score. 
Hospitalized patients could be enrolled if they were expected to be discharged within 48 
hours. Recently discharged patients were eligible to be enrolled if they were discharged from 
the hospital in the past 2 weeks and met the other study inclusion criteria. Exclusion criteria 
included anticipated heart transplant or ventricular assist device placement within 6 months 
and non-cardiac terminal illness. A complete list of inclusion and exclusion criteria has been 
previously reported (11). The Duke University Medical Center Institutional Review Board 
approved the study. All patients provided written, informed consent. 

Following trial enrollment, subjects underwent reassessment of their clinical status and 
primary outcome questionnaires at weeks 2, 6, 12, and 24 (11). 

The 2 primary endpoints were HF-specific quality of life (measured using the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire [KCCQ] overall summary score [16]) and general and 
palliative care-specific, health-related quality of life (measured using the Functional 
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy - Palliative Care scale [FACIT-Pal]). The KCCQ is a 
23-item, disease-specific questionnaire scored from 0 to 100 with higher scores representing 
better health status. The overall summary score is derived from the physical function, 
symptom, social function, and quality-of-life domains. A 5-point change in the KCCQ 
overall summary score is considered a clinically meaningful difference (17). The FACIT-Pal 
is a 46-item measure of self-reported generic quality of life (27 general; 19 palliative care) 
that assesses quality of life in several domains, including physical well-being, social/family 
well-being, emotional well-being, functional well-being, and palliative care with a range of 
0 to 184. Higher scores indicate better quality of life. A 10-point change in the overall 
summary score represents a clinically meaningful difference (18). 
Secondary quality of life endpoints included scoring on the FACIT –Spiritual Well-Being 
scale (FACIT-Sp) and HADS. FACIT-Sp (19) is a 12-item scale that assesses the role of faith 
in illness and meaning, peace, and purpose in life. The range of the score is 0 to 48 with 


 


higher scores representing increased spirituality across the range of religious traditions. 
HADS is a 14-item scale divided into anxiety and depression subscales (20). Questions are 
scored from 0 to 3 with a cut-off point of 11 on each subscale, giving the optimal sensitivity 
and specificity for the presence of the corresponding psychiatric symptoms. The range of the 
HADS total score is 0 to 42 with depression and anxiety sub-scores each ranging from 0 to 
21 and higher scores indicating worse symptoms. A score of 11 or higher on each subscale 
gives the optimal sensitivity and specificity for the presence of the corresponding psychiatric 
symptoms. These questionnaires were administered at weeks 2,12, and 24. 

The KCCQ overall summary and FACIT-Pal scores were selected as the co-primary 
endpoints of the PAL-HF study. Assuming a common standard deviation of 12 points for the 
KCCQ overall summary score, the planned sample size of 200 subjects (100 per arm) was 
projected to provide 80% power to detect a difference of 4.8 points. As noted earlier, a 5- 
point change in this score is the smallest change that is clinically significant at the individual 
patient level (17). For the FACIT-Pal co-primary endpoint, the sample size of 200 subjects 
was projected to provide 80% power to detect a difference of 10 points assuming a standard 
deviation of 25. As noted earlier, a 10-point change in this score is the smallest change that 
is clinically significant at the individual patient level. Interpretive benchmarks for quality-of- 
life scores based on clinically significant individual patient changes must be used with the 
understanding that, in group-level data, group mean values typically depend on the 
proportion of responders in the sample (10). Sample size calculations were based on a 2- 
sample t-test with a type I error rate of 0.05. The data and safety monitoring board, in 
consultation with the sponsoring agency, recommended a sample size reduction to 150 
subjects on January 14, 2015, based upon enrollment rates, a mortality rate that was lower 
than predicted, and observed outcomes differences at that intermediate time point. 
Baseline characteristics between treatment groups are presented using means (standard 
deviations) for continuous measures and counts (percentages) for categorical variables. The 
primary analyses of the longitudinal data from the KCCQ overall summary and FACIT-Pal 
scores are based on linear mixed models with an indicator variable for the treatment group. 
Mixed model analysis provides an approach that considers sources of variation and 
correlation among repeated measurements within a subject. In the analysis of repeated 
measurements, subjects can still be included even when some observations are missing; thus, 
it has advantage over the general linear model analyses in which no missing observations are 
allowed. The treatment effect at 6 months was calculated by using the appropriate contrast 
statements. Both co-primary endpoints were tested at the 2-sided type-I 0.05 level, because 
the KCCQ and FACIT-Pal assessments measure 2 different dimensions that are both 
important to patients. Mortality rates were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method, and p- 
values were computed using the log-rank test. All reported analyses were performed using 
the intention-to-treat principle. 


 



Overall, 150 patients were enrolled in PAL-HF with 75 patients in each study arm (Online 
Figure 1). The baseline characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1. The 
mean age was 71 years, 47% were women, and 41% were African-American. The mean HF 
duration was 66.9 months, and patients had an average of 2.2 hospitalizations in the 12 
months prior to enrollment. In addition, 45% of patients had an ejection fraction >40%, and 
the mean baseline NT-proBNP (N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide) was 11,576 pmol/L. 
Most participants (82%) were sedentary >50% of the time, and 85% rated their overall 
health as poor/fair. There were no significant differences in baseline demographic 
characteristics by treatment assignment. 
The frequency of interactions that occurred between patients and providers is shown in Table 
2. The specific components of the complex interactions designed to address advanced care 
planning, symptom amelioration, and psychosocial and spiritual support are difficult to 
capture from clinical records and study documents. 
During the 6-month follow-up, 30% of patients were hospitalized for HF and 29% of 
patients died. No differences were seen between the 2 treatment groups in either of these 
clinical endpoints through the 6-month follow-up point. 
The primary endpoints are presented in Table 3 and Figure 1. At baseline, the mean KCCQ 
score was 33.7 and the mean FACIT-Pal score was 119.3. Patients randomized to UC+PAL 
had greater improvements in the KCCQ overall summary score from randomization to 6 
months compared with patients randomized to UC alone (9.49 point difference, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.94 to 18.05; p =0.03). Patients randomized to UC+PAL had 
greater improvement in FACIT-Pal scores over 6 months compared with those randomized to 
UC alone (11.77 point difference, 95% CI 0.84 to 22.71; p =0.035). 
Table 4 and Figure 2 summarize secondary endpoints. From initial assessment through 6 
months, depressive symptoms improved more in UC+PAL patients (HADS-depression 
difference of −1.94 points; 95% CI 3.57 to −0.31; p =0.02) compared with UC-alone 
patients, with similar findings for anxiety (HADS-anxiety difference of -1.83 points; 95% CI 
-3.64 to -0.02; p =0.048). Spiritual well-being was improved in UC+PAL patients compared 
with UC-alone patients (FACIT-Sp difference of 3.98 points, 95% CI 0.46 to 7.50; p 
=0.027). 

PAL-HF is the first randomized, controlled trial of a longitudinal palliative care intervention 
to demonstrate the significant clinical benefit of embedding such an interdisciplinary 
intervention in the overall management of patients with advanced HF. The addition of 
palliative care principles in this vulnerable population improved physical, psychosocial 
(anxiety/depression), and spiritual quality-of-life measures, the key domains of patient 
experience in serious illness. While patient-reported outcomes are historically underused as 
primary outcome measures in cardiology clinical trials as compared with more traditional, 
objective measures (such as mortality and hospitalization rates) (20), these “hard” endpoints 


 


are often less important to patients with incurable, advanced diseases (21). Instead, many of 
these patients have a strong desire for relief of suffering and assistance with end-of-life 
planning (22). 
One of the primary goals of PAL-HF was to select a diverse and high-risk HF cohort that 
mirrors the broader population commonly admitted to the hospital. The age, sex, and race/ 
ethnic profile of our study cohort enhances the applicability of our findings. Trial inclusion 
criteria were based on symptom burden in chronic HF rather than ejection fraction, and as 
such, 45% of patients had preserved or mildly reduced left ventricular function. Prognostic 
biomarkers, including NT-proBNP and serum creatinine levels, were markedly elevated in 
both trial arms, suggestive of poor prognosis (23,24), and the KCCQ scores were 
demonstrative of a poor quality of life, heavy symptom burden, and high mortality risk (25). 
The 6-month rehospitalization (30%) and mortality (29%) rates and relatively low use of 
standard guideline-directed medical therapies related to hypotension and/or renal 
dysfunction confirmed the selection of a high-risk population. 
Previous studies of palliative care interventions in HF are few. Most have focused on 
providing decision-making interventions in an inpatient setting and have not extended 
multidisciplinary care beyond the hospital (5,6). In the only other randomized trial of HF 
and palliative care, Sidebottom and colleagues demonstrated improvements in quality of life 
and symptom burden in patients managed with standard palliative care processes (26). PAL- 
HF advances the science by defining the value of a systematic approach for outpatient 
delivery of palliative care in the HF population. The findings support the patient-reported 
benefits of a care delivery model that transitions and changes, much like symptoms do, 
beyond the walls of the health system to the community and home settings. Though patients 
have reported the value of similar models in other chronic illnesses, such as HIV and 
oncology, the palliative care interventions have been empiric and difficult to scale (27). The 
value of PAL-HF is that it demonstrates the effectiveness of an intervention that is well 
described and primarily dependent on a trained nurse practitioner and, therefore, could likely 
be more broadly applicable. 
The pattern of improvement in the primary endpoints is interesting and has previously been 
observed in palliative care clinical investigation (28). First, both patient cohorts improved 
relative to the baseline assessment, and these changes were anticipated as the acute 
exacerbation of HF is treated and patients leave the hospital. The real benefit of the palliative 
care intervention was seen after 3 months. We posit that this finding may be related to the 
sustained involvement of palliative care and the relationships that develop between patients, 
their families, and care teams. Changes in KCCQ and FACIT-Pal scores over the 6-month 
follow-up period were clinically relevant and as robust as any prior trial (22). 
Concordance of the 2 epistemologically distinct quality-of-life measures (the HF domains 
assessed by the KCCQ, and the palliative care domains assessed by FACIT-Pal) highlights 
the intersection of the contributions made by each of these disciplines to the common patient 
journey in advanced HF. While previous studies have examined the symptom experience 
from an HF perspective (8,10) and reported interventions to address palliative care 
communication gaps (14,29,30), a persistent gap has been the lack of randomized, controlled 


 


trials demonstrating the effectiveness of interventions that target the intersection of advanced 
HF and palliative care. 

There are several limitations to this study that should be acknowledged. First, it is a single- 
center trial. The imperative for wider dissemination of palliative care interventions in heart 
failure will be enhanced when others replicate our findings in additional cohorts at other 
centers. Our data certainly provide strong support for a larger, multicenter study. Second, 
while our palliative care intervention was based on approaches adapted from those used in 
other disease states such as oncology, it was implemented by a single nurse practitioner and 
palliative care specialist. Third, the intervention was delivered in an HF program that has 
already adopted many palliative care principles, so it is possible that the control group 
received care that might vary from that provided in other programs. Finally, in addition to 
the anticipated high mortality rate, 12% of patients were either lost to follow-up or withdrew 
consent for participation, due in part to advanced disease; this is consistent with other 
studies and reflects the difficulty of retaining seriously ill patients in clinical trials. This 
reduced the proportion of the study population able to contribute data to the primary 
endpoints. While such types of missing data can create biases in the analysis of quality-of- 
life data, we believe this is unlikely in our study due to the equal mortality rate in the two 
arms and the equivalent loss to follow-up for survivors. 

Advanced HF imposes significant physical, psychosocial, and spiritual burdens on patients 
and their families. PAL-HF provides empirical evidence that palliative care improves health- 
related quality of life in end-stage HF patients. Palliative care represents an important 
component of the holistic management of patients with advanced HF. 



Funding: The PAL-HF study was funded by the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR). Dr. Steinhauser is 
a Health Scientist with the Center for Health Services Research and Development in Primary Care, Durham VA 
Medical Center, Durham, NC. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the position or policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States government. 
We thank the PAL-HF data and safety monitoring board members Drs. Kirkwood Adams (chair), Laura Hanson, 
and Todd Schwartz for their careful review of the study data. We thank the patients for their participation in the 
study. Joseph Rogers and Kevin Anstrom had full access to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the 
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. 




Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery 
Catheterization Effectiveness trial 


 




















pharmacological therapy for heart failure: an update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 May 17. pii: S0735-1097(16)33024-8. 

statistics--2013 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013; 127:143– 
52. [PubMed: 23283859] 
3. Bergethon KE, Ju C, DeVore AD, et al. Trends in 30-day readmission rates for patients hospitalized 
with heart failure: findings from the Get With the Guidelines-Heart Failure Registry. Circ Heart Fail. 
2016; 9 pii:e002594. 
4. Selman L, Beynon T, Higginson IJ, Harding R. Psychological, social and spiritual distress at the end 
of life in heart failure patients. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2007; 1:260–6. [PubMed: 18685372] 
5. Bekelman DB, Havranek EP, Becker DM, et al. Symptoms, depression, and quality of life in patients 



















 


14. Steinhauser KE, Alexander SC, Byock IR, George LK, Olsen MK, Tulsky JA. Do preparation and 
life completion discussions improve functioning and quality of life in seriously ill patients? Pilot 
randomized control trial J Palliat Med. 2008; 11:1234–40. [PubMed: 19021487] 
15. O’Connor CM, Hasselblad V, Mehta RH, et al. Triage after hospitalization with advanced heart 
failure: the ESCAPE (Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery 
Catheterization Effectiveness) risk model and discharge score. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010; 55:872–8. 
[PubMed: 20185037] 
16. Green CP, Porter CB, Bresnahan DR, Spertus JA. Development and evaluation of the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000; 35:1245–55. [PubMed: 10758967] 
17. Flynn KE, Lin L, Ellis SJ, et al. Outcomes, health policy, and managed care: relationships between 
patient-reported outcome measures and clinical measures in outpatients with heart failure. Am 
Heart J. 2009; 158:S64–71. [PubMed: 19782791] 
18. Lyons KD, Bakitas M, Hegel MT, Hanscom B, Hull J, Ahles TA. Reliability and validity of the 
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Palliative Care (FACIT-Pal) Scale. J Pain 
Symptom Manage. 2009; 37:23–32. [PubMed: 18504093] 
19. Peterman AH, Fitchett G, Brady MJ, Hernandez L, Cella D. Measuring spiritual well-being in 
people with cancer: the functional assessment of chronic illness therapy--Spiritual Well-being 
Scale (FACIT-Sp). Ann Behav Med. 2002; 24:49–58. [PubMed: 12008794] 


21. Allen LA, Stevenson LW, Grady KL, et al. Decision making in advanced heart failure: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2012; 125:1928–52. [PubMed: 
22392529] 
22. Lum HD, Carey EP, Fairclough D, et al. Burdensome physical and depressive symptoms predict 
heart failure-specific health status over one year. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016; 51:963–70. 
[PubMed: 26921492] 
23. O’Connor CM, Abraham WT, Albert NM, et al. Predictors of mortality after discharge in patients 
hospitalized with heart failure: an analysis from the Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving 
Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF). Am Heart J. 2008; 
156:662–73. [PubMed: 18926148] 

peptide and long-term outcomes: data from Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in 
Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF) linked to Medicare claims. Circ Heart 
Fail. 2011; 4:628–36. [PubMed: 21743005] 


26. Sidebottom AC, Jorgenson A, Richards H, Kirven J, Sillah A. Inpatient palliative care for patients 
with acute heart failure: outcomes from a randomized trial. J Palliat Med. 2015; 18:134–42. 
[PubMed: 25479182] 



oncology care: patient outcomes in the ENABLE III randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 
2015; 33:1438–45. [PubMed: 25800768] 

strategies to support family members of ICU patients at high risk of dying. Heart Lung. 2014; 
43:406–15. [PubMed: 24655938] 
30. Goldstein NE, Kalman J, Kutner JS, et al. A study to improve communication between clinicians 
and patients with advanced heart failure: methods and challenges behind the working to improve 
discussions about defibrillator management trial. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014; 48:1236–46. 
[PubMed: 24768595] 


 






The PAL-HF trial demonstrates that a multidisciplinary palliative care intervention 
improves quality of life and patient-reported symptoms, and it reduces the psychological 
burden of heart failure compared with usual care alone. 

The morbidity and mortality associated with heart failure requires reconsideration of the 
care provided. Based upon the results of the PAL-HF trial, practitioners should consider 
adding palliative care to guideline-directed medical therapy in patients with advanced 
heart failure and a high risk for short-term mortality. 
 


Figure 1. Mean quality-of-life measures by treatment group over time for the primary outcome 
measures 
Panel A displays the KCCQ overall summary score. Panel B displays the FACIT-Pal score. 
For both scales, higher values represent better quality of life. A 5-point change for the 
KCCQ overall summary score is considered clinically significant. A 10-point change is 
considered clinically meaningful for the FACIT-Pal score. 


 




 


Figure 2. Mean quality-of-life measures by treatment group over time for the key secondary 
outcome measures 
Panel A displays the FACIT-Sp score, panel B displays the HADS-depression score, and 
panel C displays the HADS-anxiety score. For the FACIT-Sp scale, higher scores represent 
increased spirituality across the range of religious traditions. The HADS scale is divided into 
anxiety and depression subscales, giving the optimal sensitivity and specificity for the 
presence of the corresponding psychiatric symptoms. Higher scores indicate worse 
symptoms. 


 


Central Illustration. The PAL-HF study randomized 150 patients with advanced heart failure to 
usual care or usual care + a multidimensional palliative care intervention 
The co-primary endpoints were quality of life measured by the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire and the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy - Palliative Care 
scale. Patients who received the palliative care intervention had significantly better quality of 
life measured by both instruments. 


 
















































































































 
 






























Values presented are means (standard deviations) for continuous variables and counts (percentages) for categorical variables. All p-values 
comparing treatment groups >0.05. 
Abbreviations: ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker; HF = heart failure; ICD = implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator; NT-proBNP = N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA = New York Heart Association Heart Failure Classification; PAL = 
palliative car intervention; UC = usual care; ICD = implantable cardioverter defibrillator. 


 





































The data displayed in this table represent the number of unique encounters documented on case report forms and hospital billing records over the 
6-month study period. Home visits, telephonic encounters, and some types of interventions delivered (spiritual, advanced care planning, caregiver 
support) were not distinctly or differentially collected. 


 








































Mixed model results – difference at 6 months 
(95% CIs), unadjusted 
Mixed model results – difference at 6 months 
(95% CIs), adjusted for age and sex 
9.49 (0.94, 18.05) 
p =0.030 
9.14 (0.56, 17.72) 
p =0.037 































Mixed model results – difference at 6 months 
(95% CIs), unadjusted 
Mixed model results – difference at 6 months 
(95% CIs), adjusted for age and sex 
11.77 (0.84, 22.71) 
p =0.035 
11.09 (0.19, 21.99) 
p =0.0462 

Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; FACIT-Pal = Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy with Palliative Care Subscale; KCCQ = 
Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire; PAL = palliative care intervention; UC = usual care. 




 











N Assessed / N at Risk 
(%) 

N Assessed / N at Risk 
(%) 













Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), unadjusted 
Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), adjusted for age and sex 
−1.94 (−3.57, −0.31) 
p =0.020 
−1.94 (−3.58, −0.30) 
p =0.021 




Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), unadjusted 
Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), adjusted for age and sex 
















−1.83 (−3.64, −0.02) 
p =0.048 
−1.70 (−3.50, 0.09) 
p =0.063 












Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), unadjusted 
Mixed model results – difference at 6 months (95% 
CIs), adjusted for age and sex 
3.98 (0.46, 7.50) 
p =0.027 
3.93 (0.37, 7.48) 
p =0.031 





PAL 
N=75 




UC 
N=75 




Values shown are number assessed/number of patients alive and uncensored (%), mean (standard deviation). Note: baseline assessments were not 
collected for these endpoints. Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; FACIT = Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy with Palliative 
Care Subscale; HADS = Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; PAL = palliative car intervention; UC = usual care. 




 
