A Controlled Trial to Improve Care 
for Seriously III Hospitalized Patients 
The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences 
for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments (SUPPORT) 
The SUPPORT Principal Investigators 


Design.\p=m-\A2-year prospective observational study (phase I) with 4301 patients 
followed by a 2-year controlled clinical trial (phase II) with 4804 patients and their 
physicians randomized by specialty group to the intervention group (n=2652) or 
control group (n=2152). 
Setting.\p=m-\Fiveteaching hospitals in the United States. 
Patients.\p=m-\Atotal of 9105 adults hospitalized with one or more of nine 

Intervention.\p=m-\Physiciansin the intervention group received estimates of the 
likelihood of 6-month survival for every day up to 6 months, outcomes of cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation (CPR), and functional disability at 2 months. A specially trained 
nurse had multiple contacts with the patient, family, physician, and hospital staff to 
elicit preferences, improve understanding of outcomes, encourage attention to pain 
control, and facilitate advance care planning and patient-physician communication. 
Results.\p=m-\Thephase I observation documented shortcomings in communica- 
tion, frequency of aggressive treatment, and the characteristics of hospital death: 
only 47% of physicians knew when their patients preferred to avoid CPR; 46% of 
do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders were written within 2 days of death; 38% of patients 
who died spent at least 10 days in an intensive care unit (ICU); and for 50% of con- 
scious patients who died in the hospital, family members reported moderate to se- 
vere pain at least half the time. During the phase II intervention, patients experienced 
no improvement in patient-physician communication (eg, 37% of control patients 
and 40% of intervention patients discussed CPR preferences) or in the five targeted 
outcomes, ie, incidence or timing of written DNR orders (adjusted ratio, 1.02; 95% 
confidence interval [Cl], 0.90 to 1.15), physicians' knowledge of their patients'pref- 
erences not to be resuscitated (adjusted ratio, 1.22; 95% Cl, 0.99 to 1.49), number 
of days spent in an ICU, receiving mechanical ventilation, or comatose before death 
(adjusted ratio, 0.97; 95% Cl, 0.87 to 1.07), or level of reported pain (adjusted ratio, 
1.15; 95% Cl, 1.00 to 1.33). The intervention also did not reduce use of hospital re- 
sources (adjusted ratio, 1.05; 95% Cl, 0.99 to 1.12). 
Conclusions.\p=m-\Thephase I observation of SUPPORT confirmed substantial 
shortcomings in care for seriously ill hospitalized adults. The phase II intervention 
failed to improve care or patient outcomes. Enhancing opportunities for more 
patient-physician communication, although advocated as the major method for im- 
proving patient outcomes, may be inadequate to change established practices. To 
improve the experience of seriously ill and dying patients, greater individual and 
societal commitment and more proactive and forceful measures may be needed. 
(JAMA. 1995;274:1591-1598) 

investi- 
gators and collaborators appears at the end of this 
article. 
The opinions and findings contained in this article are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the views of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation or 
their Board of Trustees. 
Reprint requests to ICU Research Unit, Box 600, 
University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, Char- 
lottesville, VA 22908 (William A. Knaus, MD). 
PUBLIC HEALTH and clinical medi¬ 
cine during this century have given 
Americans the opportunity to live longer 
and more productive lives, despite pro¬ 
gressive illness. For some patients, how¬ 
ever, this progress has resulted in pro¬ 
longed dying, accompanied by substan¬ 
tial emotional and financial expense.1 
Many Americans today fear they will 
lose control over their lives if they be¬ 
come critically ill, and their dying will 
be prolonged and impersonal.2 This has 
led to an increasingly visible right-to- 
die movement. Two years after voters 
in California and Washington State nar¬ 
rowly defeated referenda on physician- 
assisted euthanasia, Oregon voters ap¬ 
proved physician prescription of lethal 
medications for persons with a terminal 
disease.3·4 Physicians and ethicists have 
debated when to use cardiac resuscita¬ 
tion and other aggressive treatments 
for patients with advanced illnesses.6,6 
Many worry about the economic and hu¬ 
man cost of providing life-sustaining 
treatment near the end of life.79 

In response, professional organiza¬ 
tions, the judiciary, consumer organiza¬ 
tions, and a president's commission have 
all advocated more emphasis on realis¬ 
tically forecasting outcomes of 
life- 
sustaining treatment and on improved 
communication between physician and 
patient.21016 Statutes requiring informed 
consent and communication, like the Pa¬ 
tient Self-determination Act,17 have been 
passed. Advance care planning and ef¬ 
fective ongoing communication among 
clinicians, patients, and families are es¬ 
sential to achieve these goals. Previous 
studies indicate, however, that commu¬ 
nication is often absent or occurs only 
during a crisis.1820 Physicians today of¬ 
ten perceive death as failure,1 they tend 
to be too pessimistic regarding prog- 

noses,21 and they provide more exten¬ 
sive treatment to seriously ill patients 
than they would choose for themselves.22 
Phase I of the Study to Understand 
Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes 
and Risks of Treatments (SUPPORT) 
confirmed barriers to optimal manage¬ 
ment and shortfalls in patient-physician 
communication.23·24 The phase II inter¬ 
vention sought to address these defi¬ 
ciencies by providing physicians with 
accurate predictive information on fu¬ 
ture functional ability,26 survival prob¬ 
ability for each day up to 6 months,26 and 
patient preferences for end-of-life care; 
a skilled nurse augmented the care team 
to elicit patient preferences, provide 
prognoses, enhance understanding, en¬ 
able palliative care, and facilitate ad¬ 
vance planning. We hypothesized that 
increased communication and under¬ 
standing of prognoses and preferences 
would result in earlier treatment deci¬ 
sions, reductions in time spent in unde¬ 
sirable states before death, and reduced 
resource use. This article describes the 
effect of the SUPPORT intervention on 
five specific outcomes: physician under¬ 
standing of patient preferences; 
inci¬ 
dence and time of documentation of do- 
not-resuscitate (DNR) orders; pain; time 
spent in an intensive care unit (ICU), 
comatose, or receiving mechanical ven¬ 
tilation before death; and hospital re¬ 
source use (Figure 1). 
METHODS 
Phase I was a prospective observa¬ 
tional study that described the process 
of decision making and patient outcomes. 
Phase II was a cluster randomized con¬ 
trolled clinical trial to test the effect of 
the intervention. Enrollment, data col¬ 
lection, and interviewing were virtually 
identical during the two phases.21,23"28 
Enrollment 
Qualified patients were in the ad¬ 
vanced stages of one or more of nine 
illnesses: acute respiratory failure, mul¬ 
tiple organ system failure with sepsis, 
multiple organ system failure with ma¬ 
lignancy, coma, chronic obstructive lung 
disease, congestive heart failure, cirrho¬ 
sis, metastatic colon cancer, and non- 
lung cancer. Patients were 
small cell 
excluded if they were younger than 18 
years, were discharged or died within 
48 hours ofqualifying for the study, were 
admitted with a scheduled discharge 
within 72 hours, did not speak English, 
were admitted to the psychiatric ward, 
had acquired immunodeficiency syn¬ 
drome, or were pregnant or sustained 
an acute burn, head, or other trauma 
(unless they later developed acute res¬ 
piratory failure or multiple organ sys¬ 
tem failure).26·28 Nurses trained in the 
SUPPORT eligibility criteria reviewed 
hospital admissions and ICU patients 
daily to identify newly qualified patients. 
Phase I enrolled patients from June 
1989 to June 1991, and phase II enrolled 
patients from January 1992 through 
January 1994. Patients were recruited 
from five medical centers: Beth Israel 
Hospital, Boston, Mass; MetroHealth 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio; Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC; Marshfield Clinic/St Joseph's Hos¬ 
pital, Marshfield, Wis; and the Univer¬ 
sity of California at Los Angeles Medi¬ 
cal Center. An independent committee 
monitored potential adverse events, in¬ 
cluding 6-month mortality for interven¬ 
tion patients and changes in patient sat¬ 
isfaction with medical care. Mortality 
follow-up to 6 months was complete for 
all phase I patients. In phase II, 22 pa¬ 
tients (0.5%) were unavailable for follow- 
up at a median of 80 days. 
Data Collection Methods 
Data collection was based on both con¬ 
current and retrospective medical re¬ 
cord reviews and on interviews with pa¬ 
tients, patient surrogates (defined as the 
person who would make decisions if the 
patient was unable to do so), and pa¬ 
tients' physicians. 
Medical Record-Based Data.—We 
indicators of 
collected physiological 
disease severity,29,30 length of stay, a 
modified version of the Therapeutic In¬ 
tervention Scoring System,31 and comor- 
bidities from the medical records on days 
1,3, 7,14, and 25. The permanent medi¬ 
cal record was retrospectively reviewed 
for discussions or decisions concerning 
18 important issues, such as the use of 
dialysis, withdrawal from a ventilator, 
and DNR orders. Reliability testing on 
10% of the medical records showed at 
least 90% agreement on abstracted data. 
Interview Data.—Patients and their 
designated surrogates were interviewed 
in the hospital between days 2 and 7 
(median, day 4) and again between days 
6 and 15 (median, day 12) after study 
enrollment, whether or not the patient 
remained hospitalized. The surrogate 
was interviewed 4 to 10 weeks after the 
patient's death. Among the 45% of pa¬ 
tients who were able to communicate, 
the response rate for the first interview 
was 85%. The surrogate response rate 
for the first interview was 87%. For the 
second-week interviews, the patient re¬ 
sponse rate was 71% and the surrogate 
response rate was 78%. The interviews 
collected information on patient demo¬ 
graphics, functional status, self-assessed 
quality of life, communication with phy¬ 
sicians, frequency and severity of pain, 
satisfaction with medical care,32 and the 
patient's preferences for cardiopulmo- 
nary resuscitation (CPR). When a pa¬ 
tient interview was not possible, the sur¬ 
rogate's responses were substituted, a 
strategy that mirrors clinical practice. 
Important elements of the patient/sur¬ 
rogate questionnaires were retested for 
reliability. Initial and repeat responses 
had greater than 80% agreement. 
The most senior available physician 
acknowledging responsibility for the pa¬ 
tient's medical decisions was interviewed 
in the first and second weeks after pa¬ 
tient enrollment (median days, 3 and 11, 
respectively). In both interviews, we 
asked the physician's understanding of 
the patient's preferences for CPR. In 
the second interview, physicians as¬ 
signed to the intervention were queried 
about its influence on the patient's care. 
Physician response rates were 86% for 
the first interview and 82% for the sec¬ 
ond interview. 

Presented with early findings from 
phase I documenting substantial short¬ 
comings in communication, decision mak¬ 
ing, and outcomes,23,24 physicians at the 
participating institutions voiced inter¬ 
est in attempting change. Physician lead¬ 
ers and study investigators at the sites 
met to discuss how decision making could 
be improved to more closely reflect both 
probable outcomes and patient prefer¬ 
ences and ways to improve patient, fam¬ 
ily, and physician communication. Phy¬ 
sicians suggested that communication 
could improve if there were more reli¬ 
able and prompt information generated 
by the study and if study personnel 
would make it more efficient to have 
conversations. In response to these sug¬ 
gestions, the phase II intervention aimed 
to improve communication and decision 
making by providing timely and reliable 
prognostic information, by eliciting and 
documenting patient and family prefer¬ 
ences and understanding of disease prog¬ 
nosis and treatment, and by providing a 
skilled nurse to help carry out the needed 
discussions, convene the meetings, and 
bring to bear the relevant information. 
The elements of the intervention and 
their timing are presented in Table 1. 
In each case, the nurse was free to 
shape her role so as to achieve the best 
possible care and outcome. For example, 
she sometimes engaged in extensive 
emotional support. Other times, she 
mainly provided information and en¬ 
sured that all parties heard one another 
involve¬ 
effectively. All of the nurses' 
ment required approval of the attend¬ 
ing physicians. In virtually all cases, the 
physician approval came with no limits. 
Physicians were free, however, to limit 
the intervention in any way that they 
felt was best for the patient, and there 


Phase I (1989 to 1991) 
Study 4301 Patients at Five Teaching Hospitals 
• Describe Outcomes 
• Develop Prognostic Models 

Identify Shortcomings of Care 
• Establish Adjustment Methods 
• Design Intervention 
Control 
11 Physician Groups 
2152 Patients (45%) 
Phasell (1992 to 1994) 
Apply Intervention to 4804 Patients 
Randomized by 27 Physician Groups 
Intervention 
16 Physician Groups 
2652 Patients (55%) 
Adjusted Analyses of 
Intervention vs Control for Five Outcomes 


• Patient-Physician Agreement on CPR Preferences 
• Days in an ICU, Comatose, or Receiving Mechanical 

• Pain 
• Hospital Resource Use 
Figure 1.—Overall schematic presentation of phases I and II of the Study to Understand Prognoses and 
Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT) project, 1989 to 1994. DNR indicates do 
not resuscitate; CPR, cardlopulmonary resuscitation; and ICU, Intensive care unit. 
was no requirement for them to share or 
discuss the information with the patient 
or family or to allow the nurse's involve¬ 
ment to continue. The nurse was iden¬ 
tified on her badge and in the consent 
process as part of a research effort, but 
she had the role and appearance of a 
typical clinical specialist. 
Randomization.—To limit contami¬ 
nation, patients were assigned to inter¬ 
vention or control (usual care) status 
based on the specialty oftheir attending 
physician. Physician specialties were di¬ 
vided into five groups: internal medi¬ 
cine, pulmonology/medical ICU, oncol¬ 
ogy, surgery, and cardiology. We used a 
cluster randomization scheme to assign 
the intervention randomly to 27 physi¬ 
cian group-site combinations, restricted 
by the conditions that 50% to 60% of 
patients would be assigned intervention 
status, and that at least one interven¬ 
tion and one control physician specialty 
group be at each of the five study in¬ 
stitutions. This resulted in 11 physician 
specialty groups assigned to control and 
16 assigned to the intervention (Figure 
1). Analyses were based on allocation to 
intervention (ie, intention to treat), ir¬ 
respective of whether· a given patient 
received the intervention. Investigators 
were blinded to the phase II results dur¬ 
ing data collection. 
Analytic Methods.—Five measures 
were chosen to evaluate the interven¬ 
tion: (1) The timing of written DNR or¬ 
ders was analyzed with a log-normal re- 
gression model to prepare Kaplan-Meier 
predicted median time until the first DNR 
order was written. If a DNR order was 
not written, DNR order timing was 
censored at the day of death or hospital 
discharge. (2) Patient and physician agree¬ 
ment on preferences to withhold resus¬ 
citation was based on the first interview 
of the patient (or surrogate if the patient 
was unable to be interviewed) and the 
responsible physician. Agreement was de¬ 
fined as a response to forgo resuscitation 
from both patient and physician, analyzed 
with binary logistic regression, and ap¬ 
plied to all interviewed patients or sur¬ 
rogates who had matching physician 
interviews. (3) Days spent in an ICU, 
receiving mechanical ventilation, or co¬ 
matose before death were analyzed using 
ordinary least-squares regression (after 
taking the log of 0.5 plus the number of 
days) and only included phase II patients 
who died during the index hospitaliza- 
tion. (4) Frequency and severity of pain 
analyses were based on all patients or 
surrogates interviewed in the second 
week with a combined measure (moder¬ 
ate or severe pain all, most, or half the 
time) and analyzed using a single, ordinal 
logistic regression model. (5) Hospital re¬ 
source use was defined as the log of the 
product of the average Therapeutic In¬ 
tervention Scoring System rating and 
length of hospital stay after the second 
day of the study. In regression analyses 
on phase I data, this measure closely es¬ 
timated hospital bills across the five study 
institutions (Pearson ñ2=0.93 on log prod¬ 
uct). We used ordinary least-squares re¬ 
gression to model the log of resource use, 
which was then converted to 1993 dol¬ 
lars. This method allows comparisons of 
groups and institutions across time with¬ 
out having to adjust for varying hospital 
billing practices. 
Power and Safety Calculations 
Power calculations based on phase I 
data indicated greater than 90% power 
(a=.05) to detect a 1-day decrease in 
days until a DNR order was written, a 
5% increase in the proportion of physi¬ 
cians and patients agreeing on a DNR 
order, a 20% decrease in undesirable 
days, a 10% decrease in reported pain, 
and a 5% decrease in resource use. Ef¬ 
fects of the intervention on mortality 
rates were quantified by the estimated 
intervention, control hazard ratio from 
adjusted Cox models.33 
Adjustment Methods 
for Phase II Results 
Because patients were assigned to in¬ 
tervention or control status based on a 
limited number of specialty groups, the 
resulting cohorts might be unbalanced 
in patient baseline risk factors. Further¬ 
more, practice patterns among the phy¬ 
sician specialty groups in phase I dif¬ 
fered substantially. We controlled for 
these expected preintervention differ¬ 
ences using baseline multivariable risk 
scores that were derived by generating 
models to predict phase I outcomes, each 
of which incorporated interactions be¬ 
tween physician specialty and hospitals. 
Observed imbalances in phase II base¬ 
line patient characteristics were also ad¬ 
justed using a propensity score that cor¬ 
rected for selection bias associated with 
being assigned to intervention status.34 
Further details on the construction of 
both of these risk scores are available on 
request. Imputation methods for miss¬ 
ing data have been published.25 Finally, 
we simulated the phase II randomiza¬ 
tion scheme on the phase I data to evalu¬ 
ate secular trends. To adjust for mul¬ 
tiple outcomes, our methods prespeci- 
fied adjusting confidence intervals (CIs) 
using the method of Hochberg and Ben- 
jamini35 if more than one value was 
less than .05. All statistical analyses were 
done with UNIX S-Plus, version 3.2 soft¬ 
ware36 and the Design library.37 
RESULTS 
Phase I Observations 
Phase I enrolled 4301 patients (Fig¬ 
ure 1) with a median age of 65 years and 
other characteristics summarized in 
Table 2. The mean predicted 6-month 
survival probability was 52% with an 
actual 6-month survival probability of 





Feedback of phase I results 
Benchmarking information 
describing phase I Incidence 
of patient-physician 
communication, pain, 
and timing of DNR order 













Patient and surrogate report of 
prognosis, preferences about 
CPR, advance directives, quality 
of life, information desires, and 
pain 

preferencest 
Nurse involvement 



outcomes/preferences 
Eliciting and documenting 













Intervention physicians 
and medical record 





and 26 
Study day 2 













Patient, family, staff, Intervention 
physicians, and medical record 
Patient, family, staff, intervention 


















"SUPPORT indicates Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment; 
tPhysician interview on day 10 was for evaluation, not part of the intervention. 
48% (Table 2). Thirty-one percent of 
phase I patients with interviews pre¬ 
ferred that CPR be withheld, but only 
47% of their physicians accurately re¬ 
ported this preference during the first 
interview. Nearly half (49%) of the 960 
phase I patients who indicated a desire 
for CPR to be withheld did not have a 
DNR order written during that hospi- 
talization. Nearly one third of these pa¬ 
tients (278 [29%]) died before discharge. 
Among all phase I patients who died 
during the index hospitalization (n= 1150), 
79% died with a DNR order, but 46% of 
these orders were written within 2 days 
of death. Among all phase I deaths, the 
median number of days spent in an ICU, 
comatose, or receiving mechanical venti¬ 
lation was 8, more than one third (38%) 
spent at least 10 days in an ICU, and 46% 
received mechanical ventilation within 3 
days of death. In the second week, 22% of 
patients reported being in moderate to 
severe pain at least half the time. In in¬ 
terviews conducted after a patient died, 
surrogates indicated that 50% of all con¬ 
scious phase I patients who died in the 
hospital experienced moderate or severe 
pain at least halfthe time during their last 
3 days of life. 
We found substantial variation in the 
five outcomes among physician specialty 
groups and across the five institutions. 
Across institutions, the median number 
of days spent in an ICU before death var¬ 
ied from 5 to 9. The proportion ofpatients 
reporting moderate to severe pain at least 
halfthe time varied by a factor of2.7, from 
12% to 32% across study institutions. The 
predicted median number of days until a 
DNR order was written for a standard 
patient varied by a factor of 3.5, from 73 
days for patients on a surgical service to 
22 for oncology. One study institution had 
a predicted median time until DNR was 
written for a standard patient of 28 days, 
and another institution had a predicted 
median time of 49 days. Agreement on 
DNR varied from 8% for cardiology pa¬ 
tients to 24% for oncology patients and 
from a low of 8% at one study institution 
to a high of 27% at another. The median 
number of days spent in an ICU before 
death ranged from 14 in the surgical spe¬ 
cialties to 5 for patients in pulmonary/ 
ICU and oncology services. 
Phase II Demographics 
Phase II enrolled 4804 patients, 2152 
assigned to usual medical care and 2652 
assigned to intervention status (Figure 
1). Their characteristics were generally 
similar to those of phase I patients 
(Table 2). 

Ninety-five percent ofintervention pa¬ 
tients received one or more patient-spe¬ 
cific components ofthe intervention. The 
SUPPORT nurse was involved in the 
care of all but 133 patients, and 75 of 
these were patients who died or were 
discharged on the day of enrollment. 
The SUPPORT nurse communicated 
with the physician in virtually all cases. 
She talked directly with the patient or 
family in most cases (eg, with 84% con¬ 
cerning prognosis, 77% about pain, 63% 
about likely outcomes or resuscitation, 
and 73% concerning written advance 
directives). For patients in the hospital 
for 7 or more days after qualifying 
for the study, the median number of 
SUPPORT nurse contacts with the pa¬ 
tient, family, or physician was four and 
the mean was six. Documentation in the 
progress notes of discussions about pa¬ 
tients' preferences with regard to re¬ 
suscitation was increased from 38.5% in 
phase I to 50.3% among phase II inter¬ 
vention patients. 
The patient's physician received at 
least one prognostic report for 94% of 
patients, and the report was put in the 
medical record of80%. The patient's phy¬ 
sician received at least one printed re¬ 
port ofpatient or surrogate understand¬ 
ing and preferences in 78% of cases. 
No physician refused to receive the 
printed reports or to have them shared 
with other professional staff. The phy¬ 
sicians for 43 patients refused to allow 
the SUPPORT nurse to have contact 
with the patient and family, and seven 
patients or surrogates refused to speak 
with the SUPPORT nurse. 

The prevalence or timing ofdocumen¬ 
tation of DNR orders for the 2534 in¬ 
tervention patients was the same as for 
the 2208 control patients (adjusted ratio 
of median time, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.90 to 
1.15) (Table 3). There was a small asso¬ 
ciation of the intervention with improved 
patient-physician DNR agreement for 
the 1480 intervention patients who had 
patient or surrogate and matching phy¬ 
sician interviews, compared with 1159 
control patients (adjusted ratio, 1.22; 95% 
CI, 0.99 to 1.49). The number of days 
spent in an ICU, comatose, or receiving 
mechanical ventilation before death for 
the 680 intervention patients who died 
in the hospital was the same as for the 
530 control patients (adjusted ratio of 
median days, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.87 to 1.07). 



Phase I 
(n=4301) 
Phase II 
(n=4804) 

I- 
Control 
Group 
(n=2152) 
Intervention 
Group 
(n=2652) 
Median age, y 
Sex, % female 
Race, % 
White 

Other 
income <$11 000, % 
Annual 
Education high school or more, % 
Primary insurance, % 





Acute organ system failuret 
Chronic diseased 
Nontraumatic coma 

Mean ADL Scale scorelffl 
Median APS of APACHE lll||# 
SUPPORT 6-mo mean survival estimateli 
Hospital mortality, % 
6-mo Mortality, % 
Median hospital charges, $ thousands 




































































*SUPPORT indicates Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment. 
tlncludes acute respiratory failure and multiple organ system failure with or without sepsis. 
^Includes end-stage cirrhosis and acute exacerbations of severe congestive heart failure or severe chronic 
(¡Includes colon cancer with liver métastases and stage III or stage IV non-small cell 
IIMeasured on the third study day. 
UADL indicates activities of daily living score from 0 to 7, with each point representing an impairment in basic 





Reported pain increased for the 1677 in¬ 
tervention patients and surrogates inter¬ 
viewed in the second week, compared with 
the control group (adjusted ratio, 1.15; 
95% CI, 1.00 to 1.33) (Table 3). There was 
no change in hospital resources used for 
2593 intervention patients not dead or 
discharged before the third study day com¬ 
pared with 2129 control patients (adjusted 
ratio of average resource use, 1.05; 95% 
CI, 0.99 to 1.12). 
The unadjusted differences between in¬ 
tervention and control patients for me¬ 
dian days until the first DNR order was 
written were large, especially for patients 
with colon cancer and non-small cell lung 
cancer for whom the median number of 
days until a written DNR order was 80% 
lower in intervention patients. Adjust¬ 
for baseline imbalances reduced 
ment 
much of the difference in each category 
(Table 4). The differences that persist in 
the cancer category are of uncertain im¬ 
portance, being one among multiple com¬ 
parisons and being based on a small num¬ 
ber of patients (Table 4). 
Figure 2 illustrates the secular trends 
of each outcome in the phase II inter¬ 
vention and control groups, as well as in 
phase I, using simulations of the physi¬ 
cian specialty groupings used in phase 
II. None of the five outcomes changed 
significantly during the 5 years of the 
study. The differences between those 
who would have been assigned to inter¬ 
vention and control in phase I persisted 
throughout the SUPPORT study, un¬ 
affected by time or by the intervention. 
Communication and Preferences 
The intervention did not change the 
unadjusted proportion ofpatients or sur¬ 
rogates reporting a discussion about 
CPR; 37% of control patients and 40% of 
intervention patients reported discuss¬ 
ing their preference. Of patients who 
did not have such a discussion, 41% of 
each group said they would like to dis¬ 
cuss CPR. Seventeen percent of control 
patients and 20% of intervention patients 
changed their resuscitation preferences 
to forgo CPR by the second week after 
enrollment, and 39% of control patients 
and 41% of intervention patients re¬ 
ported having a discussion about their 
prognosis with a physician. Of those who 
did not discuss their prognosis, 44% of 
control patients and 42% of intervention 
Table 3.—Effect of the SUPPORT Phase II 
vention on Five Outcomes: 
Control Group, 1992 to 1994 
Inter¬ 
Intervention Group vs 
Adjusted 
Ratio 
_(95% CI) 
Median time until DNR order 
was written, d 
DNR agreement, % 
Undesirable states, median d 
Pain, % 
Resource Use, median 

1.02(0.90-1.15) 
1.22 (0.99-1.49) 
0.97 (0.87-1.07) 
1.15(1.00-1.33) 

'SUPPORT indicates Study to Understand Prognoses 
and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment; 
DNR, do not resuscitate; and CI, confidence interval. 
patients reported that they would like 
to have such a discussion. 
Physician's Perspective 
on Intervention 
In the second physician interview, 59% 
acknowledged receiving the prognostic 
reports and 34% acknowledged receiv¬ 
ing the preference reports. Fifteen per¬ 
cent reported discussing this specific in¬ 
formation with patients or 
families. 
Nearly a quarter of respondents (22%) 
said they thought the SUPPORT nurses' 
involvement improved patient care. 
Safety Monitoring 
After adjusting for baseline differ¬ 
ences, the 6-month mortality for phase 
II control patients was the same as for 
intervention patients (adjusted relative 
hazard, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.87 to 1.04). Both 
control (68%) and intervention (69%) pa¬ 
tients or surrogates rated their care as 
excellent or very good. 
COMMENT 
Findings from phase I of SUPPORT 
documented many shortcomings of care. 
The SUPPORT "patients were all seri¬ 
ously ill, and their dying proved to be 
predictable, yet discussions and decisions 
substantially in advance of death were 
uncommon. Nearly half of all DNR orders 
were written in the last 2 days of life. The 
final hospitalization for half of patients 
included more than 8 days in generally 
undesirable states: in an ICU, receiving 
mechanical ventilation, or comatose. Fami¬ 
lies reported that half of the patients who 
were able to communicate in their last 
few days spent most of the time in mod¬ 
erate or severe pain. Based on a study in 
a defined population at our Wisconsin site, 
we estimate that patients meeting SUP¬ 
PORT criteria account for approximately 
400 000 admissions per year in the United 
States and that another 925000 people 
are similarly ill but would not meet SUP¬ 
PORT entry requirements of being hos¬ 
pitalized or in intensive care.38 Patients 
with SUPPORT illnesses and severity ac¬ 
count for about 40% of persons dying in 
the defined population. 




Acute 
Respiratory 
or Multiple 
Acute 
Exacerbation 
of Cirrhosis, 

Advanced 
Lung or Colon 
Cancer 
Acute 
Respiratory 
or Multiple 
Acute 
Exacerbation 
of Cirrhosis, 

Advanced 
Lung or Colon 
Cancer 















































Building on the findings in phase I, 
observations ofothers,1"16'23·24·39"'6 the opin¬ 
ions of physicians at the five sites, and 
the marked variation in their baseline 
practices, the phase II intervention aimed 
to make it easier to achieve better deci¬ 
sion making for these seriously ill pa¬ 
tients. The intervention gave physicians 
reliable prognostic information and timely 
reports of patient and surrogate percep¬ 
tions, the two most important factors 
cited recently by physicians when con¬ 
sidering life-support decisions for criti¬ 
cally ill patients.44 The intervention nurse 
also undertook time-consuming discus¬ 
sions, arranged meetings, provided in¬ 
formation, supplied forms, and did any¬ 
thing else to encourage the patient and 
family to engage in an informed and col¬ 
laborative decision-making process with 
a well-informed physician (Table 1). 
The intervention was limited by its ap¬ 
plication to a diverse group of physicians 
and patients, all of whom had to comply 
voluntarily. The intervention had to be 
perceived as helpful, polite, and appro¬ 
priate. As an initial attempt to change 
outcomes for seriously ill patients, we did 
not seek authority to be coercive or more 
than minimally disruptive. As designed, 
however, the intervention was vigorously 
applied. The SUPPORT nurses were com¬ 
mitted, energetic, and highly trained. They 
engaged in the care of virtually all our 
patients, and nearly everyone had printed 
reports delivered promptly. 
Because we thought that changes in 
the decision-making processes that were 
not reflected in improved patient out¬ 
comes would not be worth much expense, 
we specified five outcomes, each indi¬ 
cating an important improvement in pa¬ 
tient experience, as the main targets of 
the intervention. 
The intervention had no impact on 
any of these designated targets (Tables 
3 and 4). Furthermore, even though the 
targeted outcomes are objectives of 
much ethical and legal writing and of 
some explicit social policy (such as in¬ 
formed consent statutes, 
the Patient 
Self-determination Act, and guidelines 
on pain),1017 there were no secular trends 
toward improvement for intervention 
or control patients during the 5 years of 
SUPPORT data collection (Figure 2). 
These results raise fundamental ques¬ 
tions about the intent and design of this 
trial. Do patients and physicians see the 
documented shortcomings as troubling? 
Can enhanced decision making improve 
the experience of seriously ill and dying 
patients? Were the inevitable limitations 
of this project too great to draw strong 
conclusions? 
Because there was no movement to¬ 
ward what would seem to be better prac¬ 
tices, one could conclude that physicians, 
patients, and families are fairly com¬ 
fortable with the current situation. Cer¬ 
tainly, most patients and families indi¬ 
cated they were satisfied, no matter 
what happened to them. Physicians have 
their established patterns of care, and 
while they were willing to have the 
SUPPORT nurse present and carrying 
on conversations, physician behavior ap¬ 
peared unchanged. Perhaps physicians 
and patients in this study acknowledged 
problems with the care of seriously ill 
patients as a group. However, when in¬ 
volved with their own situation or en¬ 
gaged in the care of their individual pa¬ 
tients, they felt they were doing the 
best they could, were satisfied they were 
doing well, and did not wish to directly 
confront problems or face choices.46·47 

any claim that, if the health care system 
is given additional resources for collabo¬ 
rative decision making in the form of 
skilled professional time, improvements 
will occur. In phase II of SUPPORT, 
improved information, enhanced conver¬ 
sation, and an explicit effort to encour¬ 
age use of outcome data and preferences 
in decision making were completely in¬ 
effectual, despite the fact that the study 
had enough power to detect small ef¬ 
fects. 
It is possible that the intervention 
would have been more effective ifimple¬ 
mented in different settings, earlier in 
the course of illness, or with physician 
leaders rather than nurses as implement- 
ers. Perhaps, it would have been effec¬ 
tive if continued for more time or tested 
at later end points.48 However, the over¬ 
all results of this study are not encour¬ 
aging. No pattern emerged that implied 
that the intervention was successful for 
some set of patients or physicians or 
that its impact increased over time. The 
five hospitals had been chosen for their 
diversity and their willingness to un¬ 
dertake a substantial and controversial 
challenge. Yet none showed a tendency 
toward improvement in these outcomes. 
SUPPORT did demonstrate, however, 
that issues this complex can be studied 
with sufficient scientific rigor to be con¬ 
fident of the findings. We achieved good 
interview response rates among seriously 
ill patients, their families, and physicians, 
widespread acceptance of the interven¬ 
tion in diverse hospitals, and high-qual¬ 
ity data. Consent and confidentiality is¬ 
sues were complex but amenable to so¬ 
lution. The analytic issues required ap¬ 
plication of relatively novel approaches, 
but they proved effective. The study also 
demonstrated the need for such methods 
 
 
 






 40 
I 

2>c 30 
oil25 
g c 20 
«œ 
>>is 
Q 




-1-1—-1-1-1— 
1994 
1992 




























 -1-1—-1-1-1— 
1994 











 -1- 
1991 
1990 




Intervention Group 
Control Group 


Figure 2.—Secular trends in five patient outcomes In the Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT) from 
June 1989 through January 1994. The horizontal axes represent the years of SUPPORT (1989 to 1994). The time between phase I and phase II 
is represented 
by a space. The intervention and control group lines have been smoothed nonparametrically. The phase II results represent the actual impact of the trial, and the 
phase I results are the baseline or historical differences. There were no significant differences in Intervention patients between phases I and II, and after adjustment, 
no significant differences were noted between phase II control and intervention patients for the five main outcomes. DNR Indicates do not resuscitate, and ICU, 
intensive care unit. (See text for detailed definitions and exact sample sizes.) 
when performing evaluations ofcomplex 
interventions in seriously ill patients. We 
would have concluded that the interven¬ 
tion positively influenced all outcomes 
had we not had phase I results for base¬ 
line adjustment and phase II control pa¬ 
tients to evaluate secular trends (Table 4 
and Figure 2). 
In conclusion, we are left with a trou¬ 
bling situation. The picture we describe 
of the care of seriously ill or dying per¬ 
is not attractive. One would 
sons 
certainly prefer to envision that, when 
confronted with life-threatening illness, 
the patient and family would be included 
in discussions, realistic estimates of out¬ 
come would be valued, pain would be 
treated, and dying would not be pro¬ 
longed. That is still a worthy vision.2·49 
However, it is not likely to be achieved 
through an intervention such as that 
implemented by SUPPORT. Success will 
require reexamination of our individual 
and collective commitment to these goals, 
more creative efforts at shaping the treat¬ 
ment process, and, perhaps, more pro¬ 
active and forceful attempts at change. 
The SUPPORT principal investigators: Alfred 
F. Connors, Jr, MD, and Neal V. Dawson, MD, 
MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio; 
Norman A. Desbiens, MD, Marshfield (Wis) Medi¬ 
cal Research Foundation; William J. Fulkerson, Jr, 
MD, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC; Lee Goldman, MD, MPH, Beth Israel Hospi¬ 
tal, Boston, Mass; William A. Knaus, MD, George 
Washington University Medical Center, Washing¬ 
ton, DC; Joanne Lynn, MD, Dartmouth Medical 
School, Hanover, NH; and Robert K. Oye, MD, 
University of California at Los Angeles Medical 
Center. 
National Coordinating Center: William A. 
Knaus, MD, George Washington University Medicai 
Center, Washington, DC, and Joanne Lynn, MD, 
Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH (co- 
investigators); Marilyn Bergner, PhD 
principal 
(deceased), and Anne Damiano, ScD, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Md; Rosemarie Hakim, PhD, 
George Washington University Medical Center, 
Donald J. Murphy, MD, Presbyterian-St Lukes 
Medical Center, Denver, Colo; Joan Teno, MD, and 
Beth Virnig, PhD, Dartmouth Medical School; Doug¬ 
las P. Wagner, PhD, George Washington University 
Medical Center; and Albert W. Wu, MD, MPH, and 
Yutaka Yasui, PhD, Johns Hopkins University (coin- 
vestigators); Detra K. Robinson, MA, George Wash¬ 
ington University Medical Center (chart abstraction 
supervisor); Barbara Kreling, BA, George Washing¬ 
ton University Medical Center (survey coordinator); 
Jennie Dulac, BSN, RN, Dartmouth Medical School 
(intervention implementation coordinator); Rose 
Baker, MSHyg, George Washington University 
(database manager); and Sam 
Medical Center 
Holayel, BS, Thomas Meeks, BA, Mazen Mustafa, 
MS, and Juan Vegarra, BS (programmers). 
National Statistical Center, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC: Carlos Alzóla, MS, 
and Frank E. Harrell, Jr, PhD. 
Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Mass: Lee Gold¬ 
man, MD, MPH (principal investigator); E. Francis 
Cook, ScD, Mary Beth Hamel, MD, Lynn Peterson, 
MD, Russell S. Phillips, MD, Joel Tsevat, MD, 
Lachlan Forrow, MD, Linda Lesky, MD, and Roger 
Davis, ScD (coinvestigators); Nancy Kressin, MS, 
and Jeanmarie Solzan, BA (interview supervisors); 
Ann Louise Puopolo, BSN, RN (chart abstractor 
supervisor); Laura Quimby Barrett, BSN, RN, Nora 
Bucko, BSN, RN, Deborah Brown, MSN, RN, 
Maureen Burns, BSN, RN, Cathy Foskett, BSN, 
RN, Amy Hozid, BSN, RN, Carol Keohane, BSN, 
RN, Colleen Martinez, BSN, RN, Dorcie McWee- 
ney, BSN, RN, Debra Melia, BSN, RN, Shelley 
Otto, MSN, RN, Kathy Sheehan, BSN, RN, Alice 
Smith, BSN, RN, and Lauren Tofias, MS, RN (chart 
abstractors); Bernice Arthur, BA, Carol Collins, BA, 
Mary Cunnion, BA, Deborah Dyer, BA, Corinne 
Kulak, BS, Mary Michaels, BA, Maureen O'Keefe, 
BA, Marian Parker, AB, MBA, Lauren Tuchin, BA, 
Dolly Wax, BA, and Diana Weld, A (interviewers); 
Liz Hiltunen, MS, RN, CS, Geòrgie Marks, MS, 
MEd, RN, Nancy Mazzapica, MSN, RN, and Cindy 
Medich, MS, RN (SUPPORT nurse clinicians); and 
Jane Soukup, MS (analyst/data manager). 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC: 
William J. Fulkerson, Jr, MD (principal investiga¬ 
tor); Robert M. Califf, MD, Anthony N. Galanos, 
MD, Peter Kussin, MD, and Lawrence H. Muhl- 
baier, PhD (coinvestigators); Maria Winchell, MS 
(project director); Lee Mallatratt, RN (chart ab¬ 
stractor supervisor); Ella Akin, BA (interviewer 
supervisor); Lynne Belcher, RN, Elizabeth Buller, 
BSN, RN, Eileen Clair, RN, Laura Drew, BSN, 
RN, Libby Fogelman, BSN, RN, Dianna Frye, 
BSN, RN, Beth Fraulo, BSN, RN, Debbie Gessner, 
BSN, RN, Jill Hamilton, BSN, RN, Kendra Kruse, 
BSN, RN, Dawn Landis, BSN, RN, Louise Nobles, 
BSN, RN, Rene Oliverio, BSN, RN, and Carroll 
Wheeler, BSN, RN (chart abstractors); Nancy 
Banks, MA, Steven Berry, BA, Monie Clayton, 
Patricia Hartwell, MAT, Nan Hubbard, 
Isabel 
Kussin, BA, Barbara Norman, BA, Jackie Noveau, 
BSN, Heather Read, BA, and Barbara Warren, 
MSW (interviewers); Jane Castle, MSN, RN, Beth 
Fraulo, BSN, RN, Rene Oliverio, BSN, RN, and 
Kathy Turner, MSN, RN (SUPPORT nurse clini¬ 
cians); and Rosalie Perdue (data manager). 
MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio: 
Alfred F. Connors, Jr, MD, and Neal V. Dawson, 
MD (co-principal investigators); Claudia Coulton, 
PhD, C. Seth Landefeld, MD, Theodore Speroff, 
PhD, and Stuart Youngner, MD (coinvestigators); 
Mary J. Kennard, MSN, and Mary Naccaratto, 
MSN (chart abstractor supervisors); Mary Jo 
Roach, PhD (interviewer supervisor); Maria Blink- 
horn, RN, Cathy Corrigan, RNC, Elsie Geric, RN, 
Laura Haas, RN, Jennifer Ham, RN, Julie Jer- 
donek, RN, Marilyn Landy, RN, Elaine Marino, 
RN, Patti Olesen, RN, Sherry Patzke, RN, Linda 
Repas, RN, Kathy Schneeberger, RN, Carolyn 





•a 
0. 
£ 60 

 

Smith, RN, Colleen Tyler, RN, and Mary Zenczak, 
RN (chart abstractors); Helen Anderson, BA, Pat 
Carolin, Cindy Johnson, BA, Pat Leonard, BA, 
Judy Leuenberger, Linda Palotta, BA, and Millie 
Warren (interviewers); Jane Finley, RN, Toni 
Ross, RN, Gillian Solem, MSN, and Sue Zronek, 
RN (SUPPORT nurse facilitators); and Sara Davis, 
BS (data manager). 
Marshfield Medical Research Foundation/St 
Joseph's Hospital, Marshfield, Wis: Norman A. 
Desbiens, MD (principal 
investigator); Steven 
Broste, MS, and Peter Layde, MD, MSc (co-principal 
investigators); Michael Kryda, MD, Douglas J. Red¬ 
ing, MD, and Humberto J. Vidaillet, Jr, MD (coin- 
vestigators); Marilyn Folien, RN, MSN (project 
manager and chart abstractor supervisor); Patsy 
Mowery, BBA (interviewer supervisor); Barbara E. 
Backus, Debra L. Kempf, BSN, Jill M. Kupfer, Karen 
E. Maassen, LPN, Jean M. Rohde, LPN, Nancy L. 
Wilke, and Sharon M. Wilke, LPN (chart abstrac¬ 
tors); Elizabeth A. Albee, BA, Barbara Backus, An¬ 
gela M. Franz, BS, Diana L. Henseler, Juanita A. 
Herr, Irene Leick, Carol L. Lezotte, BS, and Laura 
Meddaugh (interviewers); Linda Duffy, RN, MSN, 
Debrah Johnson, RN, BSN, Susan Kronenwetter, 
RN, BSN, and Anne Merkel, RN, BSN (SUPPORT 
nurse facilitators). 
University of California at Los Angeles Medi¬ 
cal Center: Robert K. Oye, MD (principal investí- 
gator); Paul E. Bellamy, MD (co-principal investi¬ 
gator); Jonathan Hiatt, MD, and Neil S. Wenger, 
MD, MPH (coinvestigators); Margaret Leal-Sotelo, 
MSW (project director and interviewer supervi¬ 
sor); Darice Moranville-Hawkins, RN, MN, 
Patricia Sheehan, RN, Diane Watanabe, MS, and 
Myrtle C. Yamamoto, RN (chart abstractor super¬ 
visors); Allison Adema, RN, Ellen Adkins, RN, 
Ann Marie Beckson, RN, Mona Carter, RN, Ellen 
Duerr, RN, Ayam El-Hadad, RN, MN, Ann Fär¬ 
ber, RN, MA, Ann Jackson, RN, John Justice, RN, 
and Agnes O'Meara, RN (chart abstractors); Lee 
Benson, Lynette Cheney, Carlo Medina, and Jane 
Moriarty (interviewers); Kay Baker, RN, MN, 
Cleine Marsden, RN, MN, and Kara Watne, RN, 
MPH (clinical nurse liaisons); and Diane Goya, MA 
(data manager). 
Steering Committee: Alfred F. Connors, Jr, MD 
(chair), Norman Desbiens, MD, William J. Fulker¬ 
son, MD, Frank E. Harrell, Jr, PhD, William A. 
Knaus, MD, Joanne Lynn, MD, Robert K. Oye, MD, 
and Russell S. Phillips, MD. 
National Advisory Committee: Charles C. J. 
Carpenter, MD (chair), Brown University/The 
Miriam Hospital, Providence, RI; Ronald A. Car¬ 
son, PhD, University of Texas, Galveston; Don E. 
Detmer, MD, University of Virginia, Charlottes- 
ville; Donald E. Steinwachs, PhD, The Johns Hop¬ 
kins University, Baltimore, Md; Vincent Mor, PhD, 
Brown University; Robert A. Harootyan, MS, MA, 
American Association of Retired Persons, Wash¬ 
ington, DC; Alex Leaf, MD, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston; Rosalyn Watts, EdD, RN, Uni¬ 
versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; Sankey 
Williams, MD, Hospital of the University of Penn¬ 
sylvania; and David Ransohoff, MD, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 




the 
SUPPORT nurse clinicians and chart and inter¬ 
view supervisors and staff whose dedicated efforts 
ensured the high quality of the data. We also are 
grateful for the contributions of the patients, sur¬ 
rogates, and physicians who participated in the 
interviews and intervention. 
All methods of the SUPPORT project are avail¬ 
able to investigators for further study and imple¬ 
the day 3 survival and 
mentation. Details of 
functional status models have been published,2^6 
and models for other days are available from the 
authors, as is technical information on baseline risk 
or propensity scores for SUPPORT'S major tar¬ 
gets. Requests for these materials should be sent 
to William A. Knaus, MD, ICU Research Unit, Box 
600, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville, VA 22908. 
References 
1. Callahan D. The Troubled Dream ofLife: Living 
With Mortality. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster; 
1993. 
2. McCue JD. The naturalness of dying. JAMA. 
1995;273:1039-1043. 
3. Annas GJ. Death by prescription: the Oregon 
initiative. N Engl J Med. 1994;301:1240-1243. 
4. Brown D. Medical community still divided on 
Oregon's assisted suicide law. Washington Post. 
November 13, 1994:A20. 
5. Tomlinson T, Brody H. Futility and the ethics of 
resuscitation. JAMA. 1990;264:1276-1280. 
6. Blackhall LJ. Must we always use CPR? N Engl 
J Med. 1987;317:1281-1285. 
7. Wanzer SH, Federman DD, Adelstein SJ, et al. 
The physician's responsibility toward hopelessly ill 
patients. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:884-849. 
8. Ginzberg E. The high cost of dying. Inquiry. 
1980;17:293-295. 
9. Hill TP, Shirley D. A Good Death. Reading, Mass: 
Addison-Wesley; 1992. 
10. President's Commission for the Study of Ethi- 
cal Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Be- 
havioral Research. Deciding to Forego Life-Sus- 
taining Treatment. Washington, DC: US Govern- 
ment Printing Office; 1983. 
11. Hastings Center. Guidelines on the Termina- 
tion of Life-Sustaining Treatment and the Care of 
the Dying. New York, NY: Hastings Center; 1987. 
12. Coordinating Council on Life-Sustaining Medi- 
cal Treatment Decisions by the Court. Guidelines 
for State Court Decision Making in Authorizing or 
Withholding Life-Sustaining Medical Treatment. 
Williamsburg, Va: West Publishing Company; 1991. 
13. Cruzan V, director, Missouri Dept of Health. 
110 SCt 284, 1990:2855-2856. 
14. Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Guide- 
lines for the appropriate use of do-not-resuscitate 
orders. JAMA. 1991;265:1868-1871. 
15. American Thoracic Society Bioethics Task 
Force. Withholding and withdrawing life-sustain- 
ing therapy. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115:478-485. 
16. Cancer Pain Relief and Palliative Care. Report 
of a WHO Expert Committee, Technical Report 
804. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza- 
tion; 1990. 
17. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 
(OBRA-90), Pub L 101-508, \s=s\\s=s\4206and 4751 (Medi- 
care and Medicaid, respectively), 42 USC \s=s\\s=s\1395cc 
(a)(I)(Q), 1395mm (c)(8), 1395cc(f), 1396a(a)(57), 
1396a(a)(58), and 1396a(w) (supp 1991). 
18. Bedell SE, Delbanco TL. Choices about car- 
diopulmonary resuscitation in the hospital. N Engl 
J Med. 1984;310:1089-1093. 
19. Katz J. The Silent World of Doctor & Patient. 
New York, NY: Free Press; 1986. 
20. Blackhall LJ, Cobb J, Moskowitz MA. Discus- 
sions regarding aggressive care with critically ill 
patients. J Gen Intern Med. 1989;4:399-402. 
21. Arkes HR, Dawson NV, Speroff T, et al. The 
covariance decomposition of the probability score 
and its use in evaluating prognostic estimates. Med 
Decis Making. 1995;15:120-131. 
22. Molloy DW, Guyatt G, Alemayehu E, McIloy 
W. Treatment preferences, attitudes toward ad- 
vance directives, and concerns about health care. 
Humane Med. 1991;7:285-290. 
23. Teno JM, Lynn J, Phillips RS, et al. Do formal 
advance directives affect resuscitation decisions and 
the use of resources for seriously ill patients? J Clin 
Ethics. 1994;5:23-30. 
24. Teno JM, Hakim RB, Knaus WA, et al. Pref- 
erences for CPR: physician-patient agreement and 
hospital resource use. J Gen Intern Med. 1995;10: 
179-186. 
25. Wu AW, Damiano AM, Lynn J, et al. Predicting 
future functional status for seriously ill hospitalized 
adults. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122:342-350. 
26. Knaus WA, Harrell FE, Lynn J, et al. The 
SUPPORT prognostic model: objective estimates 
of survival for seriously ill hospitalized adults. Ann 
Intern Med. 1995;122:191-203. 
27. LynnJ, Knaus WA. Background for SUPPORT. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 1990;43(suppl):1S-4S. 
28. Murphy DJ, Knaus WA, Lynn J. Study popu- 
lation in SUPPORT. J Clin Epidemiol. 1990;43 
(suppl):11S-28S. 
29. Knaus WA, Wagner DP, Draper EA, et al. The 
APACHE III prognostic system. Chest. 1991;100: 
1619-1636. 
30. Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmer- 
man JE. APACHE II: a severity of disease clas- 
sification system. Crit Care Med. 1985;13:818-829. 
31. Cullen DJ, CivettaJM, Briggs BA, Ferrara LC. 
Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System. Crit Care 
Med. 1974;2:57-60. 
32. Ware JE Jr, Synder MK, Wright WR, Davies 
AR. Defining and measuring patient satisfaction with 
medical care. Eval Program Plann. 1983;6:247-263. 
33. Cox DR. Regression models and life tables. 
J Royal Stat Society B. 1972;34:187-220. 
34. Cook EF, Goldman L. Performance of tests of 
significance based on stratification by a multivar- 
iate confounder score or by a propensity score. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 1989;42:317-324. 
35. Hochberg Y, Benjamini Y. More powerful pro- 
cedures for multiple significance testing. Stat Med. 
1990:811-818. 
36. Statistical Sciences. S-Plus Users Manual, Ver- 
sion 3.2. Seattle, Wash: StatSci, MathSoft Inc; 1993. 
37. Harrell FE. Design: S-Plus functions for biosta- 
tistical/epidemiologic modeling, testing, estimation, 
validation, graphics, prediction, and typesetting. 1994. 
Available on the Internet at lib.stat.cmu.edu. 
38. Layde PM, Broste SK, Desbiens N, et al. Gen- 
eralizability of clinical studies conducted at tertiary 
care medical centers. J Clin Epidemiol. In press. 
39. Covinsky KE, Goldman L, Cook EF, et al. The 
impact ofserious illness on patients' families. JAMA. 
1994;272:1839-1844. 
40. Wachter RM, Luce JM, Hearst N, Lo B. De- 
cisions about resuscitation: inequities among pa- 
tients with different but similar prognosis. Ann 
Intern Med. 1989;111:525-532. 
41. Davidson KW, Hackler C, Caradine DR, 
McCord RS. Physicians' attitudes on advance di- 
rectives. JAMA. 1989;262:2415-2419. 
42. Brody DS, Miller SM, Lerman CE, et al. Pa- 
tient perception of involvement in medical care. 
J Gen Intern Med. 1989;4:506-511. 
43. Uhlmann RF, Pearlman RA, Cain KC. Physi- 
cians' and spouses' predictions of elderly patients' 
resuscitation preferences. J Gerontol. 1988;43:M115\x=req-\ 
M121. 
44. Cook DJ, Guyatt GH, Jaeschke R, et al. De- 
terminants in Canadian health care workers of the 
decision to withdraw life support from the critically 
ill. JAMA. 1995;273:703-708. 
45. Danis M, Patrick DL, Southerland LI, et al. 
Patients' and families' preferences for medical in- 
tensive care. JAMA. 1988;260:797-802. 
46. Tversky A, Shafir E. Choice under conflict: the 
dynamics of deferred decision. Psychol Sci. 1992; 
3:358-361. 
47. Redelmeir DA, Shafir E. Medical decision mak- 
ing in situations that offer multiple alternatives. 
JAMA. 1995;273:302-305. 
48. Greco PJ, Eisenberg JM. Changing physician's 
practices. N Engl J Med. 1993;329:1271-1274. 
49. Neuland S. How We Die: Reflections on Life's 
Final Chapter. New York, NY: Alfred A Knopf 
Inc; 1994. 

