A Randomized Controlled Study of a Home Health Care Team 
JAMES G. ZIMMER, MD, DTPH, ANNEMARIE GROTH-JUNCKER, MD, AND JANE MCCUSKER, MD, DRPH 
Abstract: This report describes the findings of a randomized 
study 9f a new team approach to home care for homebound 
chronically or terminally ill elderly. The team includes a physician, 
nurse practitioner, and social worker delivering pnrmary health care 
in the patient's home, including physician house calls. Weekly team 
conferences assure coordination of patient care. The team is avail- 
able for emergency consultation through a 24-hour telephone ser- 
vice. The team physician attends to the patient during necessary 
hospitalizations. This approach was evaluated in a randomized 
experimental design study measuring its impact on health care 
utilization, functional changes in patients, and patient and caretaker 

The team patients had fewer hospitalizations, nursing home 
admissions, and outpatient visits than the controls. They were more 
often able to die at home, if this was their wish. As expected, they 
used more in-home services, measured in weighted cost figures; 
their overall cost was lower than their controls, but the difference 
was not statistically significant. Their functional abilities did not 
change differently from the controls, but they, and especially their 
informal caretakers in the home, expressed significantly higher 
satisfaction with the care received. (Am J Public Health 1985; 
75:134-141.) 

Because of the well-recognized inadequacy in provision 
of physician services in the home, the care of seriously and 
chronically ill elderly and terminal patients is frequently 
relegated to hospital and long-term care facilities, or to 
traditional home nursing services supplemented by episodic 
emergency room visits and crisis hospitalizations. In an 
effort to provide necessary medical services to allow home- 
bound patients who wished to remain at home to do so, a 
home health care team was established in Rochester, New 
York. It consisted of a physician (internist), nurse practition- 
er, and medical social worker all of whom are experienced in 
geriatric care. Available, on call, on a 24-hour, seven day per 
week basis, they provide primary care for a case-load of 
approximately 50 homebound patients, all of whom have 
complex and debilitating chronic conditions or are terminally 
ill. 1.2 
In this report, the results of a randomized controlled 
evaluative research study of the team's effectiveness and 
acceptability are summarized. 
The dearth of published research, adequately designed 
to assess the outcome of complex health service interven- 
tions in respect to efficacy, effectiveness, and efficiency, has 
been repeatedly lamented both before and after the design of 
this study. This is nowhere more evident than in the area of 
long-term care for the elderly in general and in home care in 
particular. The need for rigorously designed controlled stud- 
ies, based on the technology of clinical trials of specific 
therapies, has been urged with increasing frequency.3-6 One 
survey of about 1,000 studies of health services for the 
elderly published between 1967 and 1978 found only seven 
which met criteria developed by the authors as to adequate 
design and execution, and all of these were randomized 
controlled intervention studies.7 That this methodology is 
adaptable to studies of such multidimensional care systems 
as home care has been adequately demonstrated,8-'5 as has 
the fact that there are significant design and execution 
From the Departments of Preventive, Family and Rehabilitation Medi- 
cine and of Medicine, University of Rochester. Address reprint requests to 
Dr. James G. Zimmer, Department of Preventive, Family and Rehabilitation 
Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine, 601 Elmwood Ave- 
nue, Rochester, NY 14642. This paper, submitted to the Journal June 11, 
1984, was revised and accepted for publication August 27, 1984. 
Editor's Note: See also related editorial p 127 this issue. 

problems which exceed those of more straightforward clini- 
cal trials ofdrugs or other single medical interventions. .113,14,16 
In spite of these problems, including those of client selection 
and recruitment, logistics of follow-up, drop-outs, and con- 
sent and cooperation particularly of controls, we concluded 
that only the randomized design offered any degree of 
assurance in dealing with selection bias and multiple con- 
founding variables. 
The "outcomes" used to compare the results of care 
provided experimental and control groups had to be sensi- 
tive to the incremental effect of adding a physician-led team 
to existing community services, and to reflect realistically 
what could be expected to occur in this group of severely 
disabled, chronically or terminally ill, and largely elderly 
patients, none of whom had a good prognosis for much 
improvement in health or even for long survival. These 
outcomes included the following, stated as hypotheses in 
terms of the most desirable outcomes expected for the team 
patients as compared with the controls: 
1) Health Care System Utilization 
* less hospitalization and other institutionalization; 
* less utilization of emergency room and other acute 


of increased care in the home. 
2) Patient Health Status 



satisfaction). 
3) Satisfaction with Health Care 
* greater patient satisfaction with care provided; and 
* greater caretaker (family or friend) satisfaction with 

Materials 
Description of the Home Health Care Team 
The "Home Health Care Team" was started in 1977 as 
an outreach program of the University of Rochester Medical 
Center's Ambulatory Care Unit to provide health care to 
home-bound, chronically or terminally ill, or disabled pa- 
tients for whom transportation to the clinic had become too 
costly or cumbersome. The nurse was a Master's Degree 
medical nurse practitioner who performed many of the 


physical assessments, routine and emergency, in the com- 
munity. She was responsible for the nursing plan and sup- 
ported the medical care in close cooperation with the physi- 
cian. All patients at intake, and as needed, received home 
visits and evaluations by the physician who also acted as the 
patient's attending physician during any hospitalizations. 
The social worker helped to deal with the many social, 
financial, and emotional problems, freeing the physician and 
the nurse practitioner to devote their efforts mostly to the 
medical and nursing aspects of care. Patients at intake 
received one home visit by each team member to perform 
the initial assessments. An interdisciplinary care plan was 
then established which designated one team member as the 
primary care provider with consultative visits by the others 
as needed. 
Informal Care Providers and Friends-The Home 
Health Care Team encouraged informal care by family and 
friends by providing them with the necessary physical and 
psychological support and education to take on or continue 
home care. Initially every patient-applicant to the program 
was required to have a care provider (a family member or 
friend) within the same household. Soon after the start of the 
program, however, this requirement was relaxed to include 
homebound patients living alone with a helper close by and 
available, but not necessarily in the same household. 
A 24-hour telephone service offered by the team and 
backed up by the physician was a vital part of this support 
system. All patients were advised to restrict telephone calls 
and service requests to office hours if at all possible, but 
were given the nurse practitioner's and the physician's home 
telephone numbers to be used for emergency consultations. 
In addition, they were given the access number to the 
physician's pager which acted as the ultimate resource for 
the patients. An off-hour telephone call study describes 
numbers, content of, and responses to these phone calls,' 
which were surprisingly low in number, especially during the 
night hours. More than 70 per cent of the calls could be 
handled by the phone call alone without need for immediate 
follow-up. 
Financing ofthe Clinical Program-Insofar as possible, 
the clinical services of the Home Health Care Team were 
provided on a fee-for-service basis, the payment mechanism 
most patients had used previously. The same mechanism 
was used by the control patients. The principle of requesting 
customary payment for the Home Health Care Team serv- 
ices was not only indispensable to its operation, but also 
forced the care providers to plan the clinical services within 
a realistic framework of cost consciousness, in order to be 
acceptable to the patients. 
The present third party reimbursement rates with pa- 
tient co-payments, where possible, did not adequately cover 
the cost for all services. The social worker's involvement in 
the home, for example, is at present rarely reimbursed and 
the physician's time for home visits and overall involvement 
in the team only inadequately so. 
The grant allowed us to budget for some overhead costs, 
which are usually assigned to the physician, and provided for 
the salary of the social worker. Subsequent to the experi- 
mental period, local foundations have supplemented the cost 
for non-reimbursable services. 
Methods 
Referral and Eligibility 
Patients were referred from a variety of sources follow- 
ing a publicity campaign informing health professionals and 

the community at large of the program. A sample size of 200 
to 250 was desired over the period of study based on ability 
of the team to care for half that number (estimated from 
previous team experience of turnover, visit frequency, and 
case load). All referrals that seemed potentially appropriate 
were screened in person by the team social worker who 
decided eligibility based on the patient being home-bound, 
wishing to remain at home, having significant illness (not 
primarily psychiatric) requiring medical care, not having a 
physician who would make home visits, living within the 
county, having a family member or friend ("caretaker") who 
could assist in their care at home, and being willing to 
participate in a research study. Following informed consent 
to participate in the study, patients were stratified into 
terminal (largely cancer patients who were receiving pallia- 
tive care only and had prognoses for survival of three 
months or less) and non-terminal groups, ability to respond 
to questionnaires, and being a member of a couple, both 
members of which wished to participate in the study; within 
each stratum they were randomized into experimental (team) 
and control groups. The patients were informed of the result 
of randomization immediately following the initial interview, 
in order to keep the base-line information as free as possible 
of bias from knowledge of the result either by the patient or 
interviewer. 
Interviews 
Interviews were conducted by interviewers trained by 
the field work coordinator with practice interviews, role 
playing, and biweekly feedback meetings. Ten of the 14 
interviewers had had previous survey experience. 


* Initial Base-line Questionnaire, based on instruments 
previously used at this medical center and tested thoroughly 
in the National Health Survey.'17.8 
* Health Service Utilization Diary, designed for this 
study, was a complete record of the patients' use of health 
services for up to six months following study entry, kept on a 
daily basis by the patient or the family caretaker.* Utiliza- 
tion data from the diaries were analyzed both as units (e.g., 
days of inpatient stay, visits to clinics, home care nurse 
visits, hours of aide care, etc.) and weighted to estimate total 
utilization costs using current average charges for services in 
the community at the main provider agencies.** Since the 
objective of the utilization analysis was to estimate a steady 
state of service provision for a changing population of 
patients, the data were adjusted for the length of time each 
subject was at risk for utilizing health services during the 
study period, i.e., for six months, or until death or drop-out 
if at less than six months. For each patient, the cost- 
weighted utilization data were converted into a "day-cost" 
figure, averaged over total time in the study, for each type of 
*All home or ambulatory care visits, hours of home health aide care, days 
of hospital or nursing home care, and related services were recorded. The 
diaries were monitored and collected bi-weekly by the interviewers. The diary 
recording of hospitalizations was validated, and corrected where necessary, 
by comparison with billing forms, and the diaries were also cross-checked 
against a sample of Visiting Nurse Service records. 
**The actual mean of hospital daily charges for the patients hospitalized 
during the study was obtained from their billing forms and was used as the 
hospital per diem weight. The physician home visit weighting factor was 
developed from estimates of total costs of a visit, including overhead and 
travel time, derived from a time-motion study of the home care team reported 
elsewhere.2 



service, and aggregated for team and control groups into 
average "day-costs" for each service. 
* The Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) was used to assess 
the patient's physical and psychosocial health status.'9 Inter- 
viewer-administered SIPs were obtained, where possible, 
from patients at study entry and at three and six months after 
entry. Self-administered surrogate SIPs were obtained from 
their caretakers at the same time. Scores were computed for 
the physical and psychosocial dimensions of the SIP, and for 
the total SIP. A comparison of patient and surrogate SIPs 
indicated a good level of agreement between the total and 
dimension scores.20 Therefore, if any patient scores were 
missing, surrogate scores were substituted, when available, 
for the complete set of SIP scores for that patient. 
* Philadelphia Geriatric Center (PGC) Morale Scale 
was used on patients who were mentally capable on initial, 
three, and six-month interviews to assess "morale" or life 
satisfaction.2' 
* Patient and Caretaker Satisfaction Questionnaires 
were administered separately to both patients and their 
caretakers, whenever possible, at study entry and at three- 
and six-months follow-up. The questionnaire contained 26 
items dealing with satisfaction with the medical care re- 
ceived by the patient, each item having a five-point Likert- 
type response scale. These items were grouped into seven 
satisfaction scales: general satisfaction, availability of care, 
continuity of care, physician availability, physician compe- 
tence, personal qualities of physician, and communication 
with physician. Scale scores were summed to give a total 
satisfaction score (ranging from 26 to 130, a higher score 
indicating greater satisfaction) which was used in testing 
hypotheses in this study. Details of the scales, and of the 
procedure used to develop and test them, are reported 
elsewhere.22 
* Death-Date and place of death were ascertained for 
all patients who died during the six-month follow-up period, 
and who had not been lost to follow-up. 
Results 
Intake and Attrition 
A total of 243 patients was referred to and seriously 
considered for the study during the 27 months of intake (i.e., 
patient and/or caretaker were interviewed and screened by 
the social worker). Of these, 210 were deemed eligible for 
the study, and 167 (79.5 per cent) of these signed the consent 
form and entered into the study. Randomization yielded 85 
team and 82 control patients. Of these, 158 underwent the 
initial interview. The other nine either changed their minds 
and dropped out (5), moved away (1), or died (3) before the 
initial interview was performed and before they knew the 
results of randomization. 
After the initial interview, an additional 15 subjects 
were lost to follow-up. This resulted in a total attrition (drop- 
out or move) rate of 12.6 per cent (21/167) from time of 
signing the consent, and 9.5 per cent from time of initial 
interview (15/158). The total attrition rate was higher for 
controls (19.5 per cent) than for team patients (5.9 per cent) 
although three of the controls were lost because they moved 
away and part of the difference was explained by higher 
control attritions prior to results of randomization being 
known. Thus, deliberate "dropping-out" among controls 
was 15.9 per cent (13/82) and among team patients 4.6 per 
cent (4/85), for a total of 10.2 per cent (17/167) for all subjects 
entered into the study. 
Of the original 167 patients randomized, 69.4 per cent 
(59/85) of team and 64.6 per cent (53/82) of control patients at 
three months, 60.0 per cent (51/85) of team and 57.3 per cent 
(47/82) of control patients at six months were still alive and 
under follow-up. 
Characteristics of Team and Control Patients at Intake 
Selected characteristics of the 158 patients who com- 
pleted the initial interview, based on data from these inter- 
views, are presented in Table 1. Overall, the randomization 
procedure produced two reasonably comparable groups. 
The only demographic variable which showed a statistically 
significant difference was sex, with 61 per cent females in the 
team group compared with 76 per cent in the controls; this is 
taken into account in the analysis by adjustment for sex. 
Previous health care utilization and diagnoses in the two 
groups were quite similar., 
Study Outcomes 
Utilization-Table 2 shows the average utilization rates 
per patient per month, adjusted for days "at risk" in the 
study, expressed in the relevant units for each service. Days 
spent in hospital and nursing home were less for team than 
for control patients, as were all the other out-of-home 
services except emergency room visits, while utilization of 
services in the home was higher for team patients. Absolute 
number of hospital and nursing home admissions during the 
first six months in the study and average lengths of stay were 
also less for team than control patients (Table 3), as were 
ambulatory out-of-home services, unadjusted for days at 
risk. 
Table 4 displays "day cost" figures for all days "at 
risk" in the first six months for team and control patients. 
The average cost per day for all services recorded for team 
patients was $47.83, or 8.6 per cent less than the $52.33 for 
control patients, using the standardized weights. For team 
patients, out-of-home services were 61.1 per cent of what 
they were for controls, while in-home services were 60.9 per 
cent more. The most important factor in explaining the 
overall difference is the reduced hospitalization among the 
team patients, at 62.0 per cent of the day cost of the controls. 
It should be emphasized here that these "cost" figures must 
be interpreted carefully, as they are intended only as a 
reflection of relative intensity of care and cannot be extrapo- 
lated directly into some actual dollar saving estimate, al- 
though they are based on actual dollar costs in this communi- 
ty. 
The results of the statistical analysis for significance of 
the adjusted differences in day-costs between the team and 
control groups using the multiple regression approach to 
analysis of variance,23 are presented in Table 5.*** These 
values are adjusted for age, sex, and prognosis, and are 
therefore slightly different from the values of the differences 
which would be calculated from the actual unadjusted day- 
costs in Table 4. The only differences which proved to be 
statistically significant were in the in-home day-costs during 
the first 90 days where team patients averaged higher costs 
(p < 0.01). Total and out-of-home day-costs showed what 
appears to be a strong numerical trend toward being lower 
***Before analyzing the day-costs, a principal components analysis was 
done on the day-cost data base to determine whether there were any strong 
associations among the components of the day-cost. This analysis suggested 
that in both team and control groups in-home and out-of-home day-costs were 
virtually uncorrelated. Therefore, it was decided as a primary analysis to 
analyze these two components separately. 




Team 
(N = 82) 
Control 
(N = 76) 
Patient Characteristics 
Age (years) 
Mean 
Median 
% Female* 
% White 
% Married 
% Living Alone 
Mean Years of Education 
Third Party Eligibility/Coverage (primary) 
% Medicaid 
% Medicare 
% Blue Cross/Shield (alone or with Medicare) 

% Terminal 
% Non-Terminal 
Primary Diagnosis 
% Cancer 
% Stroke 
% Arthritis/Rheumatism 
% Other (all below 10%)** 
Previous Health Services Utilization 
Physician contacts in preceding 2 weeks (not in- 





Mean days 
% One or more admissions 
Long-term care in preceding year 
Mean days 
% one or more admissions 
73.8 
75.5 
61.0 
73.2 
42.7 
23.2 
9.6 
31.7 
73.2 
34.2 
22.0 
78.0 
20.7 
12.2 
8.5 
58.6 


17.5 
51.2 
3.3 
9.8 
77.4 
78.5 
76.3 
85.5 
32.9 
18.4 
8.9 
26.3 
76.3 
34.2 
18.4 
81.6 
17.1 
17.1 
11.8 
54.0 


18.1 
54.0 
9.8 
4.0 
*The only one significant by chi-squared test at the 5% level (p = 0.038). 
..e.g., Dementia, ASHD, Chronic Lung Disease, Multiple Sclerosis. 
for team patients, especially during the first 90 days. Note 
that variance of out-of-home values was proportionately 
much higher than for in-home, as measured by the standard 
error. 
Statistical tests on the unadjusted means of team and 
control day-costs are presented in Table 6. Conventional 
unequal variance t-tests and the non-parametric Mann-Whit- 
ney test confirmed the t-tests done in the adjusted multiple 
regression analysis, and showed comparable levels of signifi- 
cance, except that the out-of-home day-cost difference be- 
came significantly lower for the team, at less than the 0.05 
level, using the non-parametric test, for both the first and the 
second three-month periods. Of interest is the fact that mean 
day-costs were much less during the second three months 
than during the first three for both team and control patients. 
Part of the explanation for this, to be investigated further 
below, was the death during the first three months of many 
of the seriously and terminally ill patients. 
Table 6 also shows the results of F-tests on the differ- 
ence in variances of the unadjusted day-cost means. The 
variance in the control group out-of-home costs was signifi- 
cantly greater than the team's at <0.01 level, both during the 
first and the second three-month periods, and led to a total 
day-cost variance significantly greater than the controls at 
<0.05 level. 
Because of the initial expectation that patterns of care 
would be different and utilization and costs higher for 
terminal patients than for non-terminal ones, a secondary 
analysis was undertaken to compare the unadjusted day- 
costs of the team and control patients who died within the 
first three months as opposed to those who did not. Table 7 
demonstrates that those patients dying within three months 
had much higher out-of-home day costs than did those 








Hospital Days 
Nursing Home Days 
MD Office Visits 
Clinic Visits 
Emergency Room Visits 
Ambulance Rides 
Chairmobile Rides 
MD Home Visits 
Nurse Home Visits 
Social Worker Visits 
RN Hours' 
LPN Hours" 
Home Health Aide Hours 
Homemaker Hours 
Home Lab Tech Visits 
Meals on Wheels Visits 
2.04 
0.55 
0.05 
0.11 
0.26 
0.12 
0.05 
1.10 
2.29 
0.16 
8.40 
5.49 
65.66 
4.20 
0.18 
0.50 
3.29 
1.32 
0.17 
0.53 
0.05 
0.17 
0.11 
0.14 
2.13 
0.04 
6.32 
0.83 
42.64 
3.80 
0.02 
0.35 
*This and succeeding tables on utilization data indicate one patient less in each of the 
groups than were stated previously to have completed the initial interview since two died 
immediately afterwards, before there were any days "at risk." 
**The RN and LPN hourly-paid care was usually for terminal hospice patients who 
required constant care and was distinct from the briefer episodic nurse practitioner or 
community health nurse visits which were paid by visit. 








Admissions per patient* 
Mean length of stay 
Median length of stay 
Range of length of stay 
Nursing Home Admissions 
Admissions per patient" 
Mean length of stay 
Median length of stay 
Range of length of stay 
0.35 
12.6 days 
8.5 days 
1-59 days 
0.06 
51.8 days 
36 days 
8-159 days 
0.41 
14.3 days 
11 days 
1-37 days 
0.11 
61.9 days 
56 days 
1-129 days 
*Team: 28 admissions of 24 patients (4 patients had 2 admissions each) 
Control: 31 admissions of 25 patients (6 patients had 2 admissions each) 
-Team: 5 admissions of 5 patients 
Control: 8 admissions of 7 patients (1 patient had 2 admissions) 
surviving, and that team out-of-home and total day-costs 
were substantially lower than those of controls. However, 
for those alive at three months there was virtually no 
difference between team and controls in mean day-cost. 
Thus, the team effect in reducing overall utilization (hospital- 
ization having the major effect) appears to have been entirely 
in the group of patients who died. Similar day-cost differ- 
ences were observed between those stratified initially as 
terminal versus non-terminal over the entire six-month peri- 
od, even though not all "terminal" patients died and some 
"non-terminal" ones did. 
Thus, hypothesis one, on health care system utilization, 
is supported, at least in the trends, except for emergency 
room visits. 
Sickness Impact Profile-The multiple regression ap- 
proach to analysis of variance, in which treatment effects 
were controlled for age, sex, and initial SIP scores, revealed 
no differences between team and control SIP scores either at 
three months (55 team and 49 control cases) or at six months 
(39 team and 34 controls). The adjusted score difference 
(team minus control) at six months for patient-reported SIPs 
was 0.3 and for caretaker-reported SIPs was minus 0.9, very 
small differences since the mean unadjusted scores at the 
various time intervals ranged between 28 and 39. 
Patient Morale-At the initial interview, 61 team and 50 
control patients were able to respond to the PGC Morale 
Scale. By six months, 32 team and 23 control patients were 
still in the study and able to respond; 31 team and 22 control 
patients answered both initially and at six months. There 
were no differences, or even trends, between team and 
control group mean scores at any point, or over time, in total 
score or in the sub-scores of the scale. For example, for 
patients responding both initially and at six months, mean 
initial score for team patients was 25.6 and for controls 26.8, 
and at six months were 25.9 and 25.8, respectively. Thus, 
hypothesis two, on patient health status, is not supported. 
Patient and Caretaker Satisfaction-Unadjusted pa- 
tient satisfaction scores were comparable in team and con- 
trol groups at intake, and showed a trend toward greater 
satisfaction among team patients at three months and six 
months (Table 8). Team caretakers, however, showed mark- 
edly greater satisfaction than control caretakers at three 
months and at six months, differences which were highly 
significant. In all groups studied, including control group 
patients and caretakers, there was an increase in satisfaction 
scores over time, which was most marked during the first 
three months of follow-up. This effect was also seen when 
paired data only were used. 
Results from the multiple regression approach to analy- 
sis of variance in which treatment effect was adjusted for 
initial satisfaction score, age, and sex indicate significantly 
higher mean scores for team compared with control caretak- 
ers both at three months and at six months, and for patients 
at six months only. 
In view of the significant treatment effects on caretaker 
and, to a lesser degree, patient satisfaction, a more detailed 
examination of satisfaction sub-scales was undertaken. 
Treatment effect on caretaker satisfaction was noted in all 
sub-scales, but to a greater degree in satisfaction with 






Hospital Days 
Nursing Home Days 
MD Office Visits 
Clinic Visits 
Emergency Room Visits 
Ambulance Rides 
Chairmobile Rides 
Subtotal 
In-Home 
MD Home Visits 
Nurse Home Visits 
Social Worker Visits 
RN Hours 
LPN Hours 
Home Health Aide Hours 
Homemaker Hours 
Home Lab Tech Visits 
Meals on Wheels Visits 
Subtotal 
Total 
$20.40 
1.00 
.05.)18 
.12 
.51 
.16 
.03 
(0.87) 
( 

$ 2.56 
3.20 
.22 
2.10 
1.19 
15.32 
.84 
.03 
.10 
$25.56 
$47.83 

$32.88 
2.42 
.57 
.10 
.23 
.06 


.32 
2.98 
.05 
1.58 
.18 
9.95 
.76 
.003 
.07 
$15.89 
$52.33 
62.0 
41.3 


160.9 
91.4 






Difference (± S.E.)* 
p-value** 
Out-of-Home Day-Costs 
Difference (± S.E.)* 
p-value** 

Difference (± S.E.)* 
p-value** 



-$6.06 (± 9.64) 
ns 
-16.66 (± 9.62) 
ns 
+10.61 (± 3.96) 
0.008 
-$3.67 (± 10.08) 
ns 
-14.42 (± 10.02) 
ns 
+10.74 (± 3.96) 
0.008 
-$0.15 (± 3.33) 
ns 
-3.42 (± 2.67) 
ns 
+3.27 (± 2.26) 
ns 
'Team vs control day-cost, + standard error of the estimate; minus (-) value indicates adjusted team day-cost is lower than control. 
**p-value from t-test on the difference between the adjusted day-cost means, using multiple regression approach to analysis of 


physician availability, competence, and personal qualities. 
Patient sub-scale scores showed relatively little treatment 
effect, with the exception of the sub-scales dealing with 
availability of care in general, with availability of the physi- 
cian, and with personal qualities of the physician. 


Mortality, Survivorship, and Place of Death-Exact 
mortality rates during the six months of the study cannot be 
calculated because of the subjects who were lost to follow- 
up, especially among the controls. Eliminating those on 
whom survivorship was unknown at six months after intake, 
the total known six-month mortality rate for the team 
patients was 36 per cent (29/80) and for the controls 29 per 
cent (19/66), including those who died before the initial 
interview. 
The survival profiles after adjustment for prognosis 
were tested for significance, assuming exponential survival, 
by the method of Aitken and Clayton.24 The log-likelihood 
ratio chi-square statistic for the comparison of team and 
control survivorship had a value of 1.4 with one degree of 
freedom, indicating no difference (p > 0.10). Seventy-two 
per cent of all terminal stratum patients were dead by three 
months, while only 11 per cent of the non-terminal were, 
indicating the prognosis was quite accurate. 
Place of death was determined for 43 of the 45 deaths: 20 
(71 per cent) of the team patients died at home compared 
with 7 (47 per cent) of control group patients. Place of death 
could not be determined for two control group patients. 

The trend toward reduced hospital utilization seen 
among the team patients appears to be explained almost 
entirely by the lower costs of care of team cases who died 
during the study period and is related to the considerably 
higher proportion of team than control patients dying at 
home. However, this conclusion should not tempt one to 
recommend the team care approach only for patients desig- 
nated as "terminal". The entire study population, by admis- 




Number 
Team 
Control 
Total Day-Costs* 
Team (t 1 SD.) 
Control (t 1 SD.) 
t-Test p-value 
Mann-Whitney p-value 
F-test p-value 

Team (t 1 SD.) 
Control (t 1 SD.) 
t-Test p-value 
Mann-Whitney p-value 
F-Test p-value 
In-Home Day-Costs* 
Team (t 1 SD.) 
Control (± 1 SD.) 
t-Test p-value 
Mann-Whitney p-value 
F-test p-value 
81 
75 
$47.57 (t 56.03) 
42.24 (t 72.85) 
ns 
ns 

22.24 (t 50.20) 
36.37 (t 72.61) 
ns 
0.045 
0.001 
25.34 (t 27.27) 
15.87 (± 22.58) 
0.019 
0.003 

81 
75 
$47.78 (t 59.02) 
$50.30 (t 74.64) 
ns 
ns 

22.86 (t 53.79) 
34.87 (t 74.13) 
ns 
0.033 
0.005 
24.92 (t 26.79) 
15.43 (± 22.92) 
0.018 
0.002 

58 
53 
$14.34 (t 13.84) 
15.33 (t 19.73) 
ns 
ns 

3.83 (t 9.38) 
7.74 (t 16.95) 
ns 
0.016 
0.0001 
10.51 (± 12.04) 
7.59 (± 11.26) 
ns 
ns 
ns 
'These costs are all very slightly less than those in Table 5, since they do not contain the social worker day-cost estimate (re-adjusted 
from the utilization diaries due to her activity in the non-clinical research part of the study) and the chairmobile costs (added in later for 
Tanbe 5). 






(21) 
(16) 
(37) 
(60) 
(59) 
(119) 
Out-of-Home 
Day-Cost 
In-Home 
Day-Cost 
Total 
Day-Cost 
$ 57.67 
110.79 
80.64 

9.83 
16.19 
12.99 
$34.91 
13.87 
25.81 
$21.99 
16.41 
19.22 
$ 92.58 
124.66 
106.45 
$31.82 
32.61 
32.21 


Team 
Control 
Total 
Team 
Control 
Total 
sion criteria, was a group of severely disabled homebound 
patients with multiple medical problems, the type of patient 
most at risk of developing a severe health crisis, often 
needing institutionalization, and at risk of dying. When death 
was expected, the impact of the team in providing routine 
care and 24-hour availability in the home may have affected 
the willingness of patients and family caregivers to choose 
home care even in crisis. Thus, the study answers the 
General Accounting Office call for "more research into the 
effects of expanded home health care on those elderly highly 
at risk of placement in nursing homes and on hospital 
admissions."25 It confirms the hope that in this specific 
group of patients high intensity home health care can be 
cost-effective. 
The one out-of-home utilization rate which was higher 
for team patients was emergency room visits. This is a result 
of the fact that those particular team patients happened to 
have very low numbers of days at risk and a valid conclusion 
on this point cannot be drawn. Also of interest is the fact that 
the variance in the out-of-home day-cost for the controls was 
substantially greater than for the team patients, suggesting 
possibly greater control and predictability of hospital costs 
for the patient under the close surveillance and care of the 
home care team physician. 
The study results failed to demonstrate any effect of the 
intervention upon patient functional status (physical or psy- 
chosocial) or morale. While the mortality rate was higher 
among team patients, survivorship, as an indicator of aver- 
age adjusted time survived during the period of study, did 
not differ significantly between the two groups. Although no 
significant improvement in either mortality or morbidity in 
the team cases was expected due to the age, severity of 
illness, or terminal status of the subjects, the evidence for no 
negative effect of team intervention is welcome (it might be 
of concern, for example, that over-zealous attempts to avoid 
hospitalization or emergency room care would have adverse 
effects). There was no evidence, however, for significant 
'delay in functional deterioration of the team over the control 
cases, which had been hypothesized. 
The strongest statistical results favoring the team were 
observed in caretaker satisfaction with health care. Trends 
in patient satisfaction were also strong, especially at six 
months. Sub-scale analysis indicated that satisfaction sub- 
scales which seemed the most affected by the intervention 
were the scales concerned with availability of care in general 
as well as of physician care in particular and those concerned 
with characteristics of the physician (personal qualities and 
competence). These findings are generally consistent with 
what might be expected from the intervention which made 
home care, especially physician home care, more available 
to patients and their families. The increased satisfaction with 
physician characteristics may be a reflection of the particular 
physician participating in the Home Health Care Team and 
may not necessarily occur in replications of the intervention 
at other sites, or in expansion of the program in Monroe 
County to include a broader physician group. It is not 
possible to rule out a "Hawthorne effect" in interpreting 
these results as patients and caretakers were well aware of 
being in a demonstration study. 
The controls were not truly without intervention in this 
study, since they kept health utilization diaries and were 
visited by the interviewers who sometimes perforce offered 
advice and support. The increase in satisfaction in the 
control group over the study period may reflect this, while 
the lesser increment in satisfaction among the controls as 
compared with the team group may in part be related to 
disappointment at not having been randomized into the team 
group initially. 
Patient satisfaction scale scores had lower internal 
consistency than caretaker scores.22 This may reflect the 
poorer health status of patients, and perhaps their reduced 
ability to concentrate and answer the questionnaire in a 
consistent fashion. This may account for the inability to 
detect as much improvement in satisfaction in patients as 
compared with caretakers. Also, great stress in caring for 
seriously ill patients falls on the family members who may 
therefore be more sensitive than patients themselves to 
changes in the quality of care provided. In any case, for 
these disabled, dependent, and severely ill patients and their 
caretakers, satisfaction with the health care they receive is 
undoubtedly of much greater relative importance than for 
the average citizen for whom contact with health providers is 
far less frequent and significant in the hierarchy of life 
experiences, and is therefore an even more desirable out- 
come. 
Finally, this high degree of caretaker satisfaction with 
team care deserves one further comment. The utilization 
data show that savings in hospital days, the costliest care 


















(n = 57) 
79.0 
(n = 67) 
76.1 
(n = 47) 
81.1 
(n = 65) 
75.4 




(n = 37) 
92.1 
(n = 41) 
96.9 
(n = 30) 
88.7 
(n = 42) 
82.1 




(n = 31) 
95.0 
(n = 31) 
99.8 
(n = 22) 
89.3 
(n = 33) 
88.8 




aMann-Whitney Test 
ns = not statistically significant (p greater than 0.05) 


days, can be attributed almost entirely to the fact that more 
team patients spent their days of highest care needs at home, 
where much of the service is provided by informal family 
caretakers at no cost to the system. Thus, it 
is most 
remarkable that these caretakers who contributed most 
significantly with their time and effort to lowering cost are 
also the group most satisfied with this care approach. Patient 
and caretaker satisfaction, therefore, has a direct relation- 
ship to health care utilization and cost reduction. Since all 
patients and caretakers in this study had freely chosen a 
home care approach, however, similar findings might not be 
expected in a group forced into the home care option. Thus, 
although home care at such a critical stage in life is not for 
everybody, there will always be people who prefer this 
option, and for them this study has shown that it can be cost- 
effective and desirable. 
REFERENCES 
1. Zimmer JG, Groth-Juncker A: Off-hour telephone calls to a geriatric home 

2. Zimmer JG, Groth-Juncker A: A time-motion study of patient care 
activities of a geriatric home care team. Home Health Care Serv Q 1983; 
4:67-78. 








7. Bloom BS, Super KA: Health and medical care for the elderly and aged 
population: the state of the evidence. J Am Geriatr Soc 1980; 28:451-455. 
8. Nielson M, Blenkner M, Bloom M, Downs T, Beggs H: Older persons 
after hospitalization: a controlled study of home aide service. Am J Public 
Health 1972; 62:1094-1100. 


10. Katz S, Ford AB, Downs TD, Adams M, Rusby DI: Effects of Continued 
Care-A Study of Chronic Illness in the Home. DHEW Pub. No. (HSM) 
73-3010. Washington, DC: Govt Printing Office, 1972. 


11. Papsidero JA, Katz S, Kroger MH, Akpom CA: Chance for Change: 
Implications of a Chronic Disease Module Study. East Lansing: Michigan 
State University Press, 1979. 
12. Wan TTH, Weissert WG, Livieratos BB: Geriatric day care and home- 
maker services: an experimental study. J Gerontol 1980; 35:256-274. 
13. Weissert WG, Wan TTH, Livieratos BB: Effects and Costs of Day Care 
and Homemaker Services for the Chronically Ill: A Randomized Experi- 
ment. NCHSR Research Report Series, DHEW Pub. No. (PHS)79-3258, 
Washington, DC: Govt Printing Office, 1980. 
14. Weissert WG, Wan TTH, Livieratos BB, Pellegrino J: Cost-effectiveness 
of homemaker services for the chronically ill. Inquiry 1980; 17:230-243. 
15. Skellie FA, Coan RE: Community-based long-term care and mortality: 
preliminary findings of Georgia's alternative health services project. 
Gerontologist 1980; 20:372-379. 

17. Roghmann KJ, Haggerty RJ: Measuring the use of health services by 
household interviews: a comparison of procedures used in three child 
health surveys. Int J Epidemiol 1974; 3:71-81. 
18. National Center for Health Statistics: Health Interview Survey Procedure 
1957-1974. Series 1, No. 11, DHEW Pub. No. (HRA) 75-1311). Rockville, 
MD: USDHEW, 1975. 
19. Bergner M, Bobbitt RA, Carter WB, Gilson BS: The Sickness Impact 
Profile development and final revision of a health status measure. Med 
Care 1981; 19:787-805. 




22. McCusker J: Development of scales to measure satisfaction and prefer- 
ence regarding long-term and terminal care. Med Care 1984; 22:476-493. 
23. Brownlee KA: The multiple-regression approach to analysis of variance. 
In: Statistical Theory and Methodology in Science and Engineering. New 
York: J. Wiley, Ch 18, 1960. 
24. Aitken M, Clayton D: The fitting of exponential, Weibull and extreme 
distributions to complex censored survival data using GLIM. AppI Stat 
1980; 29:156-163. 
25. General Accounting Office: The Elderly Should Benefit from Expanded 
Home Health Care but Increasing these Services Will Not Insure Cost 
Reductions. Washington, DC: GAO, 1982. 

This research supported by Grant Number HS03030 from the National 
Center for Health Services Research. Findings from this study were presented 
at the I 10th Annual Meeting of the American Public Health Association, 
Montreal, November 1982. 


The 5th Annual Occupational Safety and Health Winter Institute will be held February 25-March 
1, 1985 at the University of North Carolina, Occupational Safety and Health Center, in Chapel Hill. 
Twenty-two courses will be offered: Basic Industrial Hygiene, Fundamentals of Occupational 
Safety, Noise Control Engineering, Applied Radiation Protection, Industrial Ventilation, Sampling and 
Evaluating Airborne Asbestos Dust, Monitor of Workers for Toxic Diseases, Occupational Health 
Nursing: Basic Theory and Update, Advanced Occupational Health Nursing-Certification Review, 
Respirator Program, Advanced Occupational Safety, Advanced Industrial Ventilation, Personal 
Sampling, Legal Concerns of Occupational Safety and Health Professionals, Hazard Communication 
Standard and Update (Right to Know), Biohazard Science, Use of Microcomputers in Occupational 
Safety and Health, Applied Industrial Toxicology, Hospital Employee Health Programs, Industrial 
Hygiene Laboratory, Loss Control Implications, and Safety and Health Training for Hazardous Waste 
Site Workers. 
Each course will be 18 hours in duration, except Asbestos which will be 28 hours. 
For further information contact: UNC Occupational Safety and Health Educational Resource 



