Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common disorder 
characterized by repetitive partial (hypopnea) or complete 
(apnea) occlusion of the upper airway during sleep, which 
is caused by collapse of the pharyngeal airway and results 
in sleep fragmentation and oxyhemoglobin desaturation.1 
A study by Kiely and colleagues has shown that >20% of 
hypertensive patients exhibit OSA, whereas the prevalence of 
hypertension in the setting of OSA is >50%.2 One study con- 
firms that OSA is an important identifiable cause of hyper- 
tension.3 OSA is considered as one of the most common risk 
factors of resistant hypertension.4,5 The estimated prevalence 
of OSA among male patients with coronary artery disease 
(CAD) is 37%.6 A previous study has suggested that OSA 
significantly increases cardiovascular morbidity and mor- 
tality, especially in patients with preexisting cardiovascular 
disease.7 Several studies8–13 have found that continuous posi- 
tive airway pressure (CPAP) reduces systolic blood pressure 
(SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) in patients with 
OSA. Additionally, some articles have reported that there is 
a protective effect of CPAP therapy against death from car- 
diovascular disease in patients with severe OSA.14,15 Other 
studies have not demonstrated that CPAP has an antihy- 
pertensive effect.16,17 However, relevant studies have a rela- 
tive short study duration, with few extending longer than 
1 year. In our opinion, they are not sufficient to detect the 
real effects of CPAP on blood pressure (BP). Based on our 

Initially submitted April 28, 2014; date of first revision May 26, 2014; 
accepted for publication June 30, 2014. 
1State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, 
National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
© American Journal of Hypertension, Ltd 2014. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com 

background 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) can result in hypertension and signifi- 
cantly increase cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. There are few 
reports on the long-term effects of continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) on blood pressure in patients with uncontrolled hypertension 
with coronary heart disease (CHD) and OSA. 
methods 
We conducted a prospective, long-term follow-up study in 83 patients 
with uncontrolled hypertension, CHD, and OSA randomized to control 
or CPAP groups. Daytime systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood 
pressure (DBP), and severe cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events 
(SCCEs) were recorded at baseline and follow-up. 
P = 0.02); however, DBP did not reach statistical difference between 
the groups (81 ± 10 mm Hg vs. 79 ± 8 mm Hg; P = 0.49). In the CPAP 
group, the Epworth Sleepiness Scale was markedly reduced (7.0 ± 3.4 
vs. 3.7 ± 2.3; P < 0.001). There was 1 SCCE in the CPAP group (heart 
failure), and 5 SCCEs in the control group (acute myocardial infarc- 
tion: 2 (with 1 death); stroke: 3), but there was no significant difference 
identified. 
conclusions 
Long-term CPAP application in uncontrolled hypertension with CHD 
and OSA significantly reduced daytime SBP, improved hypertension 
control and daytime sleepiness, and decreased the trend in SCCEs com- 
pared with control subjects. 
results 
Seventy-three patients completed the study with a median follow-up 
of 36 (interquartile range = 24–54) months. The 2 groups had similar 
characteristics at baseline. CPAP was used for 4.5 ± 1.1 hour/night. SBP 
in the CPAP group was significantly reduced at follow-up (143 ± 7 mm 
Hg vs. 139 ± 7 mm Hg, P = 0.04), and SBP decreased by 8 mm Hg (95% 
confidence interval = 1.4–9.9; P = 0.01). Hypertension control was 
improved (CPAP, 69.4% for CPAP users vs. 43.2% for control subjects; 
clinical trial registration number: 
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02059993. 
Keywords: antihypertensive drugs; blood pressure; continuous posi- 
tive airway pressure; coronary heart disease; hypertension; obstructive 
sleep apnea. 



Long-Term Effects of Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
on Blood Pressure and Prognosis in Hypertensive Patients 
with Coronary Heart Disease and Obstructive Sleep Apnea: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial 
Zhiwei Huang,1 Zhihong Liu,1 Qin Luo,1 Qing Zhao,1 Zhihui Zhao,1 Xiuping Ma,1 Weihua Liu,1 and 
Dan Yang1 
 

knowledge, there are few reports about long-term effects of 
CPAP, including whether CPAP application can improve 
the prognosis of OSA patients with preexisting CHD under 
conventional medications.18,19 Therefore, we conducted a 
long-term, prospective, controlled study to investigate the 
effects of CPAP on BP, prognosis, clinical symptoms, and 
severe cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events (SCCEs) 
in hypertensive patients with CHD and OSA on conven- 
tional treatment. 


We performed a prospective, randomized, single-center 
clinical trial of parallel groups in hypertensive patients with 
CHD and OSA. We used a computer program to produce 
the randomized treatment number. These were stored in 
sequentially numbered opaque envelopes. The project man- 
ager was responsible for the allocation and had no contact 
with any of the participants throughout the trial. Patients 
were randomly assigned to either CPAP or no therapy 
(control). This study was approved by the ethics commit- 
tee of Fuwai Hospital (No. 2009215). Informed consent was 
obtained from each patient. 

We recruited consecutive patients from outpatient and 
inpatient departments of Fuwai Hospital from January 2009 
to June 2012. Patients who were diagnosed with moderate to 
severe OSA (moderate OSA was defined as an apnea–hypo- 
pnea index (AHI) of 15–29 episodes/hour, and severe OSA 
was defined as an AHI of at least 30 episodes/hour) docu- 
mented by polysomnography,20 hypertension (hypertension 
is defined as systolic pressure ≥140 mm Hg and/or diastolic 
pressure ≥90 mm Hg at rest or treatment with antihyperten- 
sive medication) and confirmation of CHD (selective coro- 
nary angiograms showed at least 1 major epicardial coronary 
artery luminal stenosis segment ≥70%, or left main coronary 
artery stenosis ≥50%, history of myocardial infarction, or 
coronary artery bypass grafting documented by medical 
record) were included in this study. The criteria for inclu- 
sion were as follows: (i) men and women aged 45–75 years; 
(ii) verified diagnosis of hypertension by medical history 
or treatment with antihypertensive medications; (iii) estab- 
lished diagnosis of CHD; (iv) at least 3-month optimal 
treatment for hypertension but BP still >140/90 mm Hg or 
>130/80 mm Hg in patients with diabetes; and (v) moder- 
ate to severe OSA. The subjects were excluded if they had 
secondary hypertension (including renal artery stenosis, 
chronic renal disease, and primary aldosteronism), central 
sleep apnea (defined as at least 50% of respiratory events 
having a pattern of apnea or hypopnea without thoracic and 
abdominal movement), an Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) 
score ≥15, a history of significant hepatic failure or severe 
pulmonary disease, malignant cancer with a life expectancy 
of <2 years, severe psychiatric disease, sustained excessive 
alcohol use, or New York Heart Association class III–IV 
heart failure; regularly used medications that can affect BP 

(including corticosteroids or sedative drugs); currently used 
CPAP treatment for OSA or pharyngeal surgery for OSA; 
declined to participate; or were unable to give informed 
consent. 

At baseline, resting BP was measured; demographic data, 
including age, sex, medical history, therapeutic regimen, life- 
style habits, height (cm), weight (kg), waist circumference 
(cm), hip circumference (cm), and neck circumference (cm), 
were recorded; and body mass index (BMI) was calculated as 
weight divided by height squared (kg/m2). Patients assessed 
their subjective daytime somnolence using the ESS,21 a self- 
completed questionnaire specific to symptoms of daytime 
sleepiness in various daytime situations. Patients underwent 
regular clinical examination and laboratory tests to exclude 
secondary hypertension. After the initial evaluation, physi- 
cian would give lifestyle advice (including smoking cessa- 
tion and heavy drinking discontinuation). Participants were 
assigned antihypertensive and CHD drugs treatments based 
on current guidelines (defined as conventional medications) 
in a 3-month run-in period that allowed for modifications 
in therapeutic schedule. Patients enrolled in the study were 
advised not to change their therapeutic regimen without 
permission from their physicians. Drug change was defined 
as any adjustment of antihypertensive treatment. SCCEs 
included new-onset acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 
hospitalization for heart failure, need for repeated coronary 
revascularization, stroke, and death associated with cardio- 
vascular and cerebrovascular disease. 
Patients visited the sleep research laboratory at 1 and 
3 months after randomization and every 6 months thereafter. 
Follow-up ended on 31 December 2013, and was carried out 
in all cases by the same investigator. Every medical appoint- 
ment involved protocol-based assessments of the following: 
morning office BP and heart rate after the patient rested for 
10 minutes, adherence to CPAP, medical treatment, lifestyle 
habits, height, weight, waist circumference, hip circum- 
ference, neck circumference, and ESS. Any SCCEs were 
recorded, and patients or their relatives were asked to pro- 
vide relevant medical documents. The physicians that han- 
dled the medical treatment as well as the clinical assessment 
and measured BP during the follow-up were blinded to the 
CPAP status of the patients. Patients were asked to bring the 
empty blister packs of their pills to ensure compliance with 
the treatment. Hypertension control was defined as rest- 
ing BP <140/90 mm Hg or <130/80 mm Hg in patients with 
diabetes.22 

To avoid the white-coat effect, BP measurements at the 
time of follow-up were recorded in a home-like environ- 
ment. The physician in charge of BP measurements received 
training of BP measurements for 2 weeks before the trial. 
The morning BP was measured with a mercury sphyg- 
momanometer by an experienced physician unaware of the 
patient’s group assignment. Patients were seated for at least 
10 minutes in a quiet environment with feet on the floor 
and their arm supported at heart level. An appropriate sized 
cuff was placed on the arm with the lower edge of the cuff 
2 cm above the antecubital fossa. The first and last Korotkoff 
sounds were used to determine SBP and DBP, respectively. 
The average of 3 consecutive BP measurements with 2-min- 
ute intervals on the same arm of the patient was recorded 
for the study. 

An overnight polysomnography was performed on all of 
the included patients in the Sleep Center of Fuwai Hospital 
by using the Embletta (Medcare Flaga, Reykjavik, Iceland) 
to record nasal airflow, finger pulse oximetry, thoracic and 
abdominal movement, body position, and snoring. The sleep 
was monitored automatically for 7 hours, starting from 30 
minutes after the subjects went to bed. Polygraphy data were 
scored manually by trained personnel. Polysomnography 
was repeated in both groups at the end of follow-up. Apnea 
was defined as airflow reduction to ≤10% of the baseline 
value for 10 seconds or more. Hypopnea was defined as a 
30%–90% reduction in oronasal airflow for >10 seconds, 
associated with an oxygen desaturation of ≥4%.23 The sever- 
ity of OSA was quantified numerically as the number of the 
AHI. AHI was defined as the total number of apneas and 
hypopneas occurring per hour of sleep. Subjective daytime 
somnolence was assessed with the ESS questionnaire. A total 
score >10 was considered indicative of excessive daytime 
sleepiness. 

The CPAP group received fixed-level CPAP titration using 
an automated pressure setting device for 1 night. The optimal 
CPAP pressure for each patient in the CPAP group was set at 
the minimum pressure required to abolish snoring, obstruc- 
tive respiratory events, and airflow limitation for 95% of the 
night, according to a previous validation by our study.24 The 
fixed pressure was then maintained throughout the study in 
patients who used a CPAP machine. CPAP compliance and 
AHI were objectively measured by the built-in compliance 
software of CPAP devices from the regular examination at 
the time of follow-up. Patients are generally considered ade- 
quately adherent to their CPAP treatment if the mean CPAP 
use was at least 4 hours/night. Each patient received stand- 
ardized instructions by 1 investigator specialized in OSA 
and by a home healthcare provider at the start of the CPAP 
treatment. A specialist OSA team assisted patients with tel- 
ephone or outpatient advice for any difficulties with CPAP 
during the study, and masks were adjusted as necessary. 


after CPAP treatment, assuming an alpha error of 5% and a 
statistical power of 80%. For baseline comparison between 
the control and CPAP groups, a 2-tailed test was used for 
normally distributed variables, and a Mann–Whitney test 
for non-normally distributed variables. The intragroup 
changes from baseline to the end of follow-up were assessed 
with a paired t test and Wilcoxon signed rank test. The χ2 test 
was used to compare categorical variables. Fisher’s exact test 
was used when ≥1 cells contained values ≤5. SPSS version 18 
software (SPSS, Chicago, IL) was used for statistical analysis. 
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 

The study flow chart is depicted in Figure 1. A total of 
243 patients were screened between January 2009 and June 
2012. Out of 97 (39.9%) patients diagnosed with OSA, 5 sub- 
jects declined to participate in the study, and 9 subjects were 
excluded because of the following: AHI <15 (n = 8 patients) 
and severe heart failure (n = 1 patient). A total of 83 patients 
fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Of these, 42 patients were 
allocated to the CPAP treatment, and 41 subjects served 
as controls. In addition, 4 participants (all had no SCCEs) 
withdrew before the end of study, 2 patients in the CPAP 
group withdrew before the 1-month visit (because of intoler- 
ance of CPAP treatment), and 2 patients in the control group 
withdrew before the 6-month visit (owing to live far from 
Beijing, complained of inconvenience). Two subjects were 
lost to follow-up in the control group, and 4 patients (all 
had no SCCEs) with very poor CPAP compliance were also 
excluded. One participant in the control group died from 
AMI before the 36-month visit and was included in the study 
analysis. Thirty-six patients in the CPAP group and 37 sub- 
jects in the control group completed the study. The median 
duration of follow-up was 36 (interquartile range = 24–54) 
months. 

Baseline characteristics and BP measurements were 
similar between the groups (Table 1). The mean age was 
62.4 ± 6.7 years. Most subjects (82.2%) in this study were 
male and overweight (79.4% had BMI >25). Of all the 
included patients, 36.8% had severe OSA, and 28 partici- 
pants (38.4%) had daytime somnolence. Comorbidities were 
similar between the CPAP treatment and the control groups. 
There were no significant differences with respect to drug 
number and category used by the patients between the 2 
groups. The SBPs in the CPAP treatment and control groups 
were 148 ± 11 mm Hg and 146 ± 8 mm Hg, respectively 
(P = 0.41), and the DBPs in the 2 groups were 83 ± 8 mm Hg 
and 83 ± 7 mm Hg, respectively (P = 0.85). 
Continuous variables with normal distribution are 
expressed as mean ± SD, and continuous variables without 
normal distribution were expressed as median (interquartile 
range), whereas categorical variables are reported as absolute 
numbers and percentages. The sample size was calculated to 
assess a minimum reduction of 5 ± 5 mm Hg in systolic BP 

The data from the follow-up are summarized in Table 2. 
The duration of follow-up did not differ significantly between 
the CPAP and control groups. Thirty-nine patients (57.4%) 
were followed for >36 months, and the shortest duration 



was 18 months. There was no significant difference in BMI 
between the groups. In the CPAP group, AHI decreased from 
28.3 ± 13.0 events/hour (baseline) to 2.8 ± 1.4 events/hour (as 
estimated by the CPAP machine’s software). The AHI in the 
control group did not change significantly. Compared with 
the control group, ESS score was markedly reduced in the 
therapeutic CPAP group (7.0 ± 3.4 vs. 3.7 ± 2.3; P < 0.001). 
Smoking, diabetes mellitus, heart rate, neck circumference, 
and number of drug treatment were not significantly dif- 
ferent in the CPAP and control groups. The mean time of 
CPAP treatment used by patients was 4.5 ± 1.1 hour/night. 
DBP at follow-up was lower but did not reach statistical dif- 
ference between the groups (81 ± 10 mm Hg for controls vs. 
79 ± 8 mm Hg for CPAP users, P = 0.49; ∆: 3 ± 11 mm Hg vs. 
4 ± 11 mm Hg, P = 0.75) (Figure 2). However, SBP was sig- 
nificantly different at the follow-up visit between the groups 
(143 ± 7 mm Hg for controls vs. 139 ± 7 mm Hg for CPAP 
users, P = 0.043; ∆: 3 ± 6 mm Hg vs. 8 ± 11 mm Hg, P = 0.01) 
(Figure 2). The proportion of controlled hypertension in the 
CPAP group was better than in the control group at the end 
of the study (P = 0.024). The number of antihypertensive 
drugs was not significantly different at the time of follow- 
up between the 2 groups. Three patients in the CPAP group 
reported that nocturia significantly decreased. The CPAP 
group had an SCCE rate of 2.8% (n = 1/36; hospitalization 
for heart failure = 1), and the control group had an SCCE 
rate of 13.5% (n = 5/37; AMI = 2 (1 died from AMI before 
the 36-month visit), stroke = 3). Although there was no dif- 
ference identified, there was a trend toward a lower percent- 
age of SCCEs in the CPAP group. 


To the best of our knowledge, this is the longest rand- 
omized controlled trial specifically designed to investigate 
the effects of CPAP treatment on BP and prognosis in hyper- 
tensive patients with CHD and OSA. Our study demon- 
strated that long-term CPAP therapy significantly reduced 
daytime SBP and improved hypertension control but did not 
further decrease daytime DBP in hypertensive patients with 
CHD and OSA on conventional antihypertensive treatment. 
There was a decreased trend in SCCEs in the CPAP group. 
Symptoms of daytime somnolence associated with OSA in 
the CPAP group were significantly improved compared with 
controls. 
Previous studies have addressed the effects of CPAP on 
daytime BP in OSA patients. However, many of these tri- 
als did not specifically investigate the effects of CPAP on 
hypertensive patients, but instead were mainly targeted at 
normotensive subjects.25–27 Our study is different from these 
studies in that the enrolled subjects were all hypertensive 
patients with CHD and OSA. Both groups received conven- 
tional antihypertensive treatment during the course of study. 
Furthermore, a median long-term follow-up period of 36 
(interquartile range = 24–54) months is sufficient to detect 
changes in BP. 
Several studies have analyzed the long-term effects of 
CPAP on BP but have resulted in variable and conflicting 
outcomes. Campos-Rodriguez et al.28 showed that CPAP 
treatment did not reduce BP in 68 OSA patients with hyper- 
tension over a period of 4 weeks. The results are different 
from our study. The reasons for this are unclear but may 



Abbreviations: ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; 
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; CCB, calcium channel blocker; 
CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; DBP, diastolic blood 
pressure; ESS, Epworth Sleepiness Scale; SBP, systolic blood pres- 
sure; SCCEs, severe cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events. 
levels or a need for less antihypertensive drugs for BP control 
in nonsleepy, hypertensive, OSA patients on conventional 
antihypertensive treatment. The outcomes are different from 
ours. However, the study has some obvious limitations. The 
subjects in their study had a significant difference in severity 
of OSA at baseline (P = 0.005), and the rate of diuretics use in 
the study was only 36.3%. Furthermore, the study included 
patients who had no subjective complaints of sleepiness. The 
clinical significance of this is unknown. 
Our outcomes suggest that CPAP was effective in lower- 
ing SBP in uncontrolled hypertensive patients with CHD 
and OSA and are consistent with the following trials. A few 
nonrandomized studies have consistently indicated that 
CPAP treatment in OSA patients with resistant hyper- 
tension mainly resulted in reductions in SBP (from 5.2 to 
11 mm Hg).31–33 International guidelines have pointed out 
that even minimal reductions in the SBP (2–3 mm Hg) in 
the older population could have a clinically significant effect 
by greatly reducing subsequent cardiovascular mortality 
(between 6%–8% for stroke and 4%–5% for coronary heart 








Values are mean ± SD or No. (%). 
Abbreviations: ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; 
AHI, apnea–hypopnea index; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; 
BMI, body mass index; bpm, beats per minute; CCB, calcium chan- 
nel blocker; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; DBP, dias- 
tolic blood pressure; ESS, Epworth Sleepiness Scale; SBP, systolic 
blood pressure. 
relate to the fact that the BMI in their study was significantly 
higher than in ours (75% of patients had obesity; mean 
BMI = 35.9 kg/m2 vs. 27.7 kg/m2). Obesity is an independent 
risk factor, may contribute to worsening of BP control, and is 
not affected by CPAP. Moreover, the study duration was only 
4 weeks. Barbé et al.9 conducted a multicenter, randomized 
controlled trial with the largest sample, which confirmed a 
small reduction in BP. The different results may have been 
caused by the fact that subjects were all nonsleepy hyper- 
tensive patients. In contrast, 38.4% participants in our study 
had daytime somnolence. Robinson et al.29 reported that the 
fall in ESS score was an independent predictor of a fall in 
24-hour ambulatory BP, but baseline severity of OSA, over- 
night hypoxia, caffeine intake, and being on antihypertensive 
drugs were not independent predictors of a fall in 24-hour 
ambulatory BP. We found that ESS score in the CPAP 
group was significantly reduced from 9.3 ± 3.1 at baseline to 
3.7 ± 2.3 at the time of follow-up. The change in SBP in the 2 
groups between baseline and post-treatment was remarkable 
(∆:2.5 mm Hg for controls vs. 8.3 mm Hg for CPAP users; 
P = 0.01). One study from Kasiakogias et al.30 suggested that 
long-term CPAP application is not associated with lower BP 
Table 1. Baseline characteristics of patients in the continuous 
positive airway pressure and control groups 
Table 2. Comparison of follow-up characteristics of patients 
between the control and continuous positive airway pressure 
groups 































































































































































Figure 2. Comparison of blood pressure at baseline and follow-up between the continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)–treated and control 
groups. Abbreviations: DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure. ★ P < 0.05. 
disease).22 Untreated OSA is strongly associated with poor 
BP control, particularly severe OSA. A review study clearly 
demonstrates that untreated OSA is associated with greater 
difficulty in the control of hypertension.34 This notion sup- 
ports our finding that the rate of hypertension control in the 
control group is poorer than in the CPAP-treated group. 
Additionally, compared with control subjects, only 1 
patient presented with an SCCE in the CPAP group,but 5 
subjects had SCCEs in the control group. Of the 5 subjects, 
1 died from AMI. The data are encouraging, although there 
was no difference identified. We believe that a longer follow- 
up period and larger sample size may have resulted in a sta- 
tistical difference. If the speculation is confirmed, it is very 
meaningful to the population with OSA and CHD. Boden- 
Albala and colleagues have shown that daytime sleepiness 
is an independent risk factor for stroke and other vascu- 
lar events.35 This may explain why the control group had a 
higher incidence of stroke than the CPAP group. 
Nevertheless, our study has some limitations. First, the 
sample size was relatively small. However, we performed a 
long-term follow-up to determine the real effects of CPAP 
on BP in the specific population. Second, this was a non- 
double-blind study. However, the use of sham CPAP in the 
long-term study is impractical. Given this situation, the 
investigator responsible for BP measurements and clinical 
assessments was blind to the allocation of CPAP. It is useful 
to avoid observer bias. Third, we did not use 24-hour ambu- 
latory BP to monitor changes in BP and could not evaluate 
the nighttime BP. However, 24-hour ambulatory BP may 
have a cuff pressure effect and cause arousal in sleeping sub- 
jects, thereby increasing the SBP and DBP. Also, most of our 
enrolled subjects were men. Further studies are required to 
extrapolate the results to the female population. 

In conclusion, this study confirmed that long-term appli- 
cation of CPAP in uncontrolled hypertensive patients with 
CHD and OSA receiving standardized treatment signifi- 
cantly reduced daytime SBP, improved hypertension con- 
trol and daytime sleepiness, and led to a decreased trend in 
SCCEs compared with control subjects. A practical clinical 
message from our study is that it would be wise and rec- 
ommended to apply CPAP in uncontrolled hypertensive 
patients with moderate to severe OSA being treated with 
conventional BP medication. In the future, larger samples 
studies are necessary to clarify the impact of CPAP on prog- 
nosis in hypertensive patients with CHD and OSA. 

We thank Baoyu Feng for her contribution to the sta- 
tistical analysis. This work was supported by the Research 
Fund of Capital Medical Development of Beijing Municipal 
Health Bureau (No. 2009–2012). 



 1. Shamsuzzaman AS, Gersh BJ, Somers VK. Obstructive sleep 
apnea: implications for cardiac and vascular disease. JAMA 2003; 
290:1906–1914. 
 2. Kiely JL, McNicholas WT. Cardiovascular risk factors in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. Eur Respir J 2000; 16:128–133. 
 3. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the asso- 
ciation between sleep-disordered breathing and hypertension. N Engl J 
Med 2000; 342: 1378–1384. 
 4. Calhoun DA, Jones D, Textor S, Goff DC, Murphy TP, Toto RD, White 
A, Cushman WC, White W, Sica D, Ferdinand K, Giles TD, Falkner 
B, Carey RM. Resistant hypertension: diagnosis, evaluation, and treat- 
ment: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association 
Professional Education Committee of the Council for High Blood 
Pressure Research. Circulation 2008; 117:e510–e526. 
 5. Muxfeldt ES, Margallo VS, Guimarães GM, Salles GF. Prevalence and 
associated factors of obstructive sleep apnea in patients with resistant 
hypertension. Am J Hypertens 2014; e-pub ahead of print 14 April 2014. 
 6. Mooe T, Rabben T, Wiklund U, Franklin KA, Eriksson P. Sleep- 
disordered breathing in men with coronary artery disease. Chest 1996; 
109:659–663. 
 7. Peker Y, Hedner J, Kraiczi H, Löth S. Respiratory disturbance index: 
an independent predictor of mortality in coronary artery disease. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162:81–86. 
 8. Campos-Rodriguez F, Perez-Ronchel J, Grilo-Reina A, Lima-Alvarez 
J, Benitez MA, Almeida-Gonzalez C. Long-term effect of continuous 
positive airway pressure on BP in patients with hypertension and sleep 
apnea. Chest 2007; 132:1847–1852. 
 9. Barbé F, Durán-Cantolla J, Capote F, de la Peña M, Chiner E, Masa JF, 
Gonzalez M, Marín JM, Garcia-Rio F, de Atauri JD, Terán J, Mayos M, 
Monasterio C, del Campo F, Gomez S, de la Torre MS, Martinez M, 
Montserrat JM. Long-term effect of continuous positive airway pres- 
sure in hypertensive patients with sleep apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2010; 181:718–726. 
10.Montesi SB, Edwards BA, Malhotra A, Bakker JP. The effect of continu- 
 
ous positive airway pressure treatment on blood pressure: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Sleep 
Med 2012; 8:587–596. 
11.Becker HF, Jerrentrup A, Ploch T, Grote L, Penzel T, Sullivan CE, Peter 
 
JH. Effect of nasal continuous positive airway pressure treatment on 
blood pressure in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Circulation 
2003; 107:68–73. 
12.Sanner BM, Tepel M, Markmann A, Zidek W. Effect of continuous posi- 
 
tive airway pressure therapy on 24-hour blood pressure in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Am J Hypertens 2002; 15:251–257. 
13.Börgel J, Sanner BM, Keskin F, Bittlinsky A, Bartels NK, Büchner N, 
 
Huesing A, Rump LC, Mügge A. Obstructive sleep apnea and blood 
pressure. Interaction between the blood pressure-lowering effects of 
positive airway pressure therapy and antihypertensive drugs. Am J 
Hypertens 2004; 17:1081–1087. 
14.Marin JM, Carrizo SJ, Vicente E, Agusti AG. Long-term cardiovascu- 
 
lar outcomes in men with obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea with or 
without treatment with continuous positive airway pressure: an obser- 
vational study. Lancet 2005; 365:1046–1053. 
15.Doherty LS, Kiely JL, Swan V, McNicholas WT. Long-term effects of 
 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure therapy on cardiovascular 
outcomes in sleep apnea syndrome. Chest 2005; 127:2076–2084. 
16.Campos-Rodriguez F, Grilo-Reina A, Perez-Ronchel J, Merino-Sanchez 
 
M, Gonzalez-Benitez MA, Beltran-Robles M, Almeida-Gonzalez C. 
Effect of continuous positive airway pressure on ambulatory BP in 
patients with sleep apnea and hypertension: a placebo-controlled trial. 
Chest 2006; 129:1459–1467. 
17.Barbé F, Mayoralas LR, Duran J, Masa JF, Maimó A, Montserrat JM, 
 
Monasterio C, Bosch M, Ladaria A, Rubio M, Rubio R, Medinas M, 
Hernandez L, Vidal S, Douglas NJ, Agustí AG. Treatment with continu- 
ous positive airway pressure is not effective in patients with sleep apnea 
but no daytime sleepiness. a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 2001; 134:1015–1023. 
18.Cassar A, Morgenthaler TI, Lennon RJ, Rihal CS, Lerman A. Treatment 
 
of obstructive sleep apnea is associated with decreased cardiac death 
after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 
50:1310–1314. 

19.Campos-Rodriguez F, Martinez-Garcia MA, de la Cruz-Moron I, 
 
Almeida-Gonzalez C, Catalan-Serra P, Montserrat JM. Cardiovascular 
mortality in women with obstructive sleep apnea with or without con- 
tinuous positive airway pressure treatment: a cohort study. Ann Intern 
Med 2012; 156:115–122. 
20.Sleep-related breathing disorders in adults: recommendations for syn- 
 
drome definition and measurement techniques in clinical research. The 
report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Task Force. Sleep 
1999; 22:667–689. 
21. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the 
 

22.Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL 
 
Jr, Jones DW, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ. The sev- 
enth report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. 
JAMA 2003; 289:2560–2572. 
23.Martínez-García MA, Capote F, Campos-Rodríguez F, Lloberes P, Díaz 
 
de Atauri MJ, Somoza M, Masa JF, González M, Sacristán L, Barbé F, 
Durán-Cantolla J, Aizpuru F, Mañas E, Barreiro B, Mosteiro M, Cebrián 
JJ, de la Peña M, García-Río F, Maimó A, Zapater J, Hernández C, Grau 
SanMarti N, Montserrat JM. Effect of CPAP on blood pressure in 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea and resistant hypertension: the 
HIPARCO randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013; 310:2407–2415. 
24.Zhao Q, Liu ZH, Luo Q, Zhao ZH, Zhang HL, Wang Y. Effects of con- 
 
tinuous positive airway pressure on blood pressure and daytime sleepi- 
ness in obstructive sleep apnea patients with coronary heart diseases 
under optimal medications. Sleep Breath 2012; 16:341–347. 
25.Dimsdale JE, Loredo JS, Profant J. Effect of continuous positive air- 
 
way pressure on blood pressure: a placebo trial. Hypertension 2000; 
35:144–147. 
26.Faccenda JF, Mackay TW, Boon NA, Douglas NJ. Randomized placebo- 
 
controlled trial of continuous positive airway pressure on blood pres- 
sure in the sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2001; 163:344–348. 
27.Pepperell JC, Ramdassingh-Dow S, Crosthwaite N, Mullins R, 
 
Jenkinson C, Stradling JR, Davies RJ. Ambulatory blood pressure after 
therapeutic and subtherapeutic nasal continuous positive airway pres- 
sure for obstructive sleep apnoea: a randomised parallel trial. Lancet 
2002; 359:204–210. 
28.Campos-Rodriguez F, Grilo-Reina A, Perez-Ronchel J, Merino-Sanchez 
 
M, Gonzalez-Benitez MA, Beltran-Robles M, Almeida-Gonzalez C. 
Effect of continuous positive airway pressure on ambulatory BP in 
patients with sleep apnea and hypertension: a placebo-controlled trial. 
Chest 2006; 129:1459–1467. 
29.Robinson GV, Langford BA, Smith DM, Stradling JR. Predictors of 
 
blood pressure fall with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
treatment of obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).Thorax 2008;63:855–859. 
30.Kasiakogias A, Tsioufis C, Thomopoulos C, Aragiannis D, Alchanatis 
 
M, Tousoulis D, Papademetriou V, Floras JS, Stefanadis C. Effects of 
continuous positive airway pressure on blood pressure in hypertensive 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a 3-year follow-up. J Hypertens 
2013;31:352–360. 
31.Logan AG, Tkacova R, Perlikowski SM, Leung RS, Tisler A, Floras JS, 
 
Bradley TD. Refractory hypertension and sleep apnoea: effect of CPAP 
on blood pressure and baroreflex. Eur Respir J 2003; 21:241–247. 
32.Martínez-García MA, Gómez-Aldaraví R, Soler-Cataluña JJ, Martínez 
 
TG, Bernácer-Alpera B, Román-Sánchez P. Positive effect of CPAP 
treatment on the control of difficult-to-treat hypertension. Eur Respir 
J 2007; 29:951–957. 
33.Dernaika TA, Kinasewitz GT, Tawk MM. Effects of nocturnal continu- 
 
ous positive airway pressure therapy in patients with resistant hyper- 
tension and obstructive sleep apnea. J Clin Sleep Med 2009; 5:103–107. 
34.Dudenbostel T, Calhoun DA. Resistant hypertension, obstructive sleep 
 

35.Boden-Albala B, Roberts ET, Bazil C, Moon Y, Elkind MS, Rundek T, 
 
Paik MC, Sacco RL. Daytime sleepiness and risk of stroke and vascular 
disease: findings from the Northern Manhattan Study (NOMAS). Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012; 5:500–507. 

