
Lancet Respir Med 2014; 
2: 804–812 
Published Online 
August 27, 2014 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S2213-2600(14)70172-9 

*Professor Davies died in 
November, 2010 

‡Investigators are listed in the 
appendix 
Academic Unit of Sleep and 
Ventilation, National Heart and 
Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, and Respiratory Disease 
Biomedical Research Unit at the 
Royal Brompton Hospital and 
Hareﬁ eld NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK (A McMillan MBBS, 
Prof M J Morrell PhD); Medical 
Research Council Clinical Trials 
Unit (MRC CTU) at University 
College London, Aviation House, 
London, UK (D J Bratton MSc, 
Prof A J Nunn MSc); Centre for 
Health Economics, University of 
York, Heslington, York, UK 
(R Faria MSc, S Griﬃ n MSc); 
Oxford Respiratory Trials Unit 
(ORTU), University of Oxford, 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford 
Radcliﬀ e Hospital, Headington, 
Oxford, UK 
(M Laskawiec-Szkonter MA, 
Prof R J Davies MD, 
Prof J R Stradling MD); Oxford 
University and Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford 
Radcliﬀ e Hospital, Headington, 
Oxford, UK (Prof R J Davies, 
Prof J R Stradling); and 
Department of Sleep Medicine, 
Royal Inﬁ rmary of Edinburgh, 
Little France, Edinburgh, UK 
(R L Riha MD) 
Correspondence to: 
Prof Mary J Morrell, Academic 
Unit of Sleep and Ventilation, 
Royal Brompton Hospital, 
London SW3 6NP, UK 
m.morrell@imperial.ac.uk 
Continuouspositive airway pressure in older people with 
 
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (PREDICT): a 12-month, 
multicentre, randomised trial 
Alison McMillan, Daniel J Bratton, Rita Faria, Magda Laskawiec-Szkonter, Susan Griﬃ n, Robert J Davies*, Andrew J Nunn, John R Stradling, 
Renata L Riha†, Mary J Morrell†, on behalf of the PREDICT Investigators‡ 
Summary 
Background The therapeutic and economic beneﬁ ts of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for moderate to 
severe obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) syndrome have been established in middle-aged people; however, the beneﬁ ts 
in older people are unknown. This trial was designed to address this evidence gap. 
Methods This 12-month, multicentre, randomised trial enrolled patients across 14 National Health Service sleep 
centres in the UK. Consecutive patients aged 65 years or older with newly diagnosed OSA syndrome were eligible to 
join the trial. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) into parallel groups to receive either CPAP with best supportive 
care (BSC) or BSC alone for 12 months. Randomisation was done by the Medical Research Council Clinical Trials 
Unit with computer-generated randomisation. The main investigator at each centre was masked to the trial 
randomisation. Coprimary endpoints were Epworth sleepiness score (ESS) at 3 months and cost-eﬀ ectiveness over 
the 12-month trial period. Secondary outcomes were subjective sleepiness at 12 months, plus objective sleepiness, 
quality of life, mood, functionality, nocturia, mobility, accidents, cognitive function, and cardiovascular risk factors 
and events at 3 months and 12 months. The analysis was by intention to treat. This study is registered as an 
International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number ISRCTN90464927. 
Findings Between Feb 24, 2010, and May 30, 2012, 278 patients were randomly assigned to the trial, of whom 231 (83%) 
completed the trial. 140 patients were allocated to and received CPAP plus BSC and 138 were allocated to and received 
BSC only. CPAP reduced ESS by 2·1 points (95% CI –3·0 to –1·3; p<0·0001) at 3 months for 124 (89%) of 140 patients 
compared with 124 (90%) of 138 patients given BSC, and by 2·0 points (–2·8 to –1·2; p<0·0001) at 12 months for 
116 patients compared with 122 patients given BSC. The eﬀ ect was greater in patients with higher CPAP usage or 
higher baseline ESS. Quality-adjusted life-years were similar between the groups (treatment eﬀ ect 0·01 (95% CI 
–0·03 to 0·04; p=0·787) and health-care costs were marginally reduced with CPAP (–£35, –390 to 321; p=0·847). 
CPAP improved objective sleepiness (p=0·024), mobility (p=0·029), total cholesterol (p=0·048), and LDL cholesterol 
(p=0·042) at 3 months, but these were not sustained at 12 months. Measures of mood, functionality, nocturia, 
accidents, cognitive function, and cardiovascular events remained unchanged. Systolic blood pressure fell in the BSC 
group. 37 serious adverse events occurred in the CPAP group, and 22 in BSC group; all were independently classiﬁ ed 
as being unrelated to the trial and no signiﬁ cant harm was attributed to CPAP use. 
Interpretation In older people with OSA syndrome, CPAP reduces sleepiness and is marginally more cost eﬀ ective 
over 12 months than is BSC alone. On the basis of these results, we recommend that CPAP treatment should be 
oﬀ ered routinely to older patients with OSA syndrome. 
Funding National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment, NIHR Respiratory Biomedical 
Research Unit at the Royal Brompton and Hareﬁ eld NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial College London. 

Introduction 
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is one of the commonest 
respiratory disorders aﬀ ecting up to 20% of the general 
population.1 When OSA leads to sleep disruption 
resulting in excessive daytime sleepiness it is known as 
OSA syndrome. OSA syndrome is thought to aﬀ ect up 
to 4% of the middle-aged population (30–60 years);1,2 
however, with the current obesity epidemic, the 
proportion of aﬀ ected patients might require upward 
revision3 because obesity is the strongest risk factor for 
OSA. The long-term consequences of OSA syndrome 
include reduced social functioning and quality of life; 
neurocognitive impairment; increased risk of road 
traﬃ c accidents; cerebrovascular, cardiovascular, and 
metabolic morbidity; and higher mortality.4 Continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy is established 
as an eﬃ cacious and cost-eﬀ ective treatment for middle- 
aged patients with moderate to severe OSA syndrome.5 
In older people (older than 60 years), the prevalence of 
OSA syndrome is increased and the symptoms can be 



initiating the intervention, once baseline data collection 
was complete. 
Treatment allocation was concealed from the individual 
completing 
follow-up assessments. Patients were 
discouraged from discussing their treatment allocation 
with the masked research staﬀ and the importance of 
maintaining blinding was emphasised in the patient 
information sheets. The case report forms were designed 
to collect blinded and unblinded data separately. Masking 
of all trial staﬀ was not possible, although the assessments 
were done blind wherever possible. The trial manager 
and trial support staﬀ at the coordinating centres in 
Oxford and London did not have contact with the patients. 
The trial statisticians analysed the results using an 
analysis plan that had been ﬁ nalised before the database 
was locked and before the blinded data were analysed. 
Procedures 
All recruitment centres had expertise in the treatment of 
OSA syndrome and were provided with auto-titrating 
CPAP devices (S9 Autoset, ResMed [UK] Ltd, Oxfordshire, 
UK), humidiﬁ ers, and a range of interfaces. CPAP 
treatment (auto-titrating with default minimum and 
maximum pressure settings at 4–20 cm H2O) was 
initiated using the standard practice in each centre, by 
appropriately qualiﬁ ed staﬀ not 
trial 
outcomes. Humidiﬁ cation and choice of interface were 
made on an individual patient basis. At every follow-up 
visit (3 months and 12 months), the hours of use of CPAP 
were downloaded from the CPAP machine. 


BSC was comprised of advice on minimising daytime 
sleepiness through sleep hygiene, naps, caﬀ eine, and 
weight loss, as appropriate to each patient. A standard 
information booklet was given to all patients. Both 
groups had identical visit schedules, and were asked to 
continue with their usual drugs and medical care during 
the trial. Further details of the visit schedules are outlined 
in the appendix p 4. 
Structured assessments were done at baseline, 
3 months, and 12 months. Additionally, all patients 
received a telephone call at 1 week, 1 month, and 
6 months to record symptoms and side-eﬀ ects and to 
optimise CPAP adherence. Patients also completed 
monthly diaries recording symptoms, side-eﬀ ects, use of 
health care, change in medication, functionality, and 
quality-of-life questionnaires. All enrolled patients 
completed a domiciliary overnight respiratory polygraphy 
study (Embletta Gold, Embla, Amsterdam, Netherlands) 
before initiation of CPAP, the results of which were 
scored centrally. Domiciliary overnight pulse-oximetry 
(Konica-Minolta, Osaka, Japan) was done at 3 months 
and 12 months. 
Outcomes 
The coprimary outcomes were subjective sleepiness at 
3 months measured by the ESS8 (mean ESS of 
months 3 and 4) and cost-eﬀ ectiveness of provision of 

conﬂ ated with the functional impairments of ageing.6 
Thus, reversing the OSA syndrome component of any 
functional impairment could increase independence and 
reduce health-care costs in ageing populations. However, 
the magnitude of the treatment and economic beneﬁ ts of 
CPAP shown in middle-aged people cannot be extrapolated 
to older populations. The daytime sleepiness associated 
with OSA could be less debilitating in older people who 
have more ﬂ exible schedules allowing for extra sleep 
opportunities. Conversely, both 
the prevalence of 
morbidities leading to polypharmacy and the detrimental 
eﬀ ect on sleep of the illnesses themselves increase with 
age.7 Furthermore, diﬀ erent perceptions of quality of life, 
higher overall health-care use, and shorter life expectancy 
could modify the economic beneﬁ ts of CPAP in this 
population. This trial was designed to assess the eﬃ cacy 
of CPAP to reduce daytime sleepiness in older people with 
OSA syndrome and to determine its cost-eﬀ ectiveness. 
Methods 
Study design and participants 
The PREDICT trial was a multicentre, investigator- 
masked, randomised, parallel controlled trial done in 
14 National Health Service (NHS) sleep centres in the UK. 
Consecutive patients aged 65 years or older with newly 
diagnosed OSA syndrome were invited to join the trial. A 
diagnosis of OSA syndrome was based on the clinical 
practice in each centre; the criteria that needed to be 
fulﬁ lled for a diagnosis were 4% or greater oxygen 
desaturation index (ODI) with more than 7·5 events 
per h, and Epworth sleepiness score (ESS) of 9 or greater. 
ODI and ESS were assessed again at enrolment and the 
(standardised) enrolment measures were used in the 
primary analysis (as opposed to the measures made 
during clinical diagnosis). Exclusion criteria were 
previous exposure to CPAP, awake oxygen saturation 
(SpO2) less than 90% on air, ratio of forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s to forced vital capacity of less than 60%, 
being a professional driver, reporting sleepiness while 
driving, shift work, or any severe symptom of OSA 
syndrome for which the referring physician felt CPAP 
was mandatory. The number of patients assessed for 
eligibility was documented in screening logs. 
This trial was approved by a central research ethics 
committee (REC 09/H0708/33) and all patients gave 
written informed consent. Further details of the trial 
management and any changes to the protocol are 
provided in the appendix pp 4, 5. 
Randomisation and masking 
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) centrally by the 
Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Unit 
(MRC CTU) by computer-generated randomisation, 
with minimisation by ESS at enrolment (>13 vs ≤13), 
functionality (Townsend Disability Scale [TDS] >1 vs 
≤1), and recruitment centre. The allocation group was 
revealed by telephone to the (unmasked) investigator 


cognitive function (Mini Mental State Examination,16 
Trail Making Test B,17 Digit Symbol Substitution Test,18 
simple and four-choice reaction time19), cardiovascular 
risk factors (systolic and diastolic blood pressures, fasting 
blood proﬁ le), and cardiovascular events at 3 months and 
12 months. SF-36 was also used to derive short-form six 
dimensions (SF-6D). Treatment compliance was a 
tertiary outcome measured objectively by download of 
the CPAP smart card at every visit. 
Statistical analysis 
The study was designed to detect a minimally clinically 
important change of one point in the ESS, with 90% 
power at the two-sided 5% signiﬁ cance level. Assuming a 
10% loss to follow-up and a standard deviation for the 
change in ESS in each group of 2·4,5 270 patients were 
required. Data were held in a central database at MRC 
CTU. All analyses were prespeciﬁ ed in the analysis plans. 
Analysis was by intention-to-treat with adjustment for 
treatment allocation, minimisation factors, and the 
corresponding baseline variable of 
the outcome. 
Multivariable linear regression models were used for 
continuous outcomes and logistic regression used for 
binary outcomes. Data obtained outside the prespeciﬁ ed 
time period of 2–5 months (primary ESS outcome) and 
patients with missing data were excluded from the 
relevant analysis. Multiple imputation with chained 
equations was used to assess the eﬀ ect of missing data 
on the primary outcomes,20 initially under the missing at 
random assumption. This was followed with several 
sensitivity analyses in which missing outcomes were 
assumed to be better or worse on average than those 
noted in the trial. Exploratory analyses were done to 
investigate the eﬀ ect of age, ODI, body-mass index, and 
baseline ESS on the primary treatment eﬀ ect with 
fractional polynomials.21 The eﬀ ect of use of CPAP on the 
primary ESS outcome was also explored. Additionally, a 
sensitivity analysis of the primary eﬃ cacy outcome was 
done excluding the patients who switched from BSC to 
CPAP before 3 months. 
The cost-eﬀ ectiveness of CPAP was analysed from the 
perspective of the UK NHS. Health outcomes were 
expressed as QALYs with EQ-5D (primary) and SF-6D 
(secondary). Costs were evaluated in UK pounds sterling 
(2012 price base) and included the costs associated with 
general practitioner and nurse visits, phone calls to the 
general practitioner and NHS Direct, ambulance use, 
visits to accident and emergency, outpatient appoint- 
ments, hospital overnight admissions, emergency 
admissions, and total number of nights in hospital, as 
recorded in the monthly diaries, plus the cost of CPAP 
treatment. The unit costs applied to every item to 
calculate the total cost per patient are given 
in 
appendix p 11. The base-case analysis was done in the 
intention-to-treat groups after multiple imputation with 
chained equations of missing data and adjustment for 
imbalances in baseline EQ-5D (or SF-6D) and in the 
CPAP over the 12 months measured by quality-adjusted 
life-years (QALYs) calculated with the European Quality 
of Life-5 Dimensions (EQ-5D) and use of health-care 
resources, which was collected monthly from patient 
diaries.9 
Secondary outcomes were subjective sleepiness at 
12 months (mean ESS of months 10, 11, and 12), objective 
sleepiness (Oxford Sleep Resistance test 
[OSLER]; 
Stowood Scientiﬁ c Instruments, Oxford, UK),10 quality of 
life (Short-Form 36 [SF-36]),11 Sleep Apnea Quality of Life 
Index (SAQLI),12 mood (Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale),13 functionality (TDS),14 nocturia, mobility (Timed 
Up and Go test),15 accidents (domestic and driving), 
Figure 1: Trial proﬁ le 
1614 patients were assessed for eligibility, of these 541 (34%) were eligible. The number of patients included in the 
ESS and health economic analysis included data obtained from monthly diaries (when available) for those who did 
not attend the 3 month and/or 12 month visits, but remained in the trial. Information about recruitment is also 
given in the appendix p 3. BSC=best supportive care. CPAP=continuous positive airway pressure. ESS=Epworth 
sleepiness score. *The 1073 ineligible patients were grouped into the following categories: 442 (41%) did not 
meet inclusion oxygen desaturation index or ESS criteria; 79 (7%) had previous exposure to CPAP; 171 (16%) had 
awake oxygen saturations less than 90% on air or forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity ratio less 
than 60%; 216 (20%) for being a professional driver, reporting sleepiness whilst driving, shift work, or any severe 
symptom of OSA syndrome for which the referring physician felt CPAP was mandatory; and 165 (15%) for no 
information or incomplete data. 



 124 attended 
 2 did not attend (but remained in the trial) 
 124 included in the ESS analysis 
 121 attended 
 4 did not attend (but remained in the trial) 
 124 included in the ESS analysis 


 
 
 
 
 

12 were lost to follow-up 
10 withdrew consent 
 
1 was unable to be contacted 
1 withdrew because of other medical condition 

 
 
6 were lost to follow-up 
 2 withdrew consent 
 3 were unable to be contacted 
 1 died 
6 discontinued BSC and started CPAP 
 2 requested CPAP 
 4 CPAP prescribed by physician 
117 attended 
 3 did not attend 
118 included in the health economic analysis 

15 were lost to follow-up 
11 withdrew consent 
2 were unable to be contacted 
2 withdrew because of other medical condition 
10 were lost to follow-up 
 4 withdrew consent 
5 were unable to be contacted 
1 died 
114 attended 
 1 did not attend 
113 included in the health economic analysis 

1073 were ineligible* 
 541 were eligible 
 263 declined to participate 


health-care costs in the month before enrolment.22 The 
probability of CPAP being cost eﬀ ective under the 
conventional UK NHS thresholds was calculated with 
semi-parametric bootstrapping.23 The sensitivity analysis 
tested ﬁ ve scenarios: (1) the assumption that the CPAP 
device was replaced every 3 years, the masks replaced 
every 3 months, and the ﬁ lters replaced monthly; (2) the 
assumption that the CPAP device was used for 1 year and 
discarded (no annuitisation of costs); (3) complete case 
analysis in which patients with missing data were 
removed from the analysis; (4) missing data imputed 
with mean interpolation between follow-up points; and 
(5) the assumption that individuals with missing data 
had 25% greater costs or had 25% lower health-related 
quality of life than what otherwise would be predicted 
from the multiple imputation model. All analyses were 
done with Stata version 12.0 (StataCorp LP, College 
Station, TX, USA). 


Role of the funding source 
The National Institute of Health Research Health 
Technology Assessment Programme funded this trial 
(08/56/02) and the views and opinions expressed 
therein are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reﬂ ect those of the Health Technology Assessment 
Programme, National Institute of Health Research, 
National Health Service, or the Department of Health. 
Neither the funder nor the company (RedMed UK) had 
any role in the trial design, data collection, data analysis, 
data interpretation, or writing of the report. The raw 
data were accessible by DJB, AJN, and the Independent 
Data Monitoring Committee only during the trial, and 
on completion to AM, RF, SG, JRS, RLR, and MJM. The 
corresponding author had full access to all of the data 
on completion of the trial and the ﬁ nal responsibility to 
submit for publication. 
Results 
Between Feb 24, 2010, and May 30, 2012, 278 patients were 
randomised. 138 patients were allocated to and received 
BSC and 140 were allocated to and received CPAP plus 
BSC. Follow-up visits were done for 245 (88%) of 
278 patients at 3 months and 231 (83%) of 278 patients at 
12 months (ﬁ gure 1). The main reason for loss to follow- 
up was withdrawal of consent; 21 (8%) patients at 
3 months and 27 (10%) patients at 12 months. The table 
and appendix (pp 12, 13) show the baseline characteristics 
and overnight domiciliary 
respiratory polygraphy 
measurements of the enrolled patients. The mean age 
across both treatment groups was 71·1 (SD 4·6) years, 
ODI 28·7 (19·1) events per h, and ESS 11·6 (3·7). The 
baseline characteristics were broadly similar between the 
two groups, although by chance the BSC group seemed to 
have a slightly higher incidence of comorbidities than did 
the CPAP group. 
At 3 months, ESS was signiﬁ cantly reduced in patients 
receiving CPAP treatment (–3·8, SD 0·4) compared with 
those given BSC (–1·6, 0·3) with a treatment eﬀ ect of 
–2·1 (ﬁ gure 2). Adjustment for age, sex, body-mass 
index, and baseline ODI made no diﬀ erence to the result, 
neither did the sensitivity analysis, which excluded two 
patients who swapped from BSC to CPAP before the 
3-month visit. Imputation analyses showed the primary 
result was robust to missing data (appendix p 6). The 
treatment eﬀ ect was signiﬁ cantly greater in patients with 
higher baseline ESS (appendix p 7) or higher CPAP use 
(appendix p 14). 
The average QALYs obtained with the EQ-5D were 
0·68 (95% CI 0·64 to 0·72) for CPAP (n=113) and 
0·67 (0·63 to 0·71) for BSC (n=118) with the adjusted 
increase in QALYs for CPAP being non-signiﬁ cant at 
0·01 (–0·03 to 0·04; p=0·787). The EQ-5D scores did not 
diﬀ er signiﬁ cantly between groups at each month 


























Time SpO2 <90% (min) 
Epworth sleepiness score 






























Data are mean (SD), median (25th–75th percentiles), or number of patients (%). BSC=best supportive care. 
CPAP=continuous positive airway pressure. Data were unavailable for body-mass index for two patients (one in BSC 
group, one in group CPAP), oxygen desaturation index for two patients (one in BSC group, one in CPAP group), time 
SpO2 for 48 patients (23 in BSC group, 25 in CPAP group), Oxford Sleep Resistance test for two patients in CPAP group, 
European Quality of Life-5 dimensions for one patient in BSC group, Mini Mental state Examination for one patient in 
BSC group, and heart failure for one patient in BSC group. The oxygen desaturation index and Epworth sleepiness 
score are those recorded at the baseline visit; which in some cases diﬀ ered from the values recorded at diagnosis (note 
the values recorded during the baseline visit were used in the analysis). 
























The improvement in the ESS on CPAP compared with 
BSC was maintained at 12 months, with a treatment 
eﬀ ect of –2·0 (ﬁ gure 2; appendix p 14). 
When cost-eﬀ ectiveness was assessed with SF-6D, 
CPAP improved QALYs by 0·018 (95% CI 0·003 to 0·034) 
and the probability of CPAP being cost-eﬀ ective was 
0·96 (appendix p 16). 
Objective sleepiness was signiﬁ cantly reduced at 
3 months (p=0·024), but less so at 12 months (p=0·058; 
appendix pp 9, 18). This was also the case with mobility 
(p=0·029 at 3 months, p=0·80 at 12 months; appendix p 19). 
Change in ESS and change in OSLER time were 
signiﬁ cantly correlated at 3 months (–0·22; p=0·0008) and 
12 months (–0·17; p=0·010). 
The energy/vitality domain of the SF-36 improved at 
3 months (p=0·001) and 12 months (p=0·004; ﬁ gure 3); 
this was also the case for the disease-speciﬁ c quality of 
life (appendix p 20). Measures of mood, functionality, 
nocturia, accidents, and cognitive function were 
unchanged (appendix pp 19, 21). 
At 3 months, CPAP reduced total cholesterol (treatment 
eﬀ ect –0·2 mmol/L, 95% CI –0·3 to 0·0; p=0·048) and 
LDL cholesterol (–0·15 mmol/L, –0·29 to –0·01; p=0·042), 
but the eﬀ ect was not sustained at 12 months (appendix p 
22). Systolic blood pressure was improved (treatment 
eﬀ ect 3·7 mm Hg, 95% CI 0·2 to 7·3; p=0·040) at 
12 months, because of a decrease in systolic blood pressure 
in the BSC group (appendix p 22). The incidence of new 
cardiovascular events did not diﬀ er between groups at 
3 months (p=0·48) or 12 months (p=0·72). Atrial ﬁ brillation 
was the predominant new pathology (appendix p 23). 
Of 140 patients randomly assigned to CPAP, 120 (86%) 
at 3 months and 99 (71%) at 12 months self-reported they 
were still using CPAP. Usage data for CPAP were obtained 
for 117 patients at 3 months with a median usage of 1 h 
52 min (IQR 19 min to 5 h 12 min) per night and for 
102 patients at 12 months with a median usage of 2 h 
22 min (10 min to 5 h 9 min) per night. Assuming zero 
usage in those patients who stopped treatment during 
follow-up or had missing data gave a more conservative 
estimate of median usage of CPAP of 1 h 33 min (IQR 
13 min to 5 h) per night at 3 months and 1 h 26 min (4 min 
to 4 h 45 min) per night at 12 months. Additional data for 
CPAP usage are shown in appendix p 24. 
37 serious adverse events were recorded during the 
trial; 15 (in 12 patients, including one death) in the CPAP 
group and 22 (in 13 patients, including one death) in the 
BSC group; all adverse events were independently 
classiﬁ ed as being unrelated to the trial. CPAP was 
associated with common self-reported side-eﬀ ects 
(appendix p 25). No clinically important harm from use 
of CPAP was noted. 
Discussion 
This 12-month randomised, controlled trial has un- 
that CPAP reduced subjective 
equivocally shown 
sleepiness in older people with OSA syndrome at 

Figure 2: Treatment eﬀ ect of CPAP compared with BSC on subjective 
sleepiness measured by mean ESS 
Adjusted treatment eﬀ ects and 95% CI at months 3 and 4 (coprimary endpoint) 
and mean of months 10, 11, and 12 (secondary endpoint). Lower scores indicate 
an improvement; each score is out of a total of 24 points. BSC=best supportive 
care. CPAP=continuous positive airway pressure. EES=Epworth sleepiness score. 
(appendix p 8) and resource use per costs were similar 
across groups (appendix p 15). 
The annual cost of CPAP treatment per patient was 
estimated at £201. This amount included the annual 
equivalent costs of the CPAP device at £70 and the 
humidiﬁ er at £27 (the humidiﬁ er was only given to 
82 [59%] of the 140 patients), totalling £86 on average per 
patient, plus the cost of masks at £114 (£104, assuming 
that 10% of patients received two masks each) and the cost 
of two ﬁ lters per patient per year at £1·13 (average cost of 
ﬁ 
 lters was £0·58). Overall the average cost per patient 
allocated to CPAP was £1363 (95% CI 1121–1606) and for 
BSC was £1389 (1116–1662). After adjustment for costs 
incurred to the month previous to enrolment, the CPAP 
group accrued on average –£35 (95% CI –390 to 321) 
health-care costs. The results were not sensitive to 
diﬀ erent assumptions regarding missing data. However, 
when alternative assumptions were made for 
the 
frequency of replacing equipment, the cost per QALY 
the 
increased 
cost-eﬀ ectiveness of CPAP was more robust in patients 
with higher baseline ESS (appendix p 17). The probability 
that the CPAP was cost eﬀ ective at the thresholds 
conventionally used in the NHS (£20 000 per QALY 
gained) was 0·61. 





BSC 
CPAP 
Treatment eﬀect=–2·1 
95% CI (−3·0 to −1·3), p<0·0001 
Treatment eﬀect=−2·0 
95% CI (−2·8 to −1·2), p<0·0001 











Figure 3: 36-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) treatment eﬀ ects at 3 months and 12 months 
Adjusted treatment eﬀ ects and 95% CI of continuous positive airway pressure versus best supportive care and the 
eight summary components of the SF-36 at 3 months and 12 months. 
Further research is needed to clarify the cardiovascular 
eﬀ ect of CPAP treatment in older people with OSA 
syndrome. Other secondary outcomes, including nocturia 
and home and driving accidents (appendix p 19), also did 
not improve with CPAP, which could be because of their 
multifactorial causes. 
The mean usage of CPAP was low at 3 months and 
12 months and this might have diluted the signiﬁ cant 
treatment eﬀ ect we noted between the groups. We adopted 
a standard NHS clinical (real-world) approach to initiate 
and manage CPAP treatment across the 14 sleep centres in 
the UK that participated in the trial. The centres varied in 
size and experience; however, any eﬀ ect of the diﬀ erences 
between centres was accounted for by adjustment for 
centre in a random eﬀ ects model in every analysis. 

in 
PREDICT could have resulted in the lower CPAP usage 
compared with that in a more intensive trial approach26 or 
shorter duration studies.27 However, such adoption 
ensured that the outcomes of PREDICT reﬂ ect clinical 
practice, which in turn strengthens the validity and 
applicability of our results. Furthermore, the mean usage 
of CPAP was similar to a 6-month, randomised, controlled 
trial of CPAP in minimally symptomatic patients with 
OSA,30 and we noted a dose–response relation between the 
3 months, despite low overall CPAP usage. The beneﬁ cial 
eﬀ ects were maintained at 12 months, and the magnitude 
of the improvement is similar to that seen in middle-aged 
patients with similar levels of disease severity treated with 
CPAP.5 The reduction in subjective sleepiness was 
corroborated by a signiﬁ cant improvement in objective 
sleepiness, measured by the OSLER test at 3 months. 
CPAP also produced signiﬁ cantly better quality-of-life 
outcomes, as measured with the SAQLI and SF-36. The 
relative increase in QALYs was not signiﬁ cant in the 
primary cost-eﬀ ectiveness analysis; this could have been 
because the EQ-5D is a less sensitive measure of health 
status attributable to sleepiness because it contains no 
relevant dimension for this symptom. Overall, the 
marginal economic beneﬁ t of CPAP was linked to a 
reduction in health-care use, oﬀ setting the cost of the 
CPAP equipment; this was more robust if using SF-6D to 
measure health beneﬁ ts and in patients with higher ESS. 
Secondary outcomes related to cognitive function did 
not show any diﬀ erence between the two groups, despite 
improvements 
in the CPAP group. 
Additionally, mood, which might also aﬀ ect cognitive 
function, was not signiﬁ cantly diﬀ erent between the 
two groups. Although, patients in this trial had a low 
prevalence of depression compared with those in a recent 
study,24 and the baseline cognitive scores were often 
within the age-adjusted normative range, which could 
have resulted in a ceiling eﬀ ect. The low overall use of 
CPAP in our trial might also have been a factor, or older 
people prepared to participate in a year-long trial might 
be constitutionally diﬀ erent to those whose cognitive 
function leads to clinically signiﬁ cant compromise. 
Cognitive deﬁ cits have been reported in middle-aged 
patients with moderate to severe OSA syndrome;25 
however, the eﬀ ect of OSA syndrome on cognitive deﬁ cits 
in mildly symptomatic patients is questionable.26 

In terms of the cardiovascular outcomes, signiﬁ cant 
improvement was noted for total cholesterol at 3 months 
in the CPAP group, but this was not sustained at 
12 months. The fall in cholesterol was similar to ﬁ ndings 
in a group of patients with more severe OSA syndrome 
after a 1-month CPAP trial.27 CPAP produced no improve- 
ment in blood pressure. At ﬁ rst sight, this might be 
surprising because CPAP has been shown in other 
randomised controlled trials to reduce blood pressure by 
roughly 2–10 mm Hg in patients with OSA syndrome.28,29 
However, our ﬁ ndings are consistent with a recent meta- 
analysis in patients with minimally symptomatic OSA, 
which showed that CPAP does not have a beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect 
on blood pressure.29 In the BSC group, systolic blood 
pressure fell, a ﬁ nding also reported in another recent 
study of minimally symptomatic patients with OSA.30 We 
speculate that this could be because the control group 
followed the BSC advice more closely than did the CPAP 
group. This suggestion cannot be veriﬁ ed, although the 
lack of weight loss in both groups could imply similar 
adherence with the BSC information (appendix p 26). 











3 months 
12 months 






treatment eﬀ ect and CPAP usage, consistent with previous 
trials 
to 
auto-titrating and ﬁ xed CPAP has not been shown to diﬀ er, 
although other factors, such as reduced social support, 
could have contributed to lower CPAP adherence, because 
50% of the patients in our trial reported sleeping alone. 
The ESS was selected as the primary outcome measure 
for sleepiness in PREDICT because it is the most widely 
used subjective scale of sleepiness severity in clinical and 
research practice; it is also the measure from which the 
UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
guidelines are drawn.5 The eﬀ ect of CPAP on ESS in 
middle-aged patients with mild OSA has been reported 
as –1·07 (SD 2·4).5 We therefore powered PREDICT for a 
one point change in ESS; however, we did not know if 
this would translate to functionality changes in older 
patients. The improvements in ESS and quality of life at 
3 months and 12 months might go some way to support 
the notion that changes of this magnitude in ESS are 
clinically meaningful in this age group. However, some 
of the secondary endpoints might have lacked power to 
detect a clinically meaningful eﬀ ect, and we also noted 
that many of the measures started at normal levels (eg, 
depression), 
there was minimum room for 
improvement. 

A possible limitation of the PREDICT trial was that 
sham CPAP was not used as a comparator, although any 
placebo eﬀ ect there might have been in the CPAP group 
could reasonably be expected to have disappeared by 
12 months. Additionally, the objective OSLER test and the 
dose–response relation between the treatment eﬀ ect and 
CPAP usage support a real eﬀ ect. Sham devices have 
been validated as a placebo for CPAP, but there is no 
consensus on the ideal comparator, and trials with BSC 
produce results essentially identical to those from trials 
with subtherapeutic or sham CPAP.5 BSC was chosen as 
the trial comparator for PREDICT because it was more 
appropriate for a pragmatic multicentre design with a 
12-month follow-up. 
The strength of the PREDICT trial was that patients 
presenting to our sleep clinics, requiring investigation 
and treatment for OSA syndrome were drawn from 
geographically diverse areas (appendix p 27) and were 
treated in a real-world clinical setting. Additionally, to our 
knowledge, PREDICT is one of the ﬁ rst trials speciﬁ cally 
aimed at older people (≥65 years). The mean age of 
70 years, with no participants younger than 65 years, 
diﬀ ers signiﬁ cantly from the mean age of 58 years (SD 7) 
in another recent UK trial,30 the MOSAIC study (appendix 
p 10). The PREDICT trial has also been one of the 
longest, randomised, trials of CPAP treatment for OSA 
syndrome, directly measuring both therapeutic and 
economic beneﬁ ts. 
The PREDICT trial was designed to be done in sleep 
clinics in the UK where polysomnography is not 
routinely done for the diagnosis of OSA syndrome. Use 
of polysomnography would have been ﬁ nancially and 
practically prohibitive. Respiratory polygraphy could 
have reduced the ODI if the older patients slept poorly, 
because the ODI is calculated as apnoeas and hypopnoeas 
divided by time asleep, and using the polyrgraphy meant 
that the time asleep could only be estimated from total 
time in bed (which might be an overestimation of the 



Systematic review 
Several systematic reviews have assessed the eﬃ cacy of 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) treatment for 
patients with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) syndrome. One 
of the most recent and comprehensive concluded that CPAP 
was an eﬀ ective and cost-eﬃ cient treatment for moderate to 
severe OSA syndrome in well deﬁ ned middle-aged 
populations.5 However, the study emphasised evidence gaps 
with a need for trials in other patient groups, one such group 
being older people. The authors concluded that ‘‘clinical trials 
to deﬁ ne treatment eﬀ ects at the extremes of age particularly 
in the elderly where cardiovascular co-morbidity complicates 
assessment would be beneﬁ cial’’. Therefore, despite the high 
prevalence of obstructive sleep apnoea in older people there 
is a paucity of evidence on the relative clinical beneﬁ ts or risks 
of CPAP treatment in older people. We then updated the 
scientiﬁ c literature search done by McDaid and colleagues5 
from Jan 1, 2006, to March 28, 2012, by searching Embase 
from Jan 1, 1996, to March 19, 2012, Cochrane Library from 
Jan 1, 2006, to March 28, 2012, Ovid (Medline) from Jan 1, 
1946, to March 19, 2012, and CINAHL from Jan 1, 1981, to 
March 19, 2012, without language restrictions, for full articles 
reporting randomised controlled trials assessing the eﬃ cacy of 
CPAP treatment in OSA syndrome, with participants aged on 
average 60 years or older with the capacity to give informed 
consent, and identiﬁ ed only three studies.31–33 None of these 
studies assessed subjective sleepiness as a primary endpoint 
or obtained generic measures of health utility, and two of the 
studies recruited only patients with chronic heart failure. 
Interpretation 
Before the PREDICT trial, very little information was available 
for clinicians and health-care professionals regarding the best 
way to treat OSA syndrome in older people, and even less 
information was available about how CPAP treatment aﬀ ected 
quality of life and cost-eﬀ ectiveness in this population. The 
results of the PREDICT trial show that CPAP reduces symptoms 
of excessive daytime sleepiness in older patients with OSA 
syndrome, as it does in middle-aged populations, and that 
these clinical beneﬁ ts are associated with some reduction in 
health-care use. Therefore, CPAP is more likely to be a cost- 
eﬀ ective option for older patients with OSA syndrome at the 
cost-eﬀ ectiveness thresholds used by the UK National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (probability 0·61 with EQ-5D 
and 0·96 with SF-6D at the threshold of £20 000 per quality- 
adjusted life-year gained). On the basis of these ﬁ ndings, we 
recommend that CPAP treatment should be oﬀ ered routinely 
to older patients with OSA syndrome. 

PREDICT, a member of the Trial Management Committee, Trial Steering 
Committee, and Data Monitoring Committee. RF was a health economist 
for PREDICT with speciﬁ c responsibility for the health economic 
analysis and write-up of the report. ML-S was trial manager for PREDICT 
with speciﬁ c responsibility for all aspects of data collection and recording, 
plus governance of the trial. SG was health economist for PREDICT with 
speciﬁ c responsibility for the health economic analysis and write-up of 
the report. RJD was a senior investigator for PREDICT, and a member of 
the Trial Steering Committee who was involved in all aspects of the study 
design and development of case report forms; however, he died during 
the early part of the study. AJN was a statistician for PREDICT, a member 
of the Trial Management Committee, Trial Steering Committee, and Data 
Monitoring Committee with speciﬁ c responsibility for the statistical 
analysis of the trial. JRS was a senior investigator for PREDICT with 
speciﬁ c responsibility for clinical oversight of the trial. RLR and MJM 
were coprincipal investigators for PREDICT; MJM and RLR share last 
authorship. MJM was corresponding author with the ﬁ nal responsibility 
to submit for publication. 
Declaration of interests 
JRS reports grants from NIHR and ResMed during the conduct of the 
study, plus personal fees from ResMed outside the duration of the 
submitted work. The other authors declare no competing interests. 
Acknowledgments 
The National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology 
Assessment (HTA) programme funded this project (08/56/02) and the 
views and opinions expressed therein are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily reﬂ ect those of the HTA Programme, NIHR, the 
National Health Service (NHS), or the Department of Health. This 
project was supported by the NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research 
Unit at the Royal Brompton and Hareﬁ eld NHS Foundation Trust and 
Imperial College London. We thank all the patients and carers who 
gave their time to be part of this trial, ResMed for their donation of the 
CPAP machines and loan of the sleep diagnostic equipment, and the 
members of the PREDICT Independent Data Monitoring Committee 
and the Trial Steering Committee and referring clinicians in every area 
for supporting the PREDICT trial (appendix p 3). 
References 
1
 
Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Skatrud J, Weber S, Badr S. 
The occurrence of sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged 
adults. N Engl J Med 1993; 328: 1230–35. 
Jennum P, Riha RL. Epidemiology of sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome and sleep-disordered breathing. Eur Respir J 2009; 
33: 907–14. 
Peppard PE, Young T, Barnet JH, Palta M, Hagen EW, Hla KM. 
Increased prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in adults. 
Am J Epidemiol 2013; 177: 1006–14. 
Jordan AS, McSharry DG, Malhotra A. Adult obstructive sleep 
apnoea. Lancet 2014; 383: 736–47. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5McDaid C, Griﬃ n S, Weatherly H, et al. Continuous positive 
 
airway pressure devices for the treatment of obstructive sleep 
apnoea-hypopnoea syndrome: a systematic review and economic 
analysis. Health Technol Assess 2009; 13: 1–119, 143–274. 
6 Ancoli-Israel S. Sleep apnea in older adults—is it real and should 
 
age be the determining factor in the treatment decision matrix? 
Sleep Med Rev 2007; 11: 83–85. 
7Willcox SM, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S. Inappropriate drug 
 
prescribing for the community-dwelling elderly. JAMA 1994; 
272: 292–96. 
Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: 
the Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep 1991; 14: 540–45. 
Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy 1996; 
37: 53–72. 
 
 
 
 
10Bennett LS, Stradling JR, Davies RJ. A behavioural test to assess 
 
daytime sleepiness in obstructive sleep apnoea. J Sleep Res 1997; 
6: 142–45. 
11 Brazier J, Roberts J, Deverill M. The estimation of a 
 
preference-based measure of health from the SF-36. J Health Econ 
2002; 21: 271–92. 
12Flemons WW, Reimer MA. Development of a disease-speciﬁ c 
 
health-related quality of life questionnaire for sleep apnea. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 158: 494–503. 
total time asleep). However, the randomised, controlled 
trial design meant that any underestimation of the 
change in ODI would be evenly distributed across 
groups. Likewise, the distribution of comorbidities likely 
to produce central events, such as heart failure, was 
similar across groups; notably, no central or mixed 
events were scored, and patients with other sleep 
disorders were excluded. For these reasons we do not 
think the use of polygraphy restricted the ﬁ ndings of 
PREDICT. 
To our knowledge, PREDICT is the ﬁ rst trial to measure 
both SF-36 and EQ-5D over a 12-month period, enabling 
a full health economic evaluation of the treatment of 
OSA syndrome in older people (panel). As already noted, 
the SF-6D has a dimension on vitality, which could 
render it more sensitive to changes in sleepiness and 
sleep quality than EQ-5D. Other studies have compared 
SF-36 with EQ-5D and also noted that SF-36 is more 
sensitive to the eﬀ ect of CPAP on health-related quality 
of life.34,35 Diﬀ erences in data collection processes could 
also have aﬀ ected the health-related quality of life 
reported by our patients. The EQ-5D was collected every 
month through the sleep diary, which was ﬁ lled in by the 
patient at home. The SF-36, from which SF-6D was 
derived, was collected in a clinic visit at baseline, 
3 months, and 12 months. 
With respect to generalisability, the PREDICT trial did 
not focus on asymptomatic older people with OSA and 
although it could be argued that the patients studied had a 
fairly low mean ESS at baseline, they were suﬃ ciently 
symptomatic to seek treatment. At the other end of the 
disease spectrum, exclusion of highly symptomatic patients 
with OSA syndrome (216 [20%] of 1073 patients; appendix 
pp 3, 4) in whom CPAP was considered mandatory, is likely 
to have diminished the treatment eﬀ ect. The exploratory 
analyses showed that the treatment eﬀ ect was larger in 
patients with a higher baseline ESS or greater use of CPAP. 
The marginal improvement in cost-eﬀ ectiveness was also 
greater in the more symptomatic patients. 
In summary, the PREDICT trial addresses the inequality 
of research in older people with OSA syndrome, and 
incorporates data for comorbidity that is often lacking in 
clinical guidelines.36 The trial shows that in older patients 
with OSA syndrome, CPAP treatment reduces symptoms 
of excessive daytime sleepiness, as it does in middle-aged 
populations. On the basis of these ﬁ ndings, we recommend 
that CPAP treatment should be oﬀ ered routinely to older 
patients with OSA syndrome, especially those with higher 
ESS. Future research should focus on how best to optimise 
CPAP delivery in this age group. 
Contributors 
All authors (except RJD) were members of the Trial Management 
Committee and Trial Steering Committee with responsibility for the 
progress and conduct of the trial. All authors were involved in the study 
design and development of case report forms, analysis of data, and all 
aspects of writing the report. AM was Clinical Research Fellow for 
PREDICT with speciﬁ c responsibility for all data collection and oversight 
of the trial, and ﬁ rst author of the report. DJB was a statistician for 



13 Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. 
 
27 Robinson GV, Pepperell JC, Segal HC, Davies RJ, Stradling JR. 
 

14McGee MA, Johnson AL, Kay DW. The description of activities of daily 
 
living in ﬁ ve centres in England and Wales. Medical Research Council 
Cognitive Function and Ageing Study. Age Ageing 1998; 27: 605–13. 
15Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The timed “Up & Go”: a test of basic 
 
functional mobility for frail elderly persons. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991; 
39: 142–48. 
16 Folstein MF, Robins LN, Helzer JE. The Mini-Mental State 
 

17 Reitan R. Trail Making Test. Tucson, AZ: Reitan Neuropsychology 
 

18 Wechsler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligance Scale, 3rd edn (WAIS-III). 
 

19 Deary IJ, Liewald D, Nissan J. A free, easy-to-use, computer-based 
 
simple and four-choice reaction time programme: the 
Deary-Liewald reaction time task. Behav Res Methods 2011; 
43: 258–68. 
20 White IR, Royston P, Wood AM. Multiple imputation using chained 
 
equations: issues and guidance for practice. Stat Med 2011; 
30: 377–99. 
21 Royston P, Sauerbrei W. A new approach to modelling interactions 
 
between treatment and continuous covariates in clinical trials by 
using fractional polynomials. Stat Med 2004; 23: 2509–25. 
22Manca A, Hawkins N, Sculpher MJ. Estimating mean QALYs in 
 
trial-based cost-eﬀ ectiveness analysis: the importance of controlling 
for baseline utility. Health Econ 2005; 14: 487–96. 
23 Fenwick E, Claxton K, Sculpher M. Representing uncertainty: the 
 
role of cost-eﬀ ectiveness acceptability curves. Health Econ 2001; 
10: 779–87. 
24Douglas N, Young A, Roebuck T, et al. Prevalence of depression in 
 
patients referred with snoring and obstructive sleep apnoea. 
Intern Med J 2013; 43: 630–34. 
25 Twigg GL, Papaioannou I, Jackson M, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea 
 
syndrome is associated with deﬁ cits in verbal but not visual 
memory. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182: 98–103. 
26Kushida CA, Nichols DA, Holmes TH, et al. Eﬀ ects of continuous 
 
positive airway pressure on neurocognitive function in obstructive 
sleep apnea patients: the Apnea Positive Pressure Long-term 
Eﬃ cacy Study (APPLES). Sleep 2012; 35: 1593–602. 
Circulating cardiovascular risk factors in obstructive sleep apnoea: 
data from randomised controlled trials. Thorax 2004; 59: 777–82. 
28 Pepperell JC, Ramdassingh-Dow S, Crosthwaite N, et al. 
 
Ambulatory blood pressure after therapeutic and subtherapeutic 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure for obstructive sleep 
apnoea: a randomised parallel trial. Lancet 2002; 359: 204–10. 
29Bratton DJ, Stradling JR, Barbé F, Kohler M. Eﬀ ect of CPAP on 
 
blood pressure in patients with minimally symptomatic obstructive 
sleep apnoea: a meta-analysis using individual patient data from 
four randomised controlled trials. Thorax 2014; published online 
June 19. DOI:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-204993. 
30Craig SE, Kohler M, Nicoll D, et al. Continuous positive airway 
 
pressure improves sleepiness but not calculated vascular risk in 
patients with minimally symptomatic obstructive sleep apnoea: the 
MOSAIC randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2012; 67: 1090–96. 
31 Egea CJ, Aizpuru F, Pinto JA, et al. Cardiac function after CPAP 
therapy in patients with chronic heart failure and sleep apnea: a 
multicenter study. Sleep Med 2008; 9: 660–66. 
32 Ruttanaumpawan P, Gilman MP, Usui K, Floras JS, Bradley TD. 
Sustained eﬀ ect of continuous positive airway pressure on 
baroreﬂ ex sensitivity in congestive heart failure patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. J Hypertens 2008; 26: 1163–68. 


 
 
obstructive apnoea and stroke outcome: a randomised controlled 
trial. Eur Respir J 2011; 37: 1128–36. 
Jenkinson C, Stradling J, Petersen S. Comparison of three measures 
of quality of life outcome in the evaluation of continuous positive 
airways pressure therapy for sleep apnoea. J Sleep Res 1997; 
6: 199–204. 
Jenkinson C, Stradling J, Petersen S. How should we evaluate 
health status? A comparison of three methods in patients 
presenting with obstructive sleep apnoea. Qual Life Res 1998; 
7: 95–100. 
36Hughes LD, McMurdo ME, Guthrie B. Guidelines for people not 
 
for diseases: the challenges of applying UK clinical guidelines to 
people with multimorbidity. Age Ageing 2013; 42: 62–69. 


 
