
Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2018, 1515–1518 
doi:10.1093/ntr/ntx223 


Effect of Real-Time Monitoring and Notification 
of Smoking Episodes on Smoking Reduction: 
A Pilot Study of a Novel Smoking Cessation App 


Corresponding Author: Reuven Dar, PhD, School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel. 
Telephone: 972-3-6408624; Fax: 972-3-6409547; E-mail: ruvdar@post.tau.ac.il 

Introduction: Smartphone applications (apps) for smoking cessation are becoming increasingly 
available, but their efficacy remains to be demonstrated. We conducted a pilot study of SmokeBeat, 
a novel app designed for use with smartwatches and wristbands. SmokeBeat is powered by a data 
analytics software platform that processes information from the sensors embedded in wearables. 
It relies on an original algorithm to identify in real time the hand-to-mouth gestures that character- 
ize smoking a cigarette. We examined whether merely monitoring and notifying smokers on smok- 
ing episodes in real time via the SmokeBeat app would lead to reduction in smoking. 
Methods: Forty smokers (9 women and 31 men) who expressed a wish to reduce or quit smoking 
were randomly assigned to using the SmokeBeat app for 30 days or to a wait-list control group. 
All participants completed questionnaires at baseline and at the end of the study, including their 
level of smoking. Smokers in the experimental condition were notified whenever the SmokeBeat 
system detected a smoking episode and were asked to confirm or deny it. 
Results: The SmokeBeat algorithm correctly detected over 80% of the smoking episodes and pro- 
duced very few false alarms. According to both self-report and detection of smoking episodes by 
the SmokeBeat system, smokers in the experimental condition showed a significant decline in 
smoking rate over the 30-day trial (p < .001). There was no change in the smoking rate of the con- 
trol group. 
Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest that automatic monitoring of smoking episodes and 
alerting the smoker in real time may facilitate smoking reduction in motivated smokers. 
Implications: Raising the awareness of smokers to the act of smoking in real time, as the SmokeBeat 
app is able to do, can counter the automaticity of the smoking habit. Bringing smoking under con- 
scious awareness may benefit smokers who are motivated to reduce or quit smoking to gain better 
control of their smoking behavior and reduce cigarette intake. 
The immense societal toll associated with cigarette smoking in 
terms of illness, mortality, and financial costs makes the reduction 
of smoking rates at a population level a primary worldwide object- 
ive. A recent addition to this effort has been smartphone applica- 
tions (“apps”) providing psychological interventions to aid smoking 
cessation. Smartphone apps have important advantages that poten- 
tially can make them a major player in the efforts to reduce smoking 
globally. In contrast to individual or group therapy for smoking 
cessation, smartphone apps are available around the clock to an 
estimated 2.3 billion smartphone owners around the world (https:// 
www.statista.com/statistics/330695/number-of-smartphone-users- 
worldwide/) and are free or very inexpensive to use. And because 
people carry their smartphones wherever they go, these apps are 
available to the smoker whenever he or she wishes to use them. 





While there are presently more than 400 smoking cessation apps in 
the market, however, we could find only a couple whose efficacy has 
been tested.1,2 Moreover, reviews of existing smoking cessation apps 
recently noted that so far, these apps have not exploited their unique 
potential advantages.3,4 
This pilot study examines a novel app for smoking cessation, 
which is the first such app designed for use with wearables (smart- 
watches and wristbands). Using information from the sensors embed- 
ded in wearables, the SmokeBeat app relies on an original algorithm 
to identify the hand-to-mouth gestures that characterize smoking 
a cigarette and alert smokers in real time about smoking episodes. 
Specifically, raw data are collected from the accelerometer and gyro- 
scope sensors, and following data stabilization and noise filtering, 
the SmokeBeat algorithm determines which specific hand-to-mouth 
movements being performed by the wearable user signify smoking. 
Thanks to its ability to detect smoking in real time, SmokeBeat does 
not depend on users registering every smoking event, as do all other 
current apps. This unique feature has the potential to increase smok- 
ers’ awareness of his or her smoking behavior, countering the ten- 
dency of the smoking habit to become automatic and “mindless”.5 
Indeed, self-monitoring was recently shown to be a critical behavior 
change technique in smoking cessation interventions.6 We therefore 
expected that notifying smokers in real-time of smoking episodes 
would increase awareness and may lead to smoking reduction in 
smokers wishing to reduce or quit smoking. 

Participants 
Forty-two participants were recruited using advertisements in 
Facebook inviting people aged 18–45 who smoked at least five 
cigarettes per day and who wished to reduce or quit smoking. 
Participants had to own an android smartphone version 4.3 or 
higher, which was required for running the version of SmokeBeat 
used in this study. They were offered a fixed payment of 1000 New 
Israeli Shekels (equivalent to approximately $250) in return for par- 
ticipating in the study for the full 30 days. Participants were assigned 
in alternating order to either the experimental group or a wait-list 
control group, as described below. Two participants dropped out of 
the study, both from the experimental group and both very early on, 
so the final number of participants was 40 (9 women and 31 men, all 
Caucasian). The study was conducted in the Tel Aviv Area and was 
approved by the Ethical Board of Tel Aviv University. 
Materials 
The SmokeBeat app is part of Somatix, a behavioral modification 
software platform designed to develop interventions based on data 
gathered from real-time detection of hand-to-mouth gestures using 
standard wearables (smartbands and smartwatches). In the case of 
SmokeBeat, the Somatix platform uses machine-learning algorithms 
to detect smoking episodes and notify detection back to the user in 
real time. In the present study, participants were asked following 
every detection of a smoking episode several questions in regard to 
the episode. Participants were asked about their position during this 
episode (sitting, standing, lying down, walking, driving), whether the 
elbow of their smoking hand was leaning on something, whether 
they were eating or drinking, whether they felt stressed before 
smoking the present cigarette, and the extent to which they enjoyed 
the cigarette (rated from “extremely” to “not at all”). 
Baseline data were collected before the first use of the app via 
web-based questionnaires. These included demographics (sex, age, 
and education) and information regarding the subjects’ smoking his- 
tory and smoking habits, including the Fagerström Test of Cigarette 
Dependence (FTCD7,8). At the end of the study, participants in the 
experimental group responded to questions via the smartphone that 
were designed to evaluate their experience of using the app (see 
details in Supplementary Material). 
Procedure 
Participants who responded to our ad (via email) received a docu- 
ment that explained the experimental process. If they were inter- 
ested in participating, they were asked to sign an informed consent 
form and were assigned in alternating order to the experimental or 
the control group. Participants in the experimental group received a 
smartwatch (LG Urbane or LG G-R) and were instructed to wear it 
on the hand that they used for smoking (four participants wore the 
watch on their right hand, and the remaining 16 on their left hand). 
They then downloaded the SmokeBeat app to their smartphone and 
completed the baseline questionnaire over the web. Those assigned 
to the wait-list control condition did not receive a watch and only 
completed the web-based baseline questionnaire. In the next 14 days, 
participants in experimental group received pop-up notifications 
whenever the system detected a smoking episode. The notification 
appeared on both the watch and the phone and remained until the 
user confirmed or denied smoking (overall, 93% of the notifications 
were responded to and 90% of the participants answered more than 
80% of the notifications). A response to the notification opened the 
app and presented the cigarette follow-up questions described above. 
If a participant smoked and the episode was not detected by the app, 
he or she was instructed to report having smoked through the app 
in real time using the designated icon and then answer the cigarette 
follow-up questions. In addition, participants could actively search 
in the app for statistical information regarding their smoking pat- 
terns (see Supplementary Material for details), but this information 
was never pushed to the users. After 14 days, the development team 
manually tuned the detection algorithm to fit each subject’s specific 
smoking patterns (as a result of the tuning, the rate of false positives 
dropped from 6.19% to 2.84%) and the subject continued using the 
app in the same way for 16 more days. We used the second period 
to assess the precision of the smoking detection process and the full 
30 days to evaluate the effect of smoking monitoring and detection 
on smoking patterns. At the end of the 30 days period participants in 
the experimental condition returned the watch (all of them did), and 
all participants completed the end-of-study questionnaire and were 
then thanked and payed for their participation. 
Statistical Analysis 
Analyses of data were conducted with the IBM SPSS 24 package. We 
used a mixed-model ANOVA to analyze the self-reported CPD at 
baseline and end of study in the two groups. Changes in CPD in the 
experimental group over time (as detected by the app) were assessed 
using repeated measures ANOVA. Statistical significance was set at 
.05 and η2 was used as an estimate of effect size. Correlations were 
estimated using Pearson correlation coefficients. 




Table 1 displays the baseline data of participants in our study. The 
two groups did not differ in age, education level, and the age of 
smoking initiation. However, despite the random assignment, the 
control group reported smoking more cigarettes per day and had 
higher scores on the FTCD. 
There was a main effect of group on self-reported CPD, 
F(1, 38) = 19.24, p < .001, reflecting the baseline differences noted 
above between the two groups. There was also an effect of time, so 
that overall participants smoked less at the end of the study com- 
pared to baseline, F(1, 38) = 7.99, p < .001. However, an identical 
interaction effect between group and time, F(1, 38) = 7.99, p < .001, 
indicates that the decline was solely due to the experimental group 
(Figure 1). Whereas the control group reported identical number of 
CPD at baseline and at end of study (both M = 18.75), the experi- 
mental group reported a significant decline in the same 30-day 
period (Mbaseline = 12.00, Mend-of study = 9.25), F(1, 38) = 15.98, p < .001, 
η2 = .296. 
In the next step of the analysis, we examined the information 
received from the SmokeBeat platform in regard to detection of 
smoking episodes. Participants reported having smoked 64.23% 
of their cigarettes while sitting and 18.09% while standing, and 
the detection rates for these positions were 87.29% and 89.67%, 
respectively, with overall detection rate (across all positions) of 
82.29%. False alarms—cases where the system erroneously detected 
and reported a smoking episode—occurred only at 2.85% of the 
total episodes reported by the system. The results of the analysis 
of change in CPD in the experimental group as assessed by the 
SmokeBeat algorithm were consistent with those self-reported by 
the participants, F(29, 551) = 2.542, p < .001, η2 = .118. A negative 
linear contrast on these data was significant, t(28) = 2.77, p = .0122, 
confirming the decline in cigarettes detected and reported through 
the SmokeBeat app over the 30-day study (Figure 1). The correlation 
between self-reported and observed change in CPD was moderate 
but significant, r = .45, p = .049. 
Because the groups differed at baseline in CPD and FTCD scores, 
we sought to rule out the possibility that the differences between 
the groups at the end of the study could be explained by the higher 
dependence level of participants in the control group. This was done 
by examining the correlations between change in CPD and baseline 
FTCD scores in each group. In both groups, the reported decline 
in CPD was positively correlated with FTCD scores, though the 
correlation was significant only in the experimental group (r = .51, 
p = .022) and not in the control group (r = .12, p = .61), very likely 
because of the low variance in CPD change over time in the latter 
group. Notably, in the experimental group, FTCD scores were also 
correlated with the decline in CPD as detected by the SmokeBeat 
algorithm (r = .58, p = .007). 
The results of this pilot study of SmokeBeat are encouraging in two 
respects. First, the smoking detection algorithm of the app was able 
to detect over 80% of smoking episodes in “real life” conditions 
with negligible frequency of “false alarms.” Second, the study pro- 
vides preliminary evidence that automatic monitoring of smoking 
episodes and notifying the smoker in real time when smoking epi- 
sodes are detected can lead to smoking reduction. 
We hasten to emphasize that this study has several limitations 
and that the findings raise several issues that should be resolved. 
First, the control group smoked more and was more dependent than 
the experimental group, which represents a failure of randomiza- 
tion which we cannot account for. However, higher baseline CPD 
and dependence was associated with more, rather than less smok- 
ing reduction, so the group difference at baseline cannot serve as an 
alternative explanation to our findings. Second, as seen in Figure 1, 
there was a gap between the CPD figures self-reported by the experi- 
mental group at the beginning and end of the study (upper part, 
approximately 12 CPD at the beginning and 9.5 CPD at the end of 
the study) and the ones derived from the app, which include ciga- 
rettes missed by the algorithm and reported by the smoker via the 
app (approximately 9.5 CPD at the beginning and 5 CPD at the 
end of the study). We do not know if this gap represents an over- 
estimation of the CPD figure by the smokers or under-detection by 
the app, and future studies will help to determine that. At any rate, 
the reported reduction in CPD was very similar to that detected 
by the app (approximately 2.5 CPD), which suggests that the reduc- 
tion in CPD in the experimental group is a reliable finding. Third, 
our control condition differed from the experimental condition in 
several respects, which limits our ability to conclude which of those 
were critical for our findings (eg, we cannot assess the effects of 
merely wearing the smartwatch). Fourth, the current version of the 
app cold not provide us information on the extent to which users 
actively searched for statistical information about their smoking 
rates, so we cannot assess any effects that this information may have 
had on changes in CPD. Fifth, we have no data on any long-term 
effects of using the SmokeBeat app, which remains to be examined 
future studies with the SmokeBeat app. And sixth, our participants 
were recruited using Facebook ads and were mostly men, which may 
limit the generalizability of our results. 
Finally, we should note that the unique ability of SmokeBeat 
to identify smoking behavior in real time can be used to generate 
data analytics on a vast number of smoking parameters and to dis- 
till from these data both general and personal smoking patterns. 
The detection algorithm also makes it possible to deliver incentives 
and coping strategies at the moment that they are most relevant to 
the smoker and to provide feedback on goal progress in real time, 
without depending on the smoker’s fluctuating state of energy, 

Age 
Years of education 
Age started smoking 
Reported cigarettes per day 
FTCD score 


25.90 (4.22) 
12.45 (1.23) 
16.95 (2.98) 
12.00 (2.90) 
12.50 (3.32) 

29.55 (8.72) 
13.10 (2.00) 
16.60 (2.37) 
18.75 (7.92) 
19.95 (8.56) 

−1.684 
−1.238 
0.411 
−3.576 
−3.631 

.100 
.223 
.683 
.00097 
.00083 
projected growth in the prevalence of wearables over the next few 
years (http://www.ccsinsight.com/press/company-news/2332-weara- 
bles-market-to-be-worth-25-billion-by-2019-reveals-ccs-insight). 

Supplementary data are available at Nicotine and Tobacco Research 
online. 

This work was supported by internal funds of Somatix and research funds 
from Tel Aviv Univeristy to RD. 

RD serves on the Advisory Board of Somatix. The author declares that he had 
full access to all of the data in the study and that he takes responsibility for the 
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. 

1. Iacoviello BM, Steinerman JR, Klein DB, et al. Clickotine, a personalized 
smartphone app for smoking cessation: initial evaluation. JMIR Mhealth 
Uhealth. 2017;5(4):e56. 
2. Bricker JB, Copeland W, Mull KE, et al. Single-arm trial of the second ver- 
sion of an acceptance & commitment therapy smartphone application for 
smoking cessation. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017;170:37–42. 
3. Hoeppner BB, Hoeppner SS, Seaboyer L, et al. How smart are smart- 
phone apps for smoking cessation? A content analysis. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2016;18(5):1025–1031. 
4. Abroms LC, Lee Westmaas J, Bontemps-Jones J, Ramani R, Mellerson J. A 
content analysis of popular smartphone apps for smoking cessation. Am J 
Prev Med. 2013;45(6):732–736. 
5. Motschman CA, Tiffany ST. Cognitive regulation of smoking behavior 
within a cigarette: automatic and nonautomatic processes. Psychol Addict 
Behav. 2016;30(4):494–499. 
6. Bartlett YK, Sheeran P, Hawley MS. Effective behaviour change tech- 
niques in smoking cessation interventions for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a meta-analysis. Br J Health Psychol. 
2014;19(1):181–203. 
7. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerström KO. The 
Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerström 
Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 1991;86(9):1119–1127. 
8. Fagerström K. Determinants of tobacco use and renaming the FTND 
to the Fagerstrom Test for Cigarette Dependence. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2012;14(1):75–78. 
Figure 1. Above, cigarettes per day in the two group at baseline and end of 
study. Below, cigarettes per day in the experimental group across the 30 days 
of the study. Bars represent standard errors. The straight line in the bottom 
figure represents the linear regression fit. (Note that the detection data for 
day 1 are partial, as this was the first day in which smokers used the app). 
motivation, or awareness. We believe that these unique advantages 
of the SmokeBeat system have the potential to enrich the research 
on smoking behavior and improve the efficacy and dissemination of 
effective treatment for smoking cessation, especially considering the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
