Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 
2016, Vol. 84, No. 6, 544 –557 

© 2016 American Psychological Association 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000093 
A Brief Mobile App Reduces Nonsuicidal and Suicidal Self-Injury: 
Evidence From Three Randomized Controlled Trials 
Joseph C. Franklin, Kathryn R. Fox, Christopher R. Franklin, Evan M. Kleiman, Jessica D. Ribeiro, 
Adam C. Jaroszewski, Jill M. Hooley, and Matthew K. Nock 
Harvard University 
Objective: Self-injurious thoughts and behaviors (SITBs) are a major public health problem that 
traditional interventions have been unable to address on a large scale. The goal of this series of studies 
was to take initial steps toward developing an effective SITB treatment that can be easily delivered on 
a very large scale. Method: We created a brief (1–2 min), game-like app called Therapeutic Evaluative 
Conditioning (TEC), designed to increase aversion to SITBs and decrease aversion to the self. In 3 
separate studies, we recruited participants with recent and severe histories of SITBs from web forums 
focused on self-injury and psychopathology (Ns (cid:2) 114, 131, and 163) and randomly assigned them to 
receive access to the mobile treatment TEC app or a control app for 1 month. We tested the effect of TEC 
on the frequency of self-cutting, nonsuicidal self-injury more generally, suicide ideation, suicide plans, 
and suicidal behaviors. Results: Analyses showed that, compared with the control app, TEC produced 
moderate reductions for all SITBs except suicide ideation. Across studies, the largest and most consistent 
reductions were for self-cutting episodes (32%– 40%), suicide plans (21%–59%), and suicidal behaviors 
(33%–77%). Two of the 3 studies showed that TEC impacted its intended treatment targets and that 
greater change in these targets was associated with greater SITB reductions. TEC effects were not 
maintained at the 1-month posttreatment follow-up. Conclusions: Future versions of brief, mobile 
interventions like that tested here may have the potential to reduce SITBs and related behaviors on a large 
scale. 
What is the public health significance of this article? 
Across 3 studies, we found that a brief mobile app generated moderate reductions in nonsuicidal and 
suicidal self-injury. These findings suggest that mobile interventions may have the potential to impact 
SITBs on a large scale. 


Self-injurious thoughts and behaviors (SITBs) are a major 
public health problem. Suicide accounts for an estimated one 
million worldwide deaths each year, making suicide responsible 
for more deaths than war, accidents, or AIDS (World Health 
Organization, 2012). These deaths are in addition to an esti- 
mated 25 million annual nonfatal suicide attempts, many of 
which result in serious medical injuries (Crosby et al., 2011). 
The rates of these behaviors are exceeded by the annual prev- 
alence of suicide plans (0.6%) and ideation (3%) (Kessler et al., 
2005). Nonsuicidal self-injury (NSSI; e.g., cutting or burning 
without suicidal intent) is even more common, with estimates of 
prevalence rates ranging for 5% to 17% in general populations 
and more than 50% in certain clinical populations (see Swannell 
et al., 2014). 
This article was published Online First March 28, 2016. 
Joseph C. Franklin, Kathryn R. Fox, Christopher R. Franklin, Evan M. 
Kleiman, Jessica D. Ribeiro, Adam C. Jaroszewski, Jill M. Hooley, and 
Matthew K. Nock, Department of Psychology, Harvard University. 


Joseph C. Franklin and Christopher R. Franklin are co-authors on a 
pending patent application for TEC, and Joseph C. Franklin is owner of 
tec-tec, LLC. This research was funded in part by the following: The 
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (Award No. PRG-048-13) to 
Joseph C. Franklin, Jill M. Hooley, and Matthew K. Nock; The Eric M. 
Mindich Research Fund for the Foundations of Human Behavior to Joseph 
C. Franklin; The Military Suicide Research Consortium (MSRC), an effort 
supported by the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense and Health 
Affairs (Award No. W81XWH-10-2-0181) to Joseph C. Franklin, Jessica 
D. Ribeiro, and Matthew K. Nock (opinions, interpretations, conclusions 
and recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily 
endorsed by the MSRC or Department of Defense); The National Institute 
of Mental Health (Award No. T32MH18921) to Jessica D. Ribeiro; and 
The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation to Matthew K. Nock. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Joseph 
C. Franklin, who is now at Vanderbilt University, Department of 
Psychology, PMB 407817, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 
37240-7817. E-mail: franjc1@gmail.com 



Given the scope and seriousness of this problem, a tremendous 
amount of research has been devoted to the development of effec- 
tive SITB interventions over the last several decades. Unfortu- 
nately, few interventions have proven effective and even the most 
promising interventions have produced mixed results (Brown & 
Jager-Hyman, 2014; Glenn, Franklin, & Nock, 2015). Regardless 
of their efficacy, most existing interventions are inherently limited 
in their ability to reduce SITB rates on a large scale. This is 
because their in-person model of delivery, which typically in- 
volves a therapist and client (or group of clients) meeting face-to- 
face on a weekly basis for an hour, constrains the potential impact 
of these treatments in several ways (Kazdin & Rabbitt, 2013). 
First, there is approximately one therapist for every 100 mentally 
ill 
therapists practiced 
evidence-based treatments, there would still be little change in 
national and international rates of SITBs. Second, this model of 
delivery is often costly in terms of time, money, and client effort. 
These cost barriers prohibit many individuals from accessing treat- 
ments (Mojtabai et al., 2011; Sareen et al., 2007). Third, this model 
of delivery is unable to overcome one of the most common barriers 
to accessing treatment: the desire to handle one’s own problems 
(i.e., the autonomy barrier; Mojtabai et al., 2011; Sareen et al., 
2007). 

These barriers help to explain why most individuals with SITBs 
do not receive treatment (Bruffaerts et al., 2011), which in turns 
helps to explain why there has been little change in SITB rates 
over the last several decades (Kessler et al., 2005; Nock, Borges, 
et al., 2008a). These patterns show a clear need for the develop- 
ment of effective SITB interventions that can overcome availabil- 
ity, cost, and autonomy barriers. The present series of studies 
represent initial steps toward this goal. Specifically, these studies 
evaluated the first iterations of a novel web app designed to reduce 
SITBs by targeting two recently identified SITB risk factors. 
The first treatment target is the diminished aversion to SITB- 
related stimuli (e.g., blood, wounds, knives, skulls, etc.). Whereas 
most people find these stimuli extremely aversive, many people 
who engage in SITBs find these stimuli neutral or even pleasant 
(Franklin, Lee, Puzia, & Prinstein, 2014; Joiner, 2005). This di- 
minished aversion may be partially explained by pain offset relief 
conditioning during episodes of self-injury (Franklin, 2014; Frank- 
lin et al., 2013; Franklin, Lee, et al., 2014; Franklin, Puzia, Lee, & 
Prinstein, 2014). Although pain itself is unpleasant, the removal of 
pain generates a powerful state of relief; any stimuli present during 
this relief (e.g., blood, wounds) acquire a more positive valence. 
Recent evidence indicates that this diminished aversion to SITB 
stimuli longitudinally predicts future SITBs above and beyond 
several other competing predictors, including prior SITBs and 
psychopathology (Franklin, Puzia, et al., 2014). According to 
recent theories, the aversion to SITB stimuli creates a barrier that 
dissuades most people from engaging in SITBs, and a reduction in 
this barrier facilitates SITBs (Franklin, Lee, et al., 2014; Franklin, 
Puzia, et al., 2014; Joiner, 2005). Based on this work, we hypoth- 
esized that increasing the aversion to SITB stimuli would reduce 
future SITBs. 
The second treatment target is aversion toward the self (i.e., 
one’s own representation of their identity or subjective experi- 
ence). Most people have a positive association with the self (e.g., 
Koole et al., 2001), but many people who engage in SITBs show 
aversion toward the self, as indicated by high levels of self- 
criticism and similar constructs in this population (e.g., Hooley & 
Germain, 2014). Recent experimental work indicates that self- 
aversion may be a particularly important motivator of SITBs (e.g., 
Hooley & Germain, 2014). Specifically, this work suggests that 
self-aversion generates the belief that one deserves pain, punish- 
ment, or death. In the absence of such beliefs, it may be much more 
difficult for SITBs to occur. Correspondingly, we hypothesized 
that decreasing self-aversion would reduce future SITBs. 
Our preliminary work is consistent with these two treatment 
target hypotheses. In a pilot study, Franklin (2014) attempted to 
increase aversion to SITB stimuli by pairing these stimuli with 
mildly painful electric shocks. Compared with a control group that 
received shocks unpaired with SITB stimuli, a group that received 
aversive conditioning (i.e., shocks paired with SITB stimuli) re- 
ported significantly fewer self-cutting behaviors over the ensuing 
six months. Treatment response was significantly predicted by 
increases in physiological aversion to SITB stimuli. Similarly, 
Hooley and Germain (2014) found that a 5-min cognitive inter- 
vention aimed at improving self-worth normalized pain endurance 
in a sample of individuals with a history of self-injury. Although 
these preliminary findings are promising, one major limitation is 
that these interventions are impossible to deliver on a large scale in 
their present formats. Given their relatively simple proposed mech- 
anisms of action (i.e., increasing aversion to SITB stimuli, decreas- 
ing self-aversion), however, we believed that these interventions 
could be transformed into a simple format amenable to large-scale 
dissemination. 
For the present series of studies, we built on this preliminary 
work to place these two potential interventions into a single, novel 
evaluative conditioning paradigm. Evaluative conditioning is a 
form of Pavlovian conditioning that occurs when the liking (i.e., 
evaluation) of one stimulus changes as a result of its pairing with 
another stimulus (e.g., Hofmann et al., 2010). For example, the 
liking of a picture of a blue triangle may change if it is repeatedly 
paired with a picture of a spider. Evaluative conditioning has 
traditionally been employed to study changes in attitudes toward 
neutral stimuli in social psychology (see Hofmann et al., 2010), but 
more recently has been applied to study clinical phenomena (e.g., 
Houben et al., 2010). Although there is a wide range of evaluative 
conditioning procedures (see Hofmann et al., 2010), most involve 
the simultaneous or sequential pairing of pictures or words. These 
paradigms are typically short ((cid:3)100 trials), passive (watching 
stimuli on screen), and administered a single time in a laboratory. 
As described in more detail below, we created a modified evalu- 
ative conditioning procedure that has an engaging, game-like de- 
sign and is meant to be played many times outside of the labora- 
tory on a mobile device. We call this procedure Therapeutic 
Evaluative Conditioning (TEC). In the present series of studies, we 
designed TEC to increase aversion to SITB-related stimuli (pairing 
these stimuli with unpleasant stimuli) and to increase liking of 
self-related words (pairing these words with pleasant stimuli). 
Across all studies, we hypothesized that TEC would cause de- 
creases in SITBs. 

In Study 1, we tested TEC within a sample of individuals with 
a recent history of frequent NSSI. We focused on this population 
in our initial study because our pilot work focused on this popu- 


lation and NSSI is prevalent, frequent, and strongly associated 
with a range of SITBs (see Franklin & Nock, in press). Participants 
were randomly assigned to receive access to an active version of 
TEC (“active group”) or a control version of TEC (“control 
group”), and were allowed to access the appropriate version of the 
TEC app as much as they desired over a one-month period. 
We hypothesized that, compared with the control group, the 
active group would display reductions in self-cutting and overall 
NSSI. Given the specificity of this version of TEC to self-cutting, 
we expected milder treatment effects for suicide ideation, plans, 
and behavior. We additionally hypothesized that any treatment 
effects would remain significant after controlling for stringent 
covariates including prior month SITBs, emotion reactivity, inter- 
nalizing symptoms, recent psychiatric treatment (both psychoso- 
cial and pharmacological), desire to stop engaging in NSSI, and 
self-prediction of future NSSI. 
Secondary analyses explored a range of other potential effects, 
including the effect of active TEC dosage on SITBs and whether 
any treatment effects persisted during the month after TEC access 
ended. We also hypothesized that active TEC would impact its 
intended treatment targets (i.e., diminished aversion to NSSI stim- 
uli; heighted aversion to self-related words) and that changes in 
these treatment targets would be associated with SITB reductions. 
Finally, we explored the possibility that reductions in SITBs would 
be accompanied by compensatory increases in non-SITB dysregu- 
lated behaviors. 

Participants. Participants were 114 individuals (80.70% fe- 
male) recruited from online web forums that focused on topics 
relating to self-injury or psychopathology. To be eligible to 
participate, individuals had to meet the following criteria: (a) 18 
years of age or older; (b) English fluency; and (c) two or more 
episodes of self-cutting in past month. Most participants were 
young adults (M (cid:2) 23.02 years old, SD (cid:2) 5.47) and most 
identified as Caucasian (81.57%), with the remaining identify- 
ing as Asian (6.14%), Black/African American (1.75%), His- 
panic (1.75%), or Other (8.77%; e.g., mixed race). Most par- 
ticipants were living in the United States (n (cid:2) 96), with the 
remaining living in Canada (n (cid:2) 2), Europe (n (cid:2) 12), Asia (n (cid:2) 
3), and Australia (n (cid:2) 1). The majority of participants reported 
a history of psychiatric treatment 
(lifetime: 76.31%; past 
month: 55.26%), many reported a history of inpatient psychi- 
atric treatment (lifetime: 29.82%; past month: 3.50%), and 
50.87% were currently on psychiatric medication. Participants 
were randomly assigned via a random sequence generator to 
either the control group (which received access to the control 
TEC, n (cid:2) 59) or the active group (which received access to 
active TEC, n (cid:2) 55). There were no significant demographic or 
treatment history differences between the two groups (all ps (cid:4) 
.05). Groups reported similar baseline levels of each of SITBs 
and covariates (see Table 1), with the exception of significantly 
fewer prior month suicide plans in the active group (B (cid:2) (cid:5).29, 
SE (cid:2) .09, p (cid:2) .001). CONSORT flow diagrams for each study 
are presented as Supplemental Figures S1 through S3. 
Therapeutic evaluative conditioning (TEC). We designed 
TEC to be a brief, game-like treatment that could be accessed by 
any device with an Internet connection. We aimed for TEC to be 
accessed multiple times a day at the convenience of the user. 
Several TEC characteristics promoted this aim: It takes 1 to 2 min 
to complete a single instance of TEC; TEC becomes more chal- 
lenging as the trials progress; points are awarded for faster and 
more accurate performance; each instance of TEC is unique, 
increasing replay value; and although TEC was primarily intended 
as a mobile app, it includes a responsive design that allows it to 
automatically format itself for phones, tablets, laptops, and desk- 
tops (see Figure 1 and Supplemental Method for a detailed de- 
scription of TEC). For the present study, we included a version of 
TEC that targeted self-related words (e.g., me, myself, I, mine) and 
SITB-related stimuli that primarily depicted self-cutting (in Stud- 
ies 1 and 2) or suicide/death stimuli (in Study 3). 
Measures. 
Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors Interview (SITBI; 
Nock et al., 2007). The SITBI is a structured interview that 
assesses the presence, frequency, and characteristics of self- 
injurious thoughts and behaviors. As in previous studies (e.g., 
Table 1 
Means and Standard Deviations for Prior Month SITBs, Covariates, and AMPs Across All Studies 










Self-cutting episodes 
Self-cutting events 
NSSI episodes 
NSSI events 
Suicide ideation 
Suicide plans 
Self-prediction of NSSI 
Desire to stop NSSI 
ERS total 
BSI total 
IDB total 
AMP NSSI 
AMP self 
15.88 (28.15) 
— 
32.47 (61.29) 
— 
12.63 (11.30) 
6.88 (10.04) 
4.05 (1.27) 
2.73 (1.27) 
53.53 (18.18) 
40.98 (16.29) 
24.26 (4.04) 
.47 (.30) 
.58 (.27) 
10.96 (17.85) 
— 
18.85 (25.61) 
— 
11.50 (12.72) 
3.85 (6.48) 
4.13 (.96) 
2.96 (1.20) 
54.80 (19.23) 
39.09 (13.61) 
23.49 (3.07) 
.57 (.32) 
.47 (.27) 
8.59 (11.92) 
42.46 (80.47) 
24.56 (61.92) 
82.30 (134.17) 
12.50 (10.90) 
5.38 (8.76) 
4.42 (.86) 
2.99 (1.33) 
59.47 (17.49) 
46.69 (13.38) 
28.04 (2.68) 
.52 (.32) 
.54 (.34) 
12.31 (29.27) 
41.11 (77.61) 
24.16 (59.12) 
60.68 (86.98) 
13.47 (11.21) 
6.66 (9.41) 
4.23 (.98) 
2.94 (1.25) 
61.89 (14.09) 
43.16 (12.78) 
27.84 (2.66) 
.47 (.30) 
.57 (.29) 
3.38 (6.90) 
22.99 (74.22) 
8.73 (17.60) 
30.54 (59.58) 
8.84 (10.36) 
4.45 (7.76) 
3.52 (1.15) 
2.48 (1.78) 
57.29 (16.34) 
43.45 (12.29) 
28.28 (2.90) 
.41 (.28) 
.55 (.32) 
3.51 (6.18) 
19.81 (62.02) 
8.05 (13.07) 
29.09 (54.56) 
12.29 (12.60) 
4.81 (7.16) 
3.65 (1.14) 
2.55 (1.63) 
53.70 (18.58) 
41.86 (14.83) 
27.82 (2.79) 
.48 (.27) 
.54 (.34) 
Note. M (cid:2) mean; SD (cid:2) standard deviation; — (cid:2) not available; ERS (cid:2) Emotion Reactivity Scale; BSI (cid:2) Brief Symptom Index; IDB (cid:2) Index of 
Dysregulated Behaviors; AMP (cid:2) Affect Misattribution Procedure. Self-cutting and NSSI events were not recorded for Study 1. 


Figure 1. Screenshots of TEC screen types. TEC begins with a screen displaying matches, moves to a 2 (cid:6) 2 
grid for the first 15 trials; masks alternative options after the first pair member is selected for the second 15 trials; 
moves to a 3 (cid:6) 3 grid for the third 15 trials; masks alternative options within this larger grid for the final 15 trials; 
and ends with a screen that displays positive (for active TEC) or neutral images (for control TEC), total trials 
correct, game and total points, and time elapsed for that instance of TEC. See the online article for the color 
version of this figure. 
Franklin, Puzia, et al., 2014), in the present series of studies we 
employed an online self-report version of the SITBI. The online 
and in-person versions of the SITBI produce very similar esti- 
mates of SITB status and frequency (see Franklin, Puzia, et al., 
2014). We used the SITBI to measure the following: self- 
cutting (defined as number of times someone has cut them- 
selves); overall NSSI (i.e., moderate NSSI behaviors: self- 
cutting, burning, hitting, inserting objects under the skin, and 
scraping; see Franklin, Lee, et al., 2014; Franklin, Puzia, et al., 
2014); suicide ideation (defined as number of days during 
which ideation occurred); suicide plans (defined as number of 
days during which plans occurred); and suicidal behaviors 
(defined as the number of nonfatal attempts, interrupted at- 
tempts, and aborted attempts). 
We additionally used the SITBI to measure self-prediction of 
the likelihood of future NSSI (1 to 5 scale; 1 (cid:2) definitely not, 5 (cid:2) 
definitely) and desire to stop engaging in NSSI (1 to 5 scale; 1 (cid:2) 
no desire, 5 (cid:2) extreme desire). Finally, we used the SITBI to 
measure demographic and psychiatric treatment history (i.e., both 
psychosocial and pharmacological). At baseline, the SITBI was 
used to assess thoughts and behaviors over one’s lifetime, past 
year, past month, and past week. During the treatment month of the 
study, the SITBI was administered weekly and the timeframe was 
past week; during the posttreatment month, the SITBI was admin- 
istered monthly and the timeframe was past month. 

Emotion Reactivity Scale (ERS; Nock, Wedig, Holmberg, & 
Hooley, 2008). The ERS is a single-factor 21-iterm self-report 
scale that measures emotion reactivity, a construct that includes 
emotional sensitivity, 
is strongly 
correlated with measures of emotion dysregulation, psychopathol- 
ogy, and SITBs (Franklin et al., 2013; Franklin, Lee, et al., 2014; 
2014b; Nock, Wedig, et al., 2008), has been shown to mediate the 
association between psychopathology and self-injury (Nock, 
Wedig, et al., 2008), and demonstrated excellent reliability in the 
present series of studies (Cronbach’s alphas (cid:2) .93 to .95). We 
employed the ERS as a covariate in treatment analyses. 
Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI; Derogatis, 2000). The BSI is 
an 18-item self-report measure of past week psychological distress 
that includes items pertaining to internalizing symptoms such as 
anxiety, depression, and panic. The BSI has demonstrated strong 
construct validity and displayed excellent reliability in the present 
series of studies (Cronbach’s alphas (cid:2) .88 to .92). As with the 
ERS, we included the BSI as a covariate in treatment analyses. 
Index of Dysregulated Behaviors (IDB). We created the IDB 
for the present study. It is an 18-item self-report measure of 
engagement in a wide-range of dysregulated behaviors over the 


past month. Behaviors assessed include alcohol abuse, drug abuse, 
reckless driving, binge eating, purging behaviors, food restriction, 
abusive relationships, shoplifting/stealing, anger outbursts (e.g., 
provoking fights, breaking things, setting things on fire), unsafe/ 
reckless sexual behavior, and gambling (beyond small bets). We 
included this measure to test the possibility that reduction in one 
dysregulated behavior (i.e., NSSI) would be compensated for by 
increases in other dysregulated behaviors (e.g., alcohol use, reck- 
less behaviors). 
Treatment targets: Implicit aversion to NSSI, death/suicide, 
and the self. We measured implicit affect with a brief computer- 
based task called the Affect Misattribution Procedure (AMP; 
Payne & Lundberg, 2014; see Supplemental Materials for more 
information). The present series of studies operationalized treat- 
ment targets as AMP scores for stimulus categories related to NSSI 
(Studies 1 and 2), death/suicide (Study 3), and self-related words 
(all three studies). 


Recruitment. Similar to other recent self-injury studies (e.g., 
Lewis & Michal, 2015), participants were recruited from online 
web forums (n (cid:2) 12) that focused on discussions of self-injury and 
related phenomena. Advertisements did not explicitly describe the 
study as a treatment study. The informed consent form made clear 
the treatment-related aspects of the study, but did not provide 
details about TEC that would have allowed participants to discern 
whether or not they were in the active or control group. This 
procedure was designed to reduce placebo effects and to more 
effectively target our intended population—the large number of 
individuals who engage in SITBs but do not actively seek treat- 
ment. 
The web-based recruitment strategy provided several advan- 
tages. First, it improved speed of recruitment, ease of contact, 
comfort disclosing psychological and behavioral problems, atten- 
tion to study instructions, geographic diversity, and number of 
potential participants (e.g., Casler et al., 2013; Hauser & Schwarz, 
2015). On balance, however, online recruitment presents unique 
challenges that have the potential to threaten the quality of re- 
search (e.g., bots, study comprehension assurance). Over the past 
decade researchers have developed several innovative recruitment 
procedures and protocols to overcome these challenges (e.g., Bull 
et al., 2008; Ip et al., 2010). In part because of these procedures, 
several recent studies have found that online and in-person recruit- 
ment procedures produce nearly identical results across a wide 
range of tasks and populations (Casler et al., 2013; Crump et al., 
2013; Hauser & Schwarz, 2015). 
Second, instead of confining recruitment to a specific hospital or 
city, this recruitment strategy allowed us to recruit from our 
primary population of interest—the worldwide SITB population 
with an Internet connection. In particular, we were most interested 
in individuals with highly frequent SITBs who were not currently 
benefiting from traditional treatments. Third, it ensured that par- 
ticipants were regular Internet users. As TEC is web-based, this 
improved the odds that participants would regularly access TEC 
and complete follow-up assessments. Fourth, the large pool of 
potential participants made it possible to select for individuals with 
recent and frequent NSSI. Using traditional methods, it is difficult 
to recruit a large number of such participants. Fifth, compared with 
local community recruitment methods, it provided greater confi- 
dence in the validity of Participant SITB status. 
Building on best practice recommendations for online recruit- 
ment (e.g., Bull et al., 2008; Ip et al., 2010), we employed a five 
step recruitment process (see Supplemental Method for a detailed 
description). 
Design, participation, and compensation. Assessments oc- 
curred at baseline, weekly during the treatment month, and at the 
end of the posttreatment month. All individuals participated anon- 
ymously. Participants were asked to provide an email address that 
did not include identifiable information. Through this e-mail ad- 
dress, participants received automatic e-mails with links to 
follow-up surveys and were compensated via electronic Amazon 
gift cards. Participants were compensated $10 for baseline assess- 
ments, $5 for each weekly assessment during the treatment month, 
and $20 for the posttreatment month assessment. Additionally, 
participants were compensated based on their TEC performance: 
one cent for each TEC point, up to $50 (5,000 points; the average 
participant would need to play TEC (cid:7)90 times to accrue this many 
points). The six participants with the highest point totals (who also 
completed each study assessment point) were compensated an 
additional $100. 
Implementation of TEC. Participants were allowed to access 
TEC as often as they desired over the course of one month (i.e., the 
“treatment month”). We employed this ‘open dosage’ design for 
two reasons. First, we wanted TEC use in the present study to 
approximate real world usage. As such, we did not want to artifi- 
cially constrict the frequency or timing of usage. Second, because 
TEC is a new intervention, it was unclear which TEC dosage level 
would be effective. It is possible that a single dose (i.e., playing 
TEC once) may be sufficient to reduce SITBs, but it is also 
possible that SITB reductions would require hundreds of TEC 
doses. The open design of the present study allowed us to explore 
these patterns to establish an empirical basis for dosage guidelines 
in future studies. 
Each participant was given a unique ID number for the TEC 
app. This app was linked to a relational database that automatically 
stored TEC performance information including the number of 
points, total correct and wrong matches, total time, and date for a 
given instance of TEC. 
Data analytic plan. 
Retention rates and missing data. We calculated retention 
rates across each week during the treatment month and at the end 
of the posttreatment month. We note here that there were no 
significant group differences for retention rates across studies. To 
determine the representativeness of nonmissing data, we con- 
ducted Little’s Missing Completely at Random (MCAR) test (see 
each Results section for a detailed description of missingness). 
This test was nonsignificant in all three of the present studies (all 
ps (cid:2) .99), suggesting that data were missing completely at ran- 
dom. Although this indicated that effect estimates based on non- 
missing data were likely accurate and unbiased, we analyzed 
imputed data to provide additional assurance that these estimates 
were accurate. Imputation methods and results are described in 
Supplemental Method and Table S1; nonimputed results are pre- 
sented in the present paper, but we note here that imputed analyses 
produced nearly identical results. 
Outcomes. Outcomes were SITBs, including self-cutting fre- 
quency, overall NSSI frequency (including self-cutting behaviors), 


days of suicide ideation, days of suicide plans, and suicidal be- 
havior frequency. Suicidal behaviors included suicide attempts, 
interrupted suicide attempts, and aborted suicide attempts. Self- 
cutting was examined separately from other NSSI behaviors be- 
cause it is the most common form of NSSI, it is an unambiguously 
severe form of NSSI, our inclusion criteria specified self-cutting, 
and the present version of TEC primarily targeted self-cutting. 
Because of the low frequency of suicidal behaviors, we report 
these behaviors for each study but analyze them across all studies 
after all other analyses. 
Additional outcomes were changes in implicit affect toward 
NSSI- and self-related stimuli, and changes in non-SITB dysregu- 
lated behaviors. These outcomes were calculated as the difference 
between baseline and treatment month scores. 
Statistical models. SITBs are count variables that tend to 
produce positively skewed distributions and an excess of zeros. 
SITBs accordingly violate the assumptions of statistical techniques 
based on a normal distributions. Fortunately, there are two com- 
mon statistical models based on the distributions that SITBs tend 
to approximate: zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) regression and zero- 
inflated negative binomial (ZINB) regression. These two models 
are similar to one another except that ZINB includes an extra 
parameter that accounts for overdispersion unrelated to excess 
zeros (i.e., zeros that the model predicts have a 1.0 probability of 
being a zero). In the present series of studies, for SITB outcomes 
we only employed ZIP models when ZINB models indicated 
nonsignificant overdispersion. We note here that both models 
always provided very similar results in terms of significance and 
effect magnitude. Both models produce incident rate ratios (IRRs), 
which provide the ratio of the frequency of a given behavior in the 
active group compared to the control group. These models are 
described in more detail in Supplemental Method. 
Overview of treatment-related analyses. Given that TEC use 
was self-selected, we were primarily interested in overall group 
effects (i.e., effects where individuals were included in the active/ 
control TEC group analyses regardless of whether or how much 
they accessed TEC). These tests resemble intention-to-treat tests, 
but differ from such tests in that they do not include individuals 
who did not participate at certain time point (true intention-to-treat 
analyses with imputed data are provided in Table S1). We note 
here that there were no significant group differences in app usage 
participation across studies. All dosage analyses (i.e., analyses 
based on active TEC points) and posttreatment month analyses 
were exploratory. 
Group effects for treatment month. We tested whether group 
(active vs. control) significantly predicted SITBs during the treat- 
ment month. Because of the trade-offs of our open design (e.g., 
self-selection of frequency and timing of usage, exploratory dos- 
age hypotheses) and the high volatility of SITBs from week-to- 
week, we primarily focused on the month-based group treatment 
analyses in the present series of studies. Monthly SITB frequencies 
were calculated as the sum of SITB frequencies during each week 
Figure 2. Effect of active TEC on NSSI-related outcomes. All comparisons controlled for several powerful 
covariates (see Supplemental Tables S2–S4); without these covariates, treatment effects tended to be stronger 
and there were significant treatment effects on overall NSSI outcomes in Study 3 (see Supplemental Table S1). 
Error bars (cid:2) 95% confidence intervals. The upper-bound for the confidence intervals for self-cutting events in 
Study 2 and NSSI events from Studies 2 and 3 extend beyond the viewable area for the present graph (see 
Supplemental Tables S2–S4 for more information). Self-cutting events and NSSI events were not measured in 
Study 1. (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:3) .001. 
Figure 3. Effect of active TEC on suicide-related outcomes. All comparisons controlled for several covariates 
(see Supplemental Tables S2–S4). Error bars (cid:2) 95% confidence intervals. The upper-bound for the confidence 
intervals for suicide ideation outcomes extend beyond the viewable area for the present graph (see Supplemental 
Tables S2–S4 for more information). (cid:8) (cid:2) no statistical tests were performed within individual studies for 
suicidal behavior outcomes; these were examined in aggregate within the text and the overall treatment effect 
was statistically significant. (cid:2) p (cid:3) .05; (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:3) .001. 
of the treatment month. Participants needed to complete each 
weekly follow-up to allow for calculation of this monthly variable. 
We conducted two levels of analyses for SITB outcomes. First, 
we examined the effect of group on the outcome while including 
the relevant baseline month SITB as a covariate (e.g., if suicide 
ideation was the outcome, past month suicide ideation assessed at 
baseline was included as a covariate). Second, we examined the 
effect of group on the outcome while including the relevant base- 
line month SITB, ERS score, BSI score, baseline month treatment 
status, and baseline self-prediction and desire to stop NSSI (for 
self-cutting and NSSI analyses) as covariates. Only the latter 
analyses are presented, but unless otherwise noted in the results 
section, lower-order analyses produced nearly identical results in 
terms of significance. For ease of interpretation, group effects for 
the treatment month are presented in Figures 2 and 3; detailed 
analyses of group and covariate effects are included in Tables S2 
through S4. 
We also examined the effect of group on changes in IDB scores 
and treatment targets (i.e., implicit affect toward NSSI images and 
self-related words). We then tested whether these latter two dif- 
ference scores were associated with SITBs during the treatment 
month. These latter analyses included the relevant baseline SITB 
as a covariate. 
Active TEC dosage effect analyses. To explore potential dos- 
age effects of active TEC, we calculated the proportion of partic- 
ipants who activated the active TEC app and how many points they 
scored. Because points were so positively skewed (with a range of 
nearly 20,000), we transformed points into three general active 
TEC dosage categories. First, participants were placed in the no 
dose group if they either (a) were assigned to the control group and 
thus never had the opportunity to open the active TEC app or (b) 
were assigned to the active group but never opened the app. 
Second participants were placed in the low dose group if they 
scored between 0.1 and 1,999 points in the active TEC app. Third, 
participants were placed in the high dose group if they scored 
2,000 or more points in the active TEC app. Results were similar 
when more fine-grained class intervals were used (e.g., 4, 5, or 6 
class intervals). Including the relevant baseline month SITB as a 
covariate, we explored the effect of dosage on SITBs. We note 
here that there were no significant dosage effects for control TEC 
points in any study (all ps (cid:4) .05); all presented dosage analyses 
refer to the dosage of active TEC. 
Posttreatment month analyses. To explore whether any treat- 
ment effects persisted after TEC access ended, we examined the 
effect of group on SITBs during the posttreatment month while 
including the relevant baseline month SITB as a covariate. For 
comparability, only participants included in treatment month anal- 
yses were included in posttreatment month analyses. 
Suicidal behavior analyses. Given the low base rates of sui- 
cidal behaviors over short intervals, we calculated suicidal behav- 
iors over the course of both months of each study and conducted 
analyses on combined behaviors from all three studies (descriptive 




statistics for specific types of suicidal behaviors across studies and 
groups is provided in Supplemental Table S6). Outcomes included 
the number of individuals per group reporting any suicidal behav- 
iors and the number of suicidal behaviors per group. We analyzed 
group treatment effects as well as dosage group effects. Given the 
relatively low frequency of suicidal behaviors, participants were 
placed into one of two dosage groups: no active TEC dose (0 
points), and any active TEC dose (.1 or more points). 

Descriptive statistics. 
Retention rates for follow-up assessments. Retention rates 
gradually dropped from weeks one to four (81.57%, 67.54%, 
64.91%, and 60.52%, respectively), with 86.49% of participants 
completing at least one follow-up during the treatment month and 
52.25% of participants completing all follow-ups. Compared with 
the control group (42.37%), a higher proportion of the active group 
completed all treatment month follow-up assessments (60.00%). 
However, nearly identical proportions of each group completed at 
least one follow-up assessment during the treatment month (con- 
trol group: 86.44%; active group: 87.27%). A total of 69.29% of 
participants completed the posttreatment month follow-up, with 
similar completion rates across groups (control group: 64.41%; 
active group: 74.54%). 
Treatment participation. Most participants accessed their as- 
signed version of the TEC app at least once (70.15%), with similar 
proportions across groups (control group: 67.79%; active group: 
73.36%). There were no significant group differences in TEC 
points (p (cid:2) .45), as both the control group (M (cid:2) 1,311.99 points; 
SD (cid:2) 2,764.54 points; Mdn (cid:2) 161.85 points; Range (cid:2) 19,181.90 
points) and active group (M (cid:2) 1,514.53 points; SD (cid:2) 2,742.78 
points; Mdn (cid:2) 270.2 points; Range (cid:2) 14,889.30 points) displayed 
similar point distributions. In terms of active TEC dosage, 72 
participants received no dose (i.e., assigned to control TEC or 
assigned to active TEC but did not open the app), 29 received a 
low dose (.1 to 1,999 points), and 13 received a high dose (2,000 (cid:9) 
points). As shown in Supplemental Figure S4, TEC usage was 
highest during the first week, dropped during the second week and 
slowly began to increase thereafter. 
Treatment analyses. 
Self-cutting. During the treatment month, the active group 
reported significantly fewer self-cutting episodes (i.e., count re- 
gression portion of the model; see Figure 2) and self-cutting 
frequency decreased significantly as active TEC dosage increased 
(B (cid:2) (cid:5).38, SE (cid:2) .07, IRR (cid:2) .68, p (cid:3) .001). The effect of active 
TEC did not extend into the posttreatment month (p (cid:2) .50). 
Overall NSSI. The active group reported significantly fewer 
overall NSSI behaviors during the treatment month (see Figure 2), 
with overall NSSI behaviors significantly decreasing as active 
TEC dose increased (B (cid:2) (cid:5).44, SE (cid:2) .06, IRR (cid:2) .64, p (cid:3) .001). 
This effect did not reach significance during the posttreatment 
month (p (cid:2) .16). 
Suicide ideation. Groups did not differ significantly on sui- 
cide ideation during the treatment month (see Figure 3) or post- 
treatment month (p (cid:2) .17), and the dosage effect was not signif- 
icant during the treatment month (p (cid:2) .08). 
Suicide plans. As shown in Figure 3, the active group reported 
significantly fewer suicide plans during the treatment month. As 
with self-cutting and NSSI behaviors, there was a significant active 
TEC dosage effect on suicide plans (B (cid:2) (cid:5).40, SE (cid:2) .17, IRR (cid:2) 
.67, p (cid:2) .02). The active group continued to report significantly 
fewer suicide plans during the posttreatment month (B (cid:2) (cid:5).59, 
SE (cid:2) .23, IRR (cid:2) .55, p (cid:2) .01). 
Suicidal behaviors. A total of nine participants reported at 
least one suicidal behavior; five in the active group (producing 10 
behaviors) and four in the control group (producing 19 behaviors). 
Among participants who accessed the active TEC app at least 
once, three reported at least one suicidal behavior (producing five 
behaviors). Among participants who never accessed the TEC app, 
six reported suicidal behaviors (producing 24 behaviors). 
Non-SITB dysregulated behaviors. There was no effect of 
group on non-SITB dysregulated behaviors during the treatment 
month (p (cid:2) .42). 
Treatment targets. Analyses showed that, compared with the 
control group (M (cid:2) .09, SD (cid:2) .22), the active group (M (cid:2) (cid:5).04, 
SD (cid:2) .21) displayed a significantly greater increase in aversion 
toward NSSI stimuli during the treatment month, t(49) (cid:2) 1.71, p (cid:2) 
.04, d (cid:2) .60 (note: positive change scores diminished aversion 
toward stimuli, negative scores indicate increased aversion toward 
stimuli). Diminished aversion to NSSI stimuli during the treatment 
month (i.e., the inverse of the present treatment target effect on 
NSSI) was significantly associated with greater NSSI (B (cid:2) 1.12, 
SE (cid:2) .16, IRR (cid:2) 3.06, p (cid:3) .001), suicide ideation (B (cid:2) .48, SE (cid:2) 
.19, IRR (cid:2) 1.62, p (cid:2) .02), and suicide plans (B (cid:2) .68, SE (cid:2) .32, 
IRR (cid:2) 1.97, p (cid:2) .04). There was no significant effect for self- 
cutting. These treatment target findings showed that TEC in- 
creased aversion to NSSI stimuli and that increased aversion was 
associated with decreased in NSSI, suicide ideation, and suicide 
plans. 
The active group (M (cid:2) (cid:5).05, SD (cid:2) .27) showed a significantly 
smaller drop in positive affect toward self-related words compared 
to the control group (M (cid:2) (cid:5).17, SD (cid:2) .24), t(49) (cid:2) (cid:5)1.77, p (cid:2) 
.04, d (cid:2) .47. Diminished aversion toward the self (i.e., the present 
treatment target effect for self) was associated with less self- 
cutting (B (cid:2) (cid:5)2.49, SE (cid:2) 1.10, IRR (cid:2) .08, p (cid:2) .02), NSSI 
(B (cid:2) (cid:5).77, SE (cid:2) .17, IRR (cid:2) .46, p (cid:3) .001), suicide ideation 
(B (cid:2) (cid:5)1.02, SE (cid:2) .20, IRR (cid:2) .36, p (cid:3) .001), and suicide 
plans (B (cid:2) (cid:5).92, SE (cid:2) .36, IRR (cid:2) .40, p (cid:2) .01). These results also 
indicated that TEC diminished aversion to self-related words and 
that this was associated with reductions in self-cutting, NSSI, 
suicide ideation, and suicide plans. 

Results indicated that active TEC had a positive impact on most 
SITBs. We hypothesized that active TEC would produce reduc- 
tions in self-cutting and overall NSSI, but expected much milder 
effects on other SITBs and limited evidence of dosage and post- 
treatment month effects. Findings exceeded these expectations as, 
compared with the control version of TEC, the active version of 
TEC significantly reduced self-cutting (37% reduction), overall 
NSSI (43% reduction), and suicide plans (45% reduction), even 
after for including several powerful covariates. There were also 
fewer suicidal behaviors in the active group, especially among 
those who played active TEC at least once (see below for suicidal 
behavior analyses/discussion across all three studies). 


Exploratory analyses revealed that treatment effects for some 
SITBs became more powerful as active TEC dosage increased. 
Notably, even individuals who received a high dosage of active 
TEC (i.e., 2,000 points or more) played TEC for less than an hour 
total during the treatment month. This suggests that relatively 
infrequent use of TEC (e.g., once per day, 15 min per week) may 
be effective. However, few treatment effects remained significant 
during the posttreatment month, indicating that persistent TEC 
effects may require consistent TEC use. As hypothesized, TEC 
appeared to impact its intended treatment targets—particularly 
aversion toward NSSI stimuli, and greater changes in these treat- 
ment targets were associated with greater reductions in SITBs. 
Contrary to findings for other SITBs, there was no effect of active 
TEC on suicide ideation, suggesting that TEC may primarily 
impact more active/behaviorally focused SITBs. Taken together, 
these findings suggest that TEC may generate moderate reductions 
in SITBs in a short amount of time. 
The present findings are promising, but we emphasize that they 
should be interpreted with caution. In addition to several general 
limitations of the present series of studies (see General Discussion 
below), it should be kept in mind that many individual studies 
often either overestimate effects or cannot be replicated (e.g., 
Ioannidis, 2005). It is especially difficult to replicate findings of 
studies with small samples and highly variable outcomes (e.g., 
SITBs). Although the present findings were consistent with our 
preliminary work (Franklin, 2014; Hooley & Germain, 2014) and 
hypotheses, we attempted to replicate these findings to obtain a 
more accurate estimate of the true effects of TEC. 

We designed Study 2 to be a close replication of Study 1, with 
a few minor modifications. First, we altered the unpleasant stimuli 
in the active version of TEC to make them more disgusting and 
fear-inducing. We hypothesized that this change would increase 
the potency of TEC by more powerfully conditioning negative 
associations with SITB-related stimuli. Second, consistent with 
evidence that most replication studies are underpowered (McShane 
& Bockenholdt, 2014), we recruited slightly more participants. 
Third, to retain more participants for treatment month effects, we 
included past month SITB questions in the week four follow-up 
assessment. Fourth, we enacted procedures designed to encourage 
increased retention rates (e.g., compensating participants immedi- 
ately after assessment completions via Amazon.com). Fifth, we 
distinguished between self-cutting/NSSI episodes and events. 
These alterations are described in more detail below. Study 2 
hypotheses were identical to those of Study 1. 

Aside from the aforementioned changes and the minor details 
noted below, the measures, procedures, and data analytic plan were 
identical to Study 1. 
Participants. Participants were 131 individuals (74.05% fe- 
male) recruited from online web forums primarily devoted to the 
discussion of topics related to self-injury or psychopathology. We 
recruited from a total of nine forums (out of nine forums that 
we requested to post advertisements on). Inclusion criteria were 
the same as for Study 1, except that individuals were ineligible to 
participate if they had participated in Study 1. Participants were 
made aware of this criterion in study postings on forums and we 
additionally excluded anyone with email addresses or Internet 
Protocol addresses that were duplicates from Study 1 (n (cid:2) 0). The 
majority of participants were young adults (M (cid:2) 22.91 years old; 
SD (cid:2) 4.99) and the majority identified as Caucasian (83.21%), 
with the remaining identifying as Asian (5.34%), Hispanic 
(3.82%), Native American (1.53%), or Other (6.12%). Most par- 
ticipants were living in the United States (n (cid:2) 107), with other 
participants living in Canada (n (cid:2) 1), Europe (n (cid:2) 19), Asia (n (cid:2) 
1), Africa (n (cid:2) 1), and Australia (n (cid:2) 2). As in Study 1, most 
participants reported a history of psychiatric treatment (lifetime: 
81.68%; past month: 46.56%), many reported a history of inpatient 
treatment (lifetime: 29.77%; past month: 3.05%), and nearly half 
were currently on psychiatric medication (45.80%). Participants 
were randomly assigned to either the control group (n (cid:2) 69) or the 
active group (n (cid:2) 62). There were no significant demographic or 
treatment history differences between the groups (all ps (cid:4) .05). 
There were no significant group differences on SITBs or covari- 
ates, with the exception of significantly higher suicide ideation in 
the active group (B (cid:2) .18, SE (cid:2) .05, p (cid:3) .001; see Table 1). 
Stimuli. Study 1 included a broad range of unpleasant stimuli 
within the active version of TEC (and the AMP). In an effort to 
increase the potency of TEC, in the present study we only included 
unpleasant stimuli that were disgusting (e.g., infected toenails) or 
fear-inducing (e.g., close up of cluster of spiders). These images 
were a combination of IAPS pictures and Creative Commons Zero 
pictures from the Internet. 
Data analytic plan. The data analytic plan was similar to that 
of Study 1, with two exceptions. First, we distinguished between 
self-cutting/NSSI episodes (i.e., discrete periods when someone 
self-injurers; this could include a single cut to the skin or hundreds 
of cuts to the skin) and self-cutting/NSSI events (i.e., individual 
instances of actual or attempted tissue damage during an episode). 
After Study 1, we realized that some participants may interpret 
questions about self-cutting/NSSI frequency to refer to episodes 
whereas others may have interpreted these questions as referring to 
events. In SITBIs for Studies 2 and 3, we separately defined and 
assessed episodes and events, thereby adding two additional SITB 
outcomes. As shown in Table 1, there were marked differences in 
the frequency of self-cutting/NSSI episodes and events, with 
events being 4 to 5 times more frequent. Second, we assessed past 
month SITBs at the week four follow-up to increase the number of 
participants that could be included in treatment month analyses. 

Descriptive statistics. 
Retention rates. Retention rates were improved from Study 1, 
with smaller drops in retention from weeks one to four (84.73%, 
82.44%, 74.81%, and 73.38%, respectively), 90.84% of partici- 
pants completing at 
least one follow-up during the treatment 
month, and 64.89% of participants completing all follow-ups. 
Unlike Study 1, all participants who completed the week four 
follow-up were able to be included in treatment month analyses 
(n (cid:2) 96), with very similar completion rates across groups (control 
group (cid:2) 75.36%; active group (cid:2) 70.97%). A total of 71.75% of 
participants completed the posttreatment month follow-up assess- 
ment (control group (cid:2) 75.36%; active group (cid:2) 67.74%). 


Treatment participation. Compared with Study 1, a greater 
proportion of participants accessed the TEC app (90.84%), with 
high access rates in both groups (control group (cid:2) 92.75%; active 
group (cid:2) 88.71%). There were no significant group differences in 
points (p (cid:2) .33), but the control group (M (cid:2) 1,737.99, SD (cid:2) 
2,924.59; Mdn (cid:2) 500; Range (cid:2) 21,271.30) averaged more points 
than the active group (M (cid:2) 1,482.92, SD (cid:2) 2,088.06; Mdn (cid:2) 
546.55; Range (cid:2) 8,881.00). In terms of active TEC dosage, 76 
participants received no dose, 39 received a low dose, and 16 
received a high dose. Active TEC points were highest during the 
first week (though much lower than in Study 1), with points 
diminishing during the second week and leveling off thereafter 
(Figure S4). 
Treatment analyses. 
Self-cutting episodes. The active group reported significantly 
fewer self-cutting episodes during the treatment month (see Figure 
2), and episodes dropped significantly as active TEC dose in- 
creased (B (cid:2) (cid:5).15, SE (cid:2) .05, IRR (cid:2) .86, p (cid:3) .001). However, this 
treatment effect did not persist during the posttreatment month 
(p (cid:2) .67). 
Self-cutting events. There was no effect of group (see Figure 
2) or active TEC dosage (p (cid:2) .58) on self-cutting events during the 
treatment month. Likewise, there was no group effect on self- 
cutting events during the posttreatment month (p (cid:2) .53). 
Overall NSSI episodes. During the treatment month, there 
was no effect of group (see Figure 2) or active TEC dosage (p (cid:2) 
.44), and no group effect during the posttreatment month effects 
(p (cid:2) .59). 
Overall NSSI events. As with self-cutting events, there was no 
effect of group on overall NSSI events during the treatment month 
(see Figure 2) or posttreatment month (p (cid:2) .72), and there were no 
dosage effects (p (cid:2) .87). 
Suicide ideation. There was no significant effect of group (see 
Figure 3) or dosage (p (cid:2) .95) on suicide ideation during the 
treatment month. However, the active group reported significantly 
more days of suicide ideation during the posttreatment month (B (cid:2) 
.50, SE (cid:2) .20, IRR (cid:2) 1.65, p (cid:2) .01). It is important to note that the 
active group did not report an increase in suicide ideation relative 
to baseline. Both groups showed declines in ideation across the 
course of the study (see Table S5); the present results indicate that 
the active group’s decline in ideation during the posttreatment 
month was less steep than that of the control group. 
Suicide plans. There was no significant effect of group (see 
Figure 3) or dosage (p (cid:2) .75) on suicide plans during the treatment 
month. Similar to suicide ideation analyses, however, the active 
group reported significantly more days of suicide plans during the 
posttreatment month (B (cid:2) .85, SE (cid:2) .35, IRR (cid:2) 2.34, p (cid:2) .02). As 
with suicide ideation, both groups displayed declines in suicide 
plans across the course of the study (see Table S5). The present 
analyses indicate that the active group’s decline in suicide plans 
during the posttreatment month was less steep than that of the 
control group. 
Suicidal behaviors. Four participants in the active group re- 
ported at least one suicidal behavior (producing 14 behaviors) 
whereas eight participants in the control group reported at least one 
behavior (producing 21 behaviors). Among participants who ac- 
cessed the active TEC app at least once, three reported at least one 
suicidal behavior (producing eight behaviors); among participants 
who never accessed the active TEC app, nine reported at least one 
behavior (producing 27 behaviors). 
Non-SITB dysregulated behaviors. As in Study 1, there was 
no effect of group on non-SITB dysregulated behaviors during the 
treatment month (p (cid:2) .68). 
Treatment targets. Contrary to the findings of Study 1, there 
were no group effects on change in implicit affect toward NSSI 
stimuli (p (cid:2) .33) or self-related words (p (cid:2) .47), and change in 
implicit affect was not significantly associated with any SITB 
outcome (ps (cid:4) .05). 

Study 2 partially replicated some of the findings from Study 1, 
but produced much weaker results overall. Similar to Study 1, the 
active group displayed significant reductions in self-cutting epi- 
sodes (40% reduction) that increased as active TEC dosage in- 
creased. Also similar to Study 1, the active TEC group displayed 
fewer suicidal behaviors, with individuals who played the active 
TEC app at least once reporting 70% fewer suicidal behaviors 
compared to those who did not play the app. Contrary to hypoth- 
eses, there were no significant effects on self-cutting/NSSI events. 
This suggests that TEC may primarily impact the number discrete 
instances that someone decides to engage in self-injury (i.e., epi- 
sodes) rather than the number of times someone attempts to 
damage their tissue across all episodes (i.e., events). Also contrary 
to hypotheses, the active group displayed significantly higher 
suicide ideation and plans compared to the control group during 
the posttreatment month. As noted above, however, both groups 
displayed reductions in suicide ideation and plans during the study 
(see Table S5); reductions in the active group were less steep than 
those of the control group. Finally, unlike Study 1, the present 
study did not detect a significant effect of TEC on its intended 
treatment targets. 
There are many possible explanations for the reduced effects 
observed in Study 2. One possibility is that the changes to active 
TEC (i.e., more disgusting and fear-inducing images) altered the 
effects of active TEC. Another possibility is that the present 
control group was more engaged and motivated than the active 
group. However, the most likely explanation for these divergent 
effects is chance. Study effects are drawn from a distribution of 
potential effects. Across hundreds of studies, most effects will 
cluster near a mean, but by chance many effects will be substan- 
tially above or below this mean. This between-studies heteroge- 
neity is likely to be especially common among small studies and 
highly variable outcomes (e.g., SITBs). With just two studies, it is 
unclear whether Study 1 provided overly optimistic effect esti- 
mates, Study 2 produced overly pessimistic effect estimates, or 
both. In part to address this question, we conducted a third study. 

Study 3 was an extension of Studies 1 and 2, with one major 
change: it was primarily suicide-focused. SITB-related targets in 
the active version of TEC were primarily suicide-related (rather 
than NSSI-related) and participants were recruited on the basis of 
suicidal behavior rather than NSSI. Hypotheses were the same as 
those from Studies 1 and 2, except that we expected stronger 
effects on suicide-related outcomes and milder effects on NSSI- 
related outcomes. 
week four 
65.38%). 

Treatment participation. TEC usage was between that of 
Studies 1 and 2, with 78.53% of participants accessing the TEC 
app at least once during the first month (control group: 78.82%; 
active group: 78.20%). There were no significant group differ- 
ences in TEC points during the first month (p (cid:2) .35), though the 
active group (M (cid:2) 1,434.85, SD (cid:2) 3,081.06; Mdn (cid:2) 273.65; 
Range (cid:2) 21,841) scored more points than the control group (M (cid:2) 
1,054.73; SD (cid:2) 1,867.07; Mdn (cid:2) 165.20; Range (cid:2) 7,882.90). As 
in the two prior studies, TEC points were highest during the 
first week. Thereafter, TEC points remained relatively high 
during the second week and diminished across weeks three and 
four (Figure S4). 
TEC usage fell sharply during the second month, with only 
36.02% of participants accessing the app. Both the active group, 
t(72) (cid:2) 4.27, p (cid:3) .001, and the control group, t(82) (cid:2) 3.94, p (cid:3) 
.001, showed significant reductions in points from month one to 
month two. Both groups showed similar low levels of play (active: 
M (cid:2) 488.48, SD (cid:2) 2,277.84, Mdn (cid:2) 0, Range (cid:2) 19,047; control: 
M (cid:2) 355.84, SD (cid:2) 1,340.04, Mdn (cid:2) 0, Range (cid:2) 11,431), with the 
majority of participants receiving zero points. 
Treatment analyses. 
Self-cutting episodes. The active group reported significantly 
fewer self-cutting episodes during the first month (see Figure 2), 
but there was no dosage effect (p (cid:2) .22). The treatment effect did 
not persist into the second month (p (cid:2) .37). 
Self-cutting events. Analyses indicated significantly fewer 
self-cutting events in the active group during the first month (see 
Figure 2) and this effect persisted into the second month 
(B (cid:2) (cid:5).66, SE (cid:2) .15, IRR (cid:2) .52, p (cid:3) .001); however, there was 
no evidence of a dosage effect (p (cid:2) .20). 
Overall NSSI episodes. Analyses that only controlled for prior 
month NSSI episodes (vs. the full range of covariates) revealed 
that the active group reported significantly fewer overall NSSI 
episodes during the first month (see Table S1). However, this 
effect was no longer significant when the full range of covariates 
were included (see Figure 2; Table S2). There was no effect of 
group on overall NSSI episodes during second month (p (cid:2) .38), 
and there was no evidence of a dosage effect (p (cid:2) .65). 
Overall NSSI events. As with NSSI events, analyses that only 
controlled for prior month NSSI events showed that the active 
group displayed significantly fewer NSSI events during the first 
month (see Table S1). But analyses including the full range of 
covariates found that there was no effect of group on overall NSSI 
events in the first (see Figure 2) or second month (p (cid:2) .58), and 
there was no dosage effect (p (cid:2) .98). 
Suicide ideation. There was no effect of group (see Figure 3) 
or dosage (p (cid:2) .43) on suicide ideation during the first month, and 
no effect of group during the second month (p (cid:2) .12). 
Suicide plans. Analyses indicated a significant reduction in 
suicide plans for the active group during the first month (see 
Figure 3), but tests were nonsignificant for a dosage effect during 
the first month (p (cid:2) .09) and a group effect during the second 
month (p (cid:2) .07). 
Suicidal behaviors. Three participants in the active group 
reported at least one suicidal behavior (producing five behaviors); 
five participants in the control group reported at least one behavior 
(producing 22 behaviors). Among participants who accessed the 
Participants. Participants were 163 individuals (58.89% fe- 
male) recruited from online web forums that focused on topics 
related to suicide and psychopathology. We recruited from a total 
of nine forums (27 were contacted, 14 did not reply, four said no). 
Inclusion criteria were similar to Studies 1 and 2, except that 
participants were required to report at least one suicidal behavior 
within the past year and were not eligible to participate if they had 
participated in either of the prior studies (n (cid:2) 0). Most participants 
were young adults (M (cid:2) 24.50 years, SD (cid:2) 6.61) and most 
self-identified as Caucasian (82.21%), with the remaining identi- 
fying as Hispanic (6.13%), Asian (4.91%), Black/African Ameri- 
can (1.84%), Native American (1.23%), or Other (3.68%). The 
majority of participants were living in the United States (n (cid:2) 138), 
with others living in Canada (n (cid:2) 7), Europe (n (cid:2) 14), Asia (n (cid:2) 
3), and South America (n (cid:2) 1). 
Similar to Studies 1 and 2, most participants had a history of 
psychiatric treatment (lifetime: 71.78%; past month: 40.49%), 
many reported a history of inpatient treatment (lifetime: 32.51%; 
past month: 1.80%) and nearly half were currently taking psychi- 
atric medication (42.94%). Participants were randomly assigned to 
either the control group (n (cid:2) 85) or active group (n (cid:2) 78). There 
were no significant group differences on any demographic or 
treatment history variables, with the exception of age, F(1, 161) (cid:2) 
4.70, p (cid:2) .03. The control group (M (cid:2) 25.61, SD (cid:2) 7.26) was 
slightly older than the active group (M (cid:2) 23.42, SD (cid:2) 5.40), and 
we note here that this factor did not alter the magnitude or 
significance of analyses when entered as a covariate. There 
were no group differences for any baseline SITB or covariate 
(see Table 1). 
Stimuli. Non-SITB stimuli were the same as those from Study 
2. Rather than SITB stimuli depicting only NSSI, the present study 
included SITB stimuli related to pill overdose (n (cid:2) 4), hanging 
(n (cid:2) 2), jumping from heights (n (cid:2) 2), pointing a gun at one’s own 
head (n (cid:2) 2), self-cutting (n (cid:2) 2), skulls/bones (n (cid:2) 2), and the 
words “death” and “suicide.” All stimuli were either created by our 
group (words and self-cutting pictures), taken from the IAPS, or 
Creative Commons Zero images from the Internet. 
Design. The design of the present study was similar to that of 
Studies 1 and 2, except that participants were allowed continued 
access to (and compensation for) TEC during the second month of 
the study. This allowed us to explore whether (or to what degree) 
TEC use patterns declined over a longer period of time and what 
effect this might have on SITBs. To maximize comparability with 
prior studies, the data analytic plan remained the same, with 
analyses primarily concentrated on the first month of the study. 

Descriptive statistics. 
Retention rates for follow-up assessments. Retention rates for 
Study 3 were comparable with those of Study 2, with rates grad- 
ually diminishing from weeks one to four (81%, 79.1%, 71.8%, 
and 67.5%, respectively). A total of 84.47% of participants had 
data for at least one follow-up during the first month, and 60.87% 
had data on all month one follow-ups for all assessments. A total 
of 55.21% of the sample completed the month two follow-up. As 
with Study 2, the present month one SITB-based analyses are 
based on month-based estimates of SITBs assessed during the 





active TEC app, two reported at least one behavior (producing four 
behaviors); among participants who never accessed the TEC app, 
six reported at least one behavior (producing 23 behaviors). 


ies, there was no effect of group on IDB scores (p (cid:2) .74). 
targets. Similar to Study 1, 
the active group 
(M (cid:2) (cid:5).07, SD (cid:2) .19) showed a significantly larger increase in 
implicit aversion to SITB stimuli compared with the control group 
(M (cid:2) .03, SD (cid:2) .21), t(79) (cid:2) 2.22, p (cid:2) .02, d (cid:2) .50 (note: positive 
change scores indicate diminished aversion toward stimuli, nega- 
tive scores indicate increased aversion toward stimuli). Diminished 
aversion to SITB stimuli (i.e., the inverse of the present treatment 
target effect) significantly predicted more self-cutting episodes 
(B (cid:2) 2.86, SE (cid:2) .79, IRR (cid:2) 17.46, p (cid:3) .001) and NSSI episodes 
(B (cid:2) 1.83, SE (cid:2) .19, IRR (cid:2) 6.23, p (cid:3) .001). These findings 
indicate that TEC increased aversion to NSSI stimuli and that this 
increased aversion was associated with reduced self-cutting and 
NSSI episodes. However, compared with the control group, the 
active group did not display a significant increase in positive 
implicit affect toward self-related words (p (cid:2) .20). 

Study 3 extended the general TEC findings of Studies 1 and 2. 
The overall pattern and magnitude of effects were in between those 
of Studies 1 and 2, suggesting that these prior studies may have 
respectively provided optimistic and pessimistic estimates of TEC 
effects on SITBs. The active group displayed significant reduc- 
tions for most SITB outcomes except suicide ideation (see Tables 
S1 and S4, Figure 2), and NSSI effects were no longer significant 
when accounting for the full range of covariates (see Table S1, 
Figure 2). There was some evidence of a dosage effect, but very 
little evidence that treatment effects extended beyond the first 
month. The present study extends prior TEC findings to a modified 
version of TEC (i.e., suicide-related stimuli) and a sample selected 
on the basis of prior suicidal behavior. 

Although rates of suicidal behaviors were in the expected di- 
rection for each study, there were too few behaviors to conduct 
reliable analyses within each study (see Table S6 for information 
on specific suicidal behaviors). Accordingly, we collapsed suicidal 
behaviors across each study to provide a more reliable assessment 
of TEC on these behaviors. Given the low rate of behaviors, 
however, these analyses should be considered exploratory and 
preliminary. 
Group treatment analyses. Combining data from all three 
studies, more individuals in the control groups reported at least one 
suicidal behavior (n (cid:2) 17 of 135 participants) than in the active 
groups (n (cid:2) 12 out of 130 participants), but this difference was not 
significant, (cid:10)2(1) (cid:2) .73, p (cid:2) .19. A significantly higher frequency 
of suicidal behaviors was reported in the control groups (n (cid:2) 62 
behaviors from 135 participants) compared with the active groups 
(n (cid:2) 29 behaviors from 130 participants), B (cid:2) (cid:5).71, SE (cid:2) .26, 
IRR (cid:2) .49, p (cid:2) .01 (i.e., 51% reduction in the rate of suicidal 
behaviors); however, this effect was no longer significant after 
controlling for baseline month suicidal behaviors, B (cid:2) (cid:5).49, SE (cid:2) 
.27, IRR (cid:2) .61, p (cid:2) .07). 
Dosage analyses. We conducted these same analyses after 
dividing participants into those who did and did not access active 
TEC at least once (i.e., any dose vs. no dose). Significantly fewer 
participants who received any dose of active TEC reported at least 
one suicidal behavior (n (cid:2) 8 out of 117 participants) compared 
with those who received no dose (n (cid:2) 21 out of 147 participants), 
(cid:10)2(1) (cid:2) 3.70, p (cid:2) .02. Similarly, compared with the no dose group 
(n (cid:2) 74 behaviors from 147 participants), the any dose group 
reported significantly fewer suicidal behaviors (n (cid:2) 17 behaviors 
from 117 participants), B (cid:2) (cid:5)1.24, SE (cid:2) .30, IRR (cid:2) .29, p (cid:3) .001 
(i.e., 71% reduction in suicidal behaviors after accounting for 
excess zeros). This effect held when controlling for baseline month 
suicidal behaviors (B (cid:2) (cid:5)1.12, SE (cid:2) .31, IRR (cid:2) .33, p (cid:3) .001). 
Although these effects are consistent with hypotheses and the 
effect of TEC on other SITBs, much larger studies are needed to 
provide a more reliable estimate of the effect of TEC on suicidal 
behaviors. 

There is a need for SITB interventions that overcome the bar- 
riers to large-scale treatment. The present series of studies repre- 
sent the initial steps toward the development of such an interven- 
tion. The results of Study 2 were relatively weak, but aggregated 
results across studies indicated that our brief, game-like app re- 
duced self-cutting episodes, overall NSSI episodes, suicide plans, 
and suicidal behaviors. Notably, most of these reductions remained 
in the context of several powerful covariates—including prior 
month SITBs—that significantly predicted SITBs during the treat- 
ment month. Also of note, participants were not made aware of 
how TEC might work and qualitative debriefing interviews indi- 
cated that participants did not ascertain TEC’s intended mecha- 
nisms of action. These findings suggest that TEC is a brief (i.e., 
1–2 min), low effort, game-like intervention that stimulates mod- 
erate reductions in most SITBs in a short amount of time. 
Although these findings are promising, several other findings 
make clear the need for improvements that can increase TEC 
potency, identify additional treatment targets, and increase user 
engagement. First, despite reductions in most SITBs, no study 
showed a significant treatment effect on suicide ideation. Second, 
even though group effects were reliable, there was mixed evidence 
that greater use of TEC was associated with greater SITB reduc- 
tions. Third, treatment effects rarely persisted after TEC cessation 
(i.e., after month one of each study). Fourth, there was mixed 
evidence that TEC engaged its intended treatment targets, with 
TEC primarily impacting the diminished aversion to SITB stimuli 
target rather than the self-aversion target. 

the hypothesized 
mechanisms of action for TEC, but they also highlight the promise 
of targeting a novel risk factor—the diminished aversion to SITB 
stimuli (or, capability for SITBs). The Benefits and Barriers Model 
of NSSI (Franklin, Lee, et al., 2014; Franklin, Puzia, et al., 2014) 
and the Interpersonal-Psychological Theory of Suicide (Joiner, 
2005) both note this as a critical SITB ingredient. The present 
results suggest that the capability to enact nonsuicidal and suicidal 
self-injury is not an immutable trait; rather, it appears to be a 
malleable risk factor that reduces SITBs when appropriately tar- 
geted. 


Along with limitations related to the present findings, several 
methodological limitations should be kept in mind when interpret- 
ing the results of the present study. First, all participants were 
recruited via online forums that focused on topics related to 
self-injury, suicide, and psychopathology. The present samples 
accordingly may have been biased in terms of desire and ability to 
engage in a web-based treatment. On balance, these samples were 
drawn from our major population of interest—the worldwide pop- 
ulation of individuals with Internet access and a history of SITBs. 
Nevertheless, it would be helpful to replicate the present findings 
in large samples recruited from the community, local clinics, and 
inpatient units. Given the high concordance between in-person and 
Internet-based studies (e.g., Casler et al., 2013; Crump et al., 2013; 
Hauser & Schwarz, 2015) and the consistency of the present 
findings and with our in-person preliminary studies (Franklin, 
2014; Hooley & Germain, 2014), we would expect similar findings 
across the two types of studies. 
Second, an additional sampling-related limitation was that par- 
ticipants were primarily young adults. This is a very important 
population as all SITBs (with the exception of suicide death) are 
particularly common among this age group. However, it will be 
important to replicate the present findings in adolescents and older 
adults. This may require modifying stimuli to be appropriate for 
adolescents and modifying the nature of the intervention (i.e., 
app-based) to be more appropriate for elderly adults. Third, the 
present studies were large compared with most SITB treatment 
studies, but it would be helpful to replicate the present findings in 
a much larger sample (e.g., (cid:4)10,000 participants). This would 
allow for more reliable estimates of TEC effects on very low base 
rate behaviors (e.g., specific types of suicide attempts) and provide 
sufficient power to examine moderators of TEC effectiveness. 
Fourth, we paid participants to use TEC. It is unclear whether 
(or to what degree) participants would use TEC in the absence of 
such compensation. Given that the control group and active groups 
were both paid for TEC use and accessed their respective versions 
of TEC at similar rates, this payment issue is unlikely to account 
for the present treatment effects. Nevertheless, for feasibility pur- 
poses, studies are needed to test TEC use in the absence of 
monetary compensation and to determine which factors best pre- 
dict TEC use. Fifth, across studies, 70% to 90% of participants 
opened the TEC app (whether active or control); these figures are 
encouraging but far from our ideal treatment engagement rate of 
100%. To improve on this limitation, future versions of TEC must 
be modified in several ways to increase its potency, reinforcing 
qualities, and ability to impact SITBs on a large scale. For exam- 
ple, we are working on new versions that include a much higher 
number (and greater variety) of stimuli, greater variations in dif- 
ficulty, integration of ecological momentary assessments that al- 
low for personalization and optimization algorithms to tailor TEC 
to each individual across time, and a feature that automatically 
translates TEC into a wide range of languages. 
Sixth, TEC use and dosage were self-selected. This self-directed 
use approximates how TEC might be used in the real world, but it 
also leaves open many questions about how assigned TEC dosage 
may affect SITBs and what the optimal dosage of TEC might be. 
Future studies would benefit from exploring these important ques- 
tions. Seventh, the present study primarily examined TEC effects 
over the course of a single month and results indicated that the 
effects of TEC likely do not persist long after TEC cessation. 
Furthermore, month two results from Study 3 suggest that TEC use 
may have to be fairly regular (e.g., at least once per week) to 
produce significant benefits. Future studies should evaluate 
whether improvements such as personalization algorithms and 
additional gamification elements generate more TEC use and more 
lasting TEC effects. Eighth, the active group displayed a less steep 
decline in suicide ideation and plans during the posttreatment 
month of Study 2. Given that similar patterns were not observed in 
Studies 1 or 3, these may be chance findings. However, it will be 
important for future studies to more thoroughly investigate the 
possibility of adverse TEC effects. 
Ninth and finally, the present version of TEC was only designed 
to impact SITBs. Indeed, results indicated the TEC did not affect 
a range of other dysregulated behaviors. This suggests that the 
effects of TEC were specific and did not generate any compensa- 
tory dysregulated behaviors. Ideally, however, TEC would have a 
much broader impact. Given its design and underlying principles, 
TEC could be modified to target a wide range of psychological 
issues, especially those that can be clearly represented by specific 
images or words. 
These significant limitations notwithstanding, the present series 
of studies indicates that TEC is a promising intervention for SITBs 
that has the potential overcome many of the traditional barriers to 
mass dissemination of treatment. With further testing and contin- 
ued improvement, TEC may eventually extend beyond its present 
limitations and have the potential to generate large-scale reduc- 
tions in SITBs and other psychopathological phenomena. Given its 
format, TEC could contribute to such reductions as either an 
add-on to existing treatments or as a low-cost, highly disseminable 
standalone intervention. 

Brown, G. K., & Jager-Hyman, S. (2014). Evidence-based psychotherapies 
for suicide prevention: Future directions. American Journal of Preven- 
tive Medicine, 47, S186 –S194. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2014 
.06.008 
Bruffaerts, R., Demyttenaere, K., Hwang, I., Chiu, W. T., Sampson, N., 
Kessler, R. C., . . . Nock, M. K. (2011). Treatment of suicidal people 
around the world. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 64 –70. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.110.084129 
Bull, S. S., Vallejos, D., Levine, D., & Ortiz, C. (2008). Improving 
recruitment and retention for an online randomized controlled trial: 
Experience from the Youthnet study. AIDS Care, 20, 887– 893. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540120701771697 
Casler, K., Bickel, L., & Hackett, E. (2013). Separate but equal? A 
comparison of participants and data gathered via Amazon’s MTurk, 
social media, and face-to-face behavioral testing. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 29, 2156 –2160. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.05.009 
Crosby, A., Gfroerer, J., Han, B., Ortega, L., & Parks, S. E. (2011). 
Suicidal thoughts and behaviors among adults aged 18 years: United 
States, 2008 –2009. U. S. Department of and Human Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Crump, M. J., McDonnell, J. V., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013). Evaluating 
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk as a tool for experimental behavioral re- 
search. PLoS ONE, 8, e57410. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone 
.0057410 


Franklin, J. C. (2014). The nature, development, and reversal of positive 
attitudes toward nonsuicidal self-injury: Implications for prediction and 


treatment. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences 
and Engineering, 9-B(E), 74. 
Franklin, J. C., Lee, K. M., Puzia, M. E., & Prinstein, M. J. (2014). 
Recent and frequent nonsuicidal self-injury is associated with dimin- 
ished implicit and explicit aversion toward self-cutting stimuli. Clin- 
ical Psychological Science, 2, 306 –318. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 
2167702613503140 
Franklin, J. C., & Nock, M. K. (in press). Nonsuicidal self-injury and its 
relation to suicidal behavior. In P. Kleespies (Ed.), The Oxford handbook 
of behavioral emergencies and crises. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Franklin, J. C., Puzia, M. E., Lee, K. M., Lee, G. E., Hanna, E. K., Spring, 
V. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2013). The nature of pain offset relief in 
nonsuicidal self-injury: A laboratory study. Clinical Psychological Sci- 
ence, 1, 110 –119. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2167702612474440 
Franklin, J. C., Puzia, M. E., Lee, K. M., & Prinstein, M. J. (2014). Low 
implicit and explicit aversion toward self-cutting stimuli longitudinally 
predict nonsuicidal self-injury. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123, 
463– 469. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036436 
Glenn, C. R., Franklin, J. C., & Nock, M. K. (2015). Evidence-based 
psychosocial treatments for self-injurious thoughts and behaviors in 
youth. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 44, 1–29. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2014.945211 
Hauser, D. J., & Schwarz, N. (2015). Attentive Turkers: MTurk partici- 
pants perform better on online attention checks than do subject pool 
participants. Behavior Research Methods. [Advance online publication.] 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-015-0578-z 
Hofmann, W., De Houwer, J., Perugini, M., Baeyens, F., & Crombez, G. 
(2010). Evaluative conditioning in humans: A meta-analysis. Psycho- 
logical Bulletin, 136, 390 – 421. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018916 
Hooley, J. M., & St. Germain, S. A. (2014). Nonsuicidal self-injury, pain, 
and self-criticism does changing self-worth change pain endurance in 
people who engage in self-injury? Clinical Psychological Science, 2, 
297–305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2167702613509372 
Houben, K., Schoenmakers, T. M., & Wiers, R. W. (2010). I didn’t feel like 
drinking but I don’t know why: The effects of evaluative conditioning on 
alcohol-related attitudes, craving and behavior. Addictive Behaviors, 35, 
1161–1163. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2010.08.012 
Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. 
PLoS Medicine, 2, e124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed 
.0020124 
Ip, E. J., Barnett, M. J., Tenerowicz, M. J., & Perry, P. J. (2010). The touro 
12-step: A systematic guide to optimizing survey research with online 
discussion boards. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 12, e16. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1314 
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Borges, G., Nock, M., & Wang, P. S. (2005). 
Trends in suicide ideation, plans, gestures, and attempts in the United 
States, 1990 –1992 to 2001–2003. JAMA: Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 293, 2487–2495. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama 
.293.20.2487 
Koole, S. L., Dijksterhuis, A., & van Knippenberg, A. (2001). What’s in a 
name: Implicit self-esteem and the automatic self. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 80, 669 – 685. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- 
3514.80.4.669 
Lewis, S. P., & Michal, N. J. (2015). Start, stop, and continue: Preliminary 
insight into the appeal of self-injury e-communities. Journal of Health 
Psychology. 
McShane, B. B., & Böckenholt, U. (2014). You cannot step into the 
same river twice: When power analyses are optimistic. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 9, 612– 625. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 
1745691614548513 
Mojtabai, R., Olfson, M., Sampson, N. A., Jin, R., Druss, B., Wang, P. S., 
. . . Kessler, R. C. (2011). Barriers to mental health treatment: Results 
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Psychological Med- 
icine, 41, 1751–1761. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291710002291 
Nock, M. K., Borges, G., Bromet, E. J., Cha, C. B., Kessler, R. C., & Lee, 
S. (2008). Suicide and suicidal behavior. Epidemiologic Reviews, 30, 
133–154. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxn002 
Nock, M. K., Holmberg, E. B., Photos, V. I., & Michel, B. D. (2007). 
Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors Interview: Development, reli- 
ability, and validity in an adolescent sample. Psychological Assessment, 
19, 309 –317. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.19.3.309 
Nock, M. K., Wedig, M. M., Holmberg, E. B., & Hooley, J. M. (2008). The 
emotion reactivity scale: Development, evaluation, and relation to self- 
injurious thoughts and behaviors. Behavior Therapy, 39, 107–116. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2007.05.005 
Payne, K., & Lundberg, K. (2014). The affect misattribution procedure: 
Ten years of evidence on reliability, validity, and mechanisms. Social 
and Personality Psychology Compass, 8, 672– 686. http://dx.doi.org/10 
.1111/spc3.12148 
Sareen, J., Jagdeo, A., Cox, B. J., Clara, I., ten Have, M., Belik, S.-L., . . . 
Stein, M. B. (2007). Perceived barriers to mental health service utiliza- 
tion in the United States, Ontario, and the Netherlands. Psychiatric 
Services, 58, 357–364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ps.2007.58.3.357 
Swannell, S. V., Martin, G. E., Page, A., Hasking, P., & St John, N. J. 
(2014). Prevalence of nonsuicidal self-injury in nonclinical samples: 
Systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression. Suicide and Life- 
Threatening Behavior, 44, 273–303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/sltb 
.12070 




Kazdin, A. E., & Rabbitt, S. M. (2013). Novel models for delivering mental 
health services and reducing the burdens of mental illness. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 1, 170 –191. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 
2167702612463566 
Received June 16, 2015 
Revision received February 1, 2016 


Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available 
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://notify.apa.org/ and you will be 
notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available! 
