GAMES FOR HEALTH JOURNAL: Research, Development, and Clinical Applications 
Volume 5, Number 1, 2016 
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. 
DOI: 10.1089/g4h.2015.0033 

Feasibility and Efﬁcacy of an mHealth Game 
for Managing Anxiety: 
‘‘Flowy’’ Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial 
and Design Evaluation 
Quynh Pham, MSc,1,2 Yasmin Khatib, PhD,1 Stephen Stansfeld, MD, PhD,1 
Simon Fox,2 and Tobias Green, LLB 2 

Objective: Meeting the complex needs of patients with chronic common mental health disorders (CMHDs) may 
be the greatest challenge facing organized medical practice. On the basis of a well-established and proven 
theoretical foundation for controlled respiration as a behavioral intervention for CMHDs, as well as preliminary 
evidence that gamiﬁcation can improve health outcomes through increasing patient engagement, this ran- 
domized controlled pilot study evaluated the feasibility and clinical efﬁcacy of a mobile health game called 
‘‘Flowy’’ (www.ﬂowygame.com) that digitally delivered breathing retraining exercises for anxiety, panic, and 
hyperventilation symptom management. 
Materials and Methods: We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group randomized controlled trial 
focusing on feasibility, clinical efﬁcacy, and design proof of concept. In the intervention condition (n = 31), 
participants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the control condition (n = 32), participants were 
placed on a waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to ‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using 
psychological self-report questionnaires were made at 2 and 4 weeks post-baseline. 
Results: At trial conclusion, participants found ‘‘Flowy’’ acceptable as an anxiety management intervention. 
‘‘Flowy’’ engaged participants sufﬁciently to endorse proactive gameplay. Intent-to-treat analysis revealed a 
reduction in anxiety, panic, and self-report hyperventilation scores in both trial arms, with the intervention arm 
experiencing greater quality of life. Participants perceived ‘‘Flowy’’ as a fun and useful intervention, proac- 
tively used ‘‘Flowy’’ as part of their care, and would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to family and friends. 
Conclusions: Our results suggest that a digital delivery of breathing retraining exercises through a mobile 
health game can manage anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation symptoms associated with CMHDs. 



for a quarter of the global burden of disease, deﬁned as 
premature death combined with years lived with disability.1 
They include depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic 
disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress 
disorder, and social anxiety disorder2 and are classiﬁed as a 
chronic disease by the World Health Organization alongside 
asthma, cancer, and diabetes.3 Worldwide, 272 million people 
suffer from anxiety disorders alone.3 The Mental Health 
Foundation reports one in ﬁve Britons feel anxious a lot or 
all the time; of these, over 6 million will experience panic 
attacks, and of this group, 1.7 million will suffer from panic 
disorder.4 
Meeting the complex needs of patients with chronic CMHDs 
may be the greatest challenge facing organized medical prac- 
tice. Despite recent global commitments to addressing mental 
disorders,5 national and international responses have been 
slow, inadequate, and fragmented. This has resulted in exor- 
bitant costs to the healthcare system; 15 percent of all United 

University of London, London, United Kingdom. 
2Playlab London, London, United Kingdom. 
This study was registered with a clinical trials registry under trial identiﬁer number ISRCTN78356215. 



Kingdom National Health Service (NHS) expenditure on 
chronic disease is linked to poor mental health and well-being, 
totalling nearly £10 billion in England each year.6 CMHDs 
disrupt existing acute healthcare structures built to be reactive 
to disease—responding only when the patient is sick—but not 
proactive and focused on keeping the patient healthy. 
Characterized by a long duration and slow progression, 
anxiety disorders are an extreme manifestation of an other- 
wise functional and appropriate human response to situa- 
tional stressors. For those with the most severe forms, their 
lives can become completely dominated and debilitated by 
their condition. The epidemiology of anxiety disorders no- 
tably postulates respiratory abnormalities as both a cyclic 
cause and effect for panic attacks.7–12 As a result controlled 
respiratory interventions by which a patient exerts voluntary 
control over his or her own breathing are hypothesized to 
alleviate anxiety symptoms. Breathing retraining methodol- 
ogies have been successfully validated in numerous outcome 
studies for effecting anxiogenic health outcomes.12–17 They 
are endorsed by the NHS and have been integrated into the 
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies 
national 
(IAPT) program, where patients are encouraged to practice 
controlled breathing for 2–3 minutes, three to four times 
daily, to cope with panic and anxiety.18 
Despite their effectiveness and proven ability to optimize 
anxiety symptom management, current methods of breath- 
ing retraining delivery are limited in both availability and 
access, making them difﬁcult to integrate into anxiety self- 
management regimens in their current form. Breathing 
retraining exercises are primarily taught in services, which 
is problematic given that nearly 85 percent of people with 
mental disorders are not receiving treatment.19 Moreover, 
although regulated breathing techniques are easy to learn, 
they are also easy to perform incorrectly. Mitigating the risk 
of people seeking misleading psychoeducation on breathing 
retraining to manage their condition, as well as respecting 
that intensive self-management is challenging for everyone 
with anxiety, 
is critical when planning novel delivery 
channels. 
A need therefore exists for using integrative healthcare 
models and designing proactive and feasible interventions 
for CMHDs with patient-level integration at all stages of 
research and design, from conceptualization to delivery. The 
patient-centered model of care is grounded in the belief that 
people are more than their disorders.20 Patients should be 
viewed as individuals with unique experiences, needs, and 
aspirations and seen in the context of their daily lives, as part 
of a family and a community. By focusing on people rather 
than their disease and designing holistic interventions that 
allow them to actively engage in and self-manage their 
condition, patients are placed at the center of the healthcare 
system where they belong. 

Advances in technology and particularly mobile digital 
information and communication technology have enabled a 
rapid proliferation of mobile health (mHealth) applications 
(apps), many targeted at health. The developers of these in- 
clude commercial enterprises, third-sector organizations, and 
NHS Trusts and staff, as well as patients themselves, with the 
majority of apps being sold via commercial marketplaces. As 
of January 2013, 75 percent of the United Kingdom popu- 
lation own a smartphone, with one in ﬁve having down- 
loaded at least one mHealth app21; it is projected that by 
2018 there will be 3.4 billion smartphone users, of whom 50 
percent will have downloaded at least one mHealth app.22 
With this level of ubiquitous penetration, mHealth apps are 
well positioned to improve access and treatment adherence 
to psychological and behavioral interventions by enabling 
services to be delivered more ﬂexibly and tailored to indi- 
vidual patient needs. They offer the potential to transform 
mental health delivery through widening access to informa- 
tion and offering sustained adherence support through real- 
time symptom monitoring. 
The NHS Confederation’s Mental Health Network recog- 
nizes that mHealth apps represent real opportunities to engage 
and empower patients with mental health problems, but also 
cautions that they must have a strong evidence base. The Mental 
Health Network recommends that patients be actively involved 
throughout the development process to ensure the trust of the 
wider public.23 Additionally, policy makers, practitioners, and 
providers of mental health services must also be active partners 
in the development, evaluation, and implementation of new 
technology to capitalize on opportunities offered by mHealth 
apps to not just improve efﬁciency, but also to transform the 
very nature of mental healthcare. 
Employing a user-centered design process—an evidence- 
based iterative approach endorsed by the WHO and informed 
by a thorough understanding of a speciﬁc end-user group—in 
creating mHealth apps demonstrates a responsible and ap- 
propriate prioritization toward patient-centered care.24 User- 
centered design has been used in the design and development 
of apps for diabetes, heart disease, and asthma to endorse 
sustained behavioral change and improved self-care.25 Inter- 
ventions that are developed or redesigned using this patient- 
centered ideology can achieve greater health outcomes and 
deliver measurable and signiﬁcant health beneﬁts.26 

A subset of mHealth apps being leveraged to improve self- 
management behaviors is mHealth games. They employ ga- 
miﬁcation, deﬁned as the implementation of the most common 
and enjoyable mechanics of videogames in non–videogame 
contexts.27 Common gamiﬁcation mechanics include badges, 
leaderboards, points, levels, challenges, and quests.28 Recent 
research has endorsed mHealth games as positive mechanisms 
for health behavior change due to their ability to engage and 
motivate players toward effective disease management.29 
Numerous mHealth games have been clinically evaluated 
and proven to effectively manage chronic diseases such as 
diabetes,26,30 cancer,31–33 cystic ﬁbrosis,34–36 and asthma.37–39 
They generated positive health outcomes, with all studies 
achieving statistically signiﬁcant results, and were readily 
adopted by their target patient group. Current games range 
from exergames to increase both knowledge and motivation of 
exercise behavior,40–43 role-playing games that foster greater 
understanding of sensitive topics like mental health,44–47 
race,48 and sexuality,49–52 and virtual rehabilitation games to 
help patients during recovery.53–57 It is clear that games are an 
appropriate and effective medium for addressing numerous 
health conditions that might otherwise be ill-addressed 
through conventional care. 


By 2015, 50 percent of industries will gamify their inno- 
vation processes, although 80 percent of gamiﬁed applications 
are expected to fail because of a lack of research around 
suitable game design, as well as poor rationale or design of 
gamiﬁcation mechanics.28 The academic and clinical staff re- 
sponsible for the majority of mHealth games currently on the 
market are not game designers and consequently develop 
products that miss the most essential mechanism of engage- 
ment in games—the fun.58 The solution seems to then be that 
mHealth games should be responsibly designed and developed 
by a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, researchers, and 
game designers, as well as clinically evaluated to conﬁrm 
how much more effective they are in changing behavioral and 
health outcomes than conventional approaches. mHealth 
games are capable of teaching new forms of thought and be- 
havior in an enjoyable way. This learning potential has been 
left largely untapped in the mental health arena, and addressing 
this gap may lead to a novel validated approach in mental 
health intervention and self-management. 

As the ﬁeld of mHealth advances and more players enter 
the arena of digital intervention development for CMHDs, 
concerns have arisen over the number of apps available for 
download that have not been adequately tested for efﬁcacy. 
In the current app marketplace, new health apps are often 
accompanied by substantial hype and promise but are not 
supported by evidence.59–61 Several studies have highlighted 
apps that could compromise patient safety and are potentially 
dangerous.62–65 To mitigate against this, both clinical and 
risk evaluation must be done to ensure that novel health 
technologies fulﬁll basic qualiﬁcations: they are evidence- 
based, provide measurable value to the user, and are risk- 
adversive and user-centered in design and development.66 
Precedence exists for safe and effective apps for CMHDs, 
but they are scarce and make up less than 1 percent of 
commercially available apps.67 
While it is tempting to shift the blame for this discrepancy 
onto the app developers themselves and cite a lack of re- 
sponsibility and best practice on their behalf, an equally fea- 
sible explanation is that few evaluation methodologies for 
mHealth interventions exist. The traditional approach to be- 
intervention evaluation is through a randomized 
havioral 
controlled trial (RCT), the gold standard for assessing the 
effect of an intervention post-development.68 Current evalu- 
ation methodologies for behavioral interventions typically 
involve development, pilot testing, evaluation in at least two 
RCTs, and implementation studies.69,70 However, this process 
can take up to 17 years from initial research to full im- 
plementation, making it fundamentally incompatible with the 
rapid pace of mHealth; the technology being evaluated may 
well be obsolete before the trial is completed.71–73 Traditional 
evaluation processes are therefore incongruent with the fun- 
damental principles of continuously evolving mHealth appli- 
cations, which rely on iterative cycles of development to 
identify design weaknesses and inefﬁciencies. Time spans of 
traditional trials also see publications citing effects of tech- 
nology that has long since been surpassed and therefore often 
provide limited value to helping inform clinical decisions. 
In acknowledgement of the shortcomings stemming from 
traditional evaluation processes as well as advances in mo- 
bile devices that now incorporate sensors and can collect and 
store both physiological and self-report health data, new 
mHealth evaluation methodologies must be conceived and 
adopted to achieve the potential for ‘‘real-time research’’ and 
render conventional research designs more efﬁcient.74–77 
The potential for mobile devices to collect research data 
under a safe, secure framework has largely remained un- 
tapped. Rigorous research is needed to examine both the 
potential and challenges of using mobile technologies to 
improve health outcomes, as well as to establish the reli- 
ability and validity of the mHealth evaluation methodology 
used to generate these critical data. The results from this 
pilot study will therefore lead to further research suppor- 
ting innovative evaluation methodologies for mHealth in- 
terventions. 

On the basis of a well-established and proven theoretical 
foundation for controlled respiration as a behavioral inter- 
vention for CMHDs and preliminary evidence that gamiﬁ- 
cation can improve health outcomes through increasing 
patient engagement, we developed an mHealth game called 
‘‘Flowy.’’ ‘‘Flowy’’ is the ﬁrst mHealth app to operationalize 
breathing retraining exercises for gameplay. We designed 
‘‘Flowy’’ to bridge intervention accessibility gaps, reduce the 
economic burden of chronic mental illness, endorse person- 
alized patient-centered care, and engage users to understand 
and manage their own condition in a fun and meaningful way. 
This randomized controlled pilot study evaluated the ac- 
ceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an mHealth game that digitally 
delivers breathing retraining exercises for anxiety, panic, and 
hyperventilation symptom management. We engaged service 
users with CMHDs, their families, and their care providers in 
the design, development, and pilot evaluation of ‘‘Flowy.’’ 
We designed this study to establish clinical efﬁcacy in re- 
ducing symptom severity alongside improving quality of life. 
Furthermore, we assessed both user engagement and us- 
ability as key study metrics. We hypothesized that ‘‘Flowy’’ 
would be an acceptable, clinically effective, engaging, and 
useful anxiety management intervention. 

This study had two main assessment objectives: (1) fea- 
sibility of a breathing retraining game called ‘‘Flowy’’ as an 
anxiety management intervention and (2) clinical efﬁcacy of 
‘‘Flowy’’ to reduce anxiety symptomatology. 
The long-term objective of this feasibility and efﬁcacy 
pilot study was to trial concepts and methods needed to in- 
form a subsequent full-scale clinical evaluation, which will 
assess whether ‘‘Flowy’’ can objectively reduce clinical 
symptoms in a vulnerable clinical population. We also trialed 
our study design to assess whether it was an appropriate 
evaluation methodology for mHealth interventions, which 
will 
inform the continued development of evaluation 
frameworks in the ﬁeld of mHealth. 

We hypothesized that we would achieve participant ac- 
ceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety intervention. This was 
assessed by the following criteria: (1) the number of people 


who responded to the recruitment call to trial an app that 
managed their anxiety and completed the study eligibility 
screener; (2) the response rate for participants in the trial 
throughout the 4-week assessment period; (3) the number of 
participants in the intervention condition proactively using 
‘‘Flowy’’ at least once for over 1 minute of play during the 4- 
week assessment, as assessed by log data; and (4) the number 
of participants in the intervention condition who engaged in 
sustained usage of ‘‘Flowy,’’ as assessed by log data. 
were randomized to one of two study conditions following 
assessment. In the intervention condition (n = 31), partici- 
pants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the 
control condition (n = 32), participants were placed on a 
waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to 
‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using self-report question- 
naires were made at 2 and 4 weeks post-baseline. Participants 
in both conditions had unrestricted access to professional 
help. Figure 1 shows the study CONSORT ﬂowchart. 


Our secondary hypotheses were that participants in the 
intervention group would experience reductions in anxiety, 
panic, and hyperventilation, and increase in quality of life at 
Week 4 assessment compared with baseline (P < 0.05). This 
was deﬁned as a decrease in score on the Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7), Panic Disorder Severity 
Scale-Self Report (PDSS-SR), Nijmegan, and Quality of Life 
Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form 
(QLES-Q-SF) psychological self-report questionnaires. We 
hypothesized that in comparison with the control condition, 
participants in the intervention group would experience 
greater reductions in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic 
attack symptoms, as well as increased quality of life at the 
Week 4 assessment. This was deﬁned as a greater decrease in 
score on the GAD-7, PDSS-SR, Nijmegan, and QLES-Q-SF 
self-report psychological questionnaires. Finally, we hypoth- 
esized that participants in the intervention group would 
perceive ‘‘Flowy’’ as a useful intervention, deﬁned by a 
mean rating of q3 (‘‘neither agree nor disagree’’) on a 1–5- 
point Likert scale usability questionnaire following study 
completion. Further detailed information on these outcome 
measures can be found in Materials and Methods. 


The study methodology was reviewed according to the 
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) 
standards for clinical trials in eHealth78 and reported ac- 
cording to the CONSORT-eHealth (version 1.6.1) check- 
list.79 The study methodology was further reviewed and 
advised by a research design advisor at the National Institute 
of Health Research Design Services. 

We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group 
RCT focusing on feasibility, clinical efﬁcacy, and design 
proof of concept. This was an exploratory study with an 
iterative design to assess and improve study methodology, 
game design, and usability. Initial contact with potential 
participants was made online; trial candidates (n = 510) self- 
generated a login username and password and completed an 
eligibility screener that required participants to meet inclu- 
sion criteria as well as show moderate signs of anxiety, de- 
ﬁned as a score of q16 on the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3 
(ASI-3), q8 on the Overall Anxiety Severity and Impair- 
ment Scale (OASIS), and q6 on the GAD-7. Eligible par- 
ticipants (n = 63) subsequently received a follow-up e-mail to 
digitally sign the study information sheet and consent form. 
They then completed the online baseline assessment and 
Table 1 provides an overview of all clinical measures used 
alongside their data collection schedule. Table 2 describes all 
measures with their number of items, minimum–maximum 
scores, clinical cutoff scores, and psychometric reliability/ 
construct validity (Cronbach’s alpha). Participants were asked 
to provide information on their age, gender, education, em- 
ployment, ethnicity, and religion/spirituality at baseline as- 
sessment (Table 3). Study measures were obtained using six 
clinical self-report questionnaires. Anxiety symptoms were 
assessed using three questionnaires: the GAD-7 item scale,80 
the OASIS,81 and the ASI-3 item scale.82 Panic symptoms 
were assessed using the PDSS-SR.83 Hyperventilation symp- 
toms were assessed using the Nijmegen Questionnaire.84 
Quality of life, enjoyment, and satisfaction were assessed 
using the QLES-Q-SF.85 Participant views on using infor- 
mation technology for health were assessed using the 
eHealth Literacy Scale (eHEALS).86 Participant perception of 
‘‘Flowy’’ was measured with a 21-question usability ques- 
tionnaire alongside open-ended qualitative feedback and user 
stories around their experience using ‘‘Flowy’’ (Table 4). 

The primary study outcome was the acceptability of 
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention. This was 
assessed by the following: 
1. The number of people who responded to the recruit- 
ment call to trial an app that managed their anxiety and 
completed the study eligibility screener 
2. Trial adherence throughout the 4-week assessment pe- 
riod as measured by completion of weekly assessments 
3. The number of participants in the intervention condi- 
tion proactively using ‘‘Flowy,’’ deﬁned internally as at 
least once for over 1 minute of play during the 4-week 
assessment 
4. The number of participants in the intervention condi- 
tion who engaged in sustained usage of ‘‘Flowy,’’ 
deﬁned internally as at least 5 minutes of uninterrupted 
play and based on NHS IAPT guidelines for suggested 
durations of controlled breathing exercises.18 

1. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation 
symptoms and improvement in quality of life reported 
by participants in the intervention group compared 
with the control group from baseline to Week 4 
2. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation 
symptoms and improvement in quality of life reported 
by participants in the intervention group from baseline 
to Week 4 










Electronic health literacy 
Anxiety 
Hyperventilation 
Panic attacks 
Quality of life 
eHEALS 
ASI-3 
GAD-7 
OASIS 
Nijmegan 
PDSS-SR 
Q-LES-Q-SF 
X 
X 
X 
X 
— 
— 
— 
— 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
— 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
— 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
ASI-3, Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3; eHEALS, eHealth Literacy Scale; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; OASIS, Overall 
Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity Scale-Self Report; Q-LES-Q-SF, Quality of Life Enjoyment 
and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form. 









Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder Scale 
(GAD-7) 

Overall Anxiety Severity 
and Impairment Scale 
(OASIS) 

Anxiety Sensitivity 
Index-3 (ASI-3) 



Panic Disorder Severity 
Scale(PDSS-SR) 



ment and Satisfaction 
Questionnaire (QLES- 
Q-SF) 
A measure of electronic health resource literacy, deﬁned as 
a consumer’s combined knowledge, comfort, and per- 
ceived skills at ﬁnding, evaluating, and applying elec- 
tronic health information to health problems. On this 
eight-item scale, responses are rated on a scale from 1 to 
5, with higher scores indicating greater eHealth literacy. 
A brief seven-item anxiety scale to assess symptom severity 
and identify probable cases of generalized anxiety 
disorder in clinical practice and research. Responses are 
rated on a scale from 0 to 3, with a total score of q6 
representing moderate anxiety, q11 moderately severe 
anxiety, and q15 severe anxiety. 
A measure of the severity and impairment associated with 
anxiety, as assessed by a brief, continuous ﬁve-item scale 
that can be used across anxiety disorders, with multiple 
anxiety disorders, and with subthreshold anxiety symp- 
toms. Responses are rated on a scale from 0 to 4, and 
individual items are added for a total severity score. A 
cutoff score of q8 is used to determine an anxiety 
diagnosis. 

three domains of anxiety sensitivity (physical, social, and 
cognitive). Respondents indicate their agreement with 
each item, from ‘‘very little’’ (0) to ‘‘very much’’ (4), 
with total scores ranging from 0 to 72. A cutoff score of 
q16 was used to establish moderate anxiety. 
A 16-item measure of hyperventilation and dysfunctional 
breathlessness, suitable as a screening tool for early 
detection and also as an aid in diagnosis and therapy 
planning. Responses are rated on a scale from 0 to 4, with 
a total score of q23 out of 64 suggesting a positive 
diagnosis of hyperventilation. 

detecting possible symptoms of panic disorder, measured 
using seven items, each rated on a 5-point scale ranging 
from 0 to 4. The overall assessment is made by a total 
score ranging from 0 to 28, and a score of q9 suggests 
the need for a formal diagnostic assessment. 
A self-report questionnaire with 14 items evaluating overall 
life enjoyment and satisfaction with physical health, 
mood, work, social and family relationships, daily 
functioning, and overall well-being. Responses are scored 
on a 5-item scale with possible scores ranging from 14 to 
70, where high scores indicate better enjoyment and 
satisfaction with life. 










4. Assessing outcome measure scores in pilot study par- 
ticipants to establish parameters of measurable change 
in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic attack symp- 
toms for a subsequent full-powered, full-scale clinical 
evaluation 
5. Study design evaluation to inform sample size calcu- 
lation and methodology of a subsequent full-powered, 
full-scale clinical evaluation. 

Participants were recruited online through extensive media 
coverage, 
including a BBC proﬁle, social media press, 
newsletters, blog posts, Google AdSense, and a Call for 
Participants landing page. Local businesses were contacted 
for permission to display recruitment posters on their prem- 
ises. University campuses were targeted for recruitment. The 
primary study advertisement included a sample of questions 
from the eligibility screener to optimize targeting appropriate 
participants who experienced anxiety. The advertisement 
emphasized the need to visit the eligibility screener Web site 
to determine eligibility. It also included a link to the main 
‘‘Flowy’’ Web site, which contained complete information 
on the intervention, clinical explanation of breathing re- 
training exercises, and illustrations of the game mechanism 
(Supplementary Fig. S1; Supplementary Data are available 
online at www.liebertonline.com/g4h). 
Participants interested in determining their eligibility ac- 
cessed the eligibility screener Web site (Supplementary Fig. 
S2) and self-generated a login username with their e-mail 






7 (22.6) 
17 (54.8) 
4 (12.9) 
1 (3.2) 
1 (3.2) 
1 (3.2) 
18 (58.1) 
13 (41.9) 
0 (0) 
3 (9.7) 
2 (6.5) 
3 (9.7) 
0 (0) 
0 (0) 
1 (3.2) 
0 (0) 
0 (0) 
12 (38.7) 
10 (32.3) 
7 (22.6) 
14 (45.2) 
6 (19.4) 
1 (3.2) 
1 (3.2) 
2 (6.5) 
25 (80.6) 
6 (19.4) 
3 (10.0) 
22 (73.3) 
3 (10.0) 
2 (6.7) 
0 (0) 
1 (3.3) 
11 (35.5) 
20 (64.5) 
14 (45.2) 
14 (43.8) 
21 (67.7) 
10 (32.3) 
10 (31.3) 
15 (46.9) 
6 (18.8) 
1 (3.1) 
0 (0) 
0 (0) 
13 (40.6) 
18 (56.3) 
1 (3.1) 
0 (0) 
0 (0) 
5 (15.6) 
1 (3.1) 
1 (3.1) 
0 (0) 
1 (3.1) 
1 (3.1) 
10 (31.3) 
13 (40.6) 
10 (31.3) 
11 (34.4) 
6 (18.8) 
3 (9.4) 
1 (3.1) 
1 (3.1) 
23 (71.9) 
9 (28.1) 
3 (10.0) 
23 (76.7) 
1 (3.3) 
2 (6.7) 
1 (3.3) 
2 (6.7) 
8 (25.0) 
24 (75.0) 
17 (54.8) 
18 (56.3) 
25 (78.1) 
7 (21.9) 
17 (27.0) 
32 (50.8) 
10 (15.9) 
2 (3.2) 
1 (1.6) 
1 (1.6) 
31 (49.2) 
31 (49.2) 
1 (1.6) 
3 (4.8) 
2 (3.2) 
8 (12.7) 
1 (1.6) 
1 (1.6) 
1 (1.6) 
1 (1.6) 
1 (1.6) 
22 (34.9) 
23 (36.5) 
17 (27.0) 
25 (39.7) 
12 (19.0) 
4 (6.3) 
2 (3.2) 
3 (4.8) 
48 (76.2) 
15 (23.8) 
6 (9.5) 
45 (71.4) 
4 (6.3) 
4 (6.3) 
1 (1.6) 
3 (4.8) 
19 (30.2) 
44 (69.8) 
28 (44.4) 
35 (55.6) 
46 (73.0) 
17 (27.0) 

Age (years) 
18–24 
25–34 
35–44 
45–54 
55–64 
65 and older 
Gender 
Male 
Female 
Other 

Argentina 
Brazil 
Canada 
Cyprus 
Germany 
Israel 
Italy 
Malaysia 
United Kingdom 
United States 

High school diploma 
Bachelor degree 
Master degree 
Professional degree 
Doctorate degree 
Not applicable 
Employment status 
Employed 
Unemployed 
Ethnicity 
Asian 
White 
European 
Hispanic 
Mixed 
Missing 

Yes 
No 

iOS 
Android 

Yes 
No 











address and a unique password. Following completion of the 
screener, their data were exported to a password-protected 
Excel(cid:2) (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) database. The e-mail 
provided was checked for multiple registrations, and par- 
ticipants with missing data were excluded. Participants were 
notiﬁed of their study eligibility by e-mail and directed to the 
online study information sheet and consent form. Those not 
eligible for the study were thanked for their time and given 
the opportunity to sign up and receive a code to download 
‘‘Flowy’’ in January 2015. Participants were not compen- 
sated for taking part 
in the study but were allowed to 
download ‘‘Flowy’’ and keep the game following study 
completion. Minors were not asked to participate in research. 

Study candidates from the general population were eligi- 
ble for the study if they met the following criteria: (1) males 


Table 4. Usability Questions to Assess Participation 
Perception of ‘‘Flowy’’ 



1 
2 



6 
7 
8 
9 
10 

12 
13 
14 

16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
‘‘Flowy’’ is useful. 
‘‘Flowy’’ makes me more produc- 
4.17 (0.38) 
3.22 (0.55) 

‘‘Flowy’’ gives me more control 
over the activities in my life. 
‘‘Flowy’’ makes the things I want to 
accomplish easier to get done. 
‘‘Flowy’’ saves me time when I use 




‘‘Flowy’’ meets my needs. 
‘‘Flowy’’ does everything I would 
3.39 (0.98) 
3.22 (0.94) 

‘‘Flowy’’ is easy to use. 
‘‘Flowy’’ is simple to use. 
Both occasional and regular users 
4.17 (1.15) 
4.39 (0.85) 
3.94 (1.11) 




I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ quickly. 
I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ easily. 
I easily remember how to use 
4.44 (1.04) 
4.61 (0.61) 
4.67 (0.49) 




I am satisﬁed with ‘‘Flowy.’’ 
I would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to a 
3.94 (0.80) 
4.17 (0.99) 

‘‘Flowy’’ is fun to use. 
‘‘Flowy’’ works the way I want it to 
3.89 (0.68) 
3.28 (0.90) 

I feel I need to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ 
‘‘Flowy’’ is wonderful. 
3.06 (0.87) 
3.94 (0.80) 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th 
edition (DSM-IV) Axis I disorder, excluding those listed in 
the inclusion criteria, that were likely to have interfered with 
the patient’s ability to participate in the study, as judged by 
the investigator; (6) presence of any DSM-IV Axis II dis- 
order that were likely to have interfered with the patient’s 
ability to participate in the study, as judged by the investi- 
gator; or (7) participants who were acutely suicidal to the 
degree that precautions against suicide were needed, or a 
history of suicide attempt in the past 5 years. 

Given that the primary study outcome was the accept- 
ability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention, 
to be assessed by recruitment and response rates, power 
calculations were not calculated a priori. The results from 
this pilot study will be used to inform the required sample 
size for a full clinical evaluation. There was no limit on the 
number of eligible participants during the 4-week recruit- 
ment period, and recruitment strategies were exhausted to 
include as many participants as possible. 

Randomization and allocation were done at the individual 
level using a computerized randomization list to protect 
against bias. Candidates who met inclusion criteria were 
randomly allocated to the intervention group (‘‘Flowy’’) or 
to the control (waitlist) group after signing the information 
sheet and consent form. Participants were equally allocated 
1:1 to intervention and control conditions for optimal anal- 
ysis and maximized statistical power. Both investigator and 
participants were unblinded to allocation. 


and females at least 18 years of age; (2) screen GAD-7 score 
of q6; (3) screen OASIS score of q8; (4) screen ASI-3 
score of q16; (5) comorbid disorders including major de- 
pression, dysthymia, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social 
anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, simple pho- 
bia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and somatization dis- 
order were accepted as long as moderate symptoms of 
anxiety were observed (these broad inclusion criteria maxi- 
mized generalizability of ﬁndings); (6) concurrent use of 
antidepressants, anxiolytics, hypnotics, and herbal products 
with psychoactive substances was acceptable provided there 
was no change in medication type and dose after randomi- 
zation; (7) provision of written informed consent; and (8) 
able to comply with the study protocol (e.g., able to down- 
load ‘‘Flowy’’ onto a mobile device, able to complete 
assessments). 
Study candidates were ineligible if they met any of the 
following criteria: (1) lack of mobile device or incompatible 
operating system (Android(cid:3) [Google, Mountaine View, 
CA] and iOS [Apple, Cupertino, CA] compatibility re- 
quired); (2) lack of access to Internet; (3) any coexisting 
medical conditions that could have altered the clinical pre- 
sentation of hyperventilation such as chronic severe asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; (4) lifetime his- 
tory of bipolar disorder or psychosis; (5) presence of any 
‘‘Flowy’’ (www.ﬂowygame.com) was initially conceived 
as a digital delivery of breathing retraining. ‘‘Flowy’’ was 
designed by start-up venture Playlab London with a team of 
game developers and animators. Playlab’s founder had lived 
experience of panic and anxiety disorders. The process of 
recovery helped him to develop insight into chronic mental 
health conditions and inspired him to investigate how con- 
dition symptoms might be ameliorated. 
In January 2013 Playlab began conceptual work, infor- 
mally testing paper and code prototypes of a simple breath- 
controlled game experience. Early research and development 
included periodic formative meetings to review each stage, 
correct problems, and make decisions for the following 
stages in an iterative process. Qualitative data were collected 
from various stakeholder groups and thematically analyzed: 
mental health practitioners and clinicians provided data on 
feasibility, people supporting those with lived experience of 
panic and anxiety disorders provided data on desirability and 
value, and people with lived experience of panic and anxiety 
disorders provided data on current behaviors concerning 
panic, anxiety, panic attacks, and technology. 

A series of test media was constructed and shown to 
people with lived experience of panic and anxiety disorders 
to assess desirable esthetics, themes, and mechanics and their 



effect on the user with particular regard to feelings of anxi- 
ety, 
trustworthiness, and ‘‘medical’’ framing. Following 
from this initial research, prototypes were developed, and 
several rounds of usability tests were performed with a 
varied group of participants to evaluate functionality, inter- 
face, and robustness. Throughout the project, expert advisors 
contributed to thinking on game design, usability, user ex- 
perience design, clinical accuracy, and efﬁcacy. ‘‘Flowy’’ 
was designed to endorse empowerment and motivation in 
managing anxiety by potentially making this process fun. 
The design team therefore aimed for ‘‘Flowy’’ to be visually 
appealing, easy to navigate, and intuitive to use and to ulti- 
mately provide a meaningful user experience. They followed 
the user-centered design process of development and en- 
gaged in usability testing throughout the project lifecycle. 
This user-centered design process is endorsed by the World 
Health Organization, which advises user evaluation at every 
step of mHealth consumer application development to ensure 
sustained user engagement for effective outcomes.24 From 
this user-centered design process, the design team obtained 
objective feedback that was crucial to producing sustained 
behavioral changes, as well as key to end-user adoption. 
cycle. The minigames in ‘‘Flowy’’ range in theme, from 
sailing a boat down a river to ﬂying balloons into the sky 
(Fig. 2 gives a screenshot of various minigames). Users touch 
the screen with their ﬁnger as they inhale and remove their 
ﬁnger from the screen as they exhale to control the gaming 
mechanics. A breathing indicator visually represents a full 
breath; users see a circle expanding as they inhale and con- 
tracting as they exhale. This indicator provides a visual 
guideline of a breathing retraining exercise and also sim- 
pliﬁes the cognitive assessment of what constitutes a full 
diaphragmatic breath. The goal of each minigame is to cor- 
rectly follow the breathing indicator while advancing in the 
game narrative; users progress through levels and achieve 
goals by breathing correctly and staying calm. ‘‘Flowy’’ also 
includes an in-game interactive tutorial on how to properly 
perform diaphragmatic breathing as guided by both an NHS 
IAPT protocol18 and evidence-based research protocols from 
literature.12,87 An overview of the game characteristics can 
be found in Table 5. Usage guidelines were not enforced to 
allow for assessment of naturalistic usage patterns deter- 
mined by the patient. 


‘‘Flowy’’ is a mHealth game that engages users in a series 
of minigames where they use breathing retraining exercises 
and perform diaphragmatic breathing to alleviate anxiety. 
Diaphragmatic breathing is the deepest of all breaths, with 
the most air inhaled. During diaphragmatic breathing, the 
lowest levels of the lungs are inﬂated; the lower third of the 
lungs contains the greatest amount of blood when standing 
vertically, resulting in more oxygenated blood per breathing 
Participants in the control group were placed on a waitlist 
for 4 weeks. To prevent high attrition rates, participants re- 
ceived a weekly newsletter with curated content on breathing 
retraining exercises, ‘‘Flowy’’ game development, mindful- 
ness meditation, and similar content relevant to ‘‘Flowy.’’ 
Additionally, they received reminder e-mails through online 
marketing tool MailChimp to complete study assessments. 
After 4 weeks, participants received a free code to download 
‘‘Flowy.’’ 




Health topic(s) 
Target age group(s) 
Other targeted group characteristics 
Short description of game idea 




Knowledge element(s) to be learned 
Behavior change procedure(s) (taken from Michie 
inventory) or therapeutic procedure(s) used 
Clinical or parental support needed? (Please specify) 
Data shared with parent or clinician 
Type of game (check all that apply): 







Procedures to generalize or transfer what’s learned in the 
game to outside the game 
Virtual environment 
Setting (describe) 

Characteristics 
Abilities 


Sensors used 
Estimated play time 


Anxiety disorders, panic attacks 
All ages 
Well-being, mindfulness, meditation 
‘‘Flowy’’ is a collection of minigames that digitally deliver 

- Individual , Dyad , Small group 
, MMOG , Other: _______________________ 
Capability-Motivation-Opportunity Behavior Model 
Mechanics-Dynamics-Esthetics Framework 
Self-Determination Theory 
Reduced hyperventilation 
Increased activation 
Increased self-management 
Increased knowledge and education 
Breathing retraining 
(From the BCT Taxonomy version 1) 
2.2 Feedback on behavior 
2.7 Feedback on outcome(s) of behavior 
4.1 Instruction on how to perform the behavior 
6.1 Demonstration of the behavior 
8.1 Behavioral practice and rehearsal 
8.2 Behavior substitution 
8.3 Habit formation 
8.4 Habit reversal 
No 
, Yes - No 
, Active , Action , Adventure 
, Role-playing , Simulation , Strategy 
, Sports - Casual - Educational 
, Other: _______________________ 
(1) Blow bubbles from a straw 
(2) Sail a boat down a river 
(3) Fly balloons into the sky 
Minigame narratives revolve around air and ﬂow to 





Reward feedback 
Goals 
Narrative 
NA 

NA 
NA 
- Smartphone - Tablet , Kinect 
, Xbox , Wii , PlayStation 
, Computer , Handheld device 
, Other: _____________ 
No 
Approximately 10 minutes per play session 




Statistical analyses were conducted using IBM (Armonk, 
NY) SPSS Statistics version 22. All participants who were 
randomized were included in data analysis in accordance 
with the intention-to-treat-principle. Chi-squared tests were 
used for discrete variables to compare control and inter- 
vention groups to determine whether they differed at baseline 
on demographic characteristics. Effect sizes were calculated 
based on means and odds ratios (Cohen’s d88). 
Primary analysis on engagement, deﬁned as proactive and 
sustained usage, used frequency and duration measures 
from gameplay logs to assess outcomes. Secondary analysis 
on clinical efﬁcacy included a repeated-measures 2 · 2 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) for four clinical outcome 
variables: (1) anxiety, (2) panic, (3) self-report hyperven- 
tilation, and (4) quality of life, with time (baseline versus 
Week 4) as a within-subjects factor and condition (inter- 
vention versus control) as a between-subjects measure. 
Results were conﬁrmed with a gain score ANOVA with 
condition as the between-subjects factor alongside an 
analysis of covariance using pretreatment scores as the 
covariate. The effect of time on treatment was evaluated 
using repeated-measures ANOVA at 
three time points 
(baseline, Week 2, and Week 4). P levels were corrected for 
non-sphericity using the Greenhouse–Geisser epsilon when 
necessary. We tested for linear trends because we hypoth- 
esized a decrease in GAD, PDSS, and Nijmegan scores and 
an increase in QLES-Q-SF scores across treatment weeks. 
Signiﬁcance levels for linear trends across all measures 
were Bonferroni-corrected. Statistical signiﬁcance was 
considered at P < 0.05 unless otherwise speciﬁed. All test 
results reported are two-tailed. 

Institutional board approval for the study protocol was ob- 
tained from the Queen Mary University of London Research 
Ethics Committee with reference number QMREC2014/20. 
The study protocol, interventions, participant information, and 
informed consent procedure were approved and found to be in 
accordance with all applicable regulations. All participants 
received and digitally signed a study information sheet and 
consent form. All participants were given the opportunity to 
download and keep ‘‘Flowy’’ on their mobile devices fol- 
lowing study completion. 


Demographic characteristics of the control and interven- 
tion groups did not differ signiﬁcantly at baseline (Table 3). 
Participants were predominantly young adults (18–34 years 
old; 51 percent) from developed, English-speaking countries 
(Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States; 84 
percent), highly educated (68 percent university-educated or 
above), employed (76 percent), and white (71 percent). As 
part of the eligibility pre-screening, candidates completed 
the eHEALS questionnaire, which assessed their electronic 
health literacy. The ﬁnal study population had high elec- 
tronic health literacy (mean = 3.58, 
standard deviation 
[SD] = 0.22). 
In total, 510 candidates were screened for study eligibility 
from April 2014 to June 2014 (Fig. 1). One hundred eighty- 
ﬁve participants met preliminary eligibility criteria. Of these, 
106 did not meet pre-study requirements (baseline assess- 
ment, registering a mobile device, providing consent). Six- 
teen participants were subsequently excluded from the study 
because of hardware compatibility issues, leaving a ﬁnal 
study population of 63. At study completion, 67 percent of 
participants remained engaged and completed terminal study 
assessments; 75 percent of control and 58 percent of inter- 
vention group participants completed all study assessments. 
In total, 63 participants were randomly allocated to either 
the control (n = 32) or intervention (n = 31) group of the study 
(Fig. 1). Both groups experienced attrition during the 4-week 
study period (45 percent of intervention participants and 25 
percent of control participants), with the majority of attrition 
occurring after Week 2 study assessments (42 percent of 
intervention participants and 16 percent of control partici- 
pants). There was a signiﬁcant association between mobile 
platform and attrition, with more participants leaving the 
study if they had downloaded ‘‘Flowy’’ on an iOS platform 
(64.3 percent) compared with an Android platform (23.5 
percent) [v2(1) = 5.28, P = 0.022]. Participants did not differ 
on any other baseline characteristics. 
Log data were recovered from all intervention group par- 
ticipants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ (26/31, 84 percent). Eighty- 
four percent of intervention group participants proactively 
played ‘‘Flowy’’ at least once for a minimum of 1 minute 
during the study. The number of participants who played 
‘‘Flowy’’ per week peaked at baseline (20/31, 65 percent) and 
was lowest at Week 4 (8/31, 26 percent) (Fig. 3, top). Log data 
measured a mean weekly sessional play duration of 10 min- 
utes during the 4-week study period, increasing weekly and 
peaking at 15 minutes in Week 4 (Fig. 3, middle) and a mean 
weekly total play duration of 20 minutes (Fig. 3, bottom). 

Mean scores and SDs for primary and secondary outcome 
measures for the intent-to-treat sample appear in Table 6. 
There were no group differences for any of the baseline 
measures. A group-effects multivariate ANOVA showed no 
signiﬁcant difference for psychopathology measures (anxi- 
ety, panic, and hyperventilation) based on treatment condi- 
tion (F3, 59 = 2.059, P = 0.115). 
At the study conclusion, participants in both groups re- 
ported improved scores on anxiety, panic, hyperventilation, 
and quality of life psychological self-report questionnaires. 
Univariate gain score and 2 · 2 treatment by condition 
ANOVAs showed an increase in quality of life (Dmean = 
4.570; F1, 61 = 4.845, P = 0.034) and a reduction in anxiety 
(Dmean = 0.911; F1, 61 = 1.049, P = 0.310), panic (Dmean = 
61 = 0.012, P = 0.914), and hyperventilation 
0.108; F1, 
(Dmean = 0.523; F1, 61 = 0.055, P = 0.816) scores (Fig. 4) in 
the intervention group playing ‘‘Flowy’’ compared with the 
waitlist control group from baseline to Week 4. In particular, 
the intervention group hyperventilation scores decreased 
meaningfully. A score of q23 out of 64 on the Nijmegan 
questionnaire suggests a positive clinical diagnosis of hy- 
perventilation; intervention group participants went from a 
mean score above the threshold score of 23 to below it and 
FIG. 3. From baseline to Week 4, (top panel) number of intervention group participants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ weekly, 
(middle panel) mean weekly play session duration, and (bottom panel) mean weekly total play duration. 
Table 6. Group Scores of Intervention and Control Group Psychometric Questionnaires 
Pre- And Post-Evaluation and Signiﬁcance of Gain Score Analysis of Variance, 2 · 2 Analysis 
of Variance, and Analysis of Covariance Group Effects Analyses 

Anxiety (GAD-7) 
Mean (SD) 
n 
Panic (PDSS-SR) 
Mean (SD) 
n 

Mean (SD) 
n 












11.55 (5.05) 
31 
9.39 (5.21) 
32 
10.66 (4.63) 
31 
9.53 (4.79) 
32 



15.78 (5.37) 
31 
14.13 (6.57) 
32 





1 1.049 0.017 0.310 
GS 
2 · 2 
1 1.049 0.017 0.310 
ANCOVA 1 0.638 0.011 0.427 
GS 
1 0.012 0.000 0.914 
1 0.012 0.000 0.914 
2 · 2 
ANCOVA 1 0.045 0.001 0.832 
1 0.055 0.001 0.816 
GS 
1 0.055 0.001 0.816 
ANCOVA 1 0.204 0.003 0.653 
1 4.845 0.108 0.034 
GS 
2 · 2 
1 4.845 0.108 0.034 
ANCOVA 1 4.698 0.108 0.036 
Mean (SD) 
n 



32.71 (6.98) 
31 
31.92 (9.17) 
32 





FIG. 4. Quality of Life, Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire Short Form scores for the intervention (solid circle, 
solid line) and control (open circle, dashed line) groups at study assessment time points (baseline, Week 2, and Week 4). 
outside the threshold zone (baseline mean, 24.45; to Week 4 
mean, 21.74). A repeated-measures ANOVA evaluating time 
as a main effect on treatment showed a decrease in panic and 
hyperventilation (P = 0.011 and 0.016, respectively) and an 
increase in quality of life (P = 0.005) scores in intervention 
participants from baseline to Week 4 (Table 7). Effect size 
differences between intervention and control groups post- 
treatment were small (d < 0.3) for anxiety, panic, and hy- 
perventilation measures and moderate (d = 0.393) for quality 
of life measures. 

One hundred percent of participants in the intervention 
group found ‘‘Flowy’’ to be a useful intervention (Fig. 5 and 
Table 4). They also all remembered how to use ‘‘Flowy’’ after 
initial play, conﬁrming that ‘‘Flowy’’ can be learned and used 
regularly with ease. Eighty-nine percent would recommend 
‘‘Flowy’’ to family and friends. Participants rated the usability 
of ‘‘Flowy’’ highly, with 92 percent saying ‘‘Flowy’’ was easy 
and simple to use. Eighty-three percent of participants found 
‘‘Flowy’’ fun to use. They did not strongly identify ‘‘Flowy’’ 
as making them more productive, making the things they want 
to accomplish easier to get done, or saving them time when 
they use it. In addressing the concern that ‘‘Flowy’’ could be 
used as a safety behavior and avoid the cognitive root of their 
panic attacks, 72 percent of participants did not identify with 
feeling like they needed to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ Qualitative feed- 
back from participants endorsed the concept of a novel breath- 
controlled game for managing anxiety and panic attacks: 
Table 7. Intervention Group Psychometric Questionnaire Scores at All Evaluations 
and Signiﬁcance of Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance Time Effect Analysis 









Anxiety (GAD-7) 
Mean (SD) 
n 
Panic (PDSS-SR) 
Mean (SD) 
n 
11.55 (5.05) 
31 
9.81 (4.60) 
32 
9.39 (5.21) 
31 
16.90 (5.24) 
31 
15.42 (5.42) 
32 
15.35 (5.78) 
31 

Mean (SD) 
n 
24.45 (9.79) 
31 
22.45 (10.61) 
32 
21.74 (11.27) 
31 

Mean (SD) 
n 
32.11 (7.32) 
31 
35.67 (5.08) 
19 
35.89 (7.71) 
18 




















FIG. 5. Frequency of intervention group participants who ‘‘agreed’’ (4 of 5) or ‘‘strongly agreed’’ (5 of 5) with positive 
usage statements on a usability questionnaire. 
I just wanted to stress how important I think the application 
(and moreover the approach) could be in helping people like 
myself deal with anxiety. For me—it’s changed my life 
completely—and I know this is a story you must hear over 
and over again. 
I think it’s such an amazing idea and there is nothing else like 
this around. I feel like panic attacks are swept under the rug 
too much and it feels amazing that someone is ﬁnally ad- 
dressing it. Once the app is ready, I will be promoting it to 
everyone I know who has anxiety!!! 
The game has helped me on more than one occasion to pre- 
vent a big panic attack. 
Since ﬁrst using ‘‘Flowy’’ I have been feeling a lot better. I do 
still use the app, and I am a lot happier having this game with 
me, it sometimes feels like a secret weapon! 

With an initial aim of creating an mHealth game for 
anxiety management that could digitally deliver health out- 
comes in a fun and engaging way, ‘‘Flowy’’ was conse- 
quently conceived and piloted to measure usefulness, 
desirability, and clinical impact. Preliminary results conﬁrm 
a demand exists for such an intervention, with a large pop- 
ulation perceiving the concept of a breathing regulation 
game as both viable and desirable. Participants accepted 
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention, engaged 
sufﬁciently with ‘‘Flowy’’ to proactively reach for it when 
needed, and showed interest in practicing breathing retrain- 
ing in a gaming context. 
The results from this feasibility and efﬁcacy randomized 
controlled pilot trial suggest that an mHealth application 
operationalizing breathing retraining exercises for behav- 
iorally targeted gaming can be an engaging and acceptable 
intervention for anxiety disorders. However, we were unable 
to demonstrate clinical efﬁcacy—our trial results indicate 
that ‘‘Flowy’’ did not produce signiﬁcant decreases in anx- 
iety, panic, and self-report hyperventilation scores. We hy- 
pothesize various explanations for this, the ﬁrst being that 
realistically, a short, lightweight, self-directed game-based 
app is unlikely to change established clinical psychopathol- 
ogy within a 4-week time frame. Second, in aiming for an 
early evaluation of ‘‘Flowy’’ to inform future design and 
development decisions, we may have trialed an immature 
version of ‘‘Flowy’’ that was not robust enough as a game to 
increase breathing retraining adherence and consequently 
have clinical impact. Third, our decision to mitigate against 
high attrition rates in the control group by sending out 
weekly psychoeducational newsletters may have turned our 
waitlist control into an active control; this may explain the 
lack of an interaction effect for our three clinical outcome 
measures. Fourth, our ﬁnal sample size of 63 was not sufﬁ- 
ciently powered to detect small effect sizes and prevented an 
accurate elucidation of how ‘‘Flowy’’ affected clinical 
symptomology. Although we obtained all study measures 
remotely through both app log data and an in-house online 
assessment platform, thereby relieving participants of having 
to attend traditional face-to-face measurement visits, we did 
not take advantage of this methodology to increase scal- 
ability and recruit a large sample size capable of detecting 
small effect sizes for our clinical measures. 
Finally, our decision to use an RCT design as an evalua- 
tion framework for ‘‘Flowy’’ was potentially inappropriate 
to establish true clinical impact. We encountered many of the 
methodological barriers highlighted by researchers89 that 
hindered our ability to accurately measure the clinical impact 
of ‘‘Flowy’’ on the studied sample. Our intervention group 
experienced high attrition, which we suspected was due to 
hardware compatibility issues and software errors affecting 
gameplay; this would have made it difﬁcult for participants 
to initially engage with ‘‘Flowy’’ and may have discouraged 
them from playing further. However, we were unable to 
verify this hypothesis because of a methodological require- 
ment to freeze development during the trial in order to 
maintain internal validity. We identiﬁed issues with subop- 
timal frequency and duration of play, which may have been 
alleviated through adjustments to the intensity of gameplay, 
breathing indicator, or gamiﬁcation techniques, but there was 
no scope in our study design for a more critical analysis of 


the process to determine where problems existed and where 
improvements could be made to make the game efﬁcacious. 
This methodological intolerance for responding in real time 
to the usage behaviors exhibited in-trial by participants is 
problematic given the continuously evolving nature of both 
digital interventions and their users, and also regrettable gi- 
ven the ease and ﬂexibility of change inherent to digital in- 
terventions that allows them to be rapidly iterated. Our future 
research will build on the methodological limitations iden- 
tiﬁed from this study and explore alternative framework for 
evaluating mHealth interventions. 
Evaluating quality of life and usability was integral to 
the study design due to a strong focus on having ‘‘Flowy’’ be 
applicable as a management application and not just a clin- 
ical 
intervention. Broad intervention applicability and 
availability were at the forefront of game design prioritiza- 
tion, which meant quality of life improvement would as- 
certain this design decision. We observed a statistically 
signiﬁcant improvement in quality of life scores for partici- 
pants randomly assigned to the intervention group, alongside 
positive usability feedback; this is noteworthy given the 4- 
week duration of the trial and shows that ‘‘Flowy’’ can effect 
positive change in a short period of time. ‘‘Flowy’’ may have 
promoted increased awareness of panic attack triggers, 
which potentially contributed to greater self-monitoring and 
reframing of the panic attack experience and consequently 
improved overall quality of life. 
The self-determination theory of Deci and Ryan90 predicts 
increased player engagement with games fosters a sense of 
autonomy, competence, and social relatedness.91 The posi- 
tive improvements in quality of life from our study are 
consistent with this: when given a game that facilitated the 
process of managing their condition, our participants felt 
motivated to take better care of themselves and consequently 
felt happier and healthier. Our ﬁndings align with previous 
studies that highlight self-efﬁcacy as being particularly 
sensitive to game-based intervention92–95; the observed high 
levels of non-enforced usage demonstrate promising vali- 
dation for this method of intervention delivery. 
Gamiﬁed breathing retraining may have special value to 
individuals with other chronic conditions involving impaired 
perceptions of their own breathing. Similar effects and value 
could apply for treating asthma, chronic obstructive pulmo- 
nary disease, cystic ﬁbrosis, and other chronic lung diseases. 
Additional research is required to evaluate the scope of be- 
havioral processes that are amenable to change through this 
intervention platform. 
Limitations to this pilot study must be acknowledged. 
First, using self-report screening and not formal diagnostic 
instruments to conﬁrm existing anxiety symptomology 
means that without a formal diagnosis, no claims about 
prevention of anxiety or mental disorders can be made. 
Non-uniform severity of symptoms at trial entry may have 
reduced statistical power but likely improved the generaliz- 
ability of study ﬁndings. Several of the outcome question- 
naires used in this study have not yet been validated for 
online use, which may change their psychometric properties. 
The open-recruitment strategy used in this study was chosen 
to optimize recruitment, but the cost of such a strategy is 
that the attracted population may not be representative of 
the actual clinical population. Analysis was done on an 
‘‘intention-to-treat’’ basis, which is more common in RCTs. 
However, for future studies analysis should be undertaken on 
a ‘‘per protocol’’ basis; study attrition and loss to follow-up 
were not correlated with lack of improvement but rather with 
practical and logistic issues associated with hardware and 
software failure. Suboptimal adherence to the intervention 
resulted in high attrition rates in the intervention group; to 
mitigate against this, future research will not enforce usage 
but will provide participants with the recommended fre- 
quency and usage parameters. Finally, generalizability of the 
ﬁndings may be limited because of the requirement of a 
smartphone to join the study. This may have economically 
biased the study ﬁndings and may not reﬂect patient access to 
similar technology on a global level. 
In summary, the feasibility and efﬁcacy demonstrated in 
this pilot trial provided preliminary empirical support for an 
mHealth game called ‘‘Flowy’’ in managing symptomology 
for a chronically ill population suffering from anxiety, panic, 
and hyperventilation. Although more research is required to 
demonstrate the clinical efﬁcacy of ‘‘Flowy’’ in promoting 
signiﬁcant symptom amelioration, this study represents an 
important ﬁrst step toward highlighting the potential use of 
‘‘Flowy’’ in hospitals and homes for anxiety management. It 
is hoped that ‘‘Flowy’’ may one day constitute one compo- 
nent of a broader integrative approach to health care that 
holistically combines physiological and behavioral inter- 
ventions to aid patients in the prevention, detection, treat- 
ment, and recovery from CMHDs. 

We would like to thank Erica Simon for reviewing this 
manuscript. We wish to acknowledge the contribution of the 
team that developed ‘‘Flowy’’: Adam Hodgson, Anders 
Furevik, Khi-Jon Chua, Jean-Baptise Krohn, and Meg 
Jayanth. We extend our gratitude to the 63 people who 
participated in the trial and took a leap of faith in allowing 
‘‘Flowy’’ into their lives. 

This research was a collaboration between industry part- 
ner Playlab London and academic partner Wolfson Institute 
for Preventive Medicine. Q.P. is the current Lead Researcher 
for Playlab London and at the time of the trial an MSc 
candidate at the Wolfson Institute. She conceived, designed, 
and implemented this study alongside support from her 
academic department and Playlab London. S.F. and T.G. 
co-founded Playlab London and conceived, designed, and 
developed ‘‘Flowy.’’ 

1. Mathers C, Fat DM, Boerma JT; World Health Organiza- 
tion. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2008. 
2. Pilling S, Whittington C, Taylor C, Kendrick T. Identiﬁ- 
cation and care pathways for common mental health dis- 
orders: Summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 2011; 342:d2868. 
3. World Health Organization. Integrating the Response to 
Mental Health Disorders and Other Chronic Diseases in 
Health Care Systems. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2014. 
4. Skapinakis P, Lewis G, Davies S, et al. Panic disorder and 
subthreshold panic in the UK general population: Epidemiology, 


comorbidity and functional limitation. Eur Psychiatry 2011; 
26:354–362. 
5. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Financing 
Global Health 2010: Development Assistance and Country 
Spending in Economic Uncertainty. Seattle, WA: Institute 
for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2010. 
6. Department of Health. No Health Without Mental Health: A 
Cross-Government Mental Health Outcomes Strategy for 
People of All Ages. Supporting Document—The Economic 
Case for Improving Efﬁciency and Quality in Mental 
Health. London: Department of Health; 2011. 
7. Beamish PM, Granello PF, Granello DH, et al. Outcome 
studies in the treatment of panic disorder: A review. J 
Counsel Dev 1996; 74:460–467. 


9. Ley R. The efﬁcacy of breathing retraining and the cen- 
trality of hyperventilation in panic disorder: A reinterpre- 
tation of experimental ﬁndings. Behav Res Ther 1991; 
29:301–304. 
10. Ley R. Pulmonary function and dyspnea/suffocation theory 
of panic. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 1998; 29:1–11. 
11. Lum LC. Hyperventilation and anxiety state. J R Soc Med 

12. Meuret AE, Wilhelm FH, Roth WT. Respiratory feedback for 
treating panic disorder. J Clin Psychol 2004; 60:197–207. 
13. Mueser KT, Lu W, Rosenberg SD, Wolfe R. The trauma of 
psychosis: Posttraumatic stress disorder and recent onset 
psychosis. Schizophr Res 2010; 116:217–227. 
14. Rapee RM, Ancis JR, Barlow DH. Emotional reactions to 
physiological sensations: Panic disorder patients and non- 
clinical Ss. Behav Res Ther 1988; 26:265–269. 
15. Rapee RM, Brown TA, Antony MM, Barlow DH. Response 
to hyperventilation and inhalation of 5.5% carbon dioxide- 
enriched air across the DSM-III-R anxiety disorders. 
J Abnorm Psychol 1992; 101:538–552. 
16. Kim S, Wollburg E, Roth WT. Opposing breathing thera- 
pies for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial of 
lowering vs raising end-tidal PCO2. J Clin Psychiatry 2012; 
73:931–939. 
17. Sanchez-Meca J, Rosa-Alcazar AI, Marin-Martinez F, 
Gomez-Conesa A. Psychological treatment of panic disor- 
der with or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clin 
Psychol Rev 2010; 30:37–50. 
18. Young C, Hunte A, Newell J, Valian P. Coping with panic. 
In: Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation 
Trust, ed. Improving Access to Psychological Therapies 
2011, Vol. 4. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridgeshire 
and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; 2011: 27–28. 
19. Saxena S, Setoya Y. World Health Organization’s com- 
prehensive mental health action plan 2013–2020. Psy- 
chiatry Clin Neurosci 2014; 68:585–586. 
20. Saha S, Beach MC, Cooper LA. Patient centeredness, 
cultural competence and healthcare quality. J Natl Med 
Assoc 2008; 100:1275–1285. 
21. Fox S, Duggan M. Mobile Health 2012. Pew Internet & 
American Life Project. 2012. www.pewinternet.org/2012/ 
11/08/mobile-health-2012/ (accessed July 29, 2015). 
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Mobile Medical Ap- 
plications. 2014. www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/ 
./UCM263366.pdf (accessed July 29, 2015). 
23. Cotton R, Irwin J, Wilkins A, Young C. The Future’s Di- 
gital: Mental Health and Technology. London: NHS Con- 
federation Mental Health Network; 2014. 
24. World Health Organization. mHealth: New Horizons for 
Health Through Mobile Technologies. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2011. 
25. McCurdie T, Taneva S, Casselman M, et al. mHealth 
consumer apps: The case for user-centered design. Biomed 
Instrum Technol 2012;(Suppl):49–56. 
26. Cafazzo JA, Casselman M, Hamming N, et al. Design of 
an mHealth app for the self-management of adolescent 
type 1 diabetes: A pilot study. J Med Internet Res 2012; 
14:e70. 
27. Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke L. From game 
design elements to gamefulness: deﬁning ‘‘gamiﬁcation.’’ 
In: Proceedings of the 15th International Academic Mind- 
Trek Conference: Envisioning Future Media Environments. 
Tampere, Finland: ACM Press; 2011. 
28. Zichermann G, Cunningham C. Gamiﬁcation by Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. 
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc.; 2011. 
29. Heron KE, Smyth JM. Ecological momentary interven- 
tions: Incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial 
and health behaviour treatments. Br J Health Psychol 2010; 
15:1–39. 
30. Brown SJ, Lieberman DA, Germeny BA, et al. Educational 
video game for juvenile diabetes: Results of a controlled 
trial. Med Inform (Lond) 1997; 22:77–89. 
31. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video 
game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and 
young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics 
2008; 122:e305–e317. 
32. Kato PM, Beale IL. Factors affecting acceptability to young 
cancer patients of a psychoeducational video game about 
cancer. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2006; 23:269–275. 
33. Stinson JN, Jibb LA, Nguyen C, et al. Development and 
testing of a multidimensional iPhone pain assessment ap- 
plication for adolescents with cancer. J Med Internet Res 
2013; 15:e51. 
34. Bingham PM, Bates JH, Thompson-Figueroa J, Lahiri T. A 
breath biofeedback computer game for children with cystic 
ﬁbrosis. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2010; 49:337–342. 
35. Bingham PM, Lahiri T, Ashikaga T. Pilot trial of spirom- 
eter games for airway clearance practice in cystic ﬁbrosis. 
Respir Care 2012; 57:1278–1284. 
36. Davis MA, Quittner AL, Stack CM, Yang MC. Controlled 
evaluation of the STARBRIGHT CD-ROM program for 
children and adolescents with cystic ﬁbrosis. J Pediatr 
Psychol 2004; 29:259–267. 
37. Asthma Advisory Committee Meeting. Asthma Self- 
Management Application Project. In: University of Western 
Ontario Centre for Global e-Health Innovation, Queen’s 
University. The Lung Association. 2014. www.on.lung.ca/ 
document.doc?id=2109 (accessed July 29, 2015). 
38. Krishna S, Francisco BD, Balas EA, et al. Internet-enabled 
interactive multimedia asthma education program: A ran- 
domized trial. Pediatrics 2003; 111:503–510. 
39. Developing Breathe: A Self-Management Web App for 
Asthma. Ottawa: Centre for Global eHealth Innovation, 
University Health Network; 2013. 
40. Garde A, Umedaly A, Abulnaga SM, et al. Assessment of a 
mobile game (‘‘MobileKids Monster Manor’’) to promote 
physical activity among children. Games Health J 2015; 
4:149–158. 
41. Lin J-H. ‘‘Just Dance’’: The effects of exergame feedback 
and controller use on physical activity and psychological 
outcomes. Games Health J 2015; 4:183–189. 


42. Moller CA, Majewski S, Standish M, et al. Active fantasy 
sports: Rationale and feasibility of leveraging online fan- 
tasy sports to promote physical activity. JMIR Serious 
Games 2014; 2:e13. 
43. Sato K, Kuroki K, Saiki S, Nagatomi R. Improving walk- 
ing, muscle strength, and balance in the elderly with an 
exergame using Kinect: A randomized controlled trial. 
Games Health J 2015; 4:161–167. 
44. Fish MT, Russoniello CV, O’Brien K. The efﬁcacy of 
prescribed casual videogame play in reducing symptoms of 
anxiety: A randomized controlled study. Games Health J 
2014; 3:291–295. 
45. Leutwyler H, Hubbard EM, Dowling GA. Adherence to a 
videogame-based physical activity program for older 
adults with schizophrenia. Games Health J 2014; 3:227– 
233. 
46. Roepke AM, Jaffee SR, Rifﬂe OM, et al. Randomized 
controlled trial of SuperBetter, a smartphone-based/ 
Internet-based self-help tool to reduce depressive symp- 
toms. Games Health J 2015; 4:235–246. 
47. Shepherd M, Fleming T, Lucassen M, et al. The design and 
relevance of a computerized gamiﬁed depression therapy 
program for indigenous M(cid:2)aori adolescents. JMIR Serious 
Games 2015; 3:e1. 
48. Gutierrez B, Kaatz A, Chu S, et al. ‘‘Fair Play’’: A vi- 
deogame designed to address implicit race bias through 
active perspective taking. Games Health J 2014; 3:371– 
378. 
49. Chu SKW, Kwan ACM, Reynolds R, et al. Promoting sex 
education among teenagers through an interactive game: 
Reasons for success and implications. Games Health J 
2015; 4:168–174. 
50. D’Cruz J, Santa Maria D, Dube S, et al. Promoting parent– 
child sexual health dialogue with an intergenerational 
game: Parent and youth perspectives. Games Health J 2015; 
4:113–122. 
51. Driesmans K, Vandenbosch L, Eggermont S. Playing a 
videogame with a sexualized female character increases 
adolescents’ rape myth acceptance and tolerance toward 
sexual harassment. Games Health J 2014; 4:91–94. 
52. Jozkowski KN, Ekbia HR. ‘‘Campus Craft’’: A game for 
sexual assault prevention in universities. Games Health J 
2014; 4:95–106. 


al. A 
neurofeedback-based intervention to reduce post-operative 
pain in lung cancer patients: Study protocol for a ran- 
domized controlled trial. JMIR Res Protoc 2015; 4:e52. 
54. Kottink AIR, Prange GB, Krabben T, et al. Gaming and 
conventional exercises for improvement of arm function 
after stroke: A randomized controlled pilot study. Games 
Health J 2014; 3:184–191. 
55. Lozano-Quilis J-A, Gil-Go´mez H, Gil-Go´mez J-A, et al. 
Virtual rehabilitation for multiple sclerosis using a Kinect- 
based system: Randomized controlled trial. JMIR Serious 
Games 2014; 2:e12. 
56. Profﬁtt R, Sevick M, Chang C-Y, Lange B. User-centered 
design of a controller-free game for hand rehabilitation. 
Games Health J 2015; 4:259–264. 
57. Szturm T, Reimer KM, Hochman J. Home-based computer 
gaming in vestibular rehabilitation of gaze and balance 
impairment. Games Health J 2015; 4:211–220. 
58. Granic I, Lobel A, Engels RCME. The Beneﬁts of Playing 
Video Games. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Radboud Uni- 
versity Nijmegen; 2013. 
59. Buijink AW, Visser BJ, Marshall L. Medical apps for 
smartphones: Lack of evidence undermines quality and 
safety. Evid Based Med 2013; 18:90–92. 
60. Haffey F, Brady RR, Maxwell S. A comparison of the re- 
liability of smartphone apps for opioid conversion. Drug 
Saf 2013; 36:111–117. 
61. Misra S, Lewis TL, Aungst TD. Medical application use 
and the need for further research and assessment for clinical 
practice: Creation and integration of standards for best 
practice to alleviate poor application design. JAMA Der- 
matol 2013; 149:661–662. 
62. Wolf JA, Moreau JF, Akilov O, et al. Diagnostic inaccuracy 
of smartphone applications for melanoma detection. JAMA 
Dermatol 2013; 149:422–426. 


64. Rosser BA, Eccleston C. Smartphone applications for pain 
management. J Telemed Telecare 2011; 17:308–312. 
65. Ferrero NA, Morrell DS, Burkhart CN. Skin scan: A 
demonstration of the need for FDA regulation of medical 
apps on iPhone. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013; 68:515–516. 
66. Lewis LT, Wyatt CJ. mHealth and mobile medical apps: A 
framework to assess risk and promote safer use. J Med 
Internet Res 2014; 16:e210. 
67. Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, et al. Smartphones for 
smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic 
review. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e247. 




70. Rounsaville BJ, Carroll KM, Onken LS. A stage model of 
behavioral therapies research: getting started and moving 
on from stage I. Clin Psychol Sci Pract 2001; 8:133–142. 
71. Balas EA, Boren SA. Managing clinical knowledge for 
healthcare improvements. In: van Bemmel JH, McCray AT, 
eds. Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2000. Stuttgart: 
Schattauer; 2000: 65–70. 
72. Brown CH, Kellam SG, Kaupert S, et al. Partnerships for 
the design, conduct, and analysis of effectiveness, and 
implementation research: Experiences of the Prevention 
Science and Methodology Group. Adm Policy Ment Health 
2012; 39:301–316. 
73. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don’t we 
see more translation of health promotion research to prac- 
tice? Rethinking the efﬁcacy-to-effectiveness transition. 
Am J Public Health 2003; 93:1261–1267. 
74. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The Multiphase 
Optimization Strategy (MOST) and the Sequential Multiple 
Assignment Randomized Trial (SMART): New methods 
for more potent eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med 
2007; 32(5 Suppl):S112–S118. 
75. Mohr CD, Schueller MS, Riley TW, et al. Trials of inter- 
vention principles: Evaluation methods for evolving be- 
intervention technologies. J Med Internet Res 
havioral 
2015; 17:e166. 
76. Mohr DC, Cheung K, Schueller SM, et al. Continuous 
evaluation of evolving behavioral intervention technolo- 
gies. Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:517–523. 
77. Wyatt J. Assessing and improving evidence based health 
informatics research. Stud Health Technol Inform 2010; 
151:435–445. 
78. Eysenbach G; CONSORT-EHEALTH Group. CONSORT- 
Improving and standardizing evaluation 



reports of Web-based and mobile health interventions. J 
Med Internet Res 2011; 13:e126. 
79. Eysenbach G. CONSORT-EHEALTH: Implementation of 
a checklist for authors and editors to improve reporting of 
web-based and mobile randomized controlled trials. Stud 
Health Technol Inform 2013; 192:657–661. 
80. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief 
measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: The 
GAD-7. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1092–1097. 
81. Norman SB, Cissell SH, Means-Christensen AJ, Stein MB. 
Development and validation of an Overall Anxiety Severity 
and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Depress Anxiety 2006; 
23:245–249. 
82. Taylor S, Zvolensky MJ, Cox BJ, et al. Robust dimensions 
of anxiety sensitivity: Development and initial validation of 
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3. Psychol Assess 2007; 
19:176–188. 
83. Shear MK, Rucci P, Williams J, et al. Reliability and va- 
lidity of the Panic Disorder Severity Scale: Replication and 
extension. J Psychiatr Res 2001; 35:293–296. 
84. van Dixhoorn J, Duivenvoorden HJ. Efﬁcacy of Nijmegen 
Questionnaire in recognition of the hyperventilation syn- 
drome. J Psychosom Res 1985; 29:199–206. 
85. Endicott J, Nee J, Harrison W, Blumenthal R. Quality of 
Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire: A new 
measure. Psychopharmacol Bull 1993; 29:321–326. 


87. Everly GS, Lating JM. A Clinical Guide to the Treatment of 
the Human Stress Response, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 
2013. 
88. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sci- 
ences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988. 
89. Kumar S, Nilsen WJ, Abernethy A, et al. Mobile health 
technology evaluation: The mHealth Evidence Workshop. 
Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:228–236. 

Intrinsic Motivation and Self- 
Determination in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum; 
1985. 
91. Przybylski AK, Deci EL, Rigby CS, Ryan RM. 
Competence-impeding electronic games and players’ ag- 
gressive feelings, 
thoughts, and behaviors. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 2014; 106:441–457. 
92. Chao YY, Scherer YK, Wu YW, et al. The feasibility of an 
intervention combining self-efﬁcacy theory and Wii Fit 
exergames in assisted living residents: A pilot study. Ger- 
iatr Nurs 2013; 34:377–382. 
93. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video 
game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and 
young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics 
2008; 122:e305–317. 
94. Lyons EJ, Hatkevich C. Prevalence of behavior changing 
strategies in ﬁtness video games: Theory-based content 
analysis. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e81. 
95. Schneider KL, Ferrara J, Lance B, et al. Acceptability of an 
online health videogame to improve diet and physical ac- 
tivity in elementary school students: ‘‘Fitter Critters.’’ 
Games Health J 2012; 1:262–268. 
Address correspondence to: 
Quynh Pham, MSc 
Playlab London 
71B St John Street 
London, United Kingdom, EC1M 4NJ 

