Ibobbly mobile health intervention 
for suicide prevention in Australian 
Indigenous youth: a pilot randomised 
controlled trial 
Joseph Tighe,1,2 Fiona Shand,1 Rebecca Ridani,1 Andrew Mackinnon,1 
Nicole De La Mata,3 Helen Christensen1 
To cite: Tighe J, Shand F, 
Ridani R, et al. Ibobbly 
mobile health intervention 
for suicide prevention in 
Australian Indigenous youth: 
a pilot randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ Open 2017;7: 
e013518. doi:10.1136/ 
bmjopen-2016-013518 
▸ Prepublication history and 
additional material is 
available. To view please visit 
the journal (http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1136/bmjopen-2016- 
013518). 
Received 19 July 2016 
Revised 2 December 2016 
Accepted 6 December 2016 
1Black Dog Institute, 
University of New South 
Wales, Randwick, New South 
Wales, Australia 
2Men’s Outreach Service Inc., 
Broome, Western Australia, 
Australia 
3Kirby Institute, University of 
New South Wales, 
Kensington, New South 
Wales, Australia 
Correspondence to 
Joseph Tighe; 
j.tighe@blackdog.org.au 
ABSTRACT 
Objectives: Rates of youth suicide in Australian 
Indigenous communities are 4 times the national youth 
average and demand innovative interventions. Historical 
and persistent disadvantage is coupled with multiple 
barriers to help seeking. Mobile phone applications 
offer the opportunity to deliver therapeutic 
interventions directly to individuals in remote 
communities. The pilot study aimed to evaluate the 
effectiveness of a self-help mobile app (ibobbly) 
targeting suicidal ideation, depression, psychological 
distress and impulsivity among Indigenous youth in 
remote Australia. 
Setting: Remote and very remote communities in the 
Kimberley region of North Western Australia. 
Participants: Indigenous Australians aged 18–35 years. 
Interventions: 61 participants were recruited and 
randomised to receive either an app (ibobbly) which 
delivered acceptance-based therapy over 6 weeks or were 
waitlisted for 6 weeks and then received the app for the 
following 6 weeks. 
Primary and secondary outcome measures: The 
primary outcome was the Depressive Symptom Inventory 
—Suicidality Subscale (DSI-SS) to identify the frequency 
and intensity of suicidal ideation in the previous weeks. 
Secondary outcomes were the Patient Health 
Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9), The Kessler Psychological 
Distress Scale (K10) and the Barratt Impulsivity Scale 
(BIS-11). 
Results: Although preintervention and postintervention 
changes on the (DSI-SS) were significant in the ibobbly 
arm (t=2.40; df=58.1; p=0.0195), these differences were 
not significant compared with the waitlist arm (t=1.05; 
df=57.8; p=0.2962). However, participants in the ibobbly 
group showed substantial and statistically significant 
reductions in PHQ-9 and K10 scores compared with 
waitlist. No differences were observed in impulsivity. 
Waitlist participants improved after 6 weeks of app use. 
Conclusions: Apps for suicide prevention reduce 
distress and depression but do not show significant 
reductions on suicide ideation or impulsivity. A feasible 
and acceptable means of lowering symptoms for mental 
health disorders in remote communities is via 
appropriately designed self-help apps. 
Trial registration number: ACTRN12613000104752. 





INTRODUCTION 
in Australia for Indigenousi 
Suicide rates 
the 
communities 
are 
non-Indigenous population1 2 and four times 
suicide 
Indigenous 
the rate for 
differs 
in 
from non-Indigenous not 
terms of the different historical contexts,3 4 
the broader sociocultural and sociopolitical 
issues,3 4 the triggers for suicidal behaviour,4 5 
the suicidal behaviours themselves,4 5 and 
the conceptualisation of suicide within the 
context of social and emotional well-being 
(ﬁgure 1).4 6 In some communities threats of 
suicide are often made by both children and 
adults during interpersonal conﬂicts, and tra- 
gically many threats end in a suicide.5 The 
social determinants of 
Indigenous health 
have their origins in dispossession and are 
iThe term Indigenous will be used throughout to refer 
to Australian peoples of Aboriginal or Torres Strait 
Islander descent. Note that most suicide prevention 
research in Australia is carried out within Aboriginal 
communities rather than the Torres Strait. 



ran successfully in eight distinct 
Indigenous communities through collaboration 
between a non-Indigenous research organisation 
and local Indigenous stakeholders. 
▪ This is the first randomised controlled trial using 
an app for suicide prevention anywhere including 
Indigenous Australian communities. 
▪ There was high adherence to the intervention 
and a very low attrition rate (3%) indicating the 
feasibility of 
intervention in 
this 
Indigenous Australian communities. 

▪ The study had a small sample size (N=61). 
▪ The study included 16 participants without sui- 
cidal 
ideation at baseline thereby reducing the 
possibility of achieving significant results in sui- 
cidal ideation. 




characterised by poverty and powerlessness.1 7 This 
impacts on the help-seeking behaviours of 
context 
Indigenous Australians. Often mental health services do 
not exist in remote areas, and when they do, they are 
not routinely deemed trustworthy or culturally compe- 
tent.8 Barriers to help seeking for mental health issues 
include remoteness, a lack of appropriate services, mis- 
trust of mainstream services due to negative experiences 
such as racism, and shame.8 Consequently there is sig- 
niﬁcantly 
the 
other 
Indigenous 
Australians.8 More than half of Indigenous people in a 
2012–2103 survey reported that a poor opinion of or 
dislike of 
the health services prevented them from 
seeking mental health counselling.9 A South Australian 
study reported that only 14% of Indigenous people with 
a diagnosed mental illness at the time of their suicide 
sought treatment for their illness.10 

among 
with 


In a space often regarded as ‘too difﬁcult’ to make 
progress, opportunities are nevertheless present and the 
need for innovation is clear. Indigenous-driven suicide 
prevention and well-being efforts are reporting good 
outcomes11–13 although the potential of 
technological 
interventions for this high-risk population has remained 
largely unexplored. Seventy per cent of Indigenous people 
own a smart phone compared with 66% of the overall 
Australian population, with Indigenous youth accessing 
social media such as Facebook almost 20% more frequently 
than other Australian youth.14 Mobile and eHealth tech- 
nologies may help overcome conﬁdentiality fears, while 
providing evidence-based therapeutic content on demand 
in areas without suitable mental health services. 
Based on acceptance-based therapies including accept- 
ance and commitment therapy,15 the ibobbly app—deliv- 
ered on an Android tablet—was developed by the Black 
Dog Institute in partnership with Indigenous community 
members 
from the Kimberley, Western Australia. 
Indigenous artists and graphic designers created original 
imagery to represent the key messages and activities of 
the therapeutic content. Full gender-matched audio was 
developed to overcome low literacy and to follow cul- 
tural protocol. The trial aimed to test the app’s impact 
on suicidal 
ideation, depression, psychological distress 
and impulsivity, and to pilot the implementation of a 
randomised controlled trial (RCT) in Indigenous com- 
munities focused on suicide prevention. 



METHODS 
Study design 
A two-arm RCT (one intervention group and a 6-week 
waitlist control group) was conducted, with post-test, and 
6-week-follow-up. Recruitment 
started in September 
2013 and ended in March 2015. The study protocol has 
been published.16 
Participants 
Recruitment took place through collaboration with a 
partner organisation Men’s Outreach Service (MOS) in 
Broome, Western Australia. MOS have managed the 
Alive and Kicking Goals (AKG)17 Indigenous youth 
suicide prevention project since 2008 in partnership 
with Indigenous community volunteers. The recruitment 
strategy included a dedicated Facebook page, posters 
and ﬂyers placed in medical centres, ﬂyers emailed to 
health professionals, and information sessions held with 
health professionals. The recruitment also relied on the 
promotion of the research by Indigenous staff to their 
networks through word-of-mouth. Initially, participants 
were eligible if aged between 18 and 35 years of age, 
had a score of more than 10 on the Patient Health 
Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9) or a score of 25 or greater 
score on the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10) 
and had suicidal thoughts in the previous 2 weeks. 




During the screening process, individuals were asked 
ﬁve questions relating to active suicidality over the previ- 
ous 2 weeks, 
including ideation, attempts and current 
intent. They were also asked if they had a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia 
disorder. 
Individuals who had active intent to suicide, or had 
experienced schizophrenia or psychosis were excluded. 
All screening was completed by the research ofﬁcer/ 
psychologist at AKG, with the exception of one individ- 
ual who was screened by the research assistant at the 
Black Dog Institute via telephone ( participant’s prefer- 
ence). Initial screening typically took up to 30 min with 
a further 30 min required to register the individual if 
eligible. 
Changes to the eligibility criteria from the protocol 
occurred in the ﬁrst weeks of the trial. These were 
prompted by feasibility (ethics were approved for only 
one region rather than nationally thereby signiﬁcantly 
reducing the number of potential participants), by local 
cultural issues, high rates of distress of those above the 
age limit but wanting to join the trial and restricted 
health services for this target group. Sixteen participants 
without recent suicidal ideation but meeting all other 
criteria were included (n=16) in the trial from 19/09/ 
2013, shortly after trial 
initiation. Seven participants 
older than 35 years with high distress and high motiv- 
ation to be included were also included from 19/09/ 
2013. 
Procedure 
Following screening, eligible participants (N=61) were 
randomised (1:1) either to the intervention or waitlist 
control group using block randomisation stratiﬁed by 
gender (16 per block), using computer-generated ran- 
domisation. Each block randomisation was performed 
ofﬂine by a member of the research team at the Black 
Dog Institute and sent to the research ofﬁcer in Broome 
who was responsible for and not blind to the interven- 
tion allocation. Participants received the intervention for 
6 weeks or joined a 6-week waitlist. The waitlist control 
group also received the ibobbly programme 6 weeks 
after baseline questionnaires were completed. Before 
starting the programme, all participants received a 
15 min training session on how to operate the tablet and 
app which included setting a password for secure access. 
Measures were taken face-to-face at baseline and at the 
beginning and end of the intervention for both groups. 
In addition to providing helpline and service provider 
information, safety checks to assess for active suicidality 
were conducted via telephone at the 3-week and 9-week 
time points. All participants had face-to-face or tele- 
phone contact with the research ofﬁcer/psychologist at 
baseline assessment, 3 weeks (safety check) and 6 weeks 
follow-up. Waitlist group participants also received a 
further safety check at 9 weeks, and ﬁnal 
follow-up 
assessment at 12 weeks. 
Intervention 
The ibobbly programme was delivered via a password- 
protected app provided at no cost to participants. The 
app contained three content modules and three self- 
assessments, to be completed over 6 weeks. Participants 
were expected to progress unprompted through the 
content. All activities were required to be completed in 
sequence. Repetition of activities was encouraged to 
improve learning and impact. Live mobile network con- 
nectivity was not necessary to use the app, with online 
data downloaded once individuals entered internet- 
enabled areas. 




the app 
required participants 
self- 
assessments on their functioning and state of mind, 
including suicidality. Participants could track their pro- 
gress through a personalised dashboard. To cater for low 
literacy levels, all text was accompanied by matching 
voice recordings. The app displayed emergency contact 
information for several 24-hour helplines. In module 1, 
participants learnt to identify thoughts (including sui- 
cidal thoughts), feelings and behaviours (including sui- 
cidal behaviour), and learnt distancing techniques. In 
module 2, participants were taught to regulate their 
emotions through (1) mindfulness, which encouraged 
participants to maintain non-judgemental contact with 
their psychological and environmental experiences; (2) 
acceptance, which presented participants with an alter- 
native to experiential avoidance and helped them to 
increase their awareness of their internal experiences 
without the need to control them; and (3) self-soothing 
activities that were social (eg, calling a friend), active 
(eg, going for a walk) and cultural (eg, storytelling). 



In module 3, participants were helped to identify values 
important to them and asked to set small, achievable 
goals to help them live by these values, and at the end, 
provided with a personalised action plan, based on prior 
answers. The suicide-speciﬁc content 
is outlined in 
online supplementary appendix A. 

Measures 
Primary outcome: suicidal ideation (DSI-SS) 
Symptom Inventory—Suicidality 
The 
Subscale (DSI-SS) is a four-item self-report questionnaire 
designed to identify the frequency and intensity of sui- 
cidal ideation in the previous weeks.18 Total inventory 
scores range from 0 to 12, with each answer being 
scored 0–3, and higher scores indicating higher severity. 
The four questions assess frequency of suicidal ideation, 
development of a suicide plan, an inability to control 
suicidal thoughts, and suicidal impulses. The scale has 
good reliability and validity19 20 speciﬁcally among a 
group of 15–24 years old general practice patients.21 
Secondary outcome measures 
Depression: The PHQ-9 consists of nine items, scored 
from 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly every day) and rated over 
previous fortnight. Overall scores range from 0 to 27 
with 0–4 representing no or minimal depression, 5–9 
representing mild depression, 10–14 moderate depres- 
sion, 15–19 moderately severe depression and 20–27 
severe depression.22 For analyses of cases, participants 
with scores on the PHQ-9 of 10 and above were classiﬁed 
as likely to meet criteria for moderate or more severe 
depression. 
Psychological distress: K10 contains 10 items rated on 
their occurrence over the previous 4 weeks 
from 1 
(none of the time) to 5 (all of the time). Total scores 
range from 10 to 50 with psychological distress being 
categorised as follows: 1–20 are likely to be well; 21–24 
are likely to have a mild mental disorder; 25–29 are 
likely to have a moderately severe mental disorder; 30 
and above are likely to have a severe mental disorder.23 
Participants with K10 scores of 25 or greater were classi- 
ﬁed as having moderate or more severe psychological 
distress. The cut-off points used in these analyses were 
developed for the Australian National Survey of Mental 
Health and Wellbeing.24 There is little evidence regard- 
ing the applicability of 
for the 
current sample. It is nevertheless widely used among the 
Australian Indigenous population. 

Impulsivity: The Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11) is a 
30-item questionnaire which asks respondents to select 
how frequently they engage in common impulsive and 
non-impulsive behaviour. Responses are coded on a four- 
point scale from 1 (rarely or never) to 4 (almost always 
or always), with higher scores indicating greater impul- 
sivity. The scale has good validity with internal consist- 
ency coefﬁcients ranging from 0(cid:1)79 to 0(cid:1)83 and has 
been used with undergraduate students, substance abuse 
patients, prison inmates 
patients.25 


Use of health services 
Data were collected at baseline regarding participant’s 
use of health and social care services over the previous 
Inventory 
6 months. The Client 
(CSRI)26 is used in mental health service evaluations 
and collects retrospective information about the use of 
health and social care services, accommodation, and 
income. The following domains were captured within 
this study: general practitioner consultations, outpatient 
visits, use of hospital services for physical or mental 
health problems, mental health helpline contacts, psy- 
chiatric crisis support team contacts, social worker con- 
therapy contacts, self-help 
tacts, counselling contacts, 
groups’ contact, and psychiatrist contacts. 
Statistical analysis 
Power analysis for the primary outcome measure indi- 
cated that 98 participants were needed to attain power 
of 80% for a medium-sized clinical effect (difference 
between arms of change from preintervention to postin- 
tervention of 0.75SDs). Analyses of trial outcomes were 
undertaken on an intent-to-treat basis using a used 
mixed-model repeated measures analysis of variance 
treatment arm (active— 
framework with factors of 
ibobbly vs comparator—waitlist) and occasion of meas- 
urement ( preintervention, postintervention and 6-week 
follow-up). This includes all available data for partici- 
pants and yields unbiased estimates of 
intervention 
effects in the assumption that data were missing at 
random. Follow-up data were available for waitlist partici- 
pants following their use of the ibobbly intervention sub- 
postintervention 
sequent 
The 
the intervention was assessed by a 
effectiveness of 
planned contrast comparing preintervention and postin- 
tervention changes between arms. For descriptive pur- 
poses, an additional contrast assessed change in the 
waitlist condition after these participants had access to 
the ibobbly app. Within-participant covariation was 
accommodated using unconstrained variance–covari- 
ance matrices and estimated degrees of freedom (df ) 
using Satterthwaite’s correction. Effects were calculated 
from observed data postintervention using pooled esti- 
mates of the SD. SPSS V.23 was used for all analyses. 



funding source: The Australian Government 
Department of Health and Ageing provided initial funds 
into design or 
for the project, but had no input 
outcomes. 
RESULTS 
Sixty-ﬁve participants were screened between September 
2013 and December 2014. Two did not meet inclusion 
criteria (one was diagnosed with schizophrenia and one 
had scores below cut-off ). The remaining two were eli- 
to participate (ﬁgure 2). The 
gible but chose not 



A smaller percentage (34%) received general medical 
care over the previous 6 months. Baseline characteristics, 
including level of employment, education, gender and 
Indigenous status, were similar between ibobbly and 
waitlist participants. Observed means and SDs for all 
outcome variables at each time point are presented in 
table 2. 
Outcomes 
Suicidal ideation (DSI-SS) 
Although preintervention and postintervention changes 
were signiﬁcant 
in the ibobbly arm (t=2.40; df=58.1; 
p=0.0195), the interaction of intervention arm by time 
( preintervention vs postintervention) was not signiﬁcant 
(t=1.05; df=57.8; p=0.2962). Estimated marginal means 
in ﬁgure 3 show that any difference between change in 
the two arms arose because of a slight but non- 
signiﬁcant difference (t=0.84; df=59.0; p=0.3998) in 
mean baseline status between the two arms. Observed 

majority (75%) of referrals originated from Indigenous 
word-of-mouth. 
health 
Mainstream mental health services provided the remain- 
ing 25% of referrals. 


Table 1 provides the demographic and health data. 
took place in the Kimberley 
While the recruitment 
region, participants were residing in eight distinct com- 
munities namely Broome 
(very 
remote), Fitzroy Crossing (very remote), Djarindjin 
(very remote), Lombadina (very remote), Mowanjum 
(very 
and 
Ringer’s Soak (very remote). 




At baseline 56% of participants reported receipt of a 
mental health service in the previous 6 months (n=34). 
A number of participants (n=10) had received mental 
health treatment 
in a hospital setting. However, this 
does not necessarily indicate a crisis or suicide attempt. 
In remote communities, the hospital may have been the 
familiar. 
only possible pathway to care, or the most 



postintervention means were identical leading to an esti- 
mated effect size (Cohen’s d) of 0.00 (95% CI −0(cid:1)51 to 
0(cid:1)51). 
DSI-SS scores of participants in the waitlist arm contin- 
ued to decline when they were offered access to ibobbly. 
However, the extent of change was less than in the initial 
preintervention and postintervention phases, although 
not signiﬁcantly so (t=−0.29; df=28.9; p=0.7741). 
Depression (PHQ-9) 
As shown in ﬁgure 4, participants in the ibobbly arm 
showed a substantial and statistically signiﬁcant reduc- 
tion in PHQ-9 scores compared with waitlist controls. 
The interaction of intervention arm by time ( preinter- 
signiﬁcant (t=2.79; 
vention vs postintervention) was 
df=56.9; p=0.0072). Cohen’s d was 0.71 (95% CI 0.17 to 
1.23), reﬂecting a substantial effect. 
PHQ-9 scores of participants in the waitlist arm contin- 
ued to decline when they were offered access to ibobbly; 
however, the extent of change was less than in the initial 
preintervention and postintervention phases, although 
not signiﬁcantly so (t=−0.24; df=34.7; p=0.8086). 
Depression caseness 
Participants with PHQ-9 scores of 10 or greater were 
classiﬁed as likely to meet criteria for moderate or more 
severe depressive disorder. Only three participants in 
each arm fell below this cut-off preintervention, so that 
90% of the sample (55/61) were likely to be depressed. 
Postintervention, 58% (21/30) of waitlist participants 
meet the criteria for depression while only 42% (15/31) 
of those in ibobbly arm did so. This difference was not 
statistically signiﬁcant (Fisher’s exact test p=0.1196). This 
corresponds to a relative risk of being depressed after 
accessing ibobbly of 0.69 (95% CI 0.45 to 1.06) and a 
number needed to treat of 4.6 (95% CI 2.2 to ∞ to 
41.0ii). 
General psychological distress (K10) 
As shown in ﬁgure 5, participants in the ibobbly arm 
also showed a substantial and statistically signiﬁcant 
iiCI passes through inﬁnity so that number needed to treat is greater 
than 2.2 and number needed to harm is greater than 41.0. 





Male (%) 
Age, mean (SD) 
Age range (youngest to oldest) 

Aboriginal 
Torres Strait Islander 
Both aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
Neither aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander 

Married 
De facto 
Separated 
Employment and education outcomes 
Employment status, n (%) 
Employed full-time 
Employed part-time 
Unemployed—looking for work 
Not in the labour force 
Main activity (if not in the labour force), n (%) 
Home duties/caring for children 
Schooling level completed, n (%) 
Some secondary 
Four years of secondary 
Six years of secondary 
Tertiary schooling, n (%) 
None 
Trade/apprenticeship 
Other certificate 
Bachelor’s degree 
Current study, n (%) 

Waitlist (n=30) 
Frequency (per cent) 
Intervention (n=31) 
Frequency (per cent) 

11 (37) 
24.97 (6.28) 
11 (35) 
27.48 (9.54) 
26.25 (8.13) 
18–56 

0 
1 (3) 
4 (13) 

10 (33) 
3 (10) 
9 (30) 
4 (13) 
12 (40) 
3 (10) 


11 (37) 
19 (63) 
9 (30) 
3 (10) 
18 (60) 


30 (97) 
1 (3) 
0 
0 
1 (3) 
14 (45) 
6 (19) 
10 (32) 
5 (16) 
11 (35) 
5 (16) 

5 (16) 
17 (55) 
9 (29) 
11 (35) 
3 (10) 
13 (42) 
3 (10) 

55 (90) 
1 (2) 
1 (2) 
4 (6.6) 
1 (2) 
24 (39) 
9 (15) 
19 (31) 
9 (15) 
23 (38) 
8 (13) 

5 (8) 
28 (46) 
28 (46) 
20 (33) 
6 (10) 
31 (51) 
3 (5) 


Figure 4 Estimated marginal mean depression (PHQ-9) 
scores by time and intervention arm (error bars represent ±1 
SE). PHQ-9, Patient Health Questionnaire 9. 
Figure 5 Estimated marginal mean psychological distress 
(K10) scores by time and intervention arm (error bars 
represent ±1 SE). K10, Kessler Psychological Distress Scale. 
Figure 3 Estimated marginal mean suicide ideation 
(DSI-SS) scores by time and intervention arm (error bars 
represent ±1 SE). DSI-SS, Depressive Symptom Inventory— 
Suicidality Subscale. 
reduction in K10 scores compared with waitlist controls. 
The interaction of intervention arm by time ( preinter- 
signiﬁcant (t=2.44; 
vention vs postintervention) was 
df=57.5; p=0.0177). Cohen’s d was 0.65 (95% CI 0.12 to 
1.17), reﬂecting a substantial effect. There was little 
further decline in K10 scores of participants in the wait- 
list arm when they were offered access to ibobbly. This 
(t=−0.24; df=34.7; 
signiﬁcant 
reduction was not 
p=0.8086). 
General distress caseness 
Participants with K10 scores of 22 or greater were classi- 
ﬁed as having high levels of psychological distress. Only 
three participants fell below this cut-off preintervention, 


so that 95% of the sample (58/61) were classiﬁed as 
intervention. 
before 
highly 
Postintervention, 59% (22/29) of waitlist participants 
had high levels of distress while only 40% (15/29) of 
those in ibobbly arm did so. This difference was not stat- 
istically signiﬁcant (Fisher’s exact test p=0.1001). This 
corresponds to a relative risk of being depressed after 
accessing ibobbly of 0.68 (95% CI 0.45 to 1.02) and a 
number needed to treat of 4.1 (95% CI 2.1 to 516.4). 
Impulsivity (BIS-11) 
As shown in ﬁgure 6, preintervention scores on the 
BIS-11 for the waitlist group were signiﬁcantly lower 
than for the ibobbly group (t=2.05; df=59.2; p=0.0446). 
Postintervention means were identical. Scores in the 
waitlist decreased from postintervention to follow-up 
signiﬁcant (t=−1.82; df=29.1; 
although this was not 
p=0.0792). 


Table 2 Observed mean scores for outcomes at: 
T1 (baseline), T2 (end of 6-week intervention for ibobbly 
group and start of intervention for waitlist group), 
T3 (end of intervention for waitlist group) 
Outcome 
measures 
Suicidal ideation 
Intervention 
Control 
Depression 
T1 
(baseline) 
Mean (SD) 
T2 
(6 weeks) 
Mean (SD) 
T3 
(12 weeks) 
Mean (SD) 
2.7 (2.2) 
2.3 (1.9) 
1.9 (2.1) 
1.9 (1.7) 

Intervention 
Control 
15.2 (4.5) 
15.1 (3.9) 




Intervention 
Control 
Impulsivity 
Intervention 
Control 
*(p≤0.05). 
**(p≤0.01). 
31.6 (5.7) 
31.6 (6.0) 
22.7 (7.4)* 
27.9 (8.0) 

72.1 (8.6) 
67.9 (7.7) 
70.6 (10.6) 
70.6 (10.4) 


ideation (n=45), but there were no differences found in 
this subanalysis. Our scales were brief, motivated by the 
need to make responses non-burdensome, but this may 
have reduced sensitivity. Since impulsivity measures tem- 
perament as opposed to symptoms of distress, our 
expectation of seeing change may have been too high 
for this outcome measure. This was supported by the 
observation of little change in both groups over the time 
period for this measure, especially in comparison to 
observed changes in distress and depression. 
Figure 6 Estimated marginal mean impulsivity (BIS-11) 
scores by time and intervention arm (error bars represent ±1 
SE). BIS-11, Barratt Impulsivity Scale. 
App usage 
Usage data were available from 40 out of 61 participants. 
The remaining 21 failed to provide adherence data for a 
variety of reasons: 3 were lost to follow-up, technical/ 
connectivity failure accounted for a further 5, and the 
remaining 13 were either not available to meet 
in 
person to download data or had a technical problem 
with the tablet device such as an uncharged battery. 
There is the possibility some participants were self- 
conscious post-trial about sharing this personal usage 
data or self-conscious about a lack of adherence. Of the 
40 participants for whom usage data were available, 34 
(85%) completed all activities (three self-assessments 
and three content modules), 1 completed ﬁve out of six 
activities 
and two content 
self-assessments 
modules), and 5 completed two out of six activities (one 
self-assessment and one content module). This shows 
good adherence to the trial by those whose usage data 
were available; however, it is also a limitation that we 
were unable to obtain usage data for 21 participants for 
the reasons listed above despite only losing 3 partici- 
pants to follow-up. As a pilot trial and one of the few 
RCTs using an app and the ﬁrst with this population, we 
were also interested in the technical challenges and the 
feasibility of usage data collection. 



DISCUSSION 
an app offering 
The present 
acceptance-based therapy reduced depression symptoms 
and psychological distress in the target population, but 
did not lead to signiﬁcant changes on suicidality or 
impulsivity. Eligibility criteria were modiﬁed in response 
to community need and restricted recruitment area. 
Thus, 16 of the participants did not have suicide idea- 
tion at baseline, making it difﬁcult to demonstrate a sig- 
niﬁcant effect in a small sample. We brieﬂy examined 
whether change in ideation was present for those with 
Nevertheless, the study had strengths. One of the key 
criticisms of eHealth interventions is that they target 
those with mild disorders and do not capture those at 
most risk. In this case, we demonstrated the feasibility 
and effectiveness of an app for self-help of severe psy- 
chological distress. We also demonstrated engagement 
with an intervention co-designed by 
community 
members in one of the most remote regions of the 
world. The design and execution of the study is also 
unique, even in the context of rural and urban regions. 
We are unaware of any other study in any other popula- 
tion which targets suicide ideation using an app and 
which has been evaluated by an RCT. A 2013 systematic 
review of evidence-based mobile apps for mental health 
included only ﬁve apps for analysis,27 and these did not 
include suicide ideation. No suicide prevention apps, 
despite the number publicly available28 have been 
shown to reduce anxiety and depression in the target 
groups in RCTs. A 2013 systematic review of suicide pre- 
vention interventions for Indigenous populations found 
no RCTs and noted a lack of methodological rigour in 
the 
suicide prevention 
Indigenous 
programmes.29 

Speciﬁcally, the trial demonstrates that eHealth appli- 
cations may cut through the signiﬁcant barriers that 
mental health professionals and researchers ﬁnd in 
for young 
attempting to improve health outcomes 
Indigenous people. They also demonstrate the value of 
individual interventions in addition to those targeting 
the well-being of the community. Nevertheless, the trial 
to complete from initial concept 
required 5 years 
forming, community consultations, 
through to app 
development and ﬁnally completion of the trial itself. 
Many Indigenous communities continue to be severely 
affected by cycles of suicide grief and are often resistant 
to interventions or research designed by non-Indigenous 
stakeholders.11 As this was the ﬁrst trial of its type in 
Indigenous communities, 
it presented a number of 
unknowns. It was anticipated that limitations would be 
reported such as the loss of a large number of partici- 
pants 
tablets or damage 
the loss of 
incurred to tablets. Therefore, we expected the data 
obtained at the end of the trial to come from signiﬁ- 
cantly fewer than the 61 registered participants. On the 
contrary, there was a low attrition rate (n=2, 3%) which 
is likely a consequence of the embedded nature of the 
research within a local partner organisation staffed by 
Indigenous professionals. The partner organisation had 




pre-existing relationships and a trusted reputation with 
Indigenous community members. These trusting rela- 
tionships can feature in Indigenous service provision in 
remote areas and may be advantageous for future trials. 
Recruitment processes also indicated the importance of 
the local partner in the region with 75% of participants 
recruited as a result of the promotion of the trial by staff 
through their networks via word-of-mouth. The willing- 
ness of Indigenous staff within the partner organisation 
and other mental health organisations to promote the 
research to the community indicated strong acceptance 
of the research process and the app intervention itself. 
The willingness of research participants to recommend 
the app to others in their networks also indicated 
acceptance and cultural appropriateness of the app for 
Indigenous youth in the region. A 2016 study that evalu- 
ated the acceptability of this app for Indigenous users 
reported that 
the app was culturally responsive and 
potentially an important addition to the public health 
approach for Indigenous people.30 This study high- 
lighted the importance of co-design and suggested the 
inﬂuence 
possible inclusion of historical 
Indigenous mental health. 

project management for the creation of the app which included 
consolidating text, graphics and voice overs content. She also assisted in the 
editing of this manuscript. AM made a substantial contribution to the trial 
design, statistical analyses, production of figures, interpretation of the data, 
writing the manuscript and critically reviewing the manuscript. NDLM assisted 
with the analysis plan of the data and ensured the appropriate statistical 
methods were selected and validated statistical analyses. NDLM provided 
feedback on the draft manuscripts and approved of the final manuscript. 
Funding The trial was funded by the Australian Government Department of 
Health and Ageing. 

Ethics approval University of New South Wales Human Ethics Committee 
(Ref:HC13025), the Western Australian Aboriginal Health Ethics Committee 
(Ref:486) and the Kimberley Aboriginal Health Planning Forum 
(Ref:2013-006). 

Data sharing statement Additional data can be accessed via the Dryad data 
repository at http://datadryad.org/ with the doi:10.5061/dryad.860kn. 
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with 
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, 
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- 
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided 
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ 
CONCLUSIONS 
This is the ﬁrst trial of a suicide prevention app in any 
population group; the ﬁrst trial to focus on acceptance- 
based therapies for suicide in Indigenous communities, 
and the ﬁrst published RCT of any suicide prevention 
intervention in an Australian Indigenous community. 
This trial indicated that an eHealth app developed in 
partnership with Indigenous communities was accepted 
and promoted by the target community and improved 
mental health symptoms. 

REFERENCES 
1. AIH. Overview of Australian Indigenous health status. 2014. 
Retrieved 25 Oct 16 from http://www.healthinfonet.ecu.edu.au/ 
health-facts/overviews. 
2. Statistics ABS. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander suicide deaths. 
2012. Retrieved 25 Oct 16 from http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/ 
abs@.nsf/Products/3309.0~2010~Chapter~Aboriginal+and+Torres 
+Strait+Islander+suicide+deaths?OpenDocument 








Acknowledgements This study was funded by the Australian Government 
Department of Health and Ageing. Samsung Australia generously donated 150 
Galaxy tablets for the study. Thoughtworks programmed the app at 
considerably reduced cost through their partnership with HITnet. The Young 
and Well Cooperative Research Centre (YAW-CRC) provided a PhD scholarship 
to examine the effectiveness of the app through this pilot. This study was 
designed and was carried out with the help of an Indigenous reference group 
and expert panel members. This group consisted of Indigenous suicide 
prevention professionals, multimedia professionals, professionals on suicide, 
depression, web-based interventions or clinical psychology in general. The 
authors would like to thank research participants, Indigenous community 
members from the Kimberley region of Western Australia, staff and steering 
group at Alive and Kicking Goals, Men’s Outreach Service, Kimberley based 
artists, Goolarri Media, Nyamba Buru Yawuru and Yawuru Traditional Owners, 
Kinway/Anglicare staff in Broome and Derby, BackTrack Armidale, HITnet 
Innovations, Muru Marri Indigenous Health Unit, University of New South 
Wales School of Medicine, and the YAW-CRC. 
Collaborators JT made a substantial contribution to the study design, 
Indigenous community partnerships management, recruitment, data 
interpretation, statistical analyses and writing of this manuscript. FS and HC 
made a substantial contribution to the study design, data interpretation and 
writing. RR assisted with several elements of the study design. She was 
responsible for garnering ethics approval across several committees, 
as well as setting up online data managements systems. RR provided the 


disease patterns. Lancet 2009;374:65–75. 
Isaacs AN, Pyett P, Oakley-Browne MA, et al. Barriers and 
facilitators to the utilization of adult mental health services by 
Australia’s Indigenous people: seeking a way forward. Int J Ment 
Health Nurs 2010;19:75–82. 
9. National Mental Health Commission. Contributing Lives, Thriving 
Communities – Report on the National Review of Mental Health 
Programmes and Services. Sydney: NMHC. 2014: Fact Sheet 
2 – What this means for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. 
10. Aboriginal Health Organisation of South Australia, Clayer JR. Mental 
health and behavioural problems in the urban Aboriginal population. 
South Australian Health Commission; 1991. 

empowerment, healing and leadership. Chapter 25. In: Dudgeon P, 
Milroy H, Walker R, eds. Working together: Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander mental health and wellbeing principles and practice 
2014. 2nd edn. 2014:437–48. 

suicide risk among Canada’s First Nations. In: Kirmayer LJ, 
Valaskakis GG, eds. Healing traditions: the mental health of 
Aboriginal peoples in Canada. Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia Press, 2009. 
13. Ridani R, Shand FL, Christensen H, et al. Suicide prevention in 
Australian aboriginal communities: a review of past and present 
programs. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2015;45:111–40. 

Islander People. 2014. Retrieved 13 Oct 16 from http://mcnair. 
com.au/media-release-media-usage-amongst-aboriginal-and- 
torres-strait-islander-people-infographic/ 




theory, and the third wave of behavioral and cognitive therapies. 
Behav Ther 2004;35:639–65. 

prevention app for indigenous Australian youths: study protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial. Trials 2013;14:396. 

a Kimberley suicide prevention program. Adv Mental Health 
2012;10:240–5. 




questionnaire. Cogn Ther Res 1997;21:359–84. 
Joiner TE, Rudd MD. Negative attributional style for interpersonal 
events and the occurrence of severe interpersonal disruptions as 
predictors of self-reported suicidal ideation. Suicide Life Threat 
Behav 1995;25:297–304. 
Joiner TE, Rudd MD. Disentangling the interrelations between 
hopelessness, loneliness, and suicidal ideation. Suicide Life Threat 
Behav 1996;26:19–26. 
Joiner TE, Pfaff JJ, Acres JG. A brief screening tool for suicidal 
symptoms in adolescents and young adults in general health 
settings: reliability and validity data from the Australian National 
General Practice Youth suicide prevention project. Behav Res Ther 
2002;40:471–81. 
22. Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Kroenke K. Instructions for Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ) and GAD-7 measures. (n.d.) 
Retrieved 12 Jan 2017 from http://www.phqscreeners.com/ 
overview.aspx. 
23. Kessler RC, Barker PR, Colpe LJ, et al. Screening for serious 
mental illness in the general population. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
2003;60:184–9. 

psychological distress scale (K10). Aust N Z J Public Health 
2001;25:494–7. 



interventions. Measuring Mental Health Needs London: Gaskell 
2001:220–4. 
27. Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, et al. Smartphones for smarter 
delivery of mental health programs: a systematic review. J Med 
Internet Res 2013;15:e247. 
Larsen ME, Nicholas J, Christensen H. A Systematic assessment of 
smartphone tools for suicide prevention. PLoS ONE 2016;11: 
e0152285. 


interventions targeting indigenous peoples in Australia, United States, 
Canada and New Zealand. BMC Public Health 2013;13:463. 
30. Povey J, Mills PPJR, Dingwall KM, et al. Acceptability of mental 
health apps for aboriginal and torres strait islander Australians: 
a qualitative study. J Med Internet Res 2016;18(3):e65:1–12. 



