Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2018, 1515–1518
doi:10.1093/ntr/ntx223
Brief report
Received February 9, 2017; Editorial Decision September 17, 2017; Accepted September 25, 2017
Brief report
Effect of Real-Time Monitoring and Notification
of Smoking Episodes on Smoking Reduction:
A Pilot Study of a Novel Smoking Cessation App
Reuven Dar PhD
School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Corresponding Author: Reuven Dar, PhD, School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
Telephone: 972-3-6408624; Fax: 972-3-6409547; E-mail: ruvdar@post.tau.ac.il
Abstract
Introduction: Smartphone applications (apps) for smoking cessation are becoming increasingly
available, but their efficacy remains to be demonstrated. We conducted a pilot study of SmokeBeat,
a novel app designed for use with smartwatches and wristbands. SmokeBeat is powered by a data
analytics software platform that processes information from the sensors embedded in wearables.
It relies on an original algorithm to identify in real time the hand-to-mouth gestures that character-
ize smoking a cigarette. We examined whether merely monitoring and notifying smokers on smok-
ing episodes in real time via the SmokeBeat app would lead to reduction in smoking.
Methods: Forty smokers (9 women and 31 men) who expressed a wish to reduce or quit smoking
were randomly assigned to using the SmokeBeat app for 30 days or to a wait-list control group.
All participants completed questionnaires at baseline and at the end of the study, including their
level of smoking. Smokers in the experimental condition were notified whenever the SmokeBeat
system detected a smoking episode and were asked to confirm or deny it.
Results: The SmokeBeat algorithm correctly detected over 80% of the smoking episodes and pro-
duced very few false alarms. According to both self-report and detection of smoking episodes by
the SmokeBeat system, smokers in the experimental condition showed a significant decline in
smoking rate over the 30-day trial (p < .001). There was no change in the smoking rate of the con-
trol group.
Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest that automatic monitoring of smoking episodes and
alerting the smoker in real time may facilitate smoking reduction in motivated smokers.
Implications: Raising the awareness of smokers to the act of smoking in real time, as the SmokeBeat
app is able to do, can counter the automaticity of the smoking habit. Bringing smoking under con-
scious awareness may benefit smokers who are motivated to reduce or quit smoking to gain better
control of their smoking behavior and reduce cigarette intake.
The immense societal toll associated with cigarette smoking in globally. In contrast to individual or group therapy for smoking
terms of illness, mortality, and financial costs makes the reduction cessation, smartphone apps are available around the clock to an
of smoking rates at a population level a primary worldwide object- estimated 2.3 billion smartphone owners around the world (https://
ive. A recent addition to this effort has been smartphone applica- www.statista.com/statistics/330695/number-of-smartphone-users-
tions (“apps”) providing psychological interventions to aid smoking worldwide/) and are free or very inexpensive to use. And because
cessation. Smartphone apps have important advantages that poten- people carry their smartphones wherever they go, these apps are
tially can make them a major player in the efforts to reduce smoking available to the smoker whenever he or she wishes to use them.
© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved. 1515
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/ntr/article-abstract/20/12/1515/4582712
by
University
of
Leicester
user
on
26
November
2018
1516 Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2018, Vol. 20, No. 12
While there are presently more than 400 smoking cessation apps in smoking the present cigarette, and the extent to which they enjoyed
the market, however, we could find only a couple whose efficacy has the cigarette (rated from “extremely” to “not at all”).
been tested.1,2 Moreover, reviews of existing smoking cessation apps Baseline data were collected before the first use of the app via
recently noted that so far, these apps have not exploited their unique web-based questionnaires. These included demographics (sex, age,
potential advantages.3,4 and education) and information regarding the subjects’ smoking his-
This pilot study examines a novel app for smoking cessation, tory and smoking habits, including the Fagerström Test of Cigarette
which is the first such app designed for use with wearables (smart- Dependence (FTCD7,8). At the end of the study, participants in the
watches and wristbands). Using information from the sensors embed- experimental group responded to questions via the smartphone that
ded in wearables, the SmokeBeat app relies on an original algorithm were designed to evaluate their experience of using the app (see
to identify the hand-to-mouth gestures that characterize smoking details in Supplementary Material).
a cigarette and alert smokers in real time about smoking episodes.
Specifically, raw data are collected from the accelerometer and gyro- Procedure
scope sensors, and following data stabilization and noise filtering, Participants who responded to our ad (via email) received a docu-
the SmokeBeat algorithm determines which specific hand-to-mouth ment that explained the experimental process. If they were inter-
movements being performed by the wearable user signify smoking. ested in participating, they were asked to sign an informed consent
Thanks to its ability to detect smoking in real time, SmokeBeat does form and were assigned in alternating order to the experimental or
not depend on users registering every smoking event, as do all other the control group. Participants in the experimental group received a
current apps. This unique feature has the potential to increase smok- smartwatch (LG Urbane or LG G-R) and were instructed to wear it
ers’ awareness of his or her smoking behavior, countering the ten- on the hand that they used for smoking (four participants wore the
dency of the smoking habit to become automatic and “mindless”.5
watch on their right hand, and the remaining 16 on their left hand).
Indeed, self-monitoring was recently shown to be a critical behavior They then downloaded the SmokeBeat app to their smartphone and
change technique in smoking cessation interventions.6 We therefore completed the baseline questionnaire over the web. Those assigned
expected that notifying smokers in real-time of smoking episodes to the wait-list control condition did not receive a watch and only
would increase awareness and may lead to smoking reduction in completed the web-based baseline questionnaire. In the next 14 days,
smokers wishing to reduce or quit smoking. participants in experimental group received pop-up notifications
whenever the system detected a smoking episode. The notification
appeared on both the watch and the phone and remained until the
Method
user confirmed or denied smoking (overall, 93% of the notifications
Participants were responded to and 90% of the participants answered more than
Forty-two participants were recruited using advertisements in 80% of the notifications). A response to the notification opened the
Facebook inviting people aged 18–45 who smoked at least five app and presented the cigarette follow-up questions described above.
cigarettes per day and who wished to reduce or quit smoking. If a participant smoked and the episode was not detected by the app,
Participants had to own an android smartphone version 4.3 or he or she was instructed to report having smoked through the app
higher, which was required for running the version of SmokeBeat in real time using the designated icon and then answer the cigarette
used in this study. They were offered a fixed payment of 1000 New follow-up questions. In addition, participants could actively search
Israeli Shekels (equivalent to approximately $250) in return for par- in the app for statistical information regarding their smoking pat-
ticipating in the study for the full 30 days. Participants were assigned terns (see Supplementary Material for details), but this information
in alternating order to either the experimental group or a wait-list was never pushed to the users. After 14 days, the development team
control group, as described below. Two participants dropped out of manually tuned the detection algorithm to fit each subject’s specific
the study, both from the experimental group and both very early on, smoking patterns (as a result of the tuning, the rate of false positives
so the final number of participants was 40 (9 women and 31 men, all dropped from 6.19% to 2.84%) and the subject continued using the
Caucasian). The study was conducted in the Tel Aviv Area and was app in the same way for 16 more days. We used the second period
approved by the Ethical Board of Tel Aviv University. to assess the precision of the smoking detection process and the full
30 days to evaluate the effect of smoking monitoring and detection
Materials on smoking patterns. At the end of the 30 days period participants in
The SmokeBeat app is part of Somatix, a behavioral modification the experimental condition returned the watch (all of them did), and
software platform designed to develop interventions based on data all participants completed the end-of-study questionnaire and were
gathered from real-time detection of hand-to-mouth gestures using then thanked and payed for their participation.
standard wearables (smartbands and smartwatches). In the case of
SmokeBeat, the Somatix platform uses machine-learning algorithms Statistical Analysis
to detect smoking episodes and notify detection back to the user in Analyses of data were conducted with the IBM SPSS 24 package. We
real time. In the present study, participants were asked following used a mixed-model ANOVA to analyze the self-reported CPD at
every detection of a smoking episode several questions in regard to baseline and end of study in the two groups. Changes in CPD in the
the episode. Participants were asked about their position during this experimental group over time (as detected by the app) were assessed
episode (sitting, standing, lying down, walking, driving), whether the using repeated measures ANOVA. Statistical significance was set at
elbow of their smoking hand was leaning on something, whether .05 and η2 was used as an estimate of effect size. Correlations were
they were eating or drinking, whether they felt stressed before estimated using Pearson correlation coefficients.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/ntr/article-abstract/20/12/1515/4582712
by
University
of
Leicester
user
on
26
November
2018
Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2018, Vol. 20, No. 12 1517
Results Discussion
Table 1 displays the baseline data of participants in our study. The The results of this pilot study of SmokeBeat are encouraging in two
two groups did not differ in age, education level, and the age of respects. First, the smoking detection algorithm of the app was able
smoking initiation. However, despite the random assignment, the to detect over 80% of smoking episodes in “real life” conditions
control group reported smoking more cigarettes per day and had with negligible frequency of “false alarms.” Second, the study pro-
higher scores on the FTCD. vides preliminary evidence that automatic monitoring of smoking
There was a main effect of group on self-reported CPD, episodes and notifying the smoker in real time when smoking epi-
F(1, 38) = 19.24, p < .001, reflecting the baseline differences noted sodes are detected can lead to smoking reduction.
above between the two groups. There was also an effect of time, so We hasten to emphasize that this study has several limitations
that overall participants smoked less at the end of the study com- and that the findings raise several issues that should be resolved.
pared to baseline, F(1, 38) = 7.99, p < .001. However, an identical First, the control group smoked more and was more dependent than
interaction effect between group and time, F(1, 38) = 7.99, p < .001, the experimental group, which represents a failure of randomiza-
indicates that the decline was solely due to the experimental group tion which we cannot account for. However, higher baseline CPD
(Figure 1). Whereas the control group reported identical number of and dependence was associated with more, rather than less smok-
CPD at baseline and at end of study (both M = 18.75), the experi- ing reduction, so the group difference at baseline cannot serve as an
mental group reported a significant decline in the same 30-day alternative explanation to our findings. Second, as seen in Figure 1,
period (M = 12.00, M = 9.25), F(1, 38) = 15.98, p < .001, there was a gap between the CPD figures self-reported by the experi-
baseline end-of study
η2 = .296. mental group at the beginning and end of the study (upper part,
In the next step of the analysis, we examined the information approximately 12 CPD at the beginning and 9.5 CPD at the end of
received from the SmokeBeat platform in regard to detection of the study) and the ones derived from the app, which include ciga-
smoking episodes. Participants reported having smoked 64.23% rettes missed by the algorithm and reported by the smoker via the
of their cigarettes while sitting and 18.09% while standing, and app (approximately 9.5 CPD at the beginning and 5 CPD at the
the detection rates for these positions were 87.29% and 89.67%, end of the study). We do not know if this gap represents an over-
respectively, with overall detection rate (across all positions) of estimation of the CPD figure by the smokers or under-detection by
82.29%. False alarms—cases where the system erroneously detected the app, and future studies will help to determine that. At any rate,
and reported a smoking episode—occurred only at 2.85% of the the reported reduction in CPD was very similar to that detected
total episodes reported by the system. The results of the analysis by the app (approximately 2.5 CPD), which suggests that the reduc-
of change in CPD in the experimental group as assessed by the tion in CPD in the experimental group is a reliable finding. Third,
SmokeBeat algorithm were consistent with those self-reported by our control condition differed from the experimental condition in
the participants, F(29, 551) = 2.542, p < .001, η2 = .118. A negative several respects, which limits our ability to conclude which of those
linear contrast on these data was significant, t(28) = 2.77, p = .0122, were critical for our findings (eg, we cannot assess the effects of
confirming the decline in cigarettes detected and reported through merely wearing the smartwatch). Fourth, the current version of the
the SmokeBeat app over the 30-day study (Figure 1). The correlation app cold not provide us information on the extent to which users
between self-reported and observed change in CPD was moderate actively searched for statistical information about their smoking
but significant, r = .45, p = .049. rates, so we cannot assess any effects that this information may have
Because the groups differed at baseline in CPD and FTCD scores, had on changes in CPD. Fifth, we have no data on any long-term
we sought to rule out the possibility that the differences between effects of using the SmokeBeat app, which remains to be examined
the groups at the end of the study could be explained by the higher future studies with the SmokeBeat app. And sixth, our participants
dependence level of participants in the control group. This was done were recruited using Facebook ads and were mostly men, which may
by examining the correlations between change in CPD and baseline limit the generalizability of our results.
FTCD scores in each group. In both groups, the reported decline Finally, we should note that the unique ability of SmokeBeat
in CPD was positively correlated with FTCD scores, though the to identify smoking behavior in real time can be used to generate
correlation was significant only in the experimental group (r = .51, data analytics on a vast number of smoking parameters and to dis-
p = .022) and not in the control group (r = .12, p = .61), very likely till from these data both general and personal smoking patterns.
because of the low variance in CPD change over time in the latter The detection algorithm also makes it possible to deliver incentives
group. Notably, in the experimental group, FTCD scores were also and coping strategies at the moment that they are most relevant to
correlated with the decline in CPD as detected by the SmokeBeat the smoker and to provide feedback on goal progress in real time,
algorithm (r = .58, p = .007). without depending on the smoker’s fluctuating state of energy,
Table 1. Baseline Data (Means with SD in Parentheses) of Participants in the Study (N = 20 in Each Group)
Group
Experimental Control t p
Age 25.90 (4.22) 29.55 (8.72) −1.684 .100
Years of education 12.45 (1.23) 13.10 (2.00) −1.238 .223
Age started smoking 16.95 (2.98) 16.60 (2.37) 0.411 .683
Reported cigarettes per day 12.00 (2.90) 18.75 (7.92) −3.576 .00097
FTCD score 12.50 (3.32) 19.95 (8.56) −3.631 .00083
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/ntr/article-abstract/20/12/1515/4582712
by
University
of
Leicester
user
on
26
November
2018
1518 Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2018, Vol. 20, No. 12
projected growth in the prevalence of wearables over the next few
years (http://www.ccsinsight.com/press/company-news/2332-weara-
bles-market-to-be-worth-25-billion-by-2019-reveals-ccs-insight).
Supplementary Material
Supplementary data are available at Nicotine and Tobacco Research
online.
Funding
This work was supported by internal funds of Somatix and research funds
from Tel Aviv Univeristy to RD.
Declaration of Interests
RD serves on the Advisory Board of Somatix. The author declares that he had
full access to all of the data in the study and that he takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
References
1. Iacoviello BM, Steinerman JR, Klein DB, et al. Clickotine, a personalized
smartphone app for smoking cessation: initial evaluation. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth. 2017;5(4):e56.
2. Bricker JB, Copeland W, Mull KE, et al. Single-arm trial of the second ver-
sion of an acceptance & commitment therapy smartphone application for
smoking cessation. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017;170:37–42.
3. Hoeppner BB, Hoeppner SS, Seaboyer L, et al. How smart are smart-
phone apps for smoking cessation? A content analysis. Nicotine Tob Res.
2016;18(5):1025–1031.
4. Abroms LC, Lee Westmaas J, Bontemps-Jones J, Ramani R, Mellerson J. A
content analysis of popular smartphone apps for smoking cessation. Am J
Prev Med. 2013;45(6):732–736.
5. Motschman CA, Tiffany ST. Cognitive regulation of smoking behavior
within a cigarette: automatic and nonautomatic processes. Psychol Addict
Figure 1. Above, cigarettes per day in the two group at baseline and end of Behav. 2016;30(4):494–499.
study. Below, cigarettes per day in the experimental group across the 30 days 6. Bartlett YK, Sheeran P, Hawley MS. Effective behaviour change tech-
of the study. Bars represent standard errors. The straight line in the bottom niques in smoking cessation interventions for people with chronic
figure represents the linear regression fit. (Note that the detection data for obstructive pulmonary disease: a meta-analysis. Br J Health Psychol.
day 1 are partial, as this was the first day in which smokers used the app). 2014;19(1):181–203.
7. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerström KO. The
Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerström
motivation, or awareness. We believe that these unique advantages
Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 1991;86(9):1119–1127.
of the SmokeBeat system have the potential to enrich the research 8. Fagerström K. Determinants of tobacco use and renaming the FTND
on smoking behavior and improve the efficacy and dissemination of to the Fagerstrom Test for Cigarette Dependence. Nicotine Tob Res.
effective treatment for smoking cessation, especially considering the 2012;14(1):75–78.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/ntr/article-abstract/20/12/1515/4582712
by
University
of
Leicester
user
on
26
November
2018
