GAMESFORHEALTHJOURNAL:Research,Development,andClinicalApplications Original Article
Volume5,Number1,2016
ªMaryAnnLiebert,Inc.
DOI:10.1089/g4h.2015.0033
Feasibility and Efficacy of an mHealth Game
for Managing Anxiety:
‘‘Flowy’’ Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial
and Design Evaluation
Quynh Pham, MSc,1,2 Yasmin Khatib, PhD,1 Stephen Stansfeld, MD, PhD,1
Simon Fox,2 and Tobias Green, LLB2
Abstract
Objective:Meetingthecomplexneedsofpatientswithchroniccommonmentalhealthdisorders(CMHDs)may
be the greatest challenge facing organized medical practice. On the basis of a well-established and proven
theoreticalfoundationforcontrolledrespirationasabehavioralinterventionforCMHDs,aswellaspreliminary
evidence that gamification can improve health outcomes through increasing patient engagement, this ran-
domized controlled pilot study evaluated the feasibility and clinical efficacy of a mobile health game called
‘‘Flowy’’ (www.flowygame.com) that digitally delivered breathing retraining exercises for anxiety, panic, and
hyperventilation symptom management.
Materials and Methods: We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group randomized controlled trial
focusing on feasibility, clinical efficacy, and design proof of concept. In the intervention condition (n=31),
participants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the control condition (n=32), participants were
placed on a waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to ‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using
psychological self-report questionnaires were made at 2 and 4 weeks post-baseline.
Results: At trial conclusion, participants found ‘‘Flowy’’ acceptable as an anxiety management intervention.
‘‘Flowy’’ engaged participants sufficiently to endorse proactive gameplay. Intent-to-treat analysis revealed a
reduction in anxiety,panic, and self-reporthyperventilationscores in bothtrial arms,with the interventionarm
experiencing greater quality of life. Participants perceived ‘‘Flowy’’ as a fun and useful intervention, proac-
tively used ‘‘Flowy’’ as part of their care, and would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to family and friends.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that a digital delivery of breathing retraining exercises through a mobile
health game can manage anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation symptoms associated with CMHDs.
Introduction suffer from anxiety disorders alone.3 The Mental Health
Foundation reports one in five Britons feel anxious a lot or
Background
all the time; of these, over 6 million will experience panic
Commonmentalhealthdisorders(CMHDs)account attacks,andofthisgroup,1.7millionwillsufferfrompanic
foraquarteroftheglobalburdenofdisease,definedas disorder.4
prematuredeathcombinedwithyearslivedwithdisability.1 MeetingthecomplexneedsofpatientswithchronicCMHDs
Theyincludedepression,generalizedanxietydisorder,panic may be the greatestchallengefacing organized medicalprac-
disorder,obsessive–compulsivedisorder,posttraumaticstress tice.Despiterecentglobalcommitmentstoaddressingmental
disorder, and social anxiety disorder2 and are classified as a disorders,5 national and international responses have been
chronicdiseasebytheWorldHealthOrganizationalongside slow, inadequate, and fragmented. This has resulted in exor-
asthma,cancer,anddiabetes.3Worldwide,272millionpeople bitantcoststothehealthcaresystem;15percentofallUnited
1CentreforPsychiatry,WolfsonInstituteofPreventiveMedicine,BartsandtheLondonSchoolofMedicineandDentistry,QueenMary
UniversityofLondon,London,UnitedKingdom.
2PlaylabLondon,London,UnitedKingdom.
ThisstudywasregisteredwithaclinicaltrialsregistryundertrialidentifiernumberISRCTN78356215.
1
2 PHAMET AL.
Kingdom National Health Service (NHS) expenditure on of January 2013, 75 percent of the United Kingdom popu-
chronicdiseaseislinkedtopoormentalhealthandwell-being, lation own a smartphone, with one in five having down-
totalling nearly £10 billion in England each year.6 CMHDs loaded at least one mHealth app21; it is projected that by
disruptexistingacutehealthcarestructuresbuilttobereactive 2018therewillbe3.4billionsmartphoneusers,ofwhom50
todisease—respondingonlywhenthepatientissick—butnot percent will have downloaded at least one mHealth app.22
proactiveandfocusedonkeepingthepatienthealthy. With this level of ubiquitous penetration, mHealth apps are
Characterized by a long duration and slow progression, well positioned to improve access and treatment adherence
anxiety disorders are an extreme manifestation of an other- to psychological and behavioral interventions by enabling
wise functional and appropriate human response to situa- services to be delivered more flexibly and tailored to indi-
tional stressors. For those with the most severe forms, their vidual patient needs. They offer the potential to transform
lives can become completely dominated and debilitated by mentalhealthdelivery throughwidening accesstoinforma-
their condition. The epidemiology of anxiety disorders no- tion and offering sustained adherence support through real-
tably postulates respiratory abnormalities as both a cyclic time symptommonitoring.
causeandeffectforpanicattacks.7–12Asaresultcontrolled The NHS Confederation’s Mental Health Network recog-
respiratoryinterventionsbywhichapatientexertsvoluntary nizesthatmHealthappsrepresentrealopportunitiestoengage
control over his or her own breathing are hypothesized to and empower patients with mental health problems, but also
alleviate anxiety symptoms. Breathing retraining methodol- cautionsthattheymusthaveastrongevidencebase.TheMental
ogieshavebeensuccessfullyvalidatedinnumerousoutcome HealthNetworkrecommendsthatpatientsbeactivelyinvolved
studies for effecting anxiogenic health outcomes.12–17 They throughout the development process to ensure the trust of the
are endorsed by the NHS and have been integrated into the wider public.23 Additionally, policy makers, practitioners, and
national Improving Access to Psychological Therapies providersofmentalhealthservicesmustalsobeactivepartners
(IAPT) program, where patients are encouraged to practice in the development, evaluation, and implementation of new
controlled breathing for 2–3 minutes, three to four times technology to capitalize on opportunities offered by mHealth
daily,tocope withpanicandanxiety.18 apps to not just improve efficiency, but also to transform the
Despitetheireffectivenessandprovenabilitytooptimize verynatureofmentalhealthcare.
anxiety symptom management, current methods of breath- Employing a user-centered design process—an evidence-
ing retraining delivery are limited in both availability and basediterativeapproachendorsedbytheWHOandinformed
access, making them difficult to integrate into anxiety self- byathoroughunderstandingofaspecificend-usergroup—in
management regimens in their current form. Breathing creating mHealth apps demonstrates a responsible and ap-
retraining exercises are primarily taught in services, which propriate prioritization toward patient-centered care.24 User-
is problematic given that nearly 85 percent of people with centereddesignhasbeenusedinthedesignanddevelopment
mental disorders are not receiving treatment.19 Moreover, of apps for diabetes, heart disease, and asthma to endorse
although regulated breathing techniques are easy to learn, sustained behavioral change and improved self-care.25 Inter-
theyarealsoeasytoperformincorrectly.Mitigatingtherisk ventions that are developed or redesigned using this patient-
ofpeopleseekingmisleadingpsychoeducationonbreathing centered ideology can achieve greater health outcomes and
retraining to manage their condition, as well as respecting delivermeasurableandsignificanthealthbenefits.26
thatintensiveself-managementischallengingforeveryone
with anxiety, is critical when planning novel delivery
Games formHealth
channels.
A need therefore exists for using integrative healthcare AsubsetofmHealthappsbeingleveragedtoimproveself-
models and designing proactive and feasible interventions management behaviors is mHealth games. They employ ga-
for CMHDs with patient-level integration at all stages of mification,definedastheimplementationofthemostcommon
researchanddesign,fromconceptualizationtodelivery.The and enjoyable mechanics of videogames in non–videogame
patient-centeredmodelofcareisgroundedinthebeliefthat contexts.27Commongamificationmechanicsincludebadges,
people are more than their disorders.20 Patients should be leaderboards, points, levels, challenges, and quests.28 Recent
viewed as individuals with unique experiences, needs, and researchhasendorsedmHealthgamesaspositivemechanisms
aspirationsandseeninthecontextoftheirdailylives,aspart forhealthbehaviorchangeduetotheirabilitytoengageand
ofa familyandacommunity.By focusingonpeople rather motivate players toward effective disease management.29
than their disease and designing holistic interventions that Numerous mHealth games have been clinically evaluated
allow them to actively engage in and self-manage their and proven to effectively manage chronic diseases such as
condition,patientsareplacedatthecenterofthehealthcare diabetes,26,30cancer,31–33cysticfibrosis,34–36andasthma.37–39
systemwherethey belong. They generated positive health outcomes, with all studies
achieving statistically significant results, and were readily
adopted by their target patient group. Current games range
Mobile healthinnovation
fromexergamestoincreasebothknowledgeandmotivationof
Advances in technology and particularly mobile digital exercisebehavior,40–43role-playinggamesthatfostergreater
information and communication technology have enabled a understanding of sensitive topics like mental health,44–47
rapid proliferation of mobile health (mHealth) applications race,48andsexuality,49–52andvirtual rehabilitationgamesto
(apps),manytargeted athealth. The developersof thesein- helppatientsduringrecovery.53–57Itisclearthatgamesarean
cludecommercialenterprises,third-sectororganizations,and appropriate and effective medium for addressing numerous
NHSTrustsandstaff,aswellaspatientsthemselves,withthe health conditions that might otherwise be ill-addressed
majorityofappsbeingsoldviacommercialmarketplaces.As throughconventionalcare.
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 3
By 2015, 50 percent of industries will gamify their inno- biledevicesthatnowincorporatesensorsandcancollectand
vationprocesses,although80percentofgamifiedapplications store both physiological and self-report health data, new
are expected to fail because of a lack of research around mHealth evaluation methodologies must be conceived and
suitable game design, as well as poor rationale or design of adoptedtoachievethepotentialfor‘‘real-timeresearch’’and
gamificationmechanics.28Theacademicandclinicalstaffre- render conventional research designs more efficient.74–77
sponsibleforthemajorityofmHealthgamescurrentlyonthe The potential for mobile devices to collect research data
market are not game designers and consequently develop under a safe, secure framework has largely remained un-
products that miss the most essential mechanism of engage- tapped. Rigorous research is needed to examine both the
mentingames—thefun.58Thesolutionseemstothenbethat potential and challenges of using mobile technologies to
mHealthgamesshouldberesponsiblydesignedanddeveloped improve health outcomes, as well as to establish the reli-
by a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, researchers, and ability and validity of the mHealth evaluation methodology
game designers, as well as clinically evaluated to confirm used to generate these critical data. The results from this
howmuchmoreeffectivetheyareinchangingbehavioraland pilot study will therefore lead to further research suppor-
health outcomes than conventional approaches. mHealth ting innovative evaluation methodologies for mHealth in-
games are capableofteaching new forms of thought andbe- terventions.
havior in an enjoyable way. This learning potential has been
leftlargelyuntappedinthementalhealtharena,andaddressing Studyaims
this gap may lead to a novel validated approach in mental
On the basis of a well-established and proven theoretical
healthinterventionandself-management.
foundation for controlled respiration as a behavioral inter-
vention for CMHDs and preliminary evidence that gamifi-
mHealthevaluation cation can improve health outcomes through increasing
patient engagement, we developed an mHealth game called
As the field of mHealth advances and more players enter
‘‘Flowy.’’‘‘Flowy’’isthefirstmHealthapptooperationalize
the arena of digital intervention development for CMHDs,
breathing retraining exercises for gameplay. We designed
concerns have arisen over the number of apps available for
‘‘Flowy’’tobridgeinterventionaccessibilitygaps,reducethe
download that have not been adequately tested for efficacy.
economic burden of chronic mental illness, endorse person-
In the current app marketplace, new health apps are often
alized patient-centered care, andengage users to understand
accompanied by substantial hype and promise but are not
andmanagetheirownconditioninafunandmeaningfulway.
supportedbyevidence.59–61Severalstudieshavehighlighted
This randomized controlled pilot study evaluated the ac-
appsthatcouldcompromisepatientsafetyandarepotentially
ceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an mHealth game that digitally
dangerous.62–65 To mitigate against this, both clinical and
deliversbreathingretrainingexercisesforanxiety,panic,and
risk evaluation must be done to ensure that novel health
hyperventilationsymptommanagement.Weengagedservice
technologies fulfill basic qualifications: they are evidence-
userswithCMHDs,theirfamilies,andtheircareprovidersin
based, provide measurable value to the user, and are risk-
the design, development, and pilot evaluation of ‘‘Flowy.’’
adversive and user-centered in design and development.66
We designed this study to establish clinical efficacy in re-
Precedence exists for safe and effective apps for CMHDs,
ducingsymptomseverityalongsideimprovingqualityoflife.
but they are scarce and make up less than 1 percent of
Furthermore, we assessed both user engagement and us-
commercially availableapps.67
abilityaskeystudymetrics.Wehypothesizedthat‘‘Flowy’’
Whileitistemptingtoshifttheblameforthisdiscrepancy
would be an acceptable, clinically effective, engaging, and
onto the app developers themselves and cite a lack of re-
usefulanxietymanagement intervention.
sponsibilityand bestpracticeontheir behalf,anequallyfea-
sible explanation is that few evaluation methodologies for
mHealth interventions exist. The traditional approach to be- Objectives
havioral intervention evaluation is through a randomized
This study had two main assessment objectives: (1) fea-
controlled trial (RCT), the gold standard for assessing the sibilityofabreathingretraininggamecalled‘‘Flowy’’asan
effect of an intervention post-development.68 Current evalu-
anxietymanagementinterventionand(2)clinicalefficacyof
ation methodologies for behavioral interventions typically
‘‘Flowy’’toreduceanxietysymptomatology.
involve development, pilot testing,evaluationin at least two The long-term objective of this feasibility and efficacy
RCTs,andimplementationstudies.69,70However,thisprocess
pilot study was to trial concepts and methods needed to in-
can take up to 17 years from initial research to full im-
form a subsequent full-scale clinical evaluation, which will
plementation,makingitfundamentallyincompatiblewiththe
assess whether ‘‘Flowy’’ can objectively reduce clinical
rapid pace of mHealth; the technology being evaluated may symptomsinavulnerableclinicalpopulation.Wealsotrialed
wellbeobsoletebeforethetrialiscompleted.71–73Traditional
our study design to assess whether it was an appropriate
evaluation processes are therefore incongruent with the fun-
evaluation methodology for mHealth interventions, which
damentalprinciples ofcontinuouslyevolving mHealthappli- will inform the continued development of evaluation
cations, which rely on iterative cycles of development to
frameworksinthefield ofmHealth.
identifydesignweaknesses and inefficiencies.Timespans of
traditional trials also see publications citing effects of tech-
Primaryhypotheses
nologythathaslongsincebeensurpassedandthereforeoften
providelimitedvaluetohelpinginformclinicaldecisions. We hypothesized that we would achieve participant ac-
Inacknowledgement oftheshortcomingsstemmingfrom ceptabilityof‘‘Flowy’’asananxietyintervention.Thiswas
traditional evaluation processes as well as advances in mo- assessedbythefollowing criteria:(1)thenumberofpeople
4 PHAMET AL.
who responded to the recruitment call to trial an app that were randomized to one of two study conditions following
managed their anxiety and completed the study eligibility assessment. In the intervention condition (n=31), partici-
screener; (2) the response rate for participants in the trial pants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the
throughoutthe4-weekassessmentperiod;(3)thenumberof control condition (n=32), participants were placed on a
participants in the intervention condition proactively using waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to
‘‘Flowy’’atleastonceforover1minuteofplayduringthe4- ‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using self-report question-
weekassessment,asassessedbylogdata;and(4)thenumber nairesweremadeat2and4weekspost-baseline.Participants
ofparticipantsintheinterventionconditionwhoengagedin in both conditions had unrestricted access to professional
sustained usageof‘‘Flowy,’’asassessed bylogdata. help.Figure1shows thestudy CONSORTflowchart.
Secondary hypotheses Clinical measuresand datacollection
Our secondary hypotheses were that participants in the Table1providesanoverviewofallclinicalmeasuresused
intervention group would experience reductions in anxiety, alongsidetheirdatacollectionschedule.Table2describesall
panic,andhyperventilation,andincreaseinqualityoflifeat measures with their number of items, minimum–maximum
Week4assessmentcomparedwithbaseline(P<0.05).This scores, clinical cutoff scores, and psychometric reliability/
was defined as a decrease in score on the Generalized constructvalidity(Cronbach’salpha).Participantswereasked
Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7), Panic Disorder Severity to provide information on their age, gender, education, em-
Scale-SelfReport(PDSS-SR),Nijmegan,andQualityofLife ployment, ethnicity, and religion/spirituality at baseline as-
Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form sessment (Table 3). Study measures were obtained using six
(QLES-Q-SF) psychological self-report questionnaires. We clinical self-report questionnaires. Anxiety symptoms were
hypothesized that in comparison with thecontrol condition, assessedusing threequestionnaires: theGAD-7itemscale,80
participants in the intervention group would experience the OASIS,81 and the ASI-3 item scale.82 Panic symptoms
greater reductions in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic wereassessedusingthePDSS-SR.83Hyperventilationsymp-
attack symptoms, as well as increased quality of life at the toms were assessed using the Nijmegen Questionnaire.84
Week4assessment.Thiswasdefinedasagreaterdecreasein Quality of life, enjoyment, and satisfaction were assessed
scoreontheGAD-7,PDSS-SR,Nijmegan,andQLES-Q-SF using the QLES-Q-SF.85 Participant views on using infor-
self-reportpsychologicalquestionnaires.Finally,wehypoth- mation technology for health were assessed using the
esized that participants in the intervention group would eHealthLiteracyScale(eHEALS).86Participantperceptionof
perceive ‘‘Flowy’’ as a useful intervention, defined by a ‘‘Flowy’’ was measured with a 21-question usability ques-
meanratingofq3(‘‘neitheragreenordisagree’’)ona1–5-
tionnairealongsideopen-endedqualitativefeedbackanduser
point Likert scale usability questionnaire following study storiesaroundtheirexperienceusing‘‘Flowy’’(Table4).
completion. Further detailed information on these outcome
measures canbefoundinMaterialsandMethods.
Outcomes
Materialsand Methods The primary study outcome was the acceptability of
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention. This was
Overview
assessedbythefollowing:
The study methodology was reviewed according to the
1. The number of people who responded to the recruit-
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)
mentcalltotrialanappthatmanagedtheiranxietyand
standards for clinical trials in eHealth78 and reported ac-
completed the study eligibility screener
cording to the CONSORT-eHealth (version 1.6.1) check-
2. Trial adherence throughout the 4-week assessment pe-
list.79 The study methodology was further reviewed and
riod as measured by completion of weekly assessments
advisedbyaresearchdesignadvisorattheNationalInstitute
3. The number of participants in the intervention condi-
ofHealthResearchDesign Services.
tionproactivelyusing‘‘Flowy,’’definedinternallyasat
leastonceforover1minuteofplayduringthe4-week
Trial design
assessment
We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group 4. The number of participants in the intervention condi-
RCT focusing on feasibility, clinical efficacy, and design tion who engaged in sustained usage of ‘‘Flowy,’’
proof of concept. This was an exploratory study with an definedinternallyasatleast5minutesofuninterrupted
iterative design to assess and improve study methodology, playandbasedonNHSIAPTguidelinesforsuggested
game design, and usability. Initial contact with potential durations of controlled breathing exercises.18
participantswasmadeonline;trialcandidates(n=510)self-
Secondary outcomesincluded thefollowing:
generatedaloginusernameandpasswordandcompletedan
eligibility screener that required participants to meet inclu- 1. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation
sion criteria as well as show moderate signs of anxiety, de- symptomsandimprovementinqualityoflifereported
fined as a score of q16 on the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3 by participants in the intervention group compared
(ASI-3), q8 on the Overall Anxiety Severity and Impair- with the control group from baseline to Week 4
ment Scale (OASIS), and q6 on the GAD-7. Eligible par- 2. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation
ticipants(n=63)subsequentlyreceivedafollow-upe-mailto symptomsandimprovementinqualityoflifereported
digitallysignthestudyinformationsheetandconsentform. byparticipantsintheinterventiongroupfrombaseline
They then completed the online baseline assessment and to Week 4
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 5
FIG. 1. CONSORT study flow diagram. *Last observation carried forward for full data analysis.
Table 1. Overview of Clinical Instruments Used and Data Collection Schedule
Variable Questionnaire Eligibility screener Baseline Week 2 Week 4
Electronic health literacy eHEALS X — — —
Anxiety ASI-3 X X X X
GAD-7 X X X X
OASIS X X X X
Hyperventilation Nijmegan — X X X
Panic attacks PDSS-SR — X X X
Quality of life Q-LES-Q-SF — X X X
ASI-3, Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3; eHEALS, eHealth Literacy Scale; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; OASIS, Overall
AnxietySeverityandImpairmentScale;PDSS-SR,PanicDisorderSeverityScale-SelfReport;Q-LES-Q-SF,QualityofLifeEnjoyment
andSatisfactionQuestionnaire-ShortForm.
6 PHAMET AL.
Table 2. Description of Psychometric Measures Evaluating Primary and Secondary Outcomes
Measure Type Description Alpha
eHealth Literacy Scale Self-report A measure of electronic health resource literacy, defined as 0.93
(eHEALS) a consumer’s combined knowledge, comfort, and per-
ceived skills at finding, evaluating, and applying elec-
tronic health information to health problems. On this
eight-item scale, responses are rated on a scale from1 to
5, with higher scores indicating greater eHealth literacy.
Generalized Anxiety Self-report Abriefseven-itemanxietyscaletoassesssymptomseverity 0.91
Disorder Scale and identify probable cases of generalized anxiety
(GAD-7) disorder in clinical practice and research. Responses are
rated on a scale from 0 to 3, with a total score of q6
representing moderate anxiety, q11 moderately severe
anxiety, and q15 severe anxiety.
Overall Anxiety Severity Self-report A measure of the severity and impairment associated with 0.89
and Impairment Scale anxiety,asassessedbyabrief,continuousfive-itemscale
(OASIS) that can be used across anxiety disorders, with multiple
anxiety disorders, and with subthreshold anxiety symp-
toms. Responses are rated on a scale from 0 to 4, and
individual items are added for a total severity score. A
cutoff score of q8 is used to determine an anxiety
diagnosis.
Anxiety Sensitivity Self-report An 18-item self-report multidimensional measure of the 0.93
Index-3 (ASI-3) threedomainsofanxietysensitivity(physical,social,and
cognitive). Respondents indicate their agreement with
each item, from ‘‘very little’’ (0) to ‘‘very much’’ (4),
with total scores ranging from 0 to 72. A cutoff score of
q16 was used to establish moderate anxiety.
Nijmegan Questionnaire Self-report A 16-item measure of hyperventilation and dysfunctional 0.92
breathlessness, suitable as a screening tool for early
detection and also as an aid in diagnosis and therapy
planning.Responsesareratedonascalefrom0to4,with
a total score of q23 out of 64 suggesting a positive
diagnosis of hyperventilation.
Panic Disorder Severity Self-report A questionnaire developed for assessing the severity and 0.91
Scale(PDSS-SR) detecting possible symptoms ofpanic disorder, measured
using seven items, each rated on a 5-point scale ranging
from 0 to 4. The overall assessment is made by a total
score ranging from 0 to 28, and a score of q9 suggests
the need for a formal diagnostic assessment.
Quality of Life Enjoy- Self-report Aself-reportquestionnairewith14itemsevaluatingoverall 0.86
ment and Satisfaction life enjoyment and satisfaction with physical health,
Questionnaire (QLES- mood, work, social and family relationships, daily
Q-SF) functioning,andoverallwell-being.Responsesarescored
ona5-itemscalewithpossiblescoresrangingfrom14to
70, where high scores indicate better enjoyment and
satisfaction with life.
3. Participant perception of ‘‘Flowy’’ as a useful inter- Participants landing page. Local businesses were contacted
vention for permission to displayrecruitment posterson their prem-
4. Assessing outcome measure scores in pilot study par- ises.Universitycampusesweretargetedforrecruitment.The
ticipantstoestablishparametersofmeasurablechange primarystudyadvertisementincludeda sampleofquestions
in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic attack symp- fromtheeligibilityscreenertooptimizetargetingappropriate
toms for a subsequent full-powered, full-scale clinical participants who experienced anxiety. The advertisement
evaluation emphasizedtheneedtovisittheeligibilityscreenerWebsite
5. Study design evaluation to inform sample size calcu- to determine eligibility. It also included a link to the main
lation and methodology of a subsequent full-powered, ‘‘Flowy’’ Web site, which contained complete information
full-scale clinical evaluation. on the intervention, clinical explanation of breathing re-
training exercises, and illustrations of the game mechanism
(Supplementary Fig. S1; Supplementary Data are available
Participantrecruitment
onlineatwww.liebertonline.com/g4h).
Participantswererecruitedonlinethroughextensivemedia Participants interested in determining their eligibility ac-
coverage, including a BBC profile, social media press, cessedtheeligibilityscreenerWebsite(SupplementaryFig.
newsletters, blog posts, Google AdSense, and a Call for S2) and self-generated a login username with their e-mail
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 7
Table 3. Baseline Participant Demographic Characteristics
Participants [n (%)]
Characteristic Intervention (n=31) Control (n=32) Total population (n=63) P
Age (years) 0.69
18–24 7 (22.6) 10 (31.3) 17 (27.0)
25–34 17 (54.8) 15 (46.9) 32 (50.8)
35–44 4 (12.9) 6 (18.8) 10 (15.9)
45–54 1 (3.2) 1 (3.1) 2 (3.2)
55–64 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
65 and older 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
Gender 0.27
Male 18 (58.1) 13 (40.6) 31 (49.2)
Female 13 (41.9) 18 (56.3) 31 (49.2)
Other 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Country of residence 0.27
Argentina 3 (9.7) 0 (0) 3 (4.8)
Brazil 2 (6.5) 0 (0) 2 (3.2)
Canada 3 (9.7) 5 (15.6) 8 (12.7)
Cyprus 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Germany 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Israel 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
Italy 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Malaysia 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
United Kingdom 12 (38.7) 10 (31.3) 22 (34.9)
United States 10 (32.3) 13 (40.6) 23 (36.5)
Education 0.82
High school diploma 7 (22.6) 10 (31.3) 17 (27.0)
Bachelor degree 14 (45.2) 11 (34.4) 25 (39.7)
Master degree 6 (19.4) 6 (18.8) 12 (19.0)
Professional degree 1 (3.2) 3 (9.4) 4 (6.3)
Doctorate degree 1 (3.2) 1 (3.1) 2 (3.2)
Not applicable 2 (6.5) 1 (3.1) 3 (4.8)
Employment status 0.41
Employed 25 (80.6) 23 (71.9) 48 (76.2)
Unemployed 6 (19.4) 9 (28.1) 15 (23.8)
Ethnicity
Asian 3 (10.0) 3 (10.0) 6 (9.5) 0.73
White 22 (73.3) 23 (76.7) 45 (71.4)
European 3 (10.0) 1 (3.3) 4 (6.3)
Hispanic 2 (6.7) 2 (6.7) 4 (6.3)
Mixed 0 (0) 1 (3.3) 1 (1.6)
Missing 1 (3.3) 2 (6.7) 3 (4.8)
Religion/spirituality 0.37
Yes 11 (35.5) 8 (25.0) 19 (30.2)
No 20 (64.5) 24 (75.0) 44 (69.8)
Mobile platform 0.91
iOS 14 (45.2) 17 (54.8) 28 (44.4)
Android 14 (43.8) 18 (56.3) 35 (55.6)
Mobile gameplay history 0.35
Yes 21 (67.7) 25 (78.1) 46 (73.0)
No 10 (32.3) 7 (21.9) 17 (27.0)
addressandauniquepassword.Followingcompletionofthe ‘‘Flowy’’ in January 2015. Participants were not compen-
screener, their data were exported to a password-protected sated for taking part in the study but were allowed to
Excel(cid:2) (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) database. The e-mail download ‘‘Flowy’’ and keep the game following study
provided was checked for multiple registrations, and par- completion.Minorswerenotaskedtoparticipateinresearch.
ticipantswithmissingdatawereexcluded.Participantswere
notifiedoftheirstudyeligibilitybye-mailanddirectedtothe
Inclusion/exclusion criteria
onlinestudyinformationsheetandconsentform.Thosenot
eligible for the study were thanked for their time and given Study candidates from the general population were eligi-
the opportunity to sign up and receive a code to download bleforthestudyiftheymetthefollowingcriteria:(1)males
8 PHAMET AL.
Table 4. Usability Questions to Assess Participation Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
Perception of ‘‘Flowy’’
edition (DSM-IV) Axis I disorder, excluding those listed in
theinclusioncriteria,thatwerelikelytohaveinterferedwith
Number Question Score
thepatient’s abilitytoparticipate inthestudy,asjudgedby
1 ‘‘Flowy’’ is useful. 4.17 (0.38) the investigator; (6) presence of any DSM-IV Axis II dis-
2 ‘‘Flowy’’ makes me more produc- 3.22 (0.55) order that were likely to have interfered with the patient’s
tive. ability to participate in the study, as judged by the investi-
3 ‘‘Flowy’’ gives me more control 3.56 (0.62) gator; or (7) participants who were acutely suicidal to the
over the activities in my life. degree that precautions against suicide were needed, or a
4 ‘‘Flowy’’makesthethingsIwantto 3.06 (0.87) history ofsuicideattempt inthepast 5years.
accomplish easier to get done.
5 ‘‘Flowy’’savesmetimewhenIuse 2.94 (0.64)
Sample size
it.
6 ‘‘Flowy’’ meets my needs. 3.39 (0.98) Given that the primary study outcome was the accept-
7 ‘‘Flowy’’ does everything I would 3.22 (0.94) ability of‘‘Flowy’’ asananxietymanagement intervention,
expect it to do. to be assessed by recruitment and response rates, power
8 ‘‘Flowy’’ is easy to use. 4.17 (1.15)
calculations were not calculated a priori. The results from
9 ‘‘Flowy’’ is simple to use. 4.39 (0.85)
this pilot study will be used to inform the required sample
10 Both occasional and regular users 3.94 (1.11)
size forafullclinical evaluation.Therewasnolimitonthe
would like ‘‘Flowy.’’
number of eligible participants during the 4-week recruit-
11 I can use ‘‘Flowy’’ successfully 3.89 (0.96)
every time. ment period, and recruitment strategies were exhausted to
12 I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ quickly. 4.44 (1.04) includeasmanyparticipants aspossible.
13 I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ easily. 4.61 (0.61)
14 I easily remember how to use 4.67 (0.49) Randomization and allocation
‘‘Flowy.’’
15 I quickly became skillful with 3.83 (1.25) Randomizationandallocationweredoneattheindividual
‘‘Flowy.’’ level using a computerized randomization list to protect
16 I am satisfied with ‘‘Flowy.’’ 3.94 (0.80) against bias. Candidates who met inclusion criteria were
17 I would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to a 4.17 (0.99) randomly allocated to the intervention group (‘‘Flowy’’) or
friend. to the control (waitlist) group after signing the information
18 ‘‘Flowy’’ is fun to use. 3.89 (0.68) sheet and consent form. Participants were equally allocated
19 ‘‘Flowy’’worksthewayIwantitto 3.28 (0.90)
1:1 to intervention and control conditions for optimal anal-
work.
ysis andmaximized statistical power. Both investigator and
20 I feel I need to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ 3.06 (0.87)
participantswereunblindedtoallocation.
21 ‘‘Flowy’’ is wonderful. 3.94 (0.80)
Dataaremean(standarddeviation)values. Conception
‘‘Flowy’’ (www.flowygame.com) was initially conceived
as a digital delivery of breathing retraining. ‘‘Flowy’’ was
andfemalesatleast18yearsofage;(2)screenGAD-7score
designedbystart-upventurePlaylabLondonwithateamof
of q6; (3) screen OASIS score of q8; (4) screen ASI-3
gamedevelopersandanimators.Playlab’sfounderhadlived
score of q16; (5) comorbid disorders including major de-
experience of panic and anxiety disorders. The process of
pression, dysthymia, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social
recovery helped him to develop insight into chronic mental
anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, simple pho-
health conditions and inspired him to investigate how con-
bia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and somatization dis-
dition symptomsmightbeameliorated.
order were accepted as long as moderate symptoms of
In January 2013 Playlab began conceptual work, infor-
anxiety were observed (these broad inclusion criteria maxi-
mally testingpaper andcode prototypes ofasimplebreath-
mized generalizability of findings); (6) concurrent use of
controlledgameexperience.Earlyresearchanddevelopment
antidepressants, anxiolytics, hypnotics, and herbal products
included periodic formative meetings to review each stage,
withpsychoactivesubstanceswasacceptableprovidedthere
correct problems, and make decisions for the following
was no change in medication type and dose after randomi-
stagesinaniterativeprocess.Qualitativedatawerecollected
zation; (7) provision of written informed consent; and (8)
fromvariousstakeholdergroupsandthematicallyanalyzed:
able to comply with the study protocol (e.g., able to down-
mental health practitioners and clinicians provided data on
load ‘‘Flowy’’ onto a mobile device, able to complete
feasibility,peoplesupportingthosewithlivedexperienceof
assessments).
panicandanxietydisordersprovideddataondesirabilityand
Study candidates were ineligible if they met any of the
value,andpeoplewithlivedexperienceofpanicandanxiety
followingcriteria:(1)lackofmobiledeviceorincompatible
disorders provided data on current behaviors concerning
operating system (Android(cid:3) [Google, Mountaine View,
panic,anxiety,panicattacks, andtechnology.
CA] and iOS [Apple, Cupertino, CA] compatibility re-
quired); (2) lack of access to Internet; (3) any coexisting
User-centered design
medical conditions that could have altered the clinical pre-
sentation of hyperventilation such as chronic severe asthma A series of test media was constructed and shown to
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; (4) lifetime his- peoplewithlivedexperience ofpanicandanxietydisorders
tory of bipolar disorder or psychosis; (5) presence of any toassessdesirableesthetics,themes,andmechanicsandtheir
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 9
FIG. 2. Screenshots of ‘‘Flowy’’ minigames. (Color graphics available at www.liebertonline.com/g4h)
effect on theuser with particular regard tofeelings of anxi- cycle. The minigames in ‘‘Flowy’’ range in theme, from
ety, trustworthiness, and ‘‘medical’’ framing. Following sailing a boat down a river to flying balloons into the sky
from this initial research, prototypes were developed, and (Fig.2givesascreenshotofvariousminigames).Userstouch
several rounds of usability tests were performed with a the screen with their finger as they inhale and remove their
varied group of participants to evaluate functionality, inter- finger from the screen as they exhale to control the gaming
face,androbustness.Throughouttheproject,expertadvisors mechanics. A breathing indicator visually represents a full
contributed to thinking on game design, usability, user ex- breath;users see a circle expanding as they inhale andcon-
perience design, clinical accuracy, and efficacy. ‘‘Flowy’’ tracting as they exhale. This indicator provides a visual
was designed to endorse empowerment and motivation in guideline of a breathing retraining exercise and also sim-
managing anxiety by potentially making this process fun. plifies the cognitive assessment of what constitutes a full
Thedesignteamthereforeaimedfor‘‘Flowy’’tobevisually diaphragmatic breath. The goal ofeach minigameis tocor-
appealing, easy to navigate, and intuitive to use and to ulti- rectlyfollow thebreathing indicator while advancing inthe
matelyprovideameaningfuluserexperience.Theyfollowed game narrative; users progress through levels and achieve
the user-centered design process of development and en- goalsbybreathingcorrectlyandstayingcalm.‘‘Flowy’’also
gaged in usability testing throughout the project lifecycle. includes an in-game interactive tutorial on how to properly
This user-centered design processisendorsedbytheWorld performdiaphragmaticbreathingasguidedbybothanNHS
HealthOrganization,whichadvisesuserevaluationatevery IAPTprotocol18andevidence-basedresearchprotocolsfrom
stepofmHealthconsumerapplicationdevelopmenttoensure literature.12,87 An overview of the game characteristics can
sustained user engagement for effective outcomes.24 From befound inTable 5.Usage guidelines were notenforced to
this user-centered design process, the design team obtained allow for assessment of naturalistic usage patterns deter-
objective feedback that was crucial to producing sustained minedbythepatient.
behavioral changes,aswellaskeytoend-useradoption.
Control
Intervention
Participantsinthecontrolgroupwereplacedonawaitlist
‘‘Flowy’’isamHealthgamethatengagesusersinaseries for 4 weeks. To prevent high attrition rates, participants re-
of minigames where they use breathing retraining exercises ceivedaweeklynewsletterwithcuratedcontentonbreathing
and perform diaphragmatic breathing to alleviate anxiety. retraining exercises, ‘‘Flowy’’ game development, mindful-
Diaphragmatic breathing is the deepest of all breaths, with ness meditation, and similar content relevant to ‘‘Flowy.’’
the most air inhaled. During diaphragmatic breathing, the Additionally,theyreceivedremindere-mailsthroughonline
lowestlevelsofthelungsareinflated;thelowerthirdofthe marketing tool MailChimp to complete study assessments.
lungs contains the greatest amount of blood when standing After4weeks,participantsreceivedafreecodetodownload
vertically,resultinginmoreoxygenatedbloodperbreathing ‘‘Flowy.’’
10 PHAMET AL.
Table 5. Characteristics of a Videogame for Health (‘‘Flowy’’)
Characteristic Details
Health topic(s) Anxiety disorders, panic attacks
Target age group(s) All ages
Other targeted group characteristics Well-being, mindfulness, meditation
Short description of game idea ‘‘Flowy’’ is a collection of minigames that digitally deliver
breathing retraining exercises.
Target player(s) (check one): - Individual , Dyad , Small group
, MMOG , Other: _______________________
Guidingknowledgeorbehaviorchangetheory(ies),models, Capability-Motivation-Opportunity Behavior Model
or conceptual framework(s) Mechanics-Dynamics-Esthetics Framework
Self-Determination Theory
Intended health behavior changes Reduced hyperventilation
Increased activation
Increased self-management
Increased knowledge and education
Knowledge element(s) to be learned Breathing retraining
Behavior change procedure(s) (taken from Michie (From the BCT Taxonomy version 1)
inventory) or therapeutic procedure(s) used 2.2 Feedback on behavior
2.7 Feedback on outcome(s) of behavior
4.1 Instruction on how to perform the behavior
6.1 Demonstration of the behavior
8.1 Behavioral practice and rehearsal
8.2 Behavior substitution
8.3 Habit formation
8.4 Habit reversal
Clinical or parental support needed? (Please specify) No
Data shared with parent or clinician , Yes - No
Type of game (check all that apply): , Active , Action , Adventure
, Role-playing , Simulation , Strategy
, Sports - Casual - Educational
, Other: _______________________
Story (if any)
Synopsis (including story arc) (1) Blow bubbles from a straw
(2) Sail a boat down a river
(3) Fly balloons into the sky
How the story relates to targeted behavior change Minigame narratives revolve around air and flow to
encourage calm breathing.
Game components
Player’s game goal/objective(s) Player progresses through levels and achieves goals by
staying calm and breathing correctly.
Rules Follow the breathing indicator: touch the screen to inhale,
release to exhale.
Game mechanic(s) Reward feedback
Goals
Narrative
Procedurestogeneralizeortransferwhat’slearnedinthe NA
game to outside the game
Virtual environment
Setting (describe) See Figure 2 for screenshots of the minigames.
Avatar
Characteristics NA
Abilities NA
Game platform(s) needed to play the game: (check all that - Smartphone - Tablet , Kinect
apply): , Xbox , Wii , PlayStation
, Computer , Handheld device
, Other: _____________
Sensors used No
Estimated play time Approximately 10 minutes per play session
BCT,BehaviorChangeTaxonomy;NA,notapplicable.
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 11
Statistical analyses Interventionacceptability
Statistical analyses were conducted using IBM (Armonk, Intotal,510candidateswerescreenedforstudyeligibility
NY) SPSS Statistics version 22. All participants who were fromApril2014toJune2014(Fig.1).Onehundredeighty-
randomized were included in data analysis in accordance fiveparticipantsmetpreliminaryeligibilitycriteria.Ofthese,
with the intention-to-treat-principle. Chi-squared tests were 106 did not meet pre-study requirements (baseline assess-
used for discrete variables to compare control and inter- ment, registering a mobile device, providing consent). Six-
ventiongroupstodeterminewhethertheydifferedatbaseline teenparticipantsweresubsequentlyexcludedfromthestudy
ondemographiccharacteristics.Effectsizeswerecalculated because of hardware compatibility issues, leaving a final
based onmeansandoddsratios (Cohen’sd88). study population of 63. At study completion, 67 percent of
Primaryanalysisonengagement,definedasproactiveand participantsremainedengagedandcompletedterminalstudy
sustained usage, used frequency and duration measures assessments; 75 percent of control and 58 percent of inter-
fromgameplaylogstoassessoutcomes.Secondaryanalysis ventiongroupparticipants completedallstudyassessments.
on clinical efficacy included a repeated-measures 2·2 Intotal,63participantswererandomlyallocatedtoeither
analysis of variance (ANOVA) for four clinical outcome thecontrol(n=32)orintervention(n=31)groupofthestudy
variables: (1) anxiety, (2) panic, (3) self-report hyperven- (Fig.1).Bothgroupsexperiencedattritionduringthe4-week
tilation, and (4) quality of life, with time (baseline versus study period (45 percent of intervention participants and 25
Week 4) as a within-subjects factor and condition (inter- percentofcontrolparticipants),withthemajorityofattrition
vention versus control) as a between-subjects measure. occurring after Week 2 study assessments (42 percent of
Results were confirmed with a gain score ANOVA with intervention participants and 16 percent of control partici-
condition as the between-subjects factor alongside an pants). There was a significant association between mobile
analysis of covariance using pretreatment scores as the platform and attrition, with more participants leaving the
covariate. The effect of time on treatment was evaluated studyiftheyhaddownloaded‘‘Flowy’’onaniOSplatform
using repeated-measures ANOVA at three time points (64.3 percent) compared with an Android platform (23.5
(baseline,Week2,andWeek4).Plevelswerecorrectedfor percent) [v2(1)=5.28, P=0.022]. Participants did not differ
non-sphericityusingtheGreenhouse–Geisserepsilonwhen onanyotherbaseline characteristics.
necessary. We tested for linear trends because we hypoth- Log data were recovered from all intervention group par-
esizedadecreaseinGAD,PDSS,andNijmeganscoresand ticipants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ (26/31, 84 percent). Eighty-
an increase in QLES-Q-SF scores across treatment weeks. four percent of intervention group participants proactively
Significance levels for linear trends across all measures played ‘‘Flowy’’ at least once for a minimum of 1 minute
were Bonferroni-corrected. Statistical significance was during the study. The number of participants who played
considered at P<0.05 unless otherwise specified. All test ‘‘Flowy’’perweekpeakedatbaseline(20/31,65percent)and
results reported are two-tailed. waslowestatWeek4(8/31,26percent)(Fig.3,top).Logdata
measured a mean weekly sessional play duration of 10 min-
Ethical approval utes during the 4-week study period, increasing weekly and
peakingat15minutesinWeek4(Fig.3,middle)andamean
Institutional board approval for the study protocol was ob-
weeklytotalplaydurationof20minutes(Fig.3,bottom).
tained from the Queen Mary University of London Research
Ethics Committee with reference number QMREC2014/20.
Clinicalefficacy
Thestudyprotocol,interventions,participantinformation,and
informedconsentprocedurewereapprovedandfoundtobein MeanscoresandSDsforprimaryandsecondaryoutcome
accordance with all applicable regulations. All participants measures for the intent-to-treat sample appear in Table 6.
received and digitally signed a study information sheet and There were no group differences for any of the baseline
consent form. All participants were given the opportunity to measures.Agroup-effectsmultivariateANOVAshowedno
download and keep ‘‘Flowy’’ on their mobile devices fol- significant difference for psychopathology measures (anxi-
lowingstudycompletion. ety, panic, and hyperventilation) based on treatment condi-
tion(F =2.059,P=0.115).
3,59
At the study conclusion, participants in both groups re-
Results ported improved scores on anxiety, panic, hyperventilation,
and quality of life psychological self-report questionnaires.
Demographics
Univariate gain score and 2·2 treatment by condition
Demographic characteristics of the control and interven- ANOVAs showed an increase in quality of life (Dmean=
tiongroupsdidnotdiffersignificantlyatbaseline(Table3). 4.570; F =4.845, P=0.034) and a reduction in anxiety
1, 61
Participants were predominantly young adults (18–34 years (Dmean=0.911; F =1.049, P=0.310), panic (Dmean=
1, 61
old;51percent)fromdeveloped,English-speakingcountries 0.108; F =0.012, P=0.914), and hyperventilation
1, 61
(Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States; 84 (Dmean=0.523; F =0.055, P=0.816) scores (Fig. 4) in
1, 61
percent),highlyeducated(68percentuniversity-educatedor theinterventiongroupplaying‘‘Flowy’’ comparedwith the
above), employed (76 percent), and white (71 percent). As waitlistcontrolgroupfrombaselinetoWeek4.Inparticular,
part of the eligibility pre-screening, candidates completed the intervention group hyperventilation scores decreased
the eHEALS questionnaire, which assessed their electronic meaningfully. A score of q23 out of 64 on the Nijmegan
health literacy. The final study population had high elec- questionnaire suggests a positive clinical diagnosis of hy-
tronic health literacy (mean=3.58, standard deviation perventilation; intervention group participants went from a
[SD]=0.22). mean score above the threshold score of 23 to below it and
FIG. 3. From baseline to Week 4, (top panel) number of intervention group participants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ weekly,
(middle panel) mean weekly play session duration, and (bottom panel) mean weekly total play duration.
Table 6. Group Scores of Intervention and Control Group Psychometric Questionnaires
Pre- And Post-Evaluation and Significance of Gain Score Analysis of Variance, 2·2 Analysis
of Variance, and Analysis of Covariance Group Effects Analyses
Intervention Control
Outcome Pre Post Pre Post Analysis df F g2 P
Anxiety (GAD-7) GS 1 1.049 0.017 0.310
Mean (SD) 11.55 (5.05) 9.39 (5.21) 10.66 (4.63) 9.53 (4.79) 2·2 1 1.049 0.017 0.310
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.638 0.011 0.427
Panic (PDSS-SR) GS 1 0.012 0.000 0.914
Mean (SD) 16.90 (5.24) 15.35 (5.76) 15.78 (5.37) 14.13 (6.57) 2·2 1 0.012 0.000 0.914
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.045 0.001 0.832
Hyperventilation (Nijmegan) GS 1 0.055 0.001 0.816
Mean (SD) 24.45 (9.79) 21.74 (11.27) 26.91 (11.01) 24.72 (12.75) 2·2 1 0.055 0.001 0.816
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.204 0.003 0.653
Quality of Life (Q-LES-Q-SF) GS 1 4.845 0.108 0.034
Mean (SD) 32.11 (7.32) 35.89 (7.71) 32.71 (6.98) 31.92 (9.17) 2·2 1 4.845 0.108 0.034
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 4.698 0.108 0.036
ANCOVA, analysis of covariance; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; GS, gain score; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity
Scale-SelfReport;Q-LES-Q-SF,QualityofLifeEnjoymentandSatisfactionQuestionnaire-ShortForm;SD,standarddeviation.
12
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 13
FIG. 4. Quality of Life, Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire Short Form scores for the intervention (solid circle,
solid line) and control (open circle, dashed line) groups at study assessment time points (baseline, Week 2, and Week 4).
outsidethethresholdzone(baselinemean,24.45;toWeek4 Table4).Theyalsoallrememberedhowtouse‘‘Flowy’’after
mean,21.74).Arepeated-measuresANOVAevaluatingtime initialplay,confirmingthat‘‘Flowy’’canbelearnedandused
asamaineffectontreatmentshowedadecreaseinpanicand regularly with ease. Eighty-nine percent would recommend
hyperventilation (P=0.011 and 0.016, respectively) and an ‘‘Flowy’’tofamilyandfriends.Participantsratedtheusability
increase in quality of life (P=0.005) scores in intervention of‘‘Flowy’’highly,with92percentsaying‘‘Flowy’’waseasy
participants from baseline to Week 4 (Table 7). Effect size and simpletouse.Eighty-three percent ofparticipants found
differences between intervention and control groups post- ‘‘Flowy’’funtouse.Theydidnotstronglyidentify‘‘Flowy’’
treatment were small (d<0.3) for anxiety, panic, and hy- asmakingthemmoreproductive,makingthethingstheywant
perventilationmeasuresandmoderate(d=0.393)forquality to accomplish easier to get done, or saving them time when
oflife measures. theyuseit.Inaddressingtheconcernthat‘‘Flowy’’couldbe
usedasasafetybehaviorandavoidthecognitiverootoftheir
panicattacks,72percentofparticipantsdidnotidentifywith
Usefulness and usability
feeling like they needed to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ Qualitative feed-
One hundred percent of participants in the intervention backfromparticipantsendorsedtheconceptofanovelbreath-
groupfound‘‘Flowy’’tobeausefulintervention(Fig.5and controlledgameformanaginganxietyandpanicattacks:
Table 7. Intervention Group Psychometric Questionnaire Scores at All Evaluations
and Significance of Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance Time Effect Analysis
Intervention
Outcome Baseline Week 2 Week 4 df F g2 P
Anxiety (GAD-7)
Mean (SD) 11.55 (5.05) 9.81 (4.60) 9.39 (5.21) 2 0.531 0.018 0.591
n 31 32 31
Panic (PDSS-SR)
Mean (SD) 16.90 (5.24) 15.42 (5.42) 15.35 (5.78) 2 4.858 0.139 0.011
n 31 32 31
Hyperventilation (Nijmegan)
Mean (SD) 24.45 (9.79) 22.45 (10.61) 21.74 (11.27) 2 4.405 0.128 0.016
n 31 32 31
Quality of life (Q-LES-Q-SF)
Mean (SD) 32.11 (7.32) 35.67 (5.08) 35.89 (7.71) 2 6.266 0.269 0.005
n 31 19 18
GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity Scale-Self Report; Q-LES-Q-SF, Quality of Life
EnjoymentandSatisfactionQuestionnaire-ShortForm;SD,standarddeviation.
14 PHAMET AL.
FIG.5. Frequency of interventiongroupparticipants who‘‘agreed’’ (4of5) or‘‘strongly agreed’’(5 of5)withpositive
usage statements on a usability questionnaire.
IjustwantedtostresshowimportantIthinktheapplication app is unlikely to change established clinical psychopathol-
(andmoreovertheapproach)couldbeinhelpingpeoplelike ogy within a 4-week time frame. Second, in aiming for an
myself deal with anxiety. For me—it’s changed my life early evaluation of ‘‘Flowy’’ to inform future design and
completely—and I know this is a story you must hear over development decisions, we may have trialed an immature
andoveragain.
versionof‘‘Flowy’’thatwasnotrobustenoughasagameto
Ithinkit’ssuchanamazingideaandthereisnothingelselike
increase breathing retraining adherence and consequently
thisaround.Ifeellikepanicattacksaresweptundertherug
haveclinicalimpact.Third,ourdecisiontomitigateagainst
too much and it feels amazing that someone is finally ad-
high attrition rates in the control group by sending out
dressing it.Once the app is ready, I will be promoting it to
everyoneIknowwhohasanxiety!!! weekly psychoeducational newsletters may have turned our
Thegamehashelpedmeonmorethanoneoccasiontopre- waitlist control into an active control; this may explain the
ventabigpanicattack. lack of an interaction effect for our three clinical outcome
Sincefirstusing‘‘Flowy’’Ihavebeenfeelingalotbetter.Ido measures. Fourth, our final sample size of 63 was not suffi-
stillusetheapp,andIamalothappierhavingthisgamewith cientlypoweredtodetectsmalleffectsizesandpreventedan
me,itsometimesfeelslikeasecretweapon! accurate elucidation of how ‘‘Flowy’’ affected clinical
symptomology. Although we obtained all study measures
remotely through both app log data and an in-house online
Discussion
assessmentplatform,therebyrelievingparticipantsofhaving
With an initial aim of creating an mHealth game for toattendtraditionalface-to-facemeasurementvisits,wedid
anxiety management that could digitally deliver health out- not take advantage of this methodology to increase scal-
comes in a fun and engaging way, ‘‘Flowy’’ was conse- ability and recruit a large sample size capable of detecting
quently conceived and piloted to measure usefulness, small effectsizesforourclinical measures.
desirability,andclinicalimpact.Preliminaryresultsconfirm Finally, our decision to use an RCT design as an evalua-
a demand exists for such an intervention, with a large pop- tion framework for ‘‘Flowy’’ was potentially inappropriate
ulation perceiving the concept of a breathing regulation toestablishtrueclinicalimpact.Weencounteredmanyofthe
game as both viable and desirable. Participants accepted methodological barriers highlighted by researchers89 that
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention, engaged hinderedourabilitytoaccuratelymeasuretheclinicalimpact
sufficiently with ‘‘Flowy’’ to proactively reach for it when of ‘‘Flowy’’ on the studied sample. Our intervention group
needed, and showed interest in practicing breathing retrain- experienced high attrition, which we suspected was due to
inginagamingcontext. hardware compatibility issues and software errors affecting
The results from this feasibility and efficacy randomized gameplay; this would have made it difficult for participants
controlled pilot trial suggest that an mHealth application toinitiallyengagewith‘‘Flowy’’andmayhavediscouraged
operationalizing breathing retraining exercises for behav- them from playing further. However, we were unable to
iorally targeted gaming can be an engaging and acceptable verify this hypothesis because of a methodological require-
interventionforanxietydisorders.However,wewereunable ment to freeze development during the trial in order to
to demonstrate clinical efficacy—our trial results indicate maintain internal validity. We identified issues with subop-
that ‘‘Flowy’’ did not produce significant decreases in anx- timalfrequencyanddurationofplay,whichmayhavebeen
iety, panic, and self-report hyperventilation scores. We hy- alleviatedthroughadjustmentstotheintensityofgameplay,
pothesize various explanations for this, the first being that breathingindicator,orgamificationtechniques,buttherewas
realistically, a short, lightweight, self-directed game-based no scope in our study design for a more critical analysis of
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 15
theprocesstodeterminewhereproblemsexistedandwhere However,forfuturestudiesanalysisshouldbeundertakenon
improvementscouldbemadetomakethegameefficacious. a‘‘perprotocol’’basis;studyattritionandlosstofollow-up
This methodologicalintolerance forrespondinginrealtime werenotcorrelatedwithlackofimprovementbutratherwith
to the usage behaviors exhibited in-trial by participants is practical and logistic issues associated with hardware and
problematic given the continuously evolving nature of both software failure. Suboptimal adherence to the intervention
digitalinterventions andtheirusers,andalsoregrettable gi- resulted in high attrition rates in the intervention group; to
ven the ease and flexibility of change inherent to digital in- mitigate against this, future research will not enforce usage
terventionsthatallowsthemtoberapidlyiterated.Ourfuture but will provide participants with the recommended fre-
research will build on the methodological limitations iden- quencyandusageparameters.Finally,generalizabilityofthe
tifiedfrom thisstudyandexplorealternative frameworkfor findings may be limited because of the requirement of a
evaluating mHealthinterventions. smartphone to join the study. This may have economically
Evaluating quality of life and usability was integral to biasedthestudyfindingsandmaynotreflectpatientaccessto
thestudydesignduetoastrongfocusonhaving‘‘Flowy’’be similartechnologyonaglobal level.
applicable as a management application and not just a clin- In summary, the feasibility and efficacy demonstrated in
ical intervention. Broad intervention applicability and thispilottrialprovidedpreliminaryempiricalsupportforan
availability were at the forefront of game design prioritiza- mHealthgamecalled‘‘Flowy’’inmanagingsymptomology
tion, which meant quality of life improvement would as- forachronicallyillpopulationsufferingfromanxiety,panic,
certain this design decision. We observed a statistically andhyperventilation.Althoughmoreresearchisrequiredto
significant improvement in qualityof life scores forpartici- demonstrate the clinical efficacy of ‘‘Flowy’’ in promoting
pantsrandomlyassignedtotheinterventiongroup,alongside significant symptom amelioration, this study represents an
positive usability feedback; this is noteworthy given the 4- important first step toward highlighting the potential use of
weekdurationofthetrialandshowsthat‘‘Flowy’’caneffect ‘‘Flowy’’inhospitalsandhomesforanxietymanagement.It
positivechangeinashortperiodoftime.‘‘Flowy’’mayhave is hoped that ‘‘Flowy’’ may one day constitute one compo-
promoted increased awareness of panic attack triggers, nent of a broader integrative approach to health care that
whichpotentiallycontributedtogreaterself-monitoringand holistically combines physiological and behavioral inter-
reframing of the panic attack experience and consequently ventions to aid patients in the prevention, detection, treat-
improved overallqualityoflife. ment,andrecovery fromCMHDs.
Theself-determinationtheoryofDeciandRyan90predicts
increased player engagement with games fosters a sense of Acknowledgments
autonomy, competence, and social relatedness.91 The posi-
We would like to thank Erica Simon for reviewing this
tive improvements in quality of life from our study are
manuscript.Wewishtoacknowledgethecontributionofthe
consistent with this: when given a game that facilitated the
team that developed ‘‘Flowy’’: Adam Hodgson, Anders
process of managing their condition, our participants felt
Furevik, Khi-Jon Chua, Jean-Baptise Krohn, and Meg
motivatedtotakebettercareofthemselvesandconsequently
Jayanth. We extend our gratitude to the 63 people who
felt happier and healthier. Our findings align with previous
participated in the trial and took a leap of faith in allowing
studies that highlight self-efficacy as being particularly
‘‘Flowy’’intotheir lives.
sensitivetogame-basedintervention92–95;theobservedhigh
levels of non-enforced usage demonstrate promising vali-
AuthorDisclosure Statement
dationforthismethodofinterventiondelivery.
Gamified breathing retraining may have special value to This research was a collaboration between industry part-
individualswithotherchronicconditionsinvolvingimpaired nerPlaylabLondonandacademicpartnerWolfsonInstitute
perceptionsoftheirownbreathing.Similareffectsandvalue forPreventiveMedicine.Q.P.isthecurrentLeadResearcher
could apply for treating asthma, chronic obstructive pulmo- for Playlab London and at the time of the trial an MSc
narydisease,cysticfibrosis,andotherchroniclungdiseases. candidateattheWolfsonInstitute.Sheconceived,designed,
Additional research is required to evaluate the scope of be- and implemented this study alongside support from her
havioral processesthatareamenabletochangethroughthis academic department and Playlab London. S.F. and T.G.
interventionplatform. co-founded Playlab London and conceived, designed, and
Limitations to this pilot study must be acknowledged. developed‘‘Flowy.’’
First, using self-report screening and not formal diagnostic
instruments to confirm existing anxiety symptomology References
means that without a formal diagnosis, no claims about
1. Mathers C, Fat DM, Boerma JT; World Health Organiza-
prevention of anxiety or mental disorders can be made.
tion.TheGlobalBurdenofDisease:2004Update.Geneva:
Non-uniform severity of symptoms at trial entry may have
World Health Organization; 2008.
reduced statistical power butlikely improved the generaliz-
2. Pilling S, Whittington C, Taylor C, Kendrick T. Identifi-
ability of study findings. Several of the outcome question-
cation and care pathways for common mental health dis-
naires used in this study have not yet been validated for
orders:SummaryofNICEguidance.BMJ2011;342:d2868.
onlineuse,whichmaychangetheirpsychometricproperties. 3. World Health Organization. Integrating the Response to
Theopen-recruitmentstrategyusedinthisstudywaschosen Mental Health Disorders and Other Chronic Diseases in
to optimize recruitment, but the cost of such a strategy is HealthCareSystems.Geneva:WorldHealthOrganization;
that the attracted population may not be representative of 2014.
the actual clinical population. Analysis was done on an 4. Skapinakis P, Lewis G, Davies S, et al. Panic disorder and
‘‘intention-to-treat’’basis,whichismorecommoninRCTs. subthresholdpanicintheUKgeneralpopulation:Epidemiology,
16 PHAMET AL.
comorbidity and functional limitation. Eur Psychiatry 2011; 24. World Health Organization. mHealth: New Horizons for
26:354–362. Health Through Mobile Technologies. Geneva: World
5. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Financing Health Organization; 2011.
GlobalHealth2010:DevelopmentAssistanceandCountry 25. McCurdie T, Taneva S, Casselman M, et al. mHealth
Spending in Economic Uncertainty. Seattle, WA: Institute consumerapps:Thecaseforuser-centereddesign.Biomed
for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2010. Instrum Technol 2012;(Suppl):49–56.
6. DepartmentofHealth.NoHealthWithoutMentalHealth:A 26. Cafazzo JA, Casselman M, Hamming N, et al. Design of
Cross-Government Mental Health Outcomes Strategy for an mHealth app for the self-management of adolescent
People of All Ages. Supporting Document—The Economic type 1 diabetes: A pilot study. J Med Internet Res 2012;
Case for Improving Efficiency and Quality in Mental 14:e70.
Health. London: Department of Health; 2011. 27. Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke L. From game
7. Beamish PM, Granello PF, Granello DH, et al. Outcome design elements to gamefulness: defining ‘‘gamification.’’
studies in the treatment of panic disorder: A review. J In: Proceedings of the 15th International Academic Mind-
Counsel Dev 1996; 74:460–467. TrekConference:EnvisioningFutureMediaEnvironments.
8. ClarkDM.Acognitiveapproachtopanic.BehavResTher Tampere, Finland: ACM Press; 2011.
1986; 24:461–470. 28. Zichermann G, Cunningham C. Gamification by Design:
9. Ley R. The efficacy of breathing retraining and the cen- Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps.
trality of hyperventilation in panic disorder: A reinterpre- Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc.; 2011.
tation of experimental findings. Behav Res Ther 1991; 29. Heron KE, Smyth JM. Ecological momentary interven-
29:301–304. tions: Incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial
10. LeyR.Pulmonaryfunctionanddyspnea/suffocationtheory andhealthbehaviourtreatments.BrJHealthPsychol2010;
of panic. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 1998; 29:1–11. 15:1–39.
11. LumLC.Hyperventilationandanxietystate.JRSocMed 30. BrownSJ,LiebermanDA,GermenyBA,etal.Educational
1981; 74:1–4. video game for juvenile diabetes: Results of a controlled
12. MeuretAE,WilhelmFH,RothWT.Respiratoryfeedbackfor trial. Med Inform (Lond) 1997; 22:77–89.
treatingpanicdisorder. JClinPsychol2004;60:197–207. 31. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video
13. MueserKT,LuW,RosenbergSD,WolfeR.Thetraumaof game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and
psychosis: Posttraumatic stress disorder and recent onset young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics
psychosis. Schizophr Res 2010; 116:217–227. 2008; 122:e305–e317.
14. Rapee RM, Ancis JR, Barlow DH. Emotional reactions to 32. KatoPM,BealeIL.Factorsaffectingacceptabilitytoyoung
physiological sensations: Panic disorder patients and non- cancer patients of a psychoeducational video game about
clinical Ss. Behav Res Ther 1988; 26:265–269. cancer. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2006; 23:269–275.
15. RapeeRM,BrownTA,AntonyMM,BarlowDH.Response 33. Stinson JN, Jibb LA, Nguyen C, et al. Development and
tohyperventilationandinhalationof5.5%carbondioxide- testing of a multidimensional iPhone pain assessment ap-
enriched air across the DSM-III-R anxiety disorders. plication for adolescents with cancer. J Med Internet Res
J Abnorm Psychol 1992; 101:538–552. 2013; 15:e51.
16. Kim S, Wollburg E, Roth WT. Opposing breathing thera- 34. BinghamPM,BatesJH,Thompson-FigueroaJ,LahiriT.A
pies for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial of breathbiofeedbackcomputergameforchildrenwithcystic
loweringvsraisingend-tidalP .JClinPsychiatry2012; fibrosis. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2010; 49:337–342.
CO2
73:931–939. 35. Bingham PM, Lahiri T, Ashikaga T. Pilot trial of spirom-
17. Sanchez-Meca J, Rosa-Alcazar AI, Marin-Martinez F, eter games for airway clearance practice in cystic fibrosis.
Gomez-Conesa A. Psychological treatment of panic disor- Respir Care 2012; 57:1278–1284.
der with or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clin 36. Davis MA,Quittner AL,StackCM,Yang MC.Controlled
Psychol Rev 2010; 30:37–50. evaluation of the STARBRIGHT CD-ROM program for
18. YoungC,HunteA,NewellJ,ValianP.Copingwithpanic. children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis. J Pediatr
In: Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Psychol 2004; 29:259–267.
Trust, ed. Improving Access to Psychological Therapies 37. Asthma Advisory Committee Meeting. Asthma Self-
2011,Vol.4.Cambridge,UnitedKingdom:Cambridgeshire ManagementApplicationProject.In:UniversityofWestern
and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; 2011: 27–28. Ontario Centre for Global e-Health Innovation, Queen’s
19. Saxena S, Setoya Y. World Health Organization’s com- University. The Lung Association. 2014. www.on.lung.ca/
prehensive mental health action plan 2013–2020. Psy- document.doc?id=2109 (accessed July 29,2015).
chiatry Clin Neurosci 2014; 68:585–586. 38. KrishnaS,FranciscoBD,BalasEA,etal.Internet-enabled
20. Saha S, Beach MC, Cooper LA. Patient centeredness, interactive multimedia asthma education program: A ran-
cultural competence and healthcare quality. J Natl Med domized trial. Pediatrics 2003; 111:503–510.
Assoc 2008; 100:1275–1285. 39. Developing Breathe: A Self-Management Web App for
21. Fox S, Duggan M. Mobile Health 2012. Pew Internet & Asthma. Ottawa: Centre for Global eHealth Innovation,
American Life Project. 2012. www.pewinternet.org/2012/ University Health Network; 2013.
11/08/mobile-health-2012/ (accessed July 29, 2015). 40. GardeA,UmedalyA,AbulnagaSM,etal.Assessmentofa
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Mobile Medical Ap- mobile game (‘‘MobileKids Monster Manor’’) to promote
plications. 2014. www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/ physical activity among children. Games Health J 2015;
./UCM263366.pdf (accessedJuly 29,2015). 4:149–158.
23. Cotton R, Irwin J, Wilkins A, Young C. The Future’s Di- 41. Lin J-H. ‘‘Just Dance’’: The effects of exergame feedback
gital: Mental Health and Technology. London: NHS Con- and controller use on physical activity and psychological
federation Mental Health Network; 2014. outcomes. Games Health J 2015; 4:183–189.
‘‘FLOWY’’ RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED PILOT TRIAL 17
42. Moller CA, Majewski S, Standish M, et al. Active fantasy 59. Buijink AW, Visser BJ, Marshall L. Medical apps for
sports: Rationale and feasibility of leveraging online fan- smartphones: Lack of evidence undermines quality and
tasy sports to promote physical activity. JMIR Serious safety. Evid Based Med 2013; 18:90–92.
Games 2014; 2:e13. 60. Haffey F, Brady RR, Maxwell S. A comparison of the re-
43. Sato K, Kuroki K, Saiki S, Nagatomi R. Improving walk- liability of smartphone apps for opioid conversion. Drug
ing, muscle strength, and balance in the elderly with an Saf 2013; 36:111–117.
exergame using Kinect: A randomized controlled trial. 61. Misra S, Lewis TL, Aungst TD. Medical application use
Games Health J 2015; 4:161–167. andtheneedforfurtherresearchandassessmentforclinical
44. Fish MT, Russoniello CV, O’Brien K. The efficacy of practice: Creation and integration of standards for best
prescribedcasualvideogameplayinreducingsymptomsof practice to alleviate poor application design. JAMA Der-
anxiety: A randomized controlled study. Games Health J matol 2013; 149:661–662.
2014; 3:291–295. 62. WolfJA,MoreauJF,AkilovO,etal.Diagnosticinaccuracy
45. Leutwyler H, Hubbard EM, Dowling GA. Adherence to a ofsmartphoneapplicationsformelanomadetection.JAMA
videogame-based physical activity program for older Dermatol 2013; 149:422–426.
adults with schizophrenia. Games Health J 2014; 3:227– 63. McCartney M. How do we know whether medical apps
233. work? BMJ 2013; 346:f1811.
46. Roepke AM, Jaffee SR, Riffle OM, et al. Randomized 64. RosserBA,EcclestonC.Smartphoneapplicationsforpain
controlled trial of SuperBetter, a smartphone-based/ management. J Telemed Telecare 2011; 17:308–312.
Internet-based self-help tool to reduce depressive symp- 65. Ferrero NA, Morrell DS, Burkhart CN. Skin scan: A
toms. Games Health J 2015; 4:235–246. demonstration of the need for FDA regulation of medical
47. ShepherdM,FlemingT,LucassenM,etal.Thedesignand apps on iPhone. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013; 68:515–516.
relevance of a computerized gamified depression therapy 66. LewisLT,WyattCJ.mHealthandmobilemedicalapps:A
program for indigenous M(cid:2)aori adolescents. JMIR Serious framework to assess risk and promote safer use. J Med
Games 2015; 3:e1. Internet Res 2014; 16:e210.
48. Gutierrez B, Kaatz A, Chu S, et al. ‘‘Fair Play’’: A vi- 67. Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, et al. Smartphones for
deogame designed to address implicit race bias through smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic
active perspective taking. Games Health J 2014; 3:371– review. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e247.
378. 68. PiantadosiS.ClinicalTrials:AMethodologicPerspective.
49. Chu SKW, Kwan ACM, Reynolds R, et al. Promoting sex New York: Wiley; 2005.
education among teenagers through an interactive game: 69. ChamblessDL,HollonSD.Definingempiricallysupported
Reasons for success and implications. Games Health J therapies. J Consult Clin Psychol 1998; 66:7–18.
2015; 4:168–174. 70. Rounsaville BJ, Carroll KM, Onken LS. A stage model of
50. D’CruzJ,SantaMariaD,DubeS,etal.Promotingparent– behavioral therapies research: getting started and moving
child sexual health dialogue with an intergenerational on from stage I. Clin Psychol Sci Pract 2001; 8:133–142.
game:Parentandyouthperspectives.GamesHealthJ2015; 71. Balas EA, Boren SA. Managing clinical knowledge for
4:113–122. healthcareimprovements.In:vanBemmelJH,McCrayAT,
51. Driesmans K, Vandenbosch L, Eggermont S. Playing a eds. Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2000. Stuttgart:
videogame with a sexualized female character increases Schattauer; 2000: 65–70.
adolescents’ rape myth acceptance and tolerance toward 72. Brown CH, Kellam SG, Kaupert S, et al. Partnerships for
sexual harassment. Games Health J 2014; 4:91–94. the design, conduct, and analysis of effectiveness, and
52. Jozkowski KN, Ekbia HR. ‘‘Campus Craft’’: A game for implementation research: Experiences of the Prevention
sexual assault prevention in universities. Games Health J ScienceandMethodologyGroup.AdmPolicyMentHealth
2014; 4:95–106. 2012; 39:301–316.
53. Gorini A, Marzorati C, Casiraghi M, et al. A 73. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don’t we
neurofeedback-based intervention to reduce post-operative see more translation of health promotion research to prac-
pain in lung cancer patients: Study protocol for a ran- tice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition.
domized controlled trial. JMIR Res Protoc 2015; 4:e52. Am J Public Health 2003; 93:1261–1267.
54. Kottink AIR, Prange GB, Krabben T, et al. Gaming and 74. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The Multiphase
conventional exercises for improvement of arm function OptimizationStrategy(MOST)andtheSequentialMultiple
after stroke: A randomized controlled pilot study. Games Assignment Randomized Trial (SMART): New methods
Health J 2014; 3:184–191. for more potent eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med
55. Lozano-Quilis J-A, Gil-Go´mez H, Gil-Go´mez J-A, et al. 2007; 32(5 Suppl):S112–S118.
VirtualrehabilitationformultiplesclerosisusingaKinect- 75. Mohr CD, Schueller MS, Riley TW, et al. Trials of inter-
based system: Randomized controlled trial. JMIR Serious vention principles: Evaluation methods for evolving be-
Games 2014; 2:e12. havioral intervention technologies. J Med Internet Res
56. Proffitt R, Sevick M, Chang C-Y, Lange B. User-centered 2015; 17:e166.
design of a controller-free game for hand rehabilitation. 76. Mohr DC, Cheung K, Schueller SM, et al. Continuous
Games Health J 2015; 4:259–264. evaluation of evolving behavioral intervention technolo-
57. SzturmT,ReimerKM,HochmanJ.Home-basedcomputer gies. Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:517–523.
gaming in vestibular rehabilitation of gaze and balance 77. Wyatt J. Assessing and improving evidence based health
impairment. Games Health J 2015; 4:211–220. informatics research. Stud Health Technol Inform 2010;
58. Granic I, Lobel A, Engels RCME. The Benefits of Playing 151:435–445.
Video Games. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Radboud Uni- 78. EysenbachG;CONSORT-EHEALTHGroup.CONSORT-
versity Nijmegen; 2013. EHEALTH: Improving and standardizing evaluation
18 PHAMET AL.
reports of Web-based and mobile health interventions. J 89. Kumar S, Nilsen WJ, Abernethy A, et al. Mobile health
Med Internet Res 2011; 13:e126. technology evaluation: The mHealth Evidence Workshop.
79. Eysenbach G. CONSORT-EHEALTH: Implementation of Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:228–236.
a checklist for authors and editors to improve reporting of 90. Deci EL, Ryan RM. Intrinsic Motivation and Self-
web-based and mobile randomized controlled trials. Stud Determination in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum;
Health Technol Inform 2013; 192:657–661. 1985.
80. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief 91. Przybylski AK, Deci EL, Rigby CS, Ryan RM.
measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: The Competence-impeding electronic games and players’ ag-
GAD-7. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1092–1097. gressive feelings, thoughts, and behaviors. J Pers Soc
81. NormanSB,CissellSH,Means-ChristensenAJ,SteinMB. Psychol 2014; 106:441–457.
DevelopmentandvalidationofanOverallAnxietySeverity 92. ChaoYY,SchererYK,WuYW,etal.Thefeasibilityofan
and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Depress Anxiety 2006; intervention combining self-efficacy theory and Wii Fit
23:245–249. exergames in assisted living residents: A pilot study. Ger-
82. TaylorS,ZvolenskyMJ,CoxBJ,etal.Robustdimensions iatr Nurs 2013; 34:377–382.
ofanxietysensitivity:Developmentandinitialvalidationof 93. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3. Psychol Assess 2007; game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and
19:176–188. young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics
83. Shear MK, Rucci P, Williams J, et al. Reliability and va- 2008; 122:e305–317.
lidityofthePanicDisorderSeverityScale:Replicationand 94. Lyons EJ, Hatkevich C. Prevalence of behavior changing
extension. J Psychiatr Res 2001; 35:293–296. strategies in fitness video games: Theory-based content
84. van Dixhoorn J, Duivenvoorden HJ. Efficacy of Nijmegen analysis. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e81.
Questionnaire in recognition of the hyperventilation syn- 95. SchneiderKL,FerraraJ,LanceB,etal.Acceptabilityofan
drome. J Psychosom Res 1985; 29:199–206. online health videogame to improve diet and physical ac-
85. Endicott J, Nee J, Harrison W, Blumenthal R. Quality of tivity in elementary school students: ‘‘Fitter Critters.’’
Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire: A new Games Health J 2012; 1:262–268.
measure. Psychopharmacol Bull 1993; 29:321–326.
86. Norman CD, Skinner HA. eHEALS: The eHealth Literacy Address correspondence to:
Scale. J Med Internet Res 2006; 8:e27. Quynh Pham, MSc
87. EverlyGS,LatingJM.AClinicalGuidetotheTreatmentof Playlab London
the Human Stress Response, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 71B St John Street
2013. London, United Kingdom, EC1M 4NJ
88. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sci-
ences.Hillsdale,NJ:LawrenceErlbaum Associates;1988. E-mail: quynh@playlablondon.co.uk
