Reyhan Ayaz*, Meryem Hocaoğlu, Taner Günay, Oğuz devrim Yardımcı, Abdulkadir Turgut
and Ateş Karateke
Anxiety and depression symptoms in the same
pregnant women before and during the COVID-19
pandemic
https://doi.org/10.1515/jpm-2020-0380
Received August 9, 2020; accepted August 23, 2020; published online
September 4, 2020
Abstract
Objectives: With clinical experience from previous coro-
navirus infections, public health measures and fear of
infection may have negative psychological effects on
pregnant women. This study aimed to compare the level of
anxiety and depression in the same pregnant women
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: The pregnant women continuing pregnancy
who participated in the first study which was undertaken to
clarify the factors associated with mental health of preg-
nant women before the COVID-19 pandemic, were included
for the current study during the outbreak. Anxiety and
depression symptoms of the same pregnant women were
evaluated by using the Inventory of Depression and Anxi-
ety Symptoms II and Beck Anxiety Inventory twice before
and during the pandemic.
Results: A total of 63 pregnant women completed ques-
tionnaires. The mean age of the women and the mean
gestational age was 30.35±5.27 years and 32.5±7 weeks,
respectively. The mean total IDAS II score was found to
increase from 184.78±49.67 (min: 109, max: 308) to
202.57±52.90 (min: 104, max: 329) before and during the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. According to the BAI scores the
number of patients without anxiety (from 10 to 6) and with
mild anxiety (from 31 to 24) decreased and patients with
moderate (from 20 to 25) and severe anxiety (from 2 to 8)
increased after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Multivariate linear
regression analysis revealed that obesity and relationship
with her husband are the best predictors of IDAS II scores.
Conclusions: This study indicated that COVID-19 outbreak
affects the mental health of pregnant women negatively
which leads to adverse birth outcomes. The level of anxiety
and depression symptoms of pregnant women during the
COVID-19 infection significantly increased. Healthcare
professionals should establish comprehensive treatment
plans for pregnant women who are highly vulnerable
population to prevent mental trauma during the infectious
disease outbreaks.
Keywords:
anxiety;
COVID-19;
depression;
IDAS
II;
SARS-CoV-2.
Introduction
COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2), which is transmitted to humans
by the bat and the pangolin, has rapidly spread to the
whole world since it was first reported in Wuhan, China, in
December 2019 [1]. The World Health Organization (WHO)
declared the coronavirus infection as a pandemic on March
11, 2020 [2]. At the time of this writing, the number of
infected people with SARS-CoV-2 has reached approxi-
mately 18 million, resulting in almost 700,000 deaths.
Many people experience increased anxiety and depression
with the uncertainty and isolation, public safety protocols
required such as border closures, transportation re-
strictions, social isolation to reduce the spread of corona-
virus can cause adverse psychological effects on people
[3, 4].
Approximately 10–15% of all pregnant women expe-
rience a variety of emotional changes that increase the risk
of anxiety and depression, which can adversely affect both
pregnant women and developing fetuses [5]. Depression
and anxiety during pregnancy may increase the risk for
miscarriage, preterm birth, lower birth weight, lower Apgar
score, and fetal death [6]. Children of mothers with a high
level of stress during pregnancy may show emotional,
behavioral, and cognitive problems and may be at higher
risk for neurodevelopmental impairment [7].
*Corresponding author: Reyhan Ayaz, MD, Department of
Perinatology, Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey; and İstanbul Medeniyet Üniversitesi, Göztepe Güney
Yerleşkesi, Rektör Sekreterliği Dumlupınar Mahallesi, D-100 Karayolu
No: 98, 34720, Kadıköy, İstanbul, Turkey, Phone: +90 506 859 2446,
Fax: +90 (216) 280 20 21, E-mail: drreyhanayaz@hotmail.com
Meryem Hocaoğlu, Taner Günay, Oğuz devrim Yardımcı, Abdulkadir
Turgut and Ateş Karateke, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey
J. Perinat. Med. 2020; 48(9): 965–970

It is known that previous coronavirus outbreaks
i.e., Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), and the H1N1 infection
have been associated with adverse maternal and fetal com-
plications, however, the relationship between SARS-CoV-2
and pregnancy complications has not yet been clearly
identiﬁed[8,9]. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemiccondition creates
an additional risk factor likely to increase the stress on
pregnant women who are already prone to depression and
anxiety. These women are naturally concerned not only with
their own health but also for their unborn babies due to
infectious diseases. Targeted interventions applied after
diagnosis of anxiety and depression can improve the health
of newborns and reduce adverse consequences during this
pandemic.
To date, there are limited studies on the psychological
state of pregnant women during the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak.
This study aims to compare the anxiety and depression
scores from prior to and during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
in pregnant women.
Materials and methods
Study population
SARS-CoV-2 was first reported and confirmed officially by the Turkish
Ministry of Health on March 11, 2020. Since June 1, 2018, we had
already been conducting a prospective study evaluating the associa-
tion between depressionand anxiety scores and pregnancy-associated
plasma protein-A levels measured at the time of first-trimester
screening (11–14 weeks of gestation) in pregnant women at Istanbul
Medeniyet University, Goztepe Training and Research Hospital. First-
trimester ultrasound exams were consistently performed by the same
sonographer (RA), and included the measurement of nuchal trans-
lucency (NT), the determination of fetal viability and the examination
of certain anatomic structures (head, brain, stomach, abdomen,
bladder, and extremities). All patients admitted to the outpatient clinic
for ﬁrst-trimester screening were also asked to complete the Inventory
of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms II (IDAS II) and Beck Anxiety
Inventory (BAI). These inventory scales were conducted prior to the
outbreak of the SARS-COV-2 outbreak.
In their second or third trimester (during SARS-COV-2 pandemic),
we retested those whose IDAS II and BAI scores were already available
from the first-trimester testing, (before the SARS-COV-2 pandemic).
The presence of SARS-CoV-2-related symptoms in the previous months
(fever, cough, diarrhea, shortness of breath, sputum, myalgia) was
investigated. Data were collected using the personal information form,
the IDAS II and the BAI by the same researcher (RA) in face-to-face
interviews. For each participant, detailed demographic data were
recorded, including age, body mass index (BMI), gravida, parity,
number of children, mode of previous delivery, elapsed time after the
last delivery, education and income levels, employment, duration of
marriage, partner’s education level, household size, comorbidities,
migration status, the relationship with her husband, own family and
husband’s family and her husband’s relationship with her family.
History of mental health problems, obstetric history, pregnancy
complications (threatened abortion, hyperemesis gravidarum, pres-
ence of diabetes mellitus, hypertension), intended or unintended
pregnancy were evaluated. Only those who reside in Turkey, can
speak and understand Turkish and have sufficient reading and writing
skills to properly complete surveys were included in the study. We
excluded those with a history of any psychiatric illness or those car-
rying an anomalous fetus from the study.
Clinical measures
The BAI questionnaire, which includes 21 items, screen for the pres-
ence of anxiety symptoms such as heart-pounding, nervousness,
inability to relax, and dizziness, or light-headedness. The participant
rated each question on a scale of 0–3. In this survey, overall total
scores of 0–9 indicate normal or no anxiety, scores of 10–18 indicated
mild to moderate anxiety, scores 19–29 shown moderate to severe
anxiety, and scores 30–63 indicated severe anxiety. The Turkish
version has previously been found to be reliable and valid [10].
In this study, the IDAS II was used to evaluate the depression and
anxiety of the participants. The IDAS II, which includes 99 items, was
developed by Watson to assess specific symptoms of major depres-
sion, anxiety disorders, and bipolar disorder. The Turkish validity and
reliability studies were performed by Irak. The Turkish IDAS-II sub-
scales revealed Cronbach’s alpha values ranged between 0.947 and
0.949 and the items have a relatively high internal consistency [11].
Ethical approval
Ethical approval was obtained from the Clinical Studies Ethics Com-
mittee of Istanbul Medeniyet University, Goztepe Training and
Research Hospital, (2020/0400). Informed consent was taken from the
participants in the study.
Power calculation and statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 18.0. A p-value of
<0.05 was considered statistically significant. A power analysis was
revealed that a sample of 54 patients was required to achieve a power
of 0.95 in a test based on α=0.05. The power of the present study was
calculated as 86.5%. The McNemar test was used to compare the re-
sults of BAI before and after the pandemic. A paired-samples t-test was
used to compare the results of IDAS II before and after the SARS-COV-2
outbreak. Categorical variables were described through absolute fre-
quencies and continuous variables through mean and standard de-
viation (SD). Multiple regressions were performed with the main
characteristics of the participants as predictors and their factor score
on each of the IDAS II and BAI.
Results
From April 12 to May 27, 2020, a total of 63 pregnant women
completed questionnaires. The mean age and mean
gestational age in the study population were 30.4±5.3 years
966
Ayaz et al.: Psychological impact of COVID-19 infection on pregnant women

and 32.5±7 weeks, respectively. Of the study population,
22.2% (n=7) were overweight and 20.6% (n=29) were obese.
Both inventories were again ﬁlled out in the second
trimester by 36.6% (n=14) of the patients and in the third
trimester for the remainder of the group (63.4%, n=15). The
average gravida was 2.1±1.2 (1–5) and 52.3% of participants
already had one or more children. Of the total, 54% were
housewives with 62% stating their pregnancies were
planned. The average monthly income of participants was
at typical levels in 61.9% of the women, with a higher than
average income in 38.1% of the families. Almost all (91.7%)
of patients were part of a nuclear family. At the time of the
research, none of the participants and their whole family
members
reported
job
loss
during
the
SARS-CoV-2
pandemic. None of the pregnant women were suspected,
probable, or conﬁrmed cases for SARS-CoV-2 infection and
none reported any SARS-CoV-2 infections within their
household. Table 1 summarizes the sociodemographic and
clinical characteristics of the sample.
The mean total IDAS II score was found to increase from
184.8±49.8 (109–308) pre-pandemic to 202.6±52.9 (104–329)
during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the difference in anxiety
and depression of participating patients between the periods
was statistically signiﬁcant (p<0.001) (Table2). Furthermore,
it was observed according to the BAI scores the number of
patients without anxiety (from 10 to 6) and with mild anxiety
(from 31 to 24) decreased and patients with moderate (from
20 to 25) and severe anxiety (from 2 to 8) increased after
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic state ensued (Table 3).
Multiple linear regression was used to explore which of
the challenges were most associated with anxiety and
depression. Thus, the relationship with her husband, his-
tory of depression, occupation, level of education, planned
or unplanned pregnancy, BMI, duration of marriage, dura-
tion of last delivery were assessed in this study. Multivariate
linear regression analyses showed that relationship with her
husband and BMI were associated with the state of
depression and anxiety (p=0.02 and p=0.001) (Table 4). In
obese pregnant women, IDAS II scores increased more than
others before and during the pandemic.
Discussion
Principal findings
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that
compares the effect of SARS-CoV-2 pandemic condition on
depression and anxiety symptoms in pregnant women both
before and during the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. This cross-
sectional survey study revealed that coronavirus pandemic
Table : Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants
(n=).
n, %
Mean
Standard
deviation
Maternal age, years

.
.
Gravida

.
.
Parity

.
.
Number of other children

.
.
Second trimester

.
.
Third trimester

.
.
Body mass index
Underweight
, .
Normal
, 
Overweight
, .
Obese
, .
Time from last birth

.
.
Marriage time, months

.
.
SBP/DBP

.
.

.
.
Educational level
Primary school
, .
Secondary school
, .
High school
, .
Migration status
, .
Relationship with her husband
Good
, 
Moderate
, 
Relationship with her husband’s family
Good
, 
Moderate
, 
Bad
, 
Relationship with her family
Good
, .
Moderate
, .
Her husband’s relationship with her family
Good
, .
Moderate
, .
Bad
, .
Household size
Nuclear family
, .
Non-nuclear family
, .
Employment status of women
Unemployed
, .
Ofﬁcial
, .
Worker
, .
Employment status of husbands
Ofﬁcer
, .
Worker
, .
Own business
, 
Private
, .
Educational level of husband
Primary school
, .
Secondary school
, .
High school
, .
Intended pregnancy
, .
Unintended pregnancy
, .
Level of income
High
, .
Ayaz et al.: Psychological impact of COVID-19 infection on pregnant women
967

has a significant psychological impact on maternal physi-
ological state,asconfirmed by two differentinventory scales
including IDAS-II and BAI. To be able to assess depression
and anxiety symptoms, using a single evaluation scale,
instead of multiple scales, is preferred as it eliminates other
factors related to common variances. Therefore, IDAS II was
developed as a single comprehensive measure to assess
diverse symptomatology while eliminating confounding
methodological factors. Furthermore, the relationship with
her husband and BMI were associated with a state of
depression and anxiety during pregnancy regardless of
pandemic conditions. This study indicates that pregnant
women are vulnerable to mental state changes during the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and deserve special care to cope with
the high level of anxiety and depression generated by a
period of uncertainty and stress.
Comparison with other studies
Pregnancy is a particularly vulnerable time and studies
with measures of mental health reported that pregnant
women experience higher levels of distress during an in-
fectious disease outbreak [12]. In Turkey, the ﬁrst case of
SARS-CoV-2 was reported on 11 March 2020, after six days,
the ﬁrst death due to the SARS-CoV-2 occurred on 17 March.
The Turkish government enacted strict rules, such as
border closures, transportation restrictions, and quaran-
tine to prevent the spread of infection and all these in-
terventions were continued throughout the study period
[13]. The prolongation of the pandemic will have inevitably
devastating effects on individuals economically and
ﬁnancially, and as a consequence, undesirable effects on
people’s mental health will also arise [14]. We conducted
this study in a period when the SARS-CoV-2 spread was at
its highest in our country and there was a lot of uncertainty
about the course of the pandemic and the impact of
SARS-CoV-2 infection on pregnancy.
Similar to our results, Wu et al. reported that the preva-
lence of depressive symptoms was positively associated with
the number of newly conﬁrmed cases of SARS-CoV-2, sus-
pected infections, and deaths per day in China [15]. In Can-
ada, 1987 pregnant women were evaluated and compared
with previous community pregnancy cohorts in terms of
anxiety, depression, and pregnancy-speciﬁc anxiety during
the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. They found that pregnant par-
ticipants had higher level of depression, general anxiety, and
pregnancy-speciﬁc anxiety symptoms than in previous
community pregnancy cohorts with similar demographic
proﬁles. However, unlike our study, in Lebel’s study, preg-
nantwomenacrossCanadawererecruitedviasocialmediato
complete an online survey [16]. Answering survey questions
Table : (continued)
n, %
Mean
Standard
deviation
Moderate
, .
Mode of previous delivery
Cesarean delivery
, .
Spontane vaginal delivery
, .
Pregnancy complication
Threatened abortion
, .
Hyperemesis gravidarum
, .
Diabetes mellitus
, .
Hypertension
, .
Tenant
, .
Homeowner
, .
Table : Comparison of IDAS II scores before and during the COVID-
infection.
Mean
Standard
deviation
Minimum
Maximum
p-Value
Before the
infection
.
.


<.
During the
infection
.
.


Table : Change of anxiety level of pregnant women according to BAI scores between the before and during the COVID-infection.
Before COVID-
During COVID-
p-Value
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
N
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
None








.
Mild

.

.

.


Moderate








Severe








968
Ayaz et al.: Psychological impact of COVID-19 infection on pregnant women

without the physical presence of the interviewer may have
inﬂuenced the patients’ responses.
This cross-sectional study of an ongoing prospective
cohort, compared depression and anxiety scores of the
same women at different gestational ages before and
following the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic by using IDAS II and
BAI. Data on the specific effect of gestational age on anx-
iety and depression in pregnancy is still limited. Da Costa
et al. evaluated the variations in stress levels over the
course of pregnancy and they reported signiﬁcantly higher
pregnancy-speciﬁc stress in the ﬁrst and third trimester of
pregnancy [17]. In another study, the anxiety symptoms
were determined by using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
(STAI) and they found average STAI scores remained sta-
tistically stable over time throughout pregnancy [18].
On the contrary, the anxiety level of SARS-CoV-2 pos-
itive pregnant women was appeared low at the tail-end of
the pandemic in the UK due to increased available clinical
information
and
reassurance
through
social
media,
healthcare professionals, and primary care. However, the
number of participants in that study was too few to reach a
statistically valid result [19].
In our study, depression and anxiety scores were
considerably higher during the pandemic than pre-pandemic
scores in a cohort of pregnant women with similar de-
mographic profiles. These results point out that SARS-CoV-2
mayaggravatepsychologicalchallenges forpregnantwomen,
with the potential for both short and long term impacts on the
developing fetus. Mental health problems frequently go un-
noticed and therefore untreated during pregnancy, but if
discovered, treatment results in favorable outcomes.
Strengths and limitations
Some limitations and strengths should be taken into ac-
count when interpreting the results of our study. One
limitation is the sample size but power analysis indicated
that reduced the effect of this limitation. One of our
strengths was while most other studies, administered
questionnaires online, thus preventing a face-to-face eval-
uation of the participants, in our study, the same researcher
contacted each patient face-to-face to complete the IDAS II
and BAI interviews. The most striking strength of our study
is the access to data on anxiety and depression in pregnancy
we had fortuitously collected pre-pandemic, and our ability
to comparethese same data points to mid-pandemicsurveys
from the same group of women. Another important aspect of
our study was the depth of detailed sociodemographic and
clinical characteristics recorded for each participant.
Because these sociodemographic parameters were mostly
invariant during the study period, changes in test scores
could more clearly be attributed to the onset of the
pandemic and resultant psychological pressures.
Clinical and research implication
Pregnancy may increase the tendency towards anxiety and
depression for some women. This change of mental health
status is often associated with the offspring’s neuro-
cognitive development, later psychopathologies, as well as
maternal
health
and
functioning.
The
SARS-CoV-2
pandemic may exacerbate pregnant women’s prenatal
distress and psychiatric symptomatology. Critical new
research is needed to evaluate the impact of maternal
anxiety and depression due to the pandemic on the peri-
natal and postnatal outcomes, and long-term fetal neuro-
behavioral
consequences.
Intervention
should
be
prioritized to ensure optimal perinatal and infant mental
health. Obstetrician and mental health specialists can
prevent adverse outcomes by identifying problems early
and establishing comprehensive treatment plans for
Table : Multiple regressions assessing the relationship between sociodemographic and clinical characteristics and IDAS II scores of the
participants.
Predictors
Adjusted R
B
p-Value
% CI lower bound
% CI upper bound
Relationship with her husband
.
.
.
.
.
History of depression
.
.
−.
.
Profession
.
.
−.
.
Educational level
.
.
−.
.
İntended pregnancy
−.
.
−.
.
BMI
.
.
.
.
Marriage time
−.
.
−.
.
Time since the last delivery
.
.
−.
.
B, under standardized beta; SE, Standard error for the under standardized beta; P, probability value; CI, confidence intervals.
ap<.was considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Ayaz et al.: Psychological impact of COVID-19 infection on pregnant women
969

pregnant women in conditions such as extreme stress,
emergencies and conflict situations, and natural disasters.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our results pointed out that depressive and
anxiety symptoms were significantly increased during the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic compared with pre-pandemic sur-
veys. Effective screening strategies for depression and
anxiety symptoms during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
should be prioritized to allow for timely treatment. This
may improve the personal quality of life and daily func-
tioning of women who are bringing forth new life during a
“time of plague”.
Research funding: None declared.
Author
contributions:
All
authors
have
accepted
responsibility for the entire content of this manuscript
and approved its submission.
Competing interests: Authors state no conﬂict of interest.
Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all
individuals included in this study.
Ethical approval: Ethical approval was obtained from the
Clinical Studies Ethics Committee of Istanbul Medeniyet
University, Goztepe Training and Research Hospital,
(2020/0400).
References
1. Liao X, Wang B, Kang Y. Novel coronavirus infection during the
2019–2020 epidemic: preparing intensive care units—the
experience in Sichuan Province, China. Intensive Care Med 2020;
46:357–60.
2. Cucinotta D, Vanelli M. WHO declares COVID-19 a pandemic. Acta
Biomed 2020;91:157–60.
3. Cheng VC, Wong SC, To KK, Ho PL, Yuen KY. Preparedness and
proactive infection control measures against the emerging novel
coronavirus in China. J Hops Infect 2020;104:254–5.
4. Wang C, Pan R, Wan X, Tan Y, Xu L, Ho CS, et al. Immediate
psychological responses and associated factors during the initial
stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic among
the general population in China. Int J Environ Res Publ Health 2020;
17:1729.
5. NICE. Antenatal and postnatal mental health: clinical management
and service guidance. Clinical Guidelines. No: 192. London:
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK); 2014.
6. Alder J, Fink N, Bitzer J, Hösli I, Holzgreve W. Depression and
anxiety during pregnancy: a risk factor for obstetric, fetal, and
neonatal outcome? A critical review of the literature. J Matern
Neonatal Med 2007;20:189–209.
7. Kinsella MT, Monk C. Impact of maternal stress, depression, and
anxiety on fetal neurobehavioral development. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 2009;52:425–40.
8. Mosby, LG, Rasmussen, SA, Jamieson, DJ. 2009 pandemic
inﬂuenza A (H1H1) in pregnancy: a systematic review of the
literature. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;205:10–8.
9. Lam CM, Wong SF, Leung TN, Chow KM, Yu WC, Wong TY, et al. A
case-controlled study comparing clinical course and outcomes of
pregnant and non-pregnant women with severe acute respiratory
syndrome. BJOG An Int J Obstet Gynaecol 2004;111:771–4.
10. Ulusoy M, Sahin NH, Erkmen H. Turkish version of the Beck
anxiety inventory: psychometric properties. J Cognit Psychother;
New York 1998;12:163–72.
11. Irak M, Albayrak, EO. Psychometric properties of the expanded
version of the inventory of depression and anxiety symptoms in a
Turkish population. Psychol Rep 2020;123:517–45.
12. Brooks S, Weston D, Greenberg N. Psychological impact of
infectious disease outbreaks on pregnant women: rapid evidence
review. medRxiv in press; 2020.
13. Durankuş F, Aksu E. Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on anxiety
and depressive symptoms in pregnant women: a preliminary
study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2020;18:1–7.
14. Thapa SB, Mainali A, Schwank SE, Acharya G. Maternal mental
health in the time of the COVID‐19 pandemic. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 2020;99:817–18.
15. Wu Y, Zhang C, Liu H, Duan C, Li C, Fan J, et al. Perinatal depressive
and anxiety symptoms of pregnant women along with COVID-19
outbreak in China. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020;10:S0002-9378(20)
30534-2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2020.05.009.
16. Lebel C, MacKinnon A, Bagshawe M, Tomfohr-Madsen L,
Giesbrecht G. Elevated depression and anxiety among pregnant
individuals during the COVID-19 pandemic J Affect Disord 2020;
277:5–13.
17. Schubert KO, Air T, Clark SR, Grzeskowiak LE, Miller E, Dekker GA,
et al. Trajectories of anxiety and health related quality of life
during pregnancy. PloS One 2017;12:e0181149.
18. Da Costa D, Larouche J, Dritsa M, Brender W. Variations in stress
levels over the course of pregnancy: factors associated with
elevated hassles, state anxiety and pregnancy-speciﬁc stress. J
Psychosom Res 1999;4:609–21.
19. Kotabagi P, Fortune L, Essien S, Nauta M, Yoong W. Anxiety and
depression levels among pregnant women with COVID-19. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2020;99:953–954.
970
Ayaz et al.: Psychological impact of COVID-19 infection on pregnant women

