Eran Bornstein*, Moti Gulersen, Gregg Husk, Amos Grunebaum, Matthew J. Blitz,
Timothy J. Rafael, Burton L. Rochelson, Benjamin Schwartz, Michael Nimaroff
and Frank A. Chervenak
Early postpartum discharge during the COVID-19
pandemic
https://doi.org/10.1515/jpm-2020-0337
Received July 16, 2020; accepted August 11, 2020; published online
August 26, 2020
Abstract
Objectives: To report our experience with early post-
partum discharge to decrease hospital length of stay
among low-risk puerperium patients in a large obstet-
rical service during the COVID-19 pandemic in New
York.
Methods: Retrospective analysis of all uncomplicated
postpartum women in seven obstetrical units within a large
health system between December 8th, 2019 and June 20th,
2020. Women were stratified into two groups based on date
of delivery in relation to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic
in New York (Mid-March 2020); those delivering before or
during the COVID-19 pandemic. We compared hospital
length of stay, defined as time interval from delivery to
discharge in hours, between the two groups and correlated
it with the number of COVID-19 admissions to our hospi-
tals. Statistical analysis included use of Wilcoxon rank sum
test and Chi-squared test with significance defined as
p-value<0.05.
Results: Of the 11,770 patients included, 5,893 (50.1%)
delivered prior to and 5,877 (49.9%) delivered during
the
COVID-19
pandemic.
We
detected
substantial
shortening in postpartum hospital length of stay after
vaginal delivery (34 vs. 48 h, p≤0.0001) and cesarean
delivery (51 vs. 74 h, p≤0.0001) during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Conclusions: We report successful implementation of
early postpartum
discharge
for
low-risk patients
resulting in a significantly shorter hospital stay
during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York. The
impact of this strategy on resource utilization, pa-
tient satisfaction and adverse outcomes requires
further study.
Keywords: early discharge; length of stay; postpartum;
pregnancy; puerperium; SARS-CoV-2.
Introduction
Shortly after the World Health Organization declared the
outbreak of the severe acute respiratory distress syn-
drome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a global pandemic,
New York emerged as the epicenter of the United States
(US) [1]. As a result, hospitals within the New York
metropolitan area saw a sudden inﬂux of pregnant and
nonpregnant patients with complications related to the
novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) [2]. In the face of
this a public health emergency, signiﬁcant changes in
patient care were urgently needed in order to optimize
care for obstetrical patients, accommodate the high inﬂux
of
non-obstetrical
COVID-19
admissions
requiring
increased hospital resources, as well as to decrease the
potential exposure of both patients and medical staff in
the hospital [3–6].
We therefore implemented early discharge of low risk
puerperium patients following uncomplicated vaginal
and cesarean deliveries, with the intention of reducing
potential exposure of patients and medical staff to
SARS-CoV-2, facilitate lower patient census to decrease
crowding in postpartum units, and accommodate the
surging need for beds for nonpregnant patients hospi-
talized with COVID-19 [4]. Our objective in this study was
to demonstrate that implementation of early postpartum
discharge was successful in shortening hospital length of
stay (LOS) among low-risk obstetrical patients following
uncomplicated vaginal or caesarean delivery during the
COVID-19 pandemic in New York.
*Corresponding author: Eran Bornstein, MD, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Lenox Hill Hospital – Northwell Health, 100 East 77th St.,
New York, NY, 10075, USA, E-mail: ebornstein@northwell.edu
Moti Gulersen, Timothy J. Rafael, Burton L. Rochelson and Michael
Nimaroff, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, North Shore
University Hospital – Northwell Health, Manhasset, NY, USA
Gregg Husk, Amos Grunebaum and Frank A. Chervenak, Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lenox Hill Hospital – Northwell Health,
New York, NY, USA
Matthew J. Blitz and Benjamin Schwartz, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Southside Hospital – Northwell Health, Bay Shore,
NY, USA
J. Perinat. Med. 2020; 48(9): 1008–1012

Materials and methods
This was a retrospective, cross-sectional, cohort study of all low-risk
women who had uncomplicated live births in seven obstetrical units
within a large New York based health system including both tertiary
care and community hospitals.
Women who had an uncomplicated birth between December 8th,
2019 and June 20th, 2020 were eligible for inclusion. Exclusion criteria
included patients with either one or more of the following: operative
vaginal deliveries, pregnancy-related complications such as hyper-
tensive disorders of pregnancy, chorioamnionitis, uterine rupture, or
hemorrhage requiring transfusion of packed red blood cells, post-
partum transfer to another facility or discharge with home care, as well
as those with incomplete data regarding the mode of delivery or length
of stay. Women were stratified into two groups based on date of de-
livery in relation to the approximate initial time of the COVID-19
pandemic in New York; i.e., those who delivered before March 15th,
2020 (pre-COVID group) and those who delivered after March 15th,
2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic (COVID group). We compared
the hospital LOS, deﬁned as the interval from delivery to discharge
time in hours, between the two groups. Additionally, we correlated the
length of stay with the number of COVID-19 patients in our hospitals.
Baseline maternal characteristics such as age, body mass index
(BMI), race, ethnicity, parity, insurance type and gestational age at
delivery were compared between the pre-COVID and COVID groups.
Missing data in each categorical variable were excluded from the
statistical analysis involving such variable. Statistical analysis
included use of Wilcoxon rank sum test and Chi-squared test for
comparison of continuous and categorical variables. Statistical sig-
nificance was defined as p-value<0.05.
Of note, early postpartum discharge was implemented at Lenox
Hill Hospital on March 12th in anticipation of COVID-19 cases, fol-
lowed by similar practice in the other hospitals, while an official
system-wide policy for implementation was in effect on April 1st. Our
guidelines suggested discharge home the day after uncomplicated
vaginal deliveries and 2 days after uncomplicated cesarean deliveries
using maternal criteria checklists to assure that each patient had no
medical conditions or complications requiring longer stay [4]. Due to
pediatric considerations and newborn testing requirements, post-
partum discharge prior to 1 day was not feasible.
The Northwell Health Institutional Review Board approved this
study as minimal-risk research using data collected for routine clinical
practice and waived the requirement for informed consent.
Results
Our obstetrical units delivered 13,644 patients during the
study period. Patients with operative vaginal deliveries
(256), hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (1,159), cho-
rioamnionitis (190), uterine rupture (9), hemorrhage
requiring transfusion (183), transferred to another facility
or discharged with home care (153) and missing data (321)
were excluded. After applying our exclusion criteria,
11,770 deliveries comprised the study cohort and were
further analyzed. Of those, 5,893 (50.1) comprised the pre-
COVID group, and 5,877 (49.9) the COVID group. Maternal
baseline demographics such as age, body mass index,
ethnicity, parity, mode of delivery and gestational age at
delivery were similar between the two groups (Table 1).
Racial distribution was signiﬁcantly different with slightly
more white and less other/multiracial women during
COVID compared to pre-COVID (48.7 vs. 45.3%, and 22.8
vs. 24.2%, respectively p=0.04) (Table 1). There was also a
lower proportion of women with Medicaid insurance
during COVID compared to pre-COVID (33.5 vs. 36.5%,
p=0.001) (Table 1). While differences in race and insurance
type reached statistical signiﬁcance, these differences
were small, suggesting little, if any, clinical signiﬁcance
(Table 1). The distribution of postpartum median length of
stay among uncomplicated vaginal and caesarean de-
liveries during the study period is presented in Figure 1. A
marked decrease in the length of stay is noted from March
2020 onwards. Comparison of the primary outcome be-
tween the two groups indicates a statistically signiﬁcant
difference in the median length of stay following vaginal
delivery, shortened by 29% from average of 48 h (Inter
Quartile Range (IQR) 43 and 55) Pre-COVID to 34 h (IQR 28
Table : Characteristics of the study cohort at baseline.
Pre-COVID
(n=)
During-COVID
(n=)
p-
Value
Maternal age, year –
median (IQR)
(,)
(,)
.
BMI, kg/m– median
(IQR)
.
(.,.)
.
(.,.)
.
Race – n, %
White
,(.)
,(.)
.a
Black
(.)
(.)
Asian
(.)
(.)
Other/Multiracial
,(.)
,(.)
Unknowna
()
()
Ethnicity – n, %
Hispanic
,(.)
,()
.a
Non-Hispanic
,(.)
,(.)
Unknowna
(.)
(.)
Insurance type – n, %
Medicaid
,(.)
,(.)
.
Other/Unknown
,(.)
,(.)
Parity – n, %

,(.)
,(.)
.

,(.)
,(.)
≥
,(.)
,(.)
Mode of delivery – n, %
Vaginal delivery
,(.)
,(.)
.
Cesarean delivery
,(.)
,(.)
Gestational age at delivery,
weeks – median (IQR)
(.,)
(.,)
.
BMI, body mass index; IQR, interquartile range. aUnknown data were
not included in statistical analysis.
Bornstein et al.: Early postpartum discharge during the COVID-19 pandemic
1009

and 41) during COVID (p≤0.0001). Similarly, length of stay
following caesarean delivery shortened by 31%, from an
average of 74 h (IQR of 67 and 79) pre-COVID to 51 h (IQR of
46 and 58) during COVID (p≤0.0001) (Table 2). Data
regarding the median length of stay of uncomplicated
deliveries (caesarean and vaginal) throughout the study
period in the context of the total daily inpatient census of
COVID-19 patients at the seven study hospitals is pre-
sented in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. The decrease in
Figure 1: Distributions of length of stay.
The boxes show the 25th, 50th and 75th
percentile LOS for patients after
uncomplicated vaginal and cesarean
delivery each month during the study
period.
Table : Comparison of postpartum length of stay after vaginal and
cesarean delivery between the two groups.
Pre-COVID
(n=)
During COVID
(n=)
p-Value
Vaginal delivery,
hours – median (IQR)
(,)
(,) <.
Cesarean delivery,
hours – median (IQR)
(,)
(,) <.
Figure 2: Median length of stay for patients
after uncomplicated cesarean delivery.
This graph provides the pandemic context
by showing the total daily inpatient census
of COVID-19 patients at the seven study
hospitals.
1010
Bornstein et al.: Early postpartum discharge during the COVID-19 pandemic

postpartum length of stay after uncomplicated vaginal and
cesarean delivery coincided with the abrupt increase in
inpatient
census
of
COVID-19
patients
within
our
hospitals.
Discussion
Our study demonstrates a significant shortening in the
hospital length of stay during the COVID-19 pandemic for
low-risk puerperium patients following uncomplicated
vaginal or cesarean delivery in a large health system.
Specifically, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the median
postpartum LOS decreased by approximately 30%, with
LOS shortened by average of 14 h after vaginal delivery and
by 23 h following cesarean delivery compared to pre-
COVID. This strategy had several potential implications
that beneﬁted the patients, obstetrical service, and hospi-
tal. From an infection control perspective, decreasing the
length of stay for the patient, and thus her and baby,
reduced the potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2 for patients
and medical staff, as well as decreased overall crowding in
the postpartum units by allowing for more patients to uti-
lize single rooms when available. In addition, it increased
our ability to allocate resources such as hospital beds and
medical personnel from obstetrical units to non-obstetrical
services to accommodate for increasing hospital demands
by the surge of COVID-19 admissions.
Shortening postpartum length of stay in hospitals as a
strategy for cost containment and hospital bed availability
was conceptualized in the United States decades ago [7–
10]. Since then, however, robust clinical evidence and full
economic evaluations are lacking [11–16]. A recent sys-
tematic review investigating the impact of early post-
partum discharge after vaginal delivery demonstrated the
lack of support or evidence against the widespread use of
early discharge [11]. The authors reported no statistical
difference in maternal and neonatal morbidity and
maternal and neonatal readmission rates [11]. In the setting
of an infectious disease pandemic, and lack of high quality
evidence demonstrating risks associated with early post-
partum discharge, our strategy should be considered as a
reasonable option to reduce exposure and reallocating
hospital resources.
There are several strengths to this study. First, to our
knowledge, this is the first study investigating the feasi-
bility of a system-wide initiative to shorten puerperium
in-hospital length of stay by expediting early discharge
for
uncomplicated
deliveries
during
the
COVID-19
pandemic. Secondly, we present robust data that is
based on a population from the largest health system in
the northeast US, and includes over 30,000 annual de-
liveries from both tertiary care and community hospitals.
Moreover, this population is diverse in terms of maternal
demographic, racial, and ethnic characteristics and is
thus, generalizable.
Our study has a few limitations. There was hetero-
geneity in documentation of hemorrhage and blood
transfusion between the different hospitals, thus this
outcome was not available for all patients. However, it
was included for patients from three large sites, which
represented the majority (68%) of deliveries. In addition,
given the retrospective design with information based on
review of medical records, not all charts had complete
data available regarding pregnancy-related complica-
tions. Thus, it is likely that our population is not entirely
low-risk and includes some higher risk patients or
complicated deliveries.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that an early
postpartum
discharge
initiative
was
successful
in
significantly reducing hospital length of stay for puer-
perium women with uncomplicated vaginal and cesar-
ean deliveries. Further review of this strategy in terms of
patient safety, potential adverse outcomes, utilization
of healthcare resources, and patient satisfaction, should
be performed to further solidify the benefits of early
postpartum discharge. Nevertheless, during the un-
precedented time of the COVID-19 pandemic, this
enabled our institution to maintain the obstetrical ser-
vice active, while minimizing patient and medical
personnel exposure to SARS-CoV-2, and allowed for
better allocation of healthcare resources.
Figure 3: Median length of stay for patients after uncomplicated
vaginal delivery.
This graph provides the pandemic context by showing the total daily
inpatient census of COVID-19 patients at the seven study hospitals.
Bornstein et al.: Early postpartum discharge during the COVID-19 pandemic
1011

Acknowledgments: We would like to acknowledge the
contributions of the Northwell Health COVID-19 Research
Consortium.
Research funding: None declared.
Author
contributions:
All
authors
have
accepted
responsibility for the entire content of this manuscript
and approved its submission.
Competing interests: Authors state no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval: The Northwell Health Institutional
Review Board approved this study as
minimal-risk
research using data collected for routine clinical practice
and waived the requirement for informed consent.
References
1. McKinley J New York city region is now an epicenter of the
coronavirus pandemic. New York: The New York Times; 2020.
Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/
nyregion/Coronavirus-new-York-epicenter.html [Accessed 22 Mar
2020].
2. Tekbali A, Grunebaum A, Saraya A, McCullough L, Bornstein E,
Chervenak FA. Pregnant vs. nonpregnant severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 and coronavirus disease 2019 hospital
admissions: the ﬁrst 4 weeks in New York. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2020 Jul. [Epub ahead of print].
3. Chervenak FA, Grunebaum A, Bornstein E, Wasden S, Katz A,
Rochelson BL, et al. Expanding the concept of professional
integrity of obstetrics during a public health emergency. J Perinat
Med 2020;48:435–7.
4. Rochelson B, Nimaroff M, Combs A, Schwartz B, Meirowitz N, Vohra
N, et al. The care of pregnant women during the COVID-19
pandemic – response of a large health system in metropolitan New
York. J Perinat Med 2020;48:453–61.
5. Narang K, Ibirogba ER, Elrefaei A, Trad ATA, Theiler R, Nomura R,
et al. SARS-CoV-2 in pregnancy: a comprehensive summary of
current guidelines. J Clin Med 2020;9:1521.
6. Dashraath P, Wong JLJ, Lim MXK, Lim LM, Li S, Biswas A, et al.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020;222:521–31.
7. Fink AM. Early hospital discharge in maternal and newborn care. J
Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2011;40:149–56.
8. Brooten D, Roncoli M, Finkler S, Arnold L, Cohen A, Mennuti M. A
randomized trial of early hospital discharge and home follow-up
of women having cesarean birth. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:
832–8.
9. Strong TH, Brown WL, Brown WL, Curry CM. Experience with early
postcesarean hospital dismissal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:
116–9.
10. Brooten D, Kumar S, Brown LP, Butts P, Finkler SA, Bakewell-
Sachs S, et al. A randomized clinical trial of early hospital
discharge and home follow-up of very-low-birth-weight infants. N
Engl J Med 1986;315:934–9.
11. Benahmed N, San Miguel L, Devos C, Fairon N, Christiaens W.
Vaginal delivery: how does early hospital discharge affect mother
and child outcomes? A systematic literature review. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 2017;17:289.
12. Brown S, Small R, Faber B, Krastev A, Davis P. Early postnatal
discharge from hospital for healthy mothers and infants.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002:CD002958.
13. Sainz Bueno JA, Romano MR, Teruel RG, Benjumea AG, Palacin AF,
Gonzalez CA, et al. Early discharge from obstetrics-pediatrics at
the hospital de Valme, with domiciliary follow-up. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2005;193:714–26.
14. Kehila M, Magdoud K, Touhami O, Abouda HS, Jeridi S, Marzouk
SB. Early postpartum discharge: outcomes and risk factor
readmission. Pan Afr Med J 2016;24:189.
15. Brumﬁeld CG. Early postpartum discharge. Clin Obstet Gynecol
1998;41:611–25.
16. Grullon KE, Grimes DA. The safety of early postpartum discharge:
a review and critique. Obset Gynecol 1997;90:860–5.
1012
Bornstein et al.: Early postpartum discharge during the COVID-19 pandemic

