Journal of Gerontology: MEDICAL SCIENCES In the Public Domain
2002, Vol. 57A, No. 7, M428–M432
The Effects of Animal-Assisted Therapy
on Loneliness in an Elderly Population
in Long-Term Care Facilities
Marian R. Banks1 and William A. Banks2,3
1Nursing Service and 2GRECC, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri.
3Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Missouri.
Background. Animal-assisted therapy (AAT) is claimed to have a variety of benefits, but almost all published results
are anecdotal. We characterized the resident population in long-term care facilities desiring AAT and determined
whether AAT can objectively improve loneliness.
Methods. Of 62 residents, 45 met inclusion criteria for the study. These 45 residents were administered the Demo-
graphic and Pet History Questionnaire (DPHQ) and Version 3 of the UCLA Loneliness Scale (UCLA-LS). They were
then randomized into three groups (no AAT; AAT once/week; AAT three times/week; n (cid:2) 15/group) and retested with
the UCLA-LS near the end of the 6-week study.
Results. Use of the DPHQ showed residents volunteering for the study had a strong life-history of emotional inti-
macy with pets and wished that they currently had a pet. AAT was shown by analysis of covariance followed by pair-
wise comparison to have significantly reduced loneliness scores in comparison with the no AAT group.
Conclusions. The desire for AAT strongly correlates with previous pet ownership. AAT reduces loneliness in resi-
dents of long-term care facilities.
AS the geriatric population in the United States is the plant owners. Many other, mostly anecdotal, reports sug-
steadily increasing, many older Americans eventually gest a positive effect of association with animals (10–21).
come to live in some type of long-term care facility. These No randomized, prospective study has determined whether
facilities tend to restrict the resident’s personal belongings, AAT is effective in combating loneliness among elderly adults.
including the possession of pets. Loneliness is common in A simplified version of the UCLA Loneliness Scale was used
these facilities (1–3). in a retrospective analysis of patients already participating in
As discussed by Peplau and Perlman (4), predisposing resident pet or visitation pet programs (22). The study found
factors make individuals prone to loneliness, and precipitat- that nursing home patients who reported a high level of vol-
ing events can cause the onset of loneliness. The onset of untary contact with pets had lower scores for loneliness than
loneliness can be caused by a change in an individual’s ac- those who reported a low level of contact.
tual or desired need for social relationships. Physical sepa- Here, we used a questionnaire called the Demographic
ration from loved ones, such as when a family member and Pet History Questionnaire (DPHQ) to characterize indi-
moves to a new community, can precipitate loneliness (4). viduals in a long-term facility who volunteered to partici-
How can loneliness be decreased among elders in long- pate in AAT. Loneliness was measured with Version 3 of
term care facilities? One method that has been suggested is the University of California at Los Angeles Loneliness
the use of animal-assisted therapy (AAT), also known as Scale (UCLA-LS) before and after exposure to AAT.
pet-facilitated therapy (5). AAT has been used in other set-
tings to combat loneliness or to increase socialization. METHODS
Levinson (6) used the dog “Jingles” in psychotherapy ses- The research study was conducted in three long-term care
sions to enable children to better express their feelings. facilities in a city in southern Mississippi. Each of the facili-
Brickel (7) used cat mascots on a hospital ward of total-care ties is privately owned and is licensed to maintain between
elderly patients. Friedmann and colleagues (8) found pet 75 and 100 beds. The facilities receive private, Medicaid,
ownership to be the most robust of several factors that pre- and Medicare funds. The occupancy rate for each of the fa-
dicted survival in patients with a history of myocardial in- cilities is about 95%. Most of the rooms are semiprivate.
farction or angina. Mugford and M’Comisky (9) found that, The Institutional Review Board of the Louisiana State
among old-age pensioners living alone in an urban area in University Medical Center (LSUMC) and the three long-
Yorkshire, England, and randomly given either budgerigars term care facilities reviewed and approved the study.
(a type of bird) or begonias, the budgerigar owners were Power analysis based on pilot study data (not presented)
better off emotionally, had more friends, had more visitors, was used to estimate that 15 residents per group would be
and generally were more involved with the community than needed to achieve statistical significance for a clinically rel-
M428
LONELINESS AND AAT M429
Table 1. Demographic and Pet History Questionnaire Table 1. Demographic and Pet History Questionnaire (Continued)
In order for me to understand your needs, I would like to gather information 8. What kind of pet was it?
about your background. Please complete the following:
Bird Cat Dog
1. Your sex is
Fish Farm animal
Male Female
9. How attached were you to this pet?
2. Your marital status is
Very attached Attached
Single, never married
Not at all attached
Married
10. What was your pet’s name?
Divorced
Separated
11. What happened to your pet?
Widowed
Died Gave it away
3. Your age is years old.
Ran away Other
4. What is your race?
12. How much time did you spend with your pet as an adult?
African-American
Less than 1 hour per day More than 1 hour per day
White
13. Was the time spent with your pet in these activities
Hispanic
Enjoyable Not enjoyable
Native American
14. Did touching your pet
Asian
Make you feel good Make you feel bad
Other, please state
Make you feel nothing
5. What is the highest level that you finished in school?
15. When you felt bad, did your pet
Less than sixth grade
Help you feel better Help you feel worse
Less than ninth grade
It made no difference
High school graduate
16. When you had your pet, did you talk to your pet?
College, 1–3 years
Yes, all the time No, not at all
College graduate
Sometimes
Postgraduate
17. Were you able to confide in your pet?
6. Before you came to live in this long-term care facility, did you live
Yes, all the time No, not at all
in a home in an apartment on a farm
Sometimes
Pet History Questionnaire 18. How much does it bother you that you do not have a pet?
A lot A little Not at all
1. Did you have a pet when you were a child?
19. What are your reasons for not having pets now?
Yes No
I can’t keep a pet at this present place.
2. How old were you when you had your first pet?
I am no longer interested in pets.
years old
The staff at this facility may not like pets.
3. Did you grow up with pets?
20. If possible, would you like to have a pet at this place?
Yes No
Yes No
4. If YES, what kinds of pets did you have? (Please check off all that apply)
Birds Cats Dogs
Fish Farm animals
5. Did you have a pet when you lived in your home or apartment?
evant effect. Inclusion criteria were no cognitive impair-
Yes No
ment as stated by the physician in the history and physical
6. If the answer to number 5 is yes, how many years did you have the pet?
examination; no known history of psychiatric disorders or
years
diseases; no known allergies to dogs or cats as stated ver-
7. When did you first have responsibility for the care of the pet?
bally by the resident; a minimum of a sixth-grade education;
A. Childhood (1–12 years) ability to speak, read, and write English; a score greater than
B. Teenage (13–18 years) or equal to 24 on the Mini-Mental State Examination; com-
C. Young adulthood (19–30 years) pletion of the Demographic and Pet History Questionnaire;
D. Middle age (31–61 years) and a score greater than or equal to 30 on the UCLA-LS (a
score demonstrating a significant degree of loneliness).
E. Old age (62 and older)
Residents were recruited and screened until 45 were
F. Never
found who met all criteria. The number of residents re-
Continued cruited from each nursing home was 11, 16, and 18. Resi-
dents were randomly distributed into three groups con-
sisting of 15 residents each: the control group (no AAT),
M430 BANKS AND BANKS
AAT-1 (one 30-minute session of AAT/week), and AAT-3 ence for a particular pet was ascertained by a verbal re-
(three 30-minute sessions of AAT/week). Residents were sponse.
allowed to withdraw from the study at any time, but none The UCLA-LS is a 20-item questionnaire (24) with
chose to do so. scores ranging from 20 (never lonely) to 80 (always lonely).
The UCLA-LS has a high internal consistency with a coeffi-
Instruments cient alpha of 0.89 to 0.94 (24). The UCLA-LS was given
Three instruments were used: (a) the Mini-Mental State prior to the 6 weeks of AAT and again before the last ses-
Examination (23); (b) the Demographic and Pet History sion of AAT.
Questionnaire (DPHQ); and (c) the UCLA-LS (24). AAT consisted of bringing a dog into the long-term care
The DPHQ is a 26-item instrument questionnaire used by facilities. The guidelines for bringing the dog into the long-
us to elicit data on demography, the history of pet owner- term care facilities are identical to the Louisiana State Uni-
ship, the ages of pet ownership, the types of pets previously versity (LSU) School of Veterinary Medicine Tiger Hats
owned, the length of ownership, and the desire to have an Program. The dog was temperament tested and checked by
animal in the long-term care facility (Table 1). The prefer- a veterinarian to ensure it was free from all diseases and was
current on all the required vaccinations.
A pet attendant (an investigator or owner of the pet) ac-
companied the dog during the session, but did not interact
with either the dog or the resident during the AAT session.
Table 2. Selected Responses to the Demographic and Pet
The intervention took place in the individual’s room of the
History Questionnaire
long-term care facility, although walking the pet in the facil-
N/n % ity’s hallway was also allowed. If the resident’s room was
semiprivate, AAT was conducted when the roommate was
Age when resident had first pet
not in the room. In order to circumvent the socialization be-
5–8 43 95.5
18 1 2.2 tween the animal attendant and the individual receiving
42 1 2.2 AAT, their interaction was limited to a script read by the at-
Age when resident had responsibility for pet care tendant at the beginning of each AAT session. The dog al-
5–8 43 95.5 ways remained on a leash. The resident was allowed to fully
18 1 2.2
interact with the pet. Interactions included holding, strok-
42 1 2.2
ing, grooming, walking, talking to, and playing with the an-
Resident grew up with pets
imal. The same animal was used for the same resident for a
Yes 43 95.5
No 2 4.4 period of 6 weeks.
Time spent with the pet was enjoyable
Yes 45 100.0 Data Analysis
No 0 0.0 The demographic data are presented as descriptive statis-
Touching the pet made resident feel good
tics and profile the nursing home residents who elected to
Yes 45 100.0
participate in AAT.
No 0 0.0
A one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used
When residents felt bad, pets helped to make them feel better
Yes 45 100.0 to analyze the data with the pretest score as the covariant,
No 0 0.0 treatment (0, 1, and 3 sessions/week) as the independent
Animals that residents had as a child variable, and the post-test score as the dependent variable.
Dogs 38 84.4 Pairwise comparison was used to determine differences
Cats 5 11.1
among groups. The Statistical Package for the Social Sci-
Dogs and cats 2 4.4
ences (SPSS) was used for data analysis.
Degree of attachment to pet
Very attached 43 95.5
Attached 2 4.4 RESULTS
Remembers pet’s name 43 95.5 Sixty-two residents were interviewed for the full study.
Cannot remember pet’s name 2 4.4
Eight residents elected not to participate in AAT as they did
Resident talked to pet
not like dogs or cats, and nine residents did not meet the in-
All the time 41 91.1
clusion criteria. Of the remaining 45 residents, 80% were
Sometimes 4 8.8
Resident confided in pet women, 91% were white, 78% were widowed, 60% had less
All the time 44 97.7 than a 9th grade education, 31% had a high school or GED
Sometimes 1 2.2 diploma, 31% were older than 85 years, and 70.9% were
Reasons for not having a pet now: older than 75 years. Major medical diagnoses were cere-
I can’t keep a pet at this place 42 93.3
brovascular accident (CVA), diabetes mellitus (DM), hy-
The staff may not like pets 3 6.6
pertension (HTN), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
It bothers the residents that they do not have a pet now
Yes 45 100.0 (COPD), Parkinson’s disease, atrial fibrillation, hip frac-
No 0 0.0 ture, and severe osteoporosis.
Residents would like to have a pet at this facility Selected results of the DPHQ are given in Table 2. They
Yes 45 100.0 show a strong history of association with animals as pets,
No 0 0.0
usually dating from childhood. More than 95% had pets at
LONELINESS AND AAT M431
or before the age of 8 years and were responsible for the part of their emotional support system and, if given a
care of the pet. The majority (84.4%) had dogs as pets, and choice, would continue that relationship.
the remainder had either cats (5%) or cats and dogs (4.4%). The demographics of the residents in this study popula-
All answered questions that indicated that the pets were an tion were typical of long-term care facilities in general. The
intimate part of their lives, and all residents would have great majority of residents were women, widowed, and
liked to have a pet currently, but were prevented from doing older than 75 years of age. More than 31% were older than
so by the institution or other circumstances. 85. These results agree well with the 1996 U.S. Census,
Five residents (11.1%) volunteered that they would like which found that seniors between the ages of 76 and 90 ac-
to have a pet as a mascot at their facility. Of the eight resi- count for more than 50% of all residents living in long-term
dents who did not wish to participate in AAT, none ever had care facilities. The major medical diagnoses of the residents
pets as children or as adults. Two of these residents stated were also typical of such facilities. In these particular facili-
that they were scratched by cats when young and are fearful ties, the majority of residents did not have a high school ed-
of cats. ucation and were white.
AAT reduced loneliness in a statistically significant man- All but two residents who elected to participate in AAT
ner (Figure 1). The Levene test found no significant differ- had pets during childhood, whereas the other two did not
ences in variance among the groups and so indicated that have pets until later in life. Most of the individuals had re-
ANCOVA is an appropriate statistical test for these results: sponsibility for their pets early in life and formed strong
F(2,42) (cid:2) 1.56, p (cid:2) .223. The ANCOVA was significant, emotional bonds with them. The majority of the pets lived
F(2,44) (cid:2) 5.21, p (cid:2) .001, showing that there were statisti- outdoors rather than indoors. None of the eight residents
cally significant differences among the three groups. Pair- who chose not to participate in the study had pets during
wise comparisons showed that those differences were be- childhood. The results of the DPHQ clearly show that past
cause AAT reduced loneliness. There was no statistically life experiences are a major predictor of who desires pet
significant difference between the 1 and 3 AAT sessions per therapy and who does not.
week groups. One serendipitous finding of this study was the occur-
rence of spontaneous recollection by the residents. While
DISCUSSION visiting with the animal, the residents often spontaneously
The results of this study show that AAT can effectively began to talk to the animal about past events with their pets.
reduce the loneliness of residents in long-term care facilities For example, one resident spoke to the dog and asked if the
who wish to receive such therapy. This study found that a dog had gone hunting. She remembered fondly how her pet
large subpopulation of residents in these facilities have a dog would bring dead squirrels, rabbits, and opossums back
strong life-history of a relationship with pets as an intimate to her. She would then “fillet them and fry them in oil” and
eat them. Another resident remembered how her dog would
sit at her feet and keep her company. One male resident re-
flected on his hunting dogs and the pleasure he had derived
from hunting raccoons with his dogs.
We found that AAT, even one session of 30 minutes per
week, was effective in reducing loneliness to a statistically
significant degree. The mean UCLA-LS score of the resi-
dents not receiving AAT was almost 50, indicating a high
degree of loneliness. Even with therapy, scores were still
about 40. Increasing the sessions to three times per week did
not have a significant effect on further reducing loneliness,
but prolonging therapy beyond 6 weeks might. Availability
of a pet daily or on a per need basis may also increase the
effectiveness of AAT.
This study had several strengths that helped to negate
possible confounders. Residents were randomized, and the
results were analyzed by ANCOVA, which can correct for
any differences in the pretest scores that might have arisen
from insufficient randomization. A pretest/post-test design
with separate control and intervention groups was used. The
pretest/post-test design allows the change in any individual
to be measured, greatly strengthening statistical power. Any
Figure 1. Mean values for UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3) for
retesting effect would occur for the control as well as the
the three groups. Means are shown with their SE. *Indicates the lone-
liness score was significantly lower (p (cid:3) .05) in comparison with the treatment groups and so be negated.
control group. The two animal-assisted therapy (AAT) groups did An important feature of this study was that the population
not differ from each other; n (cid:2) 15/group. [The ANCOVA was signif- studied was self-selected. The results of the DPHQ and the
icant, F(2,44) (cid:2) 5.21, p (cid:2) .001, with an effect size (eta squared) of
responses of those individuals who declined to participate in
0.206 and an observed power of 0.810. The covariate was also signifi-
cant, F(1,41) (cid:2) 21.14, p (cid:2) .001 with an eta squared of 0.340 and an AAT show that the desire to associate with animals is a
observed power of 0.994]. quality-of-life issue generated from life experiences. As
M432 BANKS AND BANKS
such, it is likely that populations that are self-selected will 3. Hogstel MO. Geropsychiatric Nursing. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby
derive the greatest benefit from AAT. Year Book; 1995.
4. Peplau LA, Perlman D. Loneliness: A Source Book of Current Theory,
The patients studied here were cognitively intact.
Research and Therapy. New York: Wiley; 1982.
Whether similar results would be obtained in demented in-
5. Arkow P. Pet Therapy: A Study and Resource Guide for the Use of
dividuals is an important question. Companion Animals in Selected Therapies. Colorado Springs, CO:
A confounder in many studies of pet–human interactions The Humane Society of the Pikes Peak Region; 1992.
is that the pet can act as a catalyst for socialization or hu- 6. Levinson B. The dog as a “co-therapist.” Ment Hygiene. 1962;46:59–
65.
man–human interactions. In this study, AAT was adminis-
7. Brickel CM. The therapeutic role of cat mascots with a hospital-based
tered on an individual basis, and interactions between the geriatric population: a staff survey. Gerontologist. 1979;19:368–372.
therapist and the resident were minimized. Therefore, the 8. Friedmann E, Katcher AH, Lynch JJ, Thomas SA. Animal compan-
benefit found here with AAT is likely to be due to associat- ions and one-year survival of patients after discharge from a coronary
care unit. Public Health Rep. 1980;95:307–312.
ing with the pet.
9. Mugford RA, M’Comisky JG. Some recent work on the psychothera-
The study tested AAT for a graded response; that is, resi-
peutic value of cage birds with old people. In: Anderson RS, ed. Pets,
dents were exposed to AAT either once or three times a Animals, and Society. London: Baillier Tindall; 1975:54–65.
week. Use of such a graded response has several advan- 10. Blenner JL. The therapeutic functions of companion animals in infer-
tages. First, it is more difficult to achieve statistical signifi- tility. Holistic Nurs Pract. 1991;5:6–11.
11. Carmack BJ, Fila D. Animal-assisted therapy: a nursing intervention.
cance by chance in two treatment groups than in one. Sec-
Nurs Manage. 2001;20:96–101.
ond, this design gives an indication of how much AAT is 12. Carmack B. The role of companion animals for persons with AIDS/
needed to affect loneliness. The results show that AAT once HIV. Holistic Nurs Pract. 2001;5:24–32.
a week is as effective as three times a week. 13. Fila D. The significance of companion animals to a geriatric vascular
patient: a case study. Holistic Nurs Pract. 1991;5:11–16.
In summary, we found that the loneliness of self-selected
14. Francis G. The therapeutic use of pets. Nurs Outlook. 1981;29:369–
residents in long-term care facilities improved with AAT.
370.
These residents had a strong life-history of responsibility 15. Francis G. Here come the puppies: the power of the human-animal
and emotional attachment to pets, usually beginning in early bond. Holistic Nurs Pract. 1991;5:38–42.
childhood. These residents missed their pets and desired to 16. Frank SJ. The touch of love. J Gerontol Nurs. 1984;10:29–35.
17. Gammonley J, Yates J. Pet projects: animal-assisted therapy in nursing
have pets in their current environment. A single, 30-minute
homes. J Gerontol Nurs. 1991;17:12–15.
session of AAT per week for 6 weeks significantly reduced 18. Harris M, Gellin M. Pet therapy for the homebound elderly. Caring.
loneliness as measured by the UCLA-LS and was as effec- 1990;9:48–51.
tive as three sessions per week. The results show that AAT 19. Manor W. Alzheimer’s patients and their caregivers: the role of the
human-animal bond. Holistic Nurs Pract. 1991;5:32–37.
is effective in combating loneliness in long-term care facili-
20. Milligan J. The magic of Mandrake. Geriatr Nurs. 1986;7:307–309.
ties.
21. Weisberg J, Pack M. Hannah Katz: resident tabby. Geriatr Nurs. 1991;
12:117–118.
Acknowledgment 22. Calvert MM. Human-pet interaction and loneliness: a test of concepts
from Roy’s adaptation model. Nurs Sci Q. 1989;2:194–202.
Address correspondence to William A. Banks, VAMC (151), 915 N.
23. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-Mental State”: A prac-
Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63106. E-mail: bankswa@slu.edu
tical guide for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J
Psychiatr Res. 1975;12:189–198.
References 24. Russell DW. UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): reliability, validity,
1. Butler RN. Living alone. In: Abrams WB, Beers MH, Berkow R, and factor structure. J Pers Assess. 1996;66:20–40.
Fletcher AJ, eds. The Merck Manual of Geriatrics. 2nd ed. White-
house Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories; 1995:1374–1379.
2. Ebersole P, Hess P. Toward Healthy Aging. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: CV Received October 3, 2001
Mosby; 1990. Accepted December 10, 2001
