Animal-Assisted Therapy and
Loneliness in Nursing Homes: Use of
Robotic versus Living Dogs
Marian R. Banks, DNS, Lisa M. Willoughby, PhD, and William A. Banks, MD
Loneliness is a common problem in long-term care but not on “general attachment” or “people substi-
facilities (LTCF) and previous work has shown that tuting.”However,MLAPSmeasuresdidnotcorrelate
animal-assisted therapy (AAT) can to some degree with changes in loneliness, showing that attachment
reverseloneliness.Here,wecomparedtheabilityof wasnotthemechanismbywhichAATdecreaseslone-
alivingdog(Dog)andaroboticdog(AIBO)totreat liness. We conclude that interactive robotic dogs can
loneliness in elderly patients living in LTCF. In com- reduce loneliness in residents of LTCF and that resi-
parison with a control group not receiving AAT, dents become attached to these robots. However,
both the Dog and AIBO groups had statistically sig- level of attachment does not explain the decrease in
nificant improvements in their levels of loneliness. lonelinessassociatedwithAATconductedwitheither
As measured by a modified Lexington Attachment a living or robotic dog.(J Am Med Dir Assoc 2008; 9:
to Pets Scale (MLAPS), residents showed high levels 173–177)
of attachment to both the dog and AIBO. Subscale
analysis showed that the AIBO group scored lower Keywords: Animal-assisted therapy; robots; nursing
thanthelivingdogon“animalrights/animalwelfare” home; loneliness; attachment
Loneliness is a common problem frequently encountered themselves as lonely, regardless of objective assessments or
amongtheelderly1inlong-termcarefacilities(LTCF).Many outside opinions, are, in fact, lonely. Evaluation, therefore,
factors contribute to loneliness. The model of Peplau and mustrelyoninstrumentsliketheUniversityofCaliforniaLos
Perlman2 differentiates between predisposing factors that Angeles (UCLA) Loneliness scale5 that can ascertain the
makeindividualspronetolonelinessandprecipitatingevents individual’s perceptions.
thatcancausetheonsetofloneliness.Predisposingfactorsto One suggested method of decreasing loneliness in long-
loneliness include characteristics of the person (for example, term care facilities is the use of animal-assisted therapy
ashyindividualoronewholackssocialskills),characteristics (AAT), also termed pet therapy or pet-facilitated therapy.
of the situation, and general cultural attitudes. Precipitating Elderlywholivewithapetarelesslonelythanthosewhodo
events include the breakup of a relationship or moving to a not.6 Previous work has shown that AAT can reduce loneli-
new community. Precipitating events result in a mismatch nessinresidentsinLTCF.7–9Previousworkfoundthatvisits
between the individual’s social relations and the person’s as infrequent as once per week are effective in reducing
social needs or desires. A change in 1 of these 2 factors loneliness.8 Work has also shown that it is interaction with
without a corresponding change in the other can result in thedog,notincreasedsocializationamongtheresidents,that
loneliness. Those with major disruptions in their lives are accounts for the improvement in loneliness.9 As such, one-
pronetoloneliness.Women,regardlessofage,aremoreprone
on-one visits with an AAT animal are likely to be more
tolonelinessthanmen.3,4 Manypredisposingandprecipitat-
effective than group visits.
ing factors are extremely common in residents of LTCF.4
TheexactmechanismsbywhichAATresultsindecreased
Loneliness, unlike dementia or depression, essentially is a
loneliness are unclear. One hypothesis is that the human
subjective perception. In other words, those who perceive becomesattachedtotheAATanimal.7Attachmenthasbeen
defined as an emotional bond that supports a sense of close-
ness,well-being,andsecurity.10Supportingthis,Baunetal11
DivisionofGeriatrics,DepartmentofInternalMedicine,SaintLouisUniversity
foundthatrelaxationasassessedbydecreasingbloodpressure
SchoolofMedicine,St.Louis,MO(M.R.B.,W.A.B.);CenterforOutcomesRe-
search, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of was greater when one was petting a familiar dog than when
Medicine,St.Louis,MO(L.M.W.). one was petting an unfamiliar dog. Voith12 found that hu-
Theauthorshavenoconflictsofinterestregardingthisarticle. mans become attached to their pets and that 99% of pet
AddresscorrespondencetoWilliamA.Banks,MD,915N.GrandBoulevard, ownersconsiderthepettobeamemberofthefamily.When
St. Louis, MO 63106. E-mail: bankswa@slu.edu pet ownership and attachment are correlated with loneli-
Copyright©2008AmericanMedicalDirectorsAssociation ness7–9andhappiness,13onlyattachmentcorrelatedwithde-
DOI:10.1016/j.jamda.2007.11.007 pression.14 Of the several scales used to measure attachment
ORIGINALSTUDIES Banks,WilloughbyandBanks 173
topets,theonemostappropriatetonursinghomesisthatof
Johnson et al,15 termed the Lexington Attachment to Pets
Scale (LAPS). This is a 23-item questionnaire originally de-
signed for telephone interview and validated in community-
dwellingpetowners.Principalcomponentanalysishasshown3
orthogonal factors: “general attachment,” “people substitut-
ing,” and “animal rights/animal welfare.”
An interesting trend has been to use robotic dogs as pets.
This has occurred especially in Japan and other Western
countries among those who have lifestyles that make it diffi-
culttoattendtothebiologicalneedsoflivingdogs.Themost
investigatedroboticdogisAIBO(SonyCorporation,Tokyo,
Japan). Chat room analysis indicates that humans become
psychologically engaged with AIBO, with 79% ascribing es-
sences (presence of biological or animistic underpinning),
60% ascribing agency (presence of mental states such as
intentions, feelings, and psychological states), and 59% as-
cribingsocialstanding(engagementofAIBOincommunica-
tions, connections, and companionship) to their AIBOs.16
However, moral standing (worthy of moral regard or respon-
sibility, having rights, or deserving respect) was seldom as-
signedtoAIBO.InastudycomparingalivingdogandAIBO,
children 7–15 years of age were more interactive with the
living dog and ascribed higher levels of physical essences,
mental states, sociability, and moral standing to the living Fig.1. Aiboandaresidentofalong-termcarefacility.
dog.17 However, AIBO also achieved very high levels on
these scores. A study from Hamamatsu University18 found
thatAATwithAIBOimprovedlonelinessandotherhealth-
related quality of life measures.
beforeanysessionsofAATandthenagain(posttest)7weeks
Here,weaskedaseriesofquestionsinastudyofAATwith
later (control group) or during week 7 of the AAT sessions.
AIBO and a living dog in residents in a LTCF located in a
TworesidentseachdroppedoutoftheAIBOandDoggroups.
midwestern US metropolitan area: Does AAT with AIBO
The Lexington Attachment to Pets Scale (LAPS) was
decreaselonelinessand,ifso,howdoesthiscomparewiththat
modified (MLAPS) to be more appropriate to the LTCF
ofalivingdog?DoesattachmentoccurwithAIBOorwitha
setting. Specifically, the following changes were made: (1)
livingdogand,ifso,howdothesecompare?Doesthedecrease
Questions 1–23: All instances of “my pet” changed to “the
in loneliness correlate with measurable attachment to AIBO
pet”; (2) Question 17: “I play with my pet quite often” is
and a living dog?
omitted; (3) Question 22: “Owning” is changed to “Having”
and so reads “Having a pet adds to my happiness.” The
METHODS MLAPS was validated in its target population of community
Residents were interviewed at 3 LTCF in St. Louis, MO. dwellers by giving both it and the LAPS to 20 community-
Studies were approved by the IRB at Saint Louis University dwelling individuals. Possible scores for the MLAPS ranged
School of Medicine. Residents were excluded if they scored from 0 to 66. Three subscale scores (general attachment,
less than 24 on the the modified mini-mental status exam,19 people substitution, and animal rights/animal welfare) were
hadallergiestodogsorcats,scoredlessthan30ontheUCLA generated based on principal component analysis performed
lonelinessscale,orhadaknownhistoryofpsychiatricdisease
ontheLAPSbyJohnsonetal15whoscoredeachitemforthe
orAlzheimer’sdisease.Recruitedindividualswererandomized orthogonal factor for which it was most robustly associated.
toagroupthatreceivednoAAT(Control)ortogroupsthat Meansaregivenwiththeirstandarderrortermsandn.Two
receivedAATwithAIBO(AIBO)oralivingdog(Dog).The means were compared by Student’s t test and more than 2
AIBO used was a model 210A (Figure 1) with hearing means were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA)
and communication capabilities. The AAT groups received followed by Newman-Keuls range test. Correlation and re-
weekly visits lasting 30 minutes from either AIBO or the gressionanalyseswereperformedbytheleastsquaresmethod
living dog for 8 weeks. Sessions occurred in the resident’s using the Prism 4.0 statistical package (GraphPad, Inc., San
room and consisted of the resident sitting in his or her chair Diego, CA).
oruprightinbedwiththedogorAIBOnexttotheresident. Changes in the loneliness score (delta Loneliness) were
AIBOwaskeptstationaryinitsrechargingcradlenexttothe calculated by subtracting the posttest score from the pretest
resident, but not allowed to walk about. Residents in all 3 scoresothatapositivevalueindicatesimprovementinlone-
groups were given the UCLA loneliness scale (Version 3) liness and a negative value indicates increased loneliness.
174 Banks,WilloughbyandBanks JAMDA–March2008
RESULTS
There were no statistical differences among the pretest
UCLA loneliness scale scores for the Control (n (cid:1) 13),
AIBO (n (cid:1) 12), or Dog (n (cid:1) 13) groups. The mean loneli-
ness score was 45.9 (cid:2) 1.16 (n (cid:1) 38). The delta loneliness
scores are shown in Figure 2. ANOVA showed a statistical
difference among the groups (F(2, 35) (cid:1) 37.3, P (cid:3) .01).
Newman-KeulsposttestshowedthattheControlgroup(n(cid:1)
13) was statistically different from the AIBO (P (cid:3) .05, n (cid:1)
12) and the Dog (P (cid:3) .05, n (cid:1) 13) group, but there was no
statisticallysignificantdifferencebetweentheAIBOandDog
groups.Pretestlonelinessscorescorrelatedwithposttestscores
and with delta loneliness scores for control and combined
results, but not for Dog or AIBO alone. The correlation
between pretest and delta loneliness scores for combined
resultswasm(cid:1)0.437,i(cid:1)((cid:4)18.9),r(cid:1)0.459,n(cid:1)38,P(cid:3)
.005.
TheMLAPSandLAPSwerecomparedin20community-
dwellingindividuals(Figure3).ThePearsonr(cid:1)0.9937,the Fig.3. LAPSversusMLAPSasassessedincommunity-dwellingpet
r2 (cid:1) 0.9874, the slope correlating LAPS (x) to MLAPS (y) owners. A high degree of correlation between LAPS and MLAPS
indicatesthatthemodificationsdidnotaffectthevalidityofthe
was 1.01, and the intercept was ((cid:4)3.04).
scale.
The MLAPS showed significant attachment in both the
AIBO(47.2(cid:2)4.03,n(cid:1)12)andtheDog(55.0(cid:2)3.73,n(cid:1)
13) groups (Figure 3; maximum score 66). Student 2-tailed t
test showed no statistical difference between these 2 groups with P (cid:1) .058), but both groups still scored high out of a
(Figure 4). Subscale analyses showed no differences between maximum score of 15 (Figure 5).
the Dog and AIBO for scale 1 (general attachment: Dog: Figure 6 correlates the delta Loneliness scores with the
25.5(cid:2)1.4,AIBO:23.1(cid:2)1.6,maximalscore30)orscale2 MLAPSscores.Therewasnostatisticallysignificantcorrela-
(people substituting: Dog: 16.5 (cid:2) 1.7, AIBO: 13.4 (cid:2) 1.9, tion between these 2 parameters.
maximalscore21)withbothreceivinghighscores.Becauseof
DISCUSSION
previous work showing that AIBO is seldom ascribed moral
standing,16 we hypothesized a priori that AIBO would score Wefoundherethatelderlyresidentslivinginlong-term
lowerintheLAPSscale3(animalrights/animalwelfare)and care facilities who received scheduled AAT with either a
socomparedthesegroupswitha1-tailedttest.AIBO(10.3(cid:2) living or robotic dog were significantly less lonely than
0.91)scoredlowerthantheDog(12.6(cid:2)0.712)by1-tailedt those who did not receive AAT (Figure 2). We found no
test(t(cid:1)2.0,df(cid:1)23,P(cid:3).05;2-tailedshowedastrongtrend differencebetweentheeffectivenessofalivingandrobotic
Fig.2. EffectsofAATwitharoboticdog(AIBO)andalivingdog Fig.4. AttachmentasmeasuredbytheMLAPSinresidentsreceiv-
(Dog)onloneliness.AATwitheitherAIBOoralivingdogresulted ingAATwitheitherAIBOoralivingdog.Bothgroupsshowedhigh
insimilarimprovementsinlonelinesswhencomparedwithacon- levelsofattachmentthatwerenotstatisticallydifferentfromeach
trolgroup(P(cid:3).05)notreceivingAAT. other.
ORIGINALSTUDIES Banks,WilloughbyandBanks 175
dog in reducing loneliness. As in a previous study,8 we
foundacorrelationbetweenpretestandposttestloneliness
scores and between pretest and delta loneliness, indicating
that those who were most lonely improved the most. This
correlationexistedforthecontrolgroupaswell,indicating
that the most lonely who did not receive AAT became
increasingly lonely.
Previousworkhasshownthatenhancementofinteractions
among residents does not account for the AAT-associated
improvementsinloneliness.9Here,wetestedwhetherattach-
mentcouldunderlietheAATeffect.TheLAPSwasmodified
(MLAPS)tobemoreappropriateasindicatedinthemethods
section to the parameters of the study. The MLAPS was
validatedbycomparingMLAPSandLAPSscoresincommu-
nitydwellingindividualswhoownedpets,theoriginalpopu-
lation for which the LAPS was designed (Figure 3). This
comparison found a Pearson r in excess of 0.99, suggesting
that the MLAPS retained in original validity of the LAPS.
Residents scored high on attachment scales to both AIBO
andalivingdog(Figure4).Residentswhoreceivedtheliving
dog had an arithmetically higher level of attachment than Fig. 6. Relation between change in loneliness (Delta Loneliness)
andMLAPS.Therewasnocorrelationbetweenchangeinloneliness
those who received AIBO, but the difference was not statis-
andMLAPSforAIBO,thelivingdog,orthecombinedgroup.
ticallysignificant.Moreimportantly,attachmentasmeasured
bytheMLAPSdidnotcorrelatewiththechangeinloneliness
(Figure 6). The lack of correlation between delta loneliness
and MLAPS suggests that attachment to either AIBO or
the living dog does not account for their abilities to reduce Anecdotally, some residents and staff were initially reluc-
loneliness. tant to interact with AIBO; however, with exposure, this
Subscale analysis of MLAPS showed differences only in resistancelargelydissipated.Acceptanceofinteractiverobot-
scale3(Figure5),butnotinscales1and2.Scale3correlates ics suggests their widespread use in geriatric facilities is feasi-
withanimalrights/animalwelfareconcernsanditslowerscore ble. Robotics are increasingly being used for in-home moni-
is consistent with a previous analysis of an online chat room toring. We should note that AIBO was not used to its full
talkthatindicatesthatAIBOisseldomascribedmoralstand- capacity,butwaskeptinitsrechargingcradlesittingnextto
ing(worthyofmoralregardorresponsibility,havingrights,or theresident.Itwasnotallowedtowalkaroundanditsvoice
deserving respect). andfacerecognitionprogramswerenotusedtofullcapacity.
It is possible that if these options were used and if residents
wereassignedorgivenapersonalroboticdog,thenitseffects
might be further enhanced. In conclusion, this study found
thatinteractiveroboticdogsareeffectiveindecreasinglone-
linessinresidentsofLTCF,thatresidentsbecomeattachedto
boththeroboticandlivingdog,butthatattachmentdidnot
underlie the effect of AAT on loneliness. Robotic dogs may
be an option for those desiring pets or needing AAT in
circumstances where the needs of living animals cannot be
met.
REFERENCES
1. Russell DW, Cutrona CE. Loneliness and nursing home admission
amongruralolderadults.PsycholAging1997;12:574–589.
2. Peplau LA, Perlman D. Loneliness: A source book of current theory,
researchandtheory.NewYork:JohnWileyandSons,1982.
3. Holmen K, Ericsson K, Andersson L, Winblad B. Loneliness among
elderly people living in Stockholm: A population study. J Adv Nurs
1992;17:43–51.
4. PaunonenM,Haggman-LaitillaA.Lifesituationofagedhome-nursing
Fig.5. Subscaleanalysisfortheorthogonalfactorassociatedwith clients.JCommunityHealthNurs1990;7:167–178.
animalrights/animalwelfare.AIBOscoredlower(P(cid:3).05)thanthe 5. RusselDW.UCLAlonelinessscale(Version3):Reliability,validity,and
livingdog. factorstructure.JPersonalityAssessment1996;66:20–40.
176 Banks,WilloughbyandBanks JAMDA–March2008
6. GoldmeierJ.Petsorpeople:Anotherresearchnote.Gerontologist1986; with Companion Animals. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
26:203–206. Press,1983.p.303–319.
7. CalvertMM.Human-petinteractionandloneliness:Atestofconcepts 14. Garrity TF, Stallones L, Marx MB, Johnson TP. Pet ownership and
fromRoy’sadaptationmodel.NursSciQ1989;2:194–202. attachmentsupportivefactorsinthehealthoftheelderly.Anthrozoos
8. BanksMR,BanksWA.Theeffectsofanimal-assistedtherapyonlone- 1989;3:35–43.
linessinanelderlypopulationinlong-termcarefacilities.JGerontolA 15. JohnsonTP,GarrityTF,StallonesL.Psychometricevaluationofthe
BiolSciMedSci2002;57A:M428–M432. Lexington attachment to pets scale (LAPS). Anthrozoos 1992;5:
160–175.
9. Banks MR, Banks WA. The effects of group and individual animal-
16. FriedmanB,KahnPH,HagmanJ.Hardwarecompanions?Whatonline
assisted therapy on loneliness in residents of long-term care facilities.
AIBO discussion forums reveal about the human-robotic relationship
Anthrozoos2005;18:396–408.
ProceedingsofCHI2003;5:273–280.
10. Bowlby J. Attachment theory, separation anxiety, and mourning. In:
17. Melson GF, Kahn PH, Beck AM, Friedman B, Roberts T, Garrett E.
ArietiS,ed.AmericanHandbookofPsychiatry.NewYork:BasicBooks,
RobotsasDogs?Children’sinteractionswiththeroboticdogAIBOand
1974.p.292–309.
aliveAustralianshephard.ProceedingsofCHI2005;1649–1652.
11. BaunMM,BergstromN,LangstonNF,ThomaL.Physiologicaleffectsof
18. KanamoriM,SuzukiM,TanakaM.[Maintenanceandimprovementof
human/companionanimalbonding.NursRes1984;33:126–129. quality of life among elderly patients using a pet-type robot.] Nippon
12. VoithVL.Attachmentofpeopletocompanionanimals.VetClinNorth RonenIggakkaiZasshi2002;39:214–218.Japanese.
Am1985;15:289–295. 19. FolsteinMF,FolsteinSE,McHughPR.Mini-MentalState:Apractical
13. Ory MG, Goldberg EL. Pet possessions and life satisfaction in elderly guideforgradingthecognitivestateofpatientsfortheclinician.JPsy-
women.In:KatcherAH,BeckAM,eds.NewPerspectivesonOurLives chiatrRes1975;12:189–198.
ORIGINALSTUDIES Banks,WilloughbyandBanks 177
