Health Technology Assessment 2008;Vol. 12: No. 4
Does befriending by trained lay workers
improve psychological well-being and
quality of life for carers of people
with dementia, and at what cost?
A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth, L Shepstone, E Wilson,
M Thalanany, M Mugford and F Poland
Feedback
The HTA Programme and the authors would like to know
your views about this report.
The Correspondence Page on the HTA website
(http://www.hta.ac.uk) is a convenient way to publish
your comments. If you prefer, you can send your comments
to the address below, telling us whether you would like
us to transfer them to the website.
We look forward to hearing from you.
March 2008
The National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment, HTA
Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood, Health Technology Assessment
University of Southampton,
NHS R&D HTA Programme
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
www.hta.ac.uk
Fax: +44 (0) 23 8059 5639 Email: hta@hta.ac.uk
http://www.hta.ac.uk ISSN 1366-5278
Health
Technology
Assessment
2008;Vol.
12:
No.
4
Psychological
well-being
and
quality
of
life
for
carers
of
people
with
dementia
HTA
How to obtain copies of this and other HTA Programme reports.
An electronic version of this publication, in Adobe Acrobat format, is available for downloading free of
charge for personal use from the HTA website (http://www.hta.ac.uk). A fully searchable CD-ROM is
also available (see below).
Printed copies of HTA monographs cost £20 each (post and packing free in the UK) to both public and
private sector purchasers from our Despatch Agents.
Non-UK purchasers will have to pay a small fee for post and packing. For European countries the cost is
£2 per monograph and for the rest of the world £3 per monograph.
You can order HTA monographs from our Despatch Agents:
– fax (with credit card or official purchase order)
– post (with credit card or official purchase order or cheque)
– phone during office hours (credit card only).
Additionally the HTA website allows you either to pay securely by credit card or to print out your
order and then post or fax it.
Contact details are as follows:
HTA Despatch Email: orders@hta.ac.uk
c/o Direct Mail Works Ltd Tel: 02392 492 000
4 Oakwood Business Centre Fax: 02392 478 555
Downley, HAVANT PO9 2NP, UK Fax from outside the UK: +44 2392 478 555
NHS libraries can subscribe free of charge. Public libraries can subscribe at a very reduced cost of
£100 for each volume (normally comprising 30–40 titles). The commercial subscription rate is £300
per volume. Please see our website for details. Subscriptions can only be purchased for the current or
forthcoming volume.
Payment methods
Paying by cheque
If you pay by cheque, the cheque must be in pounds sterling, made payable to Direct Mail Works Ltd
and drawn on a bank with a UK address.
Paying by credit card
The following cardsare accepted by phone, fax, post or via the website ordering pages: Delta, Eurocard,
Mastercard, Solo, Switch and Visa. We advise against sending credit card details in a plain email.
Paying by official purchase order
You can post or fax these, but they must be from public bodies (i.e. NHS or universities) within the UK.
We cannot at present accept purchase orders from commercial companies or from outside the UK.
How do I get a copy of HTA on CD?
Please use the form on the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk/htacd.htm). Or contact Direct Mail Works (see
contact details above) by email, post, fax or phone. HTA on CD is currently free of charge worldwide.
The website also provides information about the HTA Programme and lists the membership of the various
committees.
Does befriending by trained lay workers
improve psychological well-being and
quality of life for carers of people
with dementia, and at what cost?
A randomised controlled trial
1* 2 3
G Charlesworth, L Shepstone, E Wilson,
3 3 4
M Thalanany, M Mugford and F Poland
1 Centre for Behavioural and Social Sciences in Medicine, University
College London, UK, and North East London Mental Health Trust, UK
2 School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East
Anglia, UK
3 Health Economics Group, School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice,
University of East Anglia, UK
4 School of Allied Health Professions, University of East Anglia, UK
* Corresponding author
Declared competing interests of authors:none
Published March 2008
This report should be referenced as follows:
Charlesworth G, Shepstone L, Wilson E, Thalanany M, Mugford M, Poland F. Does
befriending by trained lay workers improve psychological well-being and quality of life for
carers of people with dementia, and at what cost? A randomised controlled trial. Health
Technol Assess2008;12(4).
Health Technology Assessmentis indexed and abstracted in Index Medicus/MEDLINE,
Excerpta Medica/EMBASE and Science Citation Index Expanded (SciSearch®)and
Current Contents®/Clinical Medicine.
NIHR Health Technology Assessment Programme
The Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Programme, part of the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR), was set up in 1993. It produces high-quality research information on the
effectiveness, costs and broader impact of health technologies for those who use, manage and provide
care in the NHS. ‘Health technologies’ are broadly defined as all interventions used to promote health,
prevent and treat disease, and improve rehabilitation and long-term care.
The research findings from the HTA Programme directly influence decision-making bodies such as the
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the National Screening Committee
(NSC). HTA findings also help to improve the quality of clinical practice in the NHS indirectly in that
they form a key component of the ‘National Knowledge Service’.
The HTA Programme is needs-led in that it fills gaps in the evidence needed by the NHS. There are
three routes to the start of projects.
First is the commissioned route. Suggestions for research are actively sought from people working in the
NHS, the public and consumer groups and professional bodies such as royal colleges and NHS trusts.
These suggestions are carefully prioritised by panels of independent experts (including NHS service
users). The HTA Programme then commissions the research by competitive tender.
Secondly, the HTA Programme provides grants for clinical trials for researchers who identify research
questions. These are assessed for importance to patients and the NHS, and scientific rigour.
Thirdly, through its Technology Assessment Report (TAR) call-off contract, the HTA Programme
commissions bespoke reports, principally for NICE, but also for other policy-makers. TARs bring
together evidence on the value of specific technologies.
Some HTA research projects, including TARs, may take only months, others need several years. They can
cost from as little as £40,000 to over £1 million, and may involve synthesising existing evidence,
undertaking a trial, or other research collecting new data to answer a research problem.
The final reports from HTA projects are peer-reviewed by a number of independent expert referees
before publication in the widely read journal series Health Technology Assessment.
Criteria for inclusion in the HTA journal series
Reports are published in the HTA journal series if (1) they have resulted from work for the HTA
Programme, and (2) they are of a sufficiently high scientific quality as assessed by the referees and editors.
Reviews in Health Technology Assessment are termed ‘systematic’ when the account of the search,
appraisal and synthesis methods (to minimise biases and random errors) would, in theory, permit the
replication of the review by others.
The research reported in this issue of the journal was commissioned by the HTA Programme as project
number 99/34/07. The contractual start date was in January 2002. The draft report began editorial review
in October 2006 and was accepted for publication in August 2007. As the funder, by devising a
commissioning brief, the HTA Programme specified the research question and study design. The authors
have been wholly responsible for all data collection, analysis and interpretation, and for writing up their
work. The HTA editors and publisher have tried to ensure the accuracy of the authors’ report and would
like to thank the referees for their constructive comments on the draft document. However, they do not
accept liability for damages or losses arising from material published in this report.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
HTA Programme or the Department of Health.
Editor-in-Chief: Professor Tom Walley
Series Editors: Dr Aileen Clarke, Dr Peter Davidson, Dr Chris Hyde,
Dr John Powell, Dr Rob Riemsma and Professor Ken Stein
Programme Managers: Sarah Llewellyn Lloyd, Stephen Lemon, Kate Rodger,
Stephanie Russell and Pauline Swinburne
ISSN 1366-5278
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008
This monograph may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and may be included in professional journals provided
that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising.
Applications for commercial reproduction should be addressed to: NCCHTA, Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
Published by Gray Publishing, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on behalf of NCCHTA.
Printed on acid-free paper in the UK by St Edmundsbury Press Ltd, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. G
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Abstract
Does befriending by trained lay workers improve psychological
well-being and quality of life for carers of people with dementia,
and at what cost? A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth,1* L Shepstone,2 E Wilson,3 M Thalanany,3 M Mugford3
and F Poland4
1Centre for Behavioural and Social Sciences in Medicine, University College London, UK, and
North East London Mental Health Trust, UK
2School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East Anglia, UK
3Health Economics Group, School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, University of East Anglia, UK
4School of Allied Health Professions, University of East Anglia, UK
* Corresponding author
Objectives: To determine whether a social support Results: A total of 236 carers were randomised into
intervention (access to an employed befriending the trial (116 intervention; 120 control). At final
facilitator in addition to usual care) is effective follow-up, 190 carers (93 intervention; 97 control) were
compared with usual care alone. Also to document still involved in the trial (19% attrition). There was no
direct and indirect costs, and establish incremental evidence of effectiveness or cost-effectiveness from the
cost-effectiveness. primary analyses on the intention-to-treat population.
Design: The Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA) The mean incremental cost per incremental QALY
trial was a cost-effectiveness randomised controlled gained was in excess of £100,000, with only a 42.2%
trial. Data on well-being and resource use were probability of being below £30,000 per QALY gained.
collected through interviews with participants at Where care-recipient QALYs were included, mean
baseline and at 6, 15 and 24 months. incremental cost per incremental QALY gained was
Setting: This research was carried out in the English £26,848, with a 51.4% probability of being below
counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the London £30,000 per QALY gained. Only 60 carers (52%) took
Borough of Havering. It was a community-based study. up the offer of being matched with a trained lay
Participants: Participants were family carers who befriender, and of these only 37 (32%) were befriended
were cohabiting with, or providing at least 20 hours’ for 6 months or more. A subgroup analysis of controls
care per week for, a community-dwelling relative with versus those befriended for 6 months or more found a
a primary progressive dementia. reduction in HADS-depression scores that approached
Interventions: The intervention was ‘access to a statistical significance (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84).
befriender facilitator’ (BF). BFs, based with charitable/ Conclusions: ‘Access to a befriender facilitator’ is
voluntary-sector organisations, were responsible for neither an effective nor a cost-effective intervention in
local befriending schemes, including recruitment, the support of carers of people with dementia,
screening, training and ongoing support of befriending although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness for
volunteers, and for matching carers with befrienders. the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In common
The role of befrienders was to provide emotional with many services for carers of people with dementia,
support for carers. The target duration for befriending uptake of befriending services was not high. However,
relationships was 6 months or more. the small number of carers who engaged with
Main outcome measures: Depression was measured befrienders for 6 months or more reported a reduction
by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) in scores on HADS depression that approached
at 15 months postrandomisation. The health-related statistical significance compared with controls
quality of life scale EQ-5D (EuroQol 5 Dimensions) was (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84). While providing only weak
used to derive utilities for the calculation of quality- evidence of any beneficial effect, further research into
adjusted life-years (QALYs). befriending interventions for carers is warranted. iii
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Contents
Glossary and list of abbreviations ............. vii Baseline characteristics of randomised
carers .......................................................... 21
Executive summary .................................... ix Main outcomes ........................................... 24
1 Introduction ............................................... 1 5 Results: overall costs and economic
Background ................................................ 1 analysis ....................................................... 31
Social consequences of caring .................... 1 Costs ........................................................... 31
Support provision ....................................... 1 Quality-adjusted life-years .......................... 31
Psychosocial interventions .......................... 2 Cost–utility analysis .................................... 31
Cost-effectiveness of support for Alternative scenarios .................................. 32
carers .......................................................... 3 Summary of cost-effectiveness analyses ..... 35
Economic methods in carer intervention
evaluations .................................................. 3 6 Discussion and conclusions ........................ 37
Summary .................................................... 3 Main findings ............................................. 37
Aim and objectives ..................................... 3 Implications for healthcare ........................ 37
Factors to consider in carer support
2 Methods ..................................................... 5 research ...................................................... 39
Design ........................................................ 5 Recommendations for future research ....... 41
Ethics approval ........................................... 5 Conclusions ................................................ 42
Intervention and control conditions .......... 5
Study population ........................................ 6 Acknowledgements .................................... 43
Randomisation ........................................... 7
Measures ..................................................... 8 References .................................................. 45
Data-collection procedures ........................ 10
Data checking ............................................. 11 Appendix 1 Organisations involved in
Data analysis ............................................... 11 the trial ....................................................... 49
Economic analyses ...................................... 11
Summary of changes to protocol ............... 12 Appendix 2 Unit costs and sources ........... 51
3 Intervention ............................................... 13 Appendix 3 Resource-use quantities at
Definition of befriending ........................... 13 15months (complete case analysis) ........... 55
Development of the BECCA befriending
schemes ...................................................... 13 Appendix 4 Detailed breakdown of
Befriending scheme procedures ................ 14 per-carer/person with dementia costs at
Befriender training programme ................ 16 15 months .................................................. 57
Costing of befriending services .................. 18
Protocol changes relating to Health Technology Assessment reports
intervention ................................................ 18 published to date ....................................... 59
4 Results: characteristics and outcomes ...... 19 Health Technology Assessment
Participant flow .......................................... 19 Programme ................................................ 75
v

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Glossary and list of abbreviations
Technical terms and abbreviations are used throughout this report. The meaning is usually clear from
the context, but a glossary is provided for the non-specialist reader. In some cases, usage differs in the
literature, but the term has a constant meaning throughout this review.
Glossary
Befriender facilitator In the context of this Perspective A viewpoint for conducting a
study, a voluntary sector employee with the cost-effectiveness analysis. Four perspectives
responsibility of recruiting, screening, training, are used in this analysis. The societal
matching and supporting volunteer perspective incorporates all costs and all
befrienders. health effects regardless of who incurs the costs
and who obtains the effects. Thus, a societal
Befriending In the context of this study, perspective in healthcare means considering
befriending refers to one-to-one emotional costs that fall upon health services, other
support by a trained lay volunteer. public sector budgets such as provision of
social support, cost of lost productivity as well
Bootstrapping Statistical method for as the costs that fall upon patients and
examining uncertainty. It is a non-parametric caregivers. The statutory sector perspective
simulation method used in economic incorporates costs incurred by the health
evaluation and is particularly useful when service and other public sector budgets
underlying data have a skewed distribution. (e.g. social services) alone. The voluntary
sector perspective incorporates costs incurred
Carers Carers are defined in this report as by the voluntary sector alone. The household
family members providing care for a person sector perspective incorporates costs
with a primary progressive dementia. incurred by private households and
individuals alone.
Direct costs The costs of providing the
intervention, primary and secondary care Quality adjusted life-years (QALYs) A metric
resource use, out-of-pocket expenses and travel that combines both the quality and quantity of
costs incurred by patients or carers, and family life gained from an intervention. One QALY is
care costs. defined as 1 year of perfect health, or 2 years
at ‘50% of perfect health’, etc.
Discounting A method by which future costs
and benefits are converted to present values. Resources In economics, ‘resources’ refer to
all the factors of production (usually simplified
Indirect costs In the context of this study, to labour and capital) that are used to produce
the value of time spent in the caring role. goods and services. In health programmes,
resources include medical and nursing staff
Opportunity cost The benefit that could time, hospitals, medical equipment and drugs,
have been obtained from the next best use of and patients’ time.
resources. The opportunity cost of an action is
the value of the forgone alternative action. Sensitivity analysis A technique used in
Opportunity costs arise because the resources economic analysis to test whether uncertainty
available to meet wants are finite, so that all in the values of the main variables is sufficient
wants cannot be satisfied. to affect the results of the analysis.
vii
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Glossary and list of abbreviations
List of abbreviations
ACH Age Concern Havering ITT intention-to-treat
ACS Age Concern Suffolk MCBS Mutual Communal Behaviours
Scale
BECCA Befriending and Costs of Caring
MREC multisite research ethics committee
BF befriender facilitator
MSPSS Multidimensional Scale of
BL baseline Perceived Social Support
CADI Carers Assessment of Difficulties n number who selected a certain
Index response
CAS Caregiver Activity Schedule N total number who answered a given
question
CBT cognitive behavioural therapy
NVS Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary
CEAC cost-effectiveness acceptability Services
curve
ONS Office for National Statistics
CI confidence interval
PANAS Positive and Negative Affect
CMHT community mental health team Schedule
COPE Coping Orientation for Problem PANT Practitioner Assessment of Network
Experience Type
CPN community psychiatric nurse PSSRU Personal Social Services Research
Unit
CRB Criminal Records Bureau
PwD person (people) with dementia
CSRI Client Service Receipt Inventory
QALY quality-adjusted life-year
CUA cost–utility analysis
RCT randomised controlled trial
EQ-5D EuroQol 5 Dimensions
RUD Resource Utilization in Dementia
FU follow-up
SPSS Statistical Package for the Social
GLM generalised linear model Sciences
HADS Hospital Anxiety and Depression VAS visual analogue scale
Scale
ICER incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
All abbreviations that have been used in this report are listed here unless the abbreviation is well known (e.g. NHS), or
it has been used only once, or it is a non-standard abbreviation used only in figures/tables/appendices in which case
the abbreviation is defined in the figure legend or at the end of the table.
viii
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Executive summary
Objectives for local befriending schemes, including
recruitment, screening, training and ongoing
The aims of this trial were two-fold. First, to support of befriending volunteers, and for
determine whether a social support intervention matching carers with befrienders. The role
(access to an employed befriending facilitator in of befrienders was to provide emotional
addition to usual care) is effective compared with support for carers. The target duration for
usual care alone, through randomly allocating befriending relationships was 6 months
carers of people with dementia to one of two or more.
groups (intervention versus usual care control)
and follow-up for 2 years postrandomisation. Main outcome measures
Secondly, to document direct and indirect costs The main outcome was depression as measured by
in both the intervention and control group, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
and establish incremental cost-effectiveness, (HADS) at 15 months postrandomisation.
calculating the costs from the perspectives of the Secondary measures were anxiety, positive affect,
statutory and voluntary sectors and from a societal loneliness and global health. The health-related
perspective. quality of life scale EQ-5D (EuroQol 5
Dimensions) was used to derive utilities for the
calculation of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).
Methods Resource use and other data related to costs were
collected using a semi-structured interview based
Design on the Resource Utilisation in Dementia
The Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA) questionnaire and Client Service Receipt
trial was a cost-effectiveness randomised Inventory. Measures of burden, social support and
controlled trial that compared outcomes and coping were also used.
associated costs for family carers offered ‘access to
befriending facilitator’ with those of control carers
receiving standard services only. Data on well- Results
being and resource use were collected through
interviews with participants at baseline and at Of 316 people expressing interest in participating,
three follow-up interviews (6, 15 and 24 months). 236 (75%) were randomised into the trial (116
The main end-point was at 15 months intervention; 120 control). At final follow-up
postrandomisation, and for the economic analyses (24months postrandomisation) 190 carers (93
the perspective in the base case is society. intervention; 97 control) were still involved in the
trial (19% attrition). There was no evidence of
Setting effectiveness or cost-effectiveness from the primary
This research was carried out in the English analyses on the intention-to-treat population. The
counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the London mean incremental cost per incremental QALY
Borough of Havering. It was a community-based gained was in excess of £100,000, with only a
study. 42.2% probability of being below £30,000 per
QALY gained. Analyses on secondary outcomes
Participants were similarly negative, and there was no evidence
Participants were family carers who were of cost-effectiveness in the alternative scenarios
cohabiting with, or providing at least 20hours’ considered except where care-recipient QALYs
care per week for, a community-dwelling relative were included. In this case mean incremental cost
with a primary progressive dementia. per incremental QALY gained was £26,848, with a
51.4% probability of being below £30,000 per
Intervention QALY gained. Only 60 carers (52%) took up the
The intervention was ‘access to a befriender offer of being matched with a trained lay
facilitator’ (BF). BFs, based with charitable/ befriender, and of these only 37 (32%) were
voluntary-sector organisations, were responsible befriended for 6 months or more. A subgroup ix
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Executive summary
analysis of controls versus those befriended for Implications for healthcare
6months or more found a reduction in HADS- Volunteers can be safely involved in the provision
depression scores that approached statistical of emotional support for carers. When considering
significance (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84). commissioning support services for carers of
people with dementia, befriending schemes alone
should not be commissioned, and short-term
Conclusions contracts should not be considered.
Recommendations for further research
‘Access to a befriender facilitator’ is neither an
effective nor a cost-effective intervention in the ● Additional research is required to establish: the
support of carers of people with dementia, characteristics of carers most likely to take up
although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness befriending; befriender–carer characteristics of
for the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In successful matches; interplay between statutory
common with many services for carers of people and voluntary support services and support
with dementia, uptake of befriending services was from families; carer well-being in the context of
not high. However, the small number of carers receipt of befriending; and placement of the
who engaged with befrienders for 6 months or care recipient in long-term residential or
more reported a reduction in scores on HADS nursing care.
depression that approached statistical significance ● Future cost-effectiveness evaluations of carer
compared with controls (95% CI –0.09 to 2.84). support should include outcomes for both the
While providing only weak evidence of any carer and care recipient.
beneficial effect, further research into befriending ● Further work is required on economic methods
interventions for carers is warranted. for carer intervention research.
x
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 1
Introduction
Background carers who experience caring as stressful are at
higher risk of mortality than non-carers.8
This study was a response to a call for bids from
the NHS Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
Programme for research into ‘support for carers of Social consequences of caring
people with dementia’. The call was made in the
context of increased recognition of the needs of The association between social support and well-
carers and the associated UK government being is well established for both physical and
legislation and initiatives such as the Carers mental health,9,10 with low levels of support being
(Recognition and Services) Act 19951 and the associated with poorer health. Family carers can
National Strategy for Carers,2 and in the National experience a reduction in their social network
Service Frameworks for Mental Health3 and for owing to a lack of opportunities to socialise and/or
Older People.4 The needs of carers of people with the stigma associated with illness. Carers report
dementia were highlighted as a particular less social interaction and fewer friendships.11,12
concern, with there being perceived deficiencies in The emotional and physical burden of caring can
the evidence base, especially in terms of evidence result in family role conflicts that may reduce the
on cost-effectiveness. amount of emotional support available. A carer’s
family and friends may distance themselves
It is estimated that there are around 6.8 million physically and/or psychologically from the carer
adult carers in the UK, with up to 1.5 million and care recipient, contributing to a reduction in
people involved in caring for a relative or friend social support for the carer.11–13
with a mental illness or some form of dementia.5
Dementia is an umbrella term encompassing a Given the commitment involved in caring for a
broad range of cognitive losses, usually including relative with increasing levels of cognitive
multiple deficits in aspects of memory, expressive impairment and dependency, carers of people
and/or receptive language, perception and with dementia may be particularly at risk of social
executive function. Dementia is the consequence isolation. Carers who experience social isolation are
of a large number of progressive brain disorders, more vulnerable to the negative impacts of caring.13
the most common being Alzheimer’s disease and
vascular dementias. The prevalence of dementia Social isolation is a risk factor for loneliness, and
depends greatly on the age structure of the loneliness has been associated with increased
population and for UK the prevalence rates are mortality and morbidity, including psychiatric
2% in the 65–70 age group; 5% in the 70–80 age morbidity. Protective factors are thought to include
group and 20% in the over-80 age group companionship14 and long-standing friendships,
(Alzheimer’s Society, UK). It is estimated that especially for women, and where the friendship is
there are currently over 750,000 people in the UK based on choice and not obligation.15
with dementia,4 which may increase to 840,000 by
2026 and 1.2 million by 2050.4
Support provision
Dementias are long-term, pervasive illnesses,
affecting all aspects of a person’s life. The person Support provision for family carers in the UK is
with dementia (PwD) becomes increasingly part of a mixed economy of care in which
dependent on those around them, most usually statutory, private and voluntary sectors provide
their spouse or other family members. It is widely community services in addition to the support
accepted that providing care for a person with given by family and friends. Britain has a long
dementia is stressful and demanding, and research tradition of voluntary action, and the emphasis on
has provided evidence on the poorer physical and partnership in recent government policies has
mental health of carers compared with non- given voluntary, community and user organisations
carers.6,7 In addition, there is some evidence that a more central role in the delivery of services.16,17
1
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Introduction
At the same time, social service departments have paraprofessionals, such as clergy and family
been encouraged to develop local markets in care doctors, are roughly the same as those of
by providing fewer direct care services themselves professional, formal helping, carried out by
and commissioning independent service psychiatrists and psychologists.
providers.18 Local authority welfare provision in
England is organised to prioritise instrumental A range of social support interventions has been
needs within a system of case management in devised and evaluated, but reviews of the evidence
which needs are assessed, care packages are set up base of social support interventions generally
and cases are discharged. Such procedure-based highlight a lack of methodological rigour.27–29
care management systems prevent the formation Within the voluntary sector, a commonly used
of sustained relationships.19 As Community Mental model of social support is ‘befriending’. There are
Health Teams integrate the working practice of many befriending schemes in the UK, most
the NHS and Social Services and move towards an particularly in the voluntary and charitable sector.
‘assess and discharge’ model, it can be voluntary The role of befrienders varies widely from project
and charitable sector workers who provide long- to project, and the characteristics of the
term support. For carers of PwD, emotional befrienders also vary, including both volunteers
support may have a greater influence on the and paid staff. Befriending has the potential to
course of stressors than instrumental support.20 foster friendship, with the reciprocities entailed in
this30,31 and concomitant gains experienced by
peer-befrienders.32 For befriendees, a volunteer
Psychosocial interventions visit may be experienced as very different from
that of a professional, perhaps without fear of
A range of psychosocial interventions has been institutional intervention in their family or care
developed to support carers, including, but not choices, which may be especially welcomed by
limited to, the provision of accessible and relevant older people trying to maintain their
information on available services, education and independence. In addition, empathic, non-
training programmes, access to support groups, directive befriending was as effective as structured
short-term breaks, and interventions targeted at cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in the short
the whole family, such as family therapy and term for people with treatment-resistant
family counselling. schizophrenia,33 although CBT was superior at
9-month follow-up. An analysis of session content
Evaluations of carer interventions have been indicated that the befriending was distinct from
extensively reviewed. Schulz and colleagues21 CBT, and a conclusion was drawn that social
identified nine systematic reviews prior to their support is “no mere placebo”.34
own. The varying methodologies used for the
systematic review have led to significant During protocol development for the Befriending
differences in conclusions about the quantity and and Costs of Caring (BECCA) project, a literature
quality of research,22 yet there is consensus that search was undertaken for befriending schemes for
carer intervention research has historically been of family carers of people with dementia. No
questionable quality, and that poor study design quantitative research trials were found for the use
has contributed to inconclusive findings. of befriending volunteers to support carers. The
Interventions showing greatest impact have closest trial was Harris and colleagues,35
generally been comprehensive and intensive.23 evaluation of a volunteer befriending intervention
Cognitive behavioural interventions have been for women with chronic depression in inner
shown to be effective in reducing carer stress,24 London. With additional searching using a
but the provision of such interventions is broader range of search terms, two randomised
expensive and often not available owing to a lack controlled trials (RCTs) were identified which
of appropriately trained therapists within evaluate ‘friendly visiting’ for isolated elders.36,37
dementia care or carer support services. Macintyre and colleagues37 found improved life
satisfaction, worth and social integration, and
Only a fraction of psychological support is concluded that volunteer visitors made a
provided by psychological therapists, and there is difference for elderly people in the community.
much in common between informal and formal Most recently, a report has been published of a
helping, such as empathy, positive regard and peer-support intervention for carers of people
genuineness.25 Faust and Zlotnick26 found that, for with Alzheimer’s disease,38 but there was no
mild to moderate mental health problems, the evidence of a beneficial effect, possibly because of
2 benefits of informal helping by mental health the short time-frame.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Cost-effectiveness of support for carer time have previously been acknowledged.46
carers Wimo and colleagues47 recommend that the
valuation be based on the opportunity costs of
The Carers Special Grant was established to time sacrificed on each type of time-use. This
support the implementation of the National would necessitate data collection on the specific
Carers Strategy, with ring-fenced funding of £140 nature of time sacrificed; for example, time spent
million made available to local authorities to help in caring, nursing and supervision; loss of time in
them to develop a wider range of services to give work; and impact on leisure activities.
carers a break from their caring responsibilities. Distinguishing between ‘care activities’ and
However, there is evidence for managers wishing ‘normal household duties’ can be especially
to commission cost-effective interventions. challenging for spouse carers where the carer is
also the person who has had a long-term
In an RCT, Patel and colleagues39 evaluated the responsibility for the domestic household duties.
cost-effectiveness of a training programme for
carers of stroke patients and found that costs were From a societal perspective, the value of informal
significantly lower in the training group, while care may be recognised by considering the cost of
improving overall quality of life of carers at 1year. its replacement. Should individuals be unwilling
Similarly, the economic evaluation of a training or unable to undertake the role of carer, society
programme for carers of people with dementia40 would have little choice but to fund formal care.
reported cost savings of Aus$7967 (US$5975) per This would involve diverting resources away from
patient, with improved patient survival at home other uses; the opportunity cost of those resources
and decreased carer morbidity. Drummond and – the forgone benefit – determines the cost of
colleagues41 evaluated a support programme for informal care. The value of the resources diverted
carers (RCT) which showed improved quality of is a measure of the cost of informal care and is
life with incremental cost per quality-adjusted life- known as ‘replacement cost’. From the perspective
year (QALY) gained of Can $20,000. The of the individual carer, the opportunity cost of
evaluation of a daily living programme (RCT) by caring may be understood in terms of the
Knapp and colleagues42 found that it was more alternatives forgone as a result of taking on this
cost-effective than hospital-based care. Similarly, role, which may include employment
Donaldson and Gregson43 reported that a opportunities, other unpaid work, such as caring
community support intervention resulted in for other family members, and leisure activities,
prolonged life at home for the elderly and including holidays, social activities and relaxation.
concluded that the intervention will be cost- Whether employment opportunities should be
effective if the cost of long-term institutional care valued is the subject of considerable debate and
averted is included in the calculations. Payton and scepticism,48 as inclusion of economically active
colleagues,44 in their cost analysis of a community individuals’ time will be valued more highly than
health information network for carers of people the time of those who are economically inactive,
with Alzheimer’s disease, concluded that it and this may lead to an exacerbation of existing
provides social and economic benefit to their inequalities in the provision of care or support.
users.
Summary
Economic methods in carer
intervention evaluations Family carers of people with dementia report high
burden and stress. Demands of time and lack of
The cost-effectiveness literature for carers has used understanding among family and friends can lead
a range of costing methodologies and there is to reduced social contact and social supports. A
presently no consensus. Considerations include: wide range of psychosocial interventions has been
whether to cost for the carer, care recipient or devised, including one-to-one social support
both; whether to take cross-sectional snapshots of interventions such as befriending, but no rigorous
service receipt or try to build up a longitudinal studies of cost-effectiveness exist for befriending.
picture of costs; and costing informal care.
Options for costing informal care include: the Aim and objectives
market price method, the contingent valuation
method and the opportunity cost method.45 The aim of this report is to address this gap in the
Theoretical and practical challenges of evaluating evidence base by evaluating the cost-effectiveness 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Introduction
of befriending schemes for carers of people with dementia to one of two groups (intervention
dementia alongside an RCT. The objectives of the versus usual care control) and follow-up for
trial were as follows. 2years postrandomisation.
● To document direct and indirect costs in both
● To determine whether a social support the intervention and control groups, and to
intervention (access to an employed befriending establish incremental cost-effectiveness,
facilitator in addition to usual care) is effective calculating the costs from the perspectives of
compared with usual care alone, through the statutory and voluntary sectors and from a
randomly allocating carers of people with societal perspective.
4
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 2
Methods
Design Intervention and control
conditions
An RCT design was used to compare usual care
plus a social support intervention [access to a The befriending schemes were organised and
befriender facilitator (BF)] with control (usual care) administered separately from the research
for carers of people with dementia. Data collection interviews. The befriending intervention
points were at 6, 15 and 24 months from the date comprised access to an employed BF, and the
of randomisation, with the main end-point being at offer of contact with a trained volunteer
15 months. The primary perspective of the befriender for the duration of the befriending
economic evaluation was societal. schemes. The expectation was that befriending
visits by the trained volunteer befrienders would
be weekly home visits (dose) for at least 6 months
Ethics approval (duration), with variations in location, duration
and frequency of contact negotiated as necessary
A protocol was submitted for ethical scrutiny by by each carer–volunteer pairing, overseen by
the multisite research ethics committee (MREC) in the BF.
2001. The submission described the methodology
approved by peer reviewers for the HTA The remit of the befriending volunteers was to
programme, and included a Zelen randomisation provide companionship and conversation. Their
procedure. The protocol was rejected on the role was to be a listening ear; that is, to provide
grounds of the Zelen design, and also concerns for emotional support to the carer. Some
the safety of carers put in contact with lay informational support or ‘signposting’ was also
intervention providers. The proposed permissible in appropriate circumstances. The
methodology was revised to use a standard RCT boundaries of the role specifically excluded giving
design, and with additional information on the advice and carrying out practical caring tasks that
recommended good practice for the involvement would otherwise be carried out by a paid worker
of volunteers in the provision of heath and social such as a nurse or home care worker. Further
care. Ethical approval was received in November details of the befriending intervention are given in
2001 with the proviso that a pilot be carried out in Chapter 3.
not more than three local research ethics
committee (LREC) districts before the The intervention was offered as an addition to
implementation of the full trial. The aim of the usual care, and was not a replacement for any
pilot was to ensure that procedures for the other service (health, social or voluntary). In the
research interviews and befriending scheme were study areas, typical health services for the care
feasible and appropriate. LREC approval was recipient included diagnostic clinics for memory
subsequently received from all five LRECs in impairment and dementia (memory clinics) and
Norfolk and Suffolk, plus the London Borough of community support for challenging behaviours
Havering. Trust research and development (R&D) through community psychiatric nurses (CPNs).
approval was also sought where recruitment was Typical social services for carers included short-
planned within secondary care, and from primary term and longer term respite in the form of day
care groupings that had R&D approval procedures centres and residential or nursing home stays,
during the recruitment phase of the trial. and assistance with washing, dressing and eating
for more dependent care recipients. Typical
There were consent procedures for both family voluntary sector provision included carer
carers and potential befriending volunteers. The information and support groups, and luncheon
PwD was not involved in interviews and was not clubs. All carers randomised into the trial were
the intended recipient of the befriending sent locally relevant information on services for
intervention, and was not therefore involved in the caring for people with dementia by the research
consent procedures. interviewer.
5
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Methods
Study population dropout of 20% at 6 months. Making an
assumption that between 30% and 60% of people
The BECCA project was carried out in the UK, in invited to take part would not respond,35,51 a
the East Anglian counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, target of 750 was set for carer invitations. In the
and in the London Borough of Havering, with course of the trial, targets were recalculated on the
recruitment between April 2002 and July 2004. grounds that fewer carers were being lost to
follow-up than had been anticipated. For a
The HTA call for bids had specified that postrandomisation dropout of 7%, it was
participants should be the carers of people with calculated that adequate precision and power
Alzheimer’s type dementia. However, Alzheimer’s should be gained from a sample size of between
disease can only be diagnosed with certainty post- 225 and 235 carers.
mortem, and the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease
invivo is made by exclusion of evidence of other Recruitment procedures
possible causes, and on a possible or probable A significant proportion of the population in
basis only. Alzheimer’s type pathology commonly Norfolk and Suffolk lives in rural areas. Rural
co-occurs with other dementia-causing carers are considered “hard to reach”52 and
pathologies, and the symptom profiles are not dissemination of information can be difficult owing
generally distinguished within primary care. to there being very few contact points.53Therefore,
Therefore, carers in this study are of people with a a recruitment strategy was needed that would
primary progressive dementia in general, rather maximise equality of access to the trial, irrespective
than specifically Alzheimer’s disease. of urban or rural location. Given that most
gerontological research work involves gatekeepers
Eligibility criteria such as health and social service practitioners,54
Inclusion it was hoped that there would be less sample bias
The main inclusion criteria were that participants from a primary care than from a secondary care
must be family carers aged 18 years or older, population. Therefore, general practices were
caring for a person with a primary progressive approached to identify surgeries that would be
dementia. Carers should either be cohabiting with happy to send out invitations to participate. It was
the PwD, or spending an average of 20 hours or hoped that this would be acceptable to practices
more per week on care-related tasks such as given that the Government’s National Priorities
supervision and assistance in activities of daily Guidance for health and social services in England
living (ADL). had asked primary care teams to take a lead and
identify carers by April 2000.
Exclusion
Carers with significant congenital or acquired Unfortunately, initial recruitment was slow and
cognitive impairment were excluded, as were those after 6 months, only 13 responses had been
with terminal illness. Carers of people in received from practices in the pilot area. In
permanent residential, nursing or long-stay keeping with the picture in the rest of the UK,
hospital accommodation were also excluded. practices had neither carers’ registers nor
straightforward means for identifying informal
Sample size
carers in either computerised or paper records.
During the planning stages of the trial there were Only around half of practices expressed
no published trials of befriending for carers of willingness to send out invitations, even though
people with dementia. Therefore, sample size funding was available from the project to
calculations were based on the effect size seen in reimburse administration time and postage costs.
befriending interventions with different client It was clear that additional recruitment strategies
groups;35,49 that is, 0.42–0.45. It was anticipated would be necessary if targets were to be met in the
that retention of carers postrandomisation would full trial, so strategies were developed for media
be high, based on the experience of Aneshensel and other publicity, and for wider dissemination of
and colleagues;20 in a 3-year longitudinal study of information through gatekeepers in social services,
caring (without an intervention), 82% of carers secondary care and the voluntary sector.
were followed up to 3 years.
● Mailouts of publicity posters and leaflets: these went
Using nQuery50 and making an assumption of a to all libraries in Suffolk and Norfolk, in
normal distribution, to achieve 90% power at the addition to social services, mental health services
5% significance level (two-tailed), 150 carers were for older people, pharmacies, day services,
6 needed for each group, for postrandomisation supermarkets and voluntary organisations.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
● Media publicity: radio interviews and various interviewers to travel throughout the counties on a
articles were arranged with local press. regular basis. Interviewers endeavoured to meet
● Voluntary-sector mailouts: some voluntary and all carers’ preferences for days and times of day.
charitable organisations were willing to circulate
invitations akin to those used in primary care to Once carers had contacted the research team
all on their mailing lists. This was the only expressing interest in participation, they were
strategy used in the London Borough of contacted by telephone, given the opportunity to
Havering, and mailing by Suffolk Carers ask questions, and sent a full information booklet.
provided a significant response in Suffolk. Written consent was taken at the first face-to-face
● Presentations to potential participants and to interview, after researchers had given an oral
gatekeepers: presentations were devised for overview of the trial and answered any questions
carers’ groups, and for health-, social- and on the content of the information booklet.
voluntary-sector personnel who may act as Information about the trial clearly explained
gatekeepers. randomisation, and made it clear to participants
that they were free to withdraw at any time without
All recruiters were briefed on the inclusion and giving a reason and without this affecting the
exclusion criteria for the trial, and the importance services available to the current or future carer, or
of avoiding inappropriate approaches (e.g. to the care recipient.
family members who are unaware of their
relative’s suspected diagnosis) was emphasised.
All used standard letters of invitation and Randomisation
approved participant information leaflets.
Sequence generation
Potential participants expressed their interest in
participating in the research by completing and Randomisation lists were drawn up by the trial
returning a response form in a prepaid envelope statistician. Randomisation was stratified by
to the researchers. Recruitment strategies were kinship between carer and PwD (either vertical or
kept under continuous review, including horizontal) and also by region of residence (urban
monitoring of productivity. or rural). Blocked randomisation (block length of
six) was used. For the stratification by kinship,
Following receipt of a response form (expression of spouses, long-term partners, cousins of the same
interest), research associates made contact with generation and siblings were designated a
carers by telephone (or e-mail if this was requested) ‘horizontal bond’, whereas adult offspring (sons
to provide further information about the trial, and and daughters) and sons- and daughters-in-law
where appropriate to carry out initial screening. were classified as having a ‘vertical bond’. It was
The purpose of the initial screening was to check anticipated that this stratification for kinship
eligibility (see the section ‘Eligibility criteria’, p. 6). would increase the likelihood of the two groups
matching in terms of gender balance and age,
For eligible carers who expressed continued since adult children carers are more commonly
interest after this initial contact, arrangements women, whereas there is a more even gender
were made for a face-to-face interview. Times and balance among spouse carers. Urban and rural
venues for face-to-face interviews were organised areas were classified on the basis of population
as flexibly as possible to accommodate density, with densities of 10,000 per km2 and
interviewees’ caring responsibilities. All contact above classified as urban.
with carers aimed to be sensitive to their needs,
Allocation concealment
and appropriately responsive to disclosure of
circumstances that present significant risk to the Team members involved in carer consent and
well-being of the carer or care recipient (e.g. interviews were not involved in the randomisation
abuse, suicidal or homicidal intent). Constraints process. The randomisation lists were drawn up
such as pressures on carers’ time and transport before the start of recruitment by the trial
difficulties were acknowledged. The importance of statistician, and held by the research
considering transportation has also been administrator.
highlighted in previous recruitment literature. For
Implementation
this project, it was anticipated that most carers
would prefer home visits, or interviews based at a After obtaining informed consent and completing
neutral location within their locality, rather than a baseline interview, the interviewer put forward
travel to a research base. Therefore, the study the carer’s ID number to the trial administrator.
protocol and budget included transport costs for The administrator assigned the carer to 7
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Methods
intervention or control on the basis of the characteristics of caring included hours spent
sequence laid out in the relevant randomisation caring, sleep disturbance, other caring roles and
list (urban/vertical; urban/horizontal; rural/vertical; employment.
rural/horizontal). The administrator was
Anxiety and depression
independent of interviews, had no direct contact
with study participants and was entirely unaware The negative aspects of carers’ well-being were
of participants’ personal circumstances. assessed by the HADS.55 On this 14-item scale,
seven items assess anxiety (e.g. ‘I feel tense’ or
Blinding
‘wound up’, ‘Worrying thoughts go through my
Over the course of the trial, six researchers were mind’) and seven items assess depression (e.g.
involved in the informed consent and recruitment ‘I feel as if I am slowed down’, ‘I have lost interest
process. To reduce experimenter bias all outcome in my appearance’). Items are scored on a four-
measurement was completed with interviewers who point scale ranging from 0 to 3, where the higher
were independent from the provision of scores indicate higher levels of anxiety or
befriending services. Carer well-being was assessed depression. Both scales have good internal
(cid:2)
using self-report inventories, which are less consistency, with Cronbach’s of 0.84 for the
susceptible to experimenter bias than observational anxiety subscale at baseline and 0.74 for the
measures. depression subscale. Cut-offs have been used to
indicate caseness, where a score of 7 or below
Owing to the nature of the intervention it was not indicates a non-case for both subscales, a score of
possible to blind trial participants to group 8–10 indicates a doubtful case, and a score of 11
allocation. Therefore, it was decided to keep or above indicates a definite case.
participants fully informed of the outcome of the
Loneliness
randomisation process by sending one of two
standard letters outlining their allocation to either A two-item measure of emotional loneliness was
control or befriending intervention. Letters were used, after Stroebe and colleagues.56 The
sent by the trial administrator responsible for questions used were ‘Over the past 7 days, how
allocation from the randomisation lists. All much have you felt distressed by feeling
participants had previously received brief details lonely/feeling lonely even when you are with
about the befriending intervention in their people?’ Both items were rated on a five-point
information booklet. However, given the quantity scale from 0 = not at all to 4 = extremely.
(cid:2)
of information about using the scheme, full details Cronbach’s was 0.86.
were only supplied to those carers who were
Positive and negative affectivity
randomised to the befriending intervention.
Positive and negative affectivity were measured
using the 20-item Positive and Negative Affect
Measures Schedule (PANAS) scale.57 The measure consists of
20 adjectives, ten of which describe negative
All data were collected through interviews with the moods (e.g. distressed, upset, guilty) and ten
carer. The care recipient was not interviewed. The describe positive moods (e.g. excited, proud,
main outcomes were carer well-being as measured determined). Respondents indicated on a five-
by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale point scale (where 1 = very slightly or not at all
(HADS) depression and health-related quality of and 5 = extremely) the extent to which they have
life measured using Euro-Qol 5 Dimensions (EQ- experienced the feelings and emotions stated ‘over
5D). Secondary measures of well-being were HADS the past seven days’. The internal consistency was
(cid:2)
anxiety, loneliness, positive affectivity and global =0.88 for the negative items and 0.84 for the
health. Measures of structural and perceived social positive items. The instrument was included so
support were used to characterise the sample, as that the possibility of an increase in positive affect
were measures of relationship quality and carer could be explored should floor effects be found on
burden. Demographic data and characteristics of the HADS (carers scoring within asymptomatic
the context of caring (e.g. multiple roles, sleep range at baseline, with no room for further
disturbance) were also collected through carer self- improvement).
report.
Burden
Demographic data included age, gender, ethnicity The Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index
of the carer and PwD, and kin relationship of (CADI)58,59 frequency scale was used as a measure
8 the carer to the care recipient. Additional of objective burden. It is a 30-item instrument
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
including statements that describe experiences you see any of your neighbours to have a chat or
related to caring (e.g. ‘It is physically tiring’, ‘The do something with?’), was developed to identify
person I care for can demand too much of me’). social support network type. The instrument has
Frequencies of experiences were indicated on a been found to correlate highly with a range of
three-point scale from 1 = never applies to me to demographic variables, level of service use and
(cid:2)
3 = always applies to me. Cronbach’s was 0.89. response to interventions. Items from the Network
Typology questionnaire were also used to construct
Relationship quality
a social isolation index akin to that of Scharf and
The quality of premorbid relationship was assessed Smith,62 summarising contact with family, friends
using a single five-point scale (0 = very poor, and neighbours. The index provided a measure of
2 = neither good nor bad, 4 = very good), and social isolation ranging from 0 = not isolated to
also with the ten-item Mutual Communal 3= extremely isolated (no contact with family,
Behaviours Scale (MCBS),60 which measures the friends or neighbours).
responsiveness between the carer and care
recipient before the onset of illness. The frequency The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social
of each behaviour was rated using a four-point Support (MSPSS)63 is a 12-item measure assessing
scale from 1 = never to 4 = always. A principal perceived social support. Each item is rated on a
components analysis for this study identified two five-point Likert-type scale ranging from
five-item factors (oblimin rotation) with 1=strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. The
eigenvalues of 5.34 and 1.53, explaining 69% of scale was developed to assess perceived social
the variance. All items loaded highly, with factor support in relation to the family (e.g. ‘My family
loadings of 0.7 and above. The first factor really tries to help me’, ‘I can talk about my
contained the five items evaluating the care problems with my family’), friends (e.g. ‘I can
recipient’s communal behaviour towards the carer count on my friends when things go wrong’,
(e.g. ‘They seemed to enjoy responding to my ‘I have friends with whom I can share my joys and
needs’, ‘They did things just to please me’) and sorrows’) and significant other (e.g. ‘There is a
the second factor containing all items concerning special person who is around when I am in need’,
the carer’s communal behaviour towards the care ‘I have a special person who is a real source of
recipient (e.g. ‘If they were feeling bad, I tried to comfort to me’) source of support, which form the
cheer him/her up’, ‘When they had a need, he/she three subscales of the measure. Strong
(cid:2)
turned to me for help’). Cronbach’s for the two psychometric properties of the measure have been
subscales was 0.91 and 0.84, respectively. documented previously, including test–retest
reliability, with correlation coefficients of r=0.73
Perceived loss of companionship was assessed for the full scale, r=0.73 for the friends subscale,
using a three-item scale by Aneshensel and r=0.74 for the family subscale and r=0.54 for
colleagues.20 Each item (‘How much have you lost the significant other subscale.64 Cronbach’s (cid:2) in
being able to confide?’ ‘How much have you lost this study was 0.92, 0.89 and 0.87 for the family,
the person that you used to know?’ ‘How much friends and significant other subscales,
have you lost having someone who knew you respectively.
well?’) was rated on a four-point scale from
Coping
1 = completely to 4 = not at all, giving a range of
3–12, with lower scores indicating the greater The Brief Coping Orientation for Problem
perceived loss. However, for ease of interpretation Experience (COPE)65 is a 28-item measure for
of results, items were recoded such that higher multidimensional assessment of coping. Active
scores indicate greater perceived loss. A principal coping includes the subscales acceptance,
components analysis on data from carers in this emotional support, religion, active coping,
study indicated that all three items loaded heavily planning and positive reframing. Avoidance
on one factor (loadings ranged from 0.82 to 0.89) coping includes the subscales self-distraction,
and accounted for 73.5% of the variance. venting, humour, denial, behavioural
Reliability of the scale, as indicated by Cronbach’s disengagement and substance use. Items (e.g. ‘I’ve
(cid:2)
was 0.81. been turning to work or other activities to take my
mind off things’, ‘I’ve been saying to myself “this
Social support
isn’t real”’) assess responses of individuals when
The Practitioner Assessment of Network Type confronted with difficult or stressful situations and
(PANT) scale,61 which consists of eight are scored on a four-point Likert-type scale
items/questions (e.g. ‘If you have any children ranging from 1 = don’t do this at all to 4 = do
where does your nearest child live?’ ‘How often do this a lot. 9
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Methods
Life events
made with family or friends which occurred on a
The List of Threatening Experiences66 is a regular daily or weekly basis were deemed ‘regular
12-item measure, which states life events (e.g. support’. Regular support was subdivided into
‘serious injury or illness to yourself’, ‘Death of a ‘respite support’, where the family member or
first degree relative including a child or a spouse’). friend replaced the carer, and ‘assistance’, where
The scale accounts for two-thirds of life events that the carer remained with the PwD.
may have a marked or moderate long-term threat.
The occurrence or absence of a life event was
scored as Yes or No. Data-collection procedures
Health-related quality of life
Baseline questionnaire data were collected after
Health-related quality of life was measured in the carer had consented to take part in the study,
QALYs for both the carer and PwD using the with follow-up at 6, 15 and 24 months
EQ-5D instrument,67 with the carer providing a postrandomisation. A longitudinal picture of
proxy measure on behalf of the PwD. The EQ-5D resource use was constructed for each carer. Carers
is a standardised instrument designed to measure interviewed at 6 months were asked about all
health outcomes and was recommended for adults resource use that occurred between the first
by Dixon and co-authors68 in an HTA review of (baseline) interview and the ongoing interview.
health status measures for economic evaluation. It This method was repeated at the 15- and 24-
is a six-item self-assessment, health state measure month interviews, so a complete picture of
of health-related quality of life. The scale includes resource use for each carer and carer recipient was
five items accounting for five dimensions of available at the end of the final interview. It was
quality of life (mobility, self-care, usual activities, anticipated that all data would be collected
pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression) and a through face-to-face interviews in carers’ own
visual analogue ‘thermometer’, ranging from 0 to homes, with the resource-use semi-structured
100 points, where 100 represents the best possible interview being used to gather information from
health state and 0 the worst. The five carers’ recall, with the use of their own recording
items/dimensions of quality of life are scored on a systems such as calendars, diaries and copies of
three-level scale ranging from 1 = no problem to repeat prescriptions. The recommended best
3 = extreme problem. Carers were not asked to practice for drug-use information is to go through
proxy for the PwD on the visual analogue scale the prescription sheets and repeat prescriptions of
(VAS). study participants and take down names of drugs,
including the correct dosage and frequency.47
Resource use
Where possible this practice was followed.
Data on resource use were collected through a However, where repeat prescription forms were
semi-structured interview devised for this trial not available, interviewers relied on carer recall.
influenced by pre-existing interview schedules, Similarly, where diaries and calendars were
namely the Client Service Receipt Inventory available, interviewers encouraged carers to use
(CSRI),69 the Caregiver Time Questionnaire,70 the them to ensure accuracy of frequency of visits and
Caregiver Activity Schedule (CAS)71,72 and the duration of stays; however, in the absence of such
Resource Utilization in Dementia (RUD) prompts, data were again subject to carer recall.
questionnaire.47 Information was collected on
statutory and voluntary sector usage by both carer Psychometric questionnaires were completed
and PwD. Areas covered included home care either as part of a semi-structured interview or as
(personal care, e.g. bathing and dressing), day self-completion, depending on the carer’s
care, inpatient admission, use of GP services, use preference.
of medication, respite care, aids and adaptations,
loss of income, time taken off work and benefits To maximise data collection, some variations were
received. The data-collection instrument varied at made in data-collection methods. For example, in
follow-up depending on whether the PwD cases where carers were fatigued by the interview
remained in the community, had moved process, or their caring responsibilities precluded
permanently into residential or nursing care, or completion of the interview, either a second
had died. appointment was made or, for the psychometric
component only, carers were provided with a
Support from family and friends
stamped addressed envelope for return of
Carers were asked about regular and occasional questionnaires. Where carers did not wish to be
10 support from family and friends. Arrangements interviewed in their own homes, alternative venues
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Primary effectiveness analysis
were organised, for example GP surgeries, health
centres, or voluntary-sector or university meeting The psychometric data were transferred to SAS
rooms. Where the carer moved away from the software for outcome analysis. The intervention
catchment area after randomisation, a telephone group carers were compared with control on the
interview was developed for the resource-use data HADS depression scale at 6, 15 and 24 months,
collection, and psychometric measures were either using the intention-to-treat (ITT) population.
completed over the telephone, or posted to carers Unadjusted analysis was based on a pooled t-test,
with a return envelope. Over the course of the and the adjusted analysis based on a generalised
trial, it became standard procedure for follow-up linear model (GLM) with baseline HADS depression
psychometric questionnaires to be posted out to score and stratification categories (urban/rural
participants with letters confirming the location; horizontal/vertical kinship) as covariates.
arrangements for follow-up interview, thus giving
Secondary effectiveness analyses
carers the option of precompleting all or part of
the questionnaire, or waiting to complete with the The method used for the primary analysis was
researcher. repeated for the secondary measures of HADS
anxiety, loneliness, positive affectivity and the
global VAS of the EQ-5D. In addition, the
Data checking proportion of PwD still in home care compared
with those institutionalised was compared between
Data were entered into the Statistical Package for groups.
the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 12.0.2; SPSS,
Subgroup analyses
Chicago, IL, USA, 2003) and accuracy checks were
carried out. Subscale scores for psychometric The primary analysis was repeated on a per-
measures were both handscored and calculated by protocol basis (i.e. removing those carers from the
SPSS as part of error checking. Other data checks intervention group who were not matched with a
for the psychometric data included checks for out- befriender for at least 6 months and those carers
of-range values. A proportion of the resource-use in the control group who ended up matched with
interview scripts was checked by the lead a befriender) and also looking at spouse carers
economics researcher and a second researcher, only (carers in a horizontal kinship relationship).
with any queries resolved with the main project
researchers.
Economic analyses
Data analysis Valuing resource use
The chosen price year was 2005. Resource-use data
Missing data
were multiplied by national unit costs obtained from
The proportion of missing psychometric data was routine NHS and other data sources such as the
generally low (less than 5%), with greater missing national schedule of reference costs. Drug prices
data for earlier rather than later interviews. No were obtained from the British National Formulary.
psychometric scale or subscale was missing for Where unit cost data were not readily available, costs
more than 10% of data from interviewer were obtained directly from the relevant agency or
participants. Where individual items were missing estimated separately. Time spent by carers, friends
within scales or subscales, data were imputed and family in caring for their relative was valued at
before calculation of the scale or subscale score. average UK gross income rates for 2005, derived
For the resource-use data, where five or fewer of from Office for National Statistics (ONS). Unit cost
the 136 cost data items were missing, or two or data are listed in Appendix 2.
fewer of the utility items were missing, data were
imputed using Rubin’s multiple imputation Discounting costs
method.73 It is conventional to discount costs (and outcomes)
incurred more than 1 year in the future to their
Baseline characteristics
‘present value’. However, it was not possible to
As is now recommended,74 no formal tests were identify which costs in the 15-month follow-up
carried out for significant differences in baseline data set had been incurred after the 12-month
characteristics between the study groups. Data cut-off point. Not discounting costs incurred
were tabulated for intervention, control and whole between 12 and 15 months is unlikely to have a
sample for both demographic and clinical great impact on the results of this analysis, and
variables. therefore no attempt was made to do so. Costs 11
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Methods
incurred and QALYs accrued between 15 and Each calculation includes only those costs relevant
24months were discounted at 3.5%. to each sector. For example, the statutory sector
analysis includes only costs borne by the NHS
Primary economic analysis
and social services, and thus excludes voluntary-
An economic evaluation was performed from the sector costs, patients’ and their carers’ out-of-
perspective of society comparing costs with the pocket costs, the value of carers’ time, and
QALYs gained by carers in intervention versus so on.
control after 15 months’ follow-up. The EQ-5D
health profiles were converted to utilities using UK Varying the time-point
general population valuations,75 and thence to Although 15 months postrandomisation was the
QALYs over the period measured.76 main end-point, data were available at 6 months
and also at 24months. The cost–utility analysis is
To compare costs and effects, an incremental repeated for these time-points.
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was calculated,
comparing the difference (increment) in costs with Complete case analysis
the difference in QALYs gained in each arm of the This comprised only observations for whom
study. The ratio states the cost of buying one complete cost and outcome data were available at
extra QALY by enacting the befriending strategy 15 months (30 intervention; 31 control).
compared with no befriending. Typically, the NHS
is willing to pay up to £20,000–30,000 for a Taking account of both carer and PwD quality of
QALY.77 Thus, if the ICER is below this threshold, life
befriending may be considered good value for The resource-use data included costs for both the
money. If it is above this, it may be considered carer and the person with dementia, but in the
poor value for money. main utility analysis the health-related quality of
C – C life relates to the carer only. This alternative
2 1
ICER = scenario includes the QALYs calculated for the care
E – E
2 1 recipient from the EQ-5D, completed by
the carer.
where C is cost per carer–PwD in the befriending
2
arm, C is cost per carer–PwD in the control arm,
1
E = QALYs gained by carer in the befriending
2 Summary of changes to protocol
arm, and E = QALYs gained by carer in the
2
control arm.
As already described above, recruitment strategies
were amended to include recruitment through the
Mean costs and QALYs gained in the intervention
voluntary sector, self-referral and secondary
and control arms were calculated from trial
services. The changes to the carer recruitment
observations. A non-parametric bootstrap approach
process also included the addition of Havering as
of 1000 replications was used to construct
a trial site. To maintain the original project end
distributions around the mean costs and QALYs
date, follow-up periodicities were amended such
gained in each arm. The simulations are used to
that follow-up occurred at 6, 15 and 24 months
construct 95% confidence intervals (CIs) resulting
rather than at 9, 18 and 36 months. That is, the
around mean difference in cost and QALYs
time-horizon (follow-up period) was reduced from
between the arms, and the ICERs used to construct
36 to 24 months owing to the extension of the
a cost-effectiveness acceptability curve (CEAC).76
recruitment period. Low attrition rates in the
Alternative economic scenarios project facilitated the reduction of recruitment
targets as the assumed attrition was not
Further analyses were performed to consider the
experienced. To maintain maximum follow-up,
cost-effectiveness of the intervention within
data-collection methods were also broadened
different scenarios.
through the course of the trial to include self-
completion of the psychometric follow-up and the
Varying the perspective
use of telephone follow-ups for carers who had
The base case was societal, but within that there
moved out of the area. Other protocol changes
are different sectors:
were revisions to the management committees in
● the statutory sector (NHS, social services and the light of new governance guidelines and the
other government-funded services) inclusion of a pilot study as requested by the
● the voluntary sector ethical committee. The latter is described further
12 ● the household sector. in Chapter 3.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 3
Intervention
In this chapter the development and number of small befriending schemes to be set up
implementation of the befriending intervention on a locality basis, with multiple BFs employed by
are described in detail. separate organisations, each of which had
experience of providing befriending services. As
Norwich and its surrounding areas had been
Definition of befriending identified as the pilot area, further discussions
were held with community organisations within
Befriending is a form of social support where a the voluntary organisations in Norwich. It was
supportive other is introduced to, or matched with agreed that the first scheme would be hosted by
an individual who would otherwise be socially Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary Services (NVS),
isolated. The term ‘befriending’ has been used to and a contract was drawn up between UEA and
describe a range of interventions from emotional NVS. Following this agreement, and during the
support to tangible assistance. In the initial process of recruiting to the post of BF, several
protocol for this trial, befriending was consultation meetings were held with key
conceptualised as offering emotional, stakeholders, with the remit of deciding the
informational and practical support. However, appropriate policies and procedures for ensuring
through consultation with the potential local the safe involvement of both carers and volunteers
providers, the definition of befriending and the in the befriending scheme. Once procedures for
planned content of the intervention were recruitment, training and matching of volunteers
amended to focus on the provision of emotional were in place in Norwich, the scheme was
support and also, where appropriate, some extended to other areas of Norfolk overseen by
‘signposting’ to information and services. The role the same BF. In addition, two further schemes
did not encompass instrumental support (hands- were set up, one with Age Concern Suffolk (ACS)
on caring, DIY, shopping, etc.) or advice. That is, and the smallest with Age Concern Havering
befriending comprised companionship and (ACH). Consistent with arrangements for the
conversation rather than instrumental support or initial Norwich scheme, the BFs were jointly
activities that aimed to increase community managed by the operations manager from the
participation. ‘host’ organisation and the BECCA grantholder
with responsibility for managing the befriending
intervention (designated ‘intervention manager’).
Development of the BECCA
befriending schemes The contracted host voluntary organisations (NVS,
ACS, ACH) agreed to employ a part-time BF, and
The BECCA project was devised at the University jointly manage the post with the UEA-based trial
of East Anglia (UEA) in the city of Norwich intervention manager; register all potential
(population 120,000) in the county of Norfolk volunteer befrienders in their area, taking
(population 800,000), to take place in Norfolk and informed consent for the volunteers’ involvement
the adjoining county of Suffolk (population in the BECCA research trial; take up references;
700,000). The physical size of the two counties facilitate Criminal Records Bureau (CRB)
made it unfeasible to have a single scheme, and disclosures; provide public liability and personal
there were no voluntary organisations spanning accident insurance; provide BECCA training for
both Norfolk and Suffolk that could support a volunteers including details of the Code of
suitable befriending scheme. Discussions were held Conduct and Statement of Confidentiality; and
between representatives of the research team (GC provide ongoing support for the BF and all
and FP) and the Alzheimer’s Society’s national registered BECCA volunteers. They also had
office to determine ways in which the befriending policies in place for volunteer support,
intervention could be set up and managed. complaints, disciplinary action, grievance and the
Various options were considered, and it was storage of information about volunteers under the
decided that the only feasible option was for a Data Protection Act.
13
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Intervention
Consultation and advisory groups
and accurately compile records for the research
The initial Norfolk-focused consultation group was team.
made up of representatives of organisations with
an interest in carer support, volunteer support The initial BF played a key part in the
and/or people with dementia. This included development of policies and procedures for the
committee members from branches of the scheme, in close collaboration with the
Alzheimer’s Society, Alzheimer’s Society outreach intervention manager and principal investigator
workers, representatives from Age Concern for the BECCA trial. Subsequently employed BFs
Norwich and Age Concern Norfolk, Pabulum (a took part in a full-day training course, which
Norwich-based project for reminiscence with covered the role of the BFs, befriender
people with dementia), the Mental Health Service recruitment and training procedures, volunteer
dementia nurse specialist, Norfolk Social Services registration and screening, befriender training,
planning and community development officer and initial contact with carers, support across the
Suffolk Social Services carers grant officer. befriending relationship, reporting procedures,
Discussions within this initial consultation forum expenses and volunteer time recording and
included consideration of the boundaries of the management, risk assessment, and befriender and
intervention, insurance, screening and training, carer reviews.
and exit strategies for the end of the project.
Members of this group also contributed to the Recruitment and screening of potential
piloting of the befriender training. This initial befriending volunteers
consultation group was extended to form a Pilot procedures for volunteer recruitment
broader group which met approximately every included dissemination of recruitment posters and
6months for the duration of the trial, to comment leaflets through the network of volunteer bureaux
on trial progress and contribute to decision- in the Norwich and District area, and through
making on evolving procedures. Similar groups partner organisations represented in the
were convened in Suffolk and Havering. consultation group. Open meetings were
organised and advertised so that potentially
In addition to issues policies, procedures and interested volunteers could, without commitment,
training, the consultation groups proved hear a short talk about the project and about the
particularly helpful in anticipating some problems role of befrienders. There were attendees at two
and in suggesting solutions during the ongoing pilot open meetings held in the City of Norwich
trial. These included publicity phrasing, (one in a suburb at a venue with parking facilities,
placement and timing to fit with local-voluntary and one in the centre of town convenient for
sector programmes, and issues to consider in public transport). However, a similar meeting
befrienders’ introductory visits to carers’ homes, arranged in one small market town did not attract
particularly in considering the carer’s relationship any new interest. Early indications were that
with the PwD. befrienders would be harder to identify outside
the largest centre of population. For the full trial,
therefore, opportunities were sought for contact
Befriending scheme procedures with a greater number of local social-care
organisations, in addition to dissemination of
Befriender facilitator recruitment and
recruitment leaflets and posters, and media
induction
advertising. Recruitment literature emphasised the
BF posts were all part-time. They were advertised importance of a ‘listening ear’ and the ability to
internally within the host organisation, and where provide ‘companionship and conversation’.
necessary in the local press. The person
specification for BFs included the following Inclusion criteria
criteria: prior experience of working in the Potential befriending volunteers were asked to
voluntary sector, working with people with meet the following criteria before being
dementia and their carers, and proficiency in considered eligible for matching with a family
training volunteers. The job description was to carer.
recruit and screen volunteers, organise training,
maintain contact with and support referred carers, Attend an open meeting, or individual meeting
match befrienders and carers, monitor ongoing with the BF
befriending relationships, support endings, The aim of open meetings was to welcome
facilitate support for befrienders, help support the potential volunteers, to orientate them to the
14 network of voluntary-sector partner organisations stages to becoming a befriender and to outline the
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
expectations of befrienders. The meetings also Provide names of referees and complete a CRB
provided volunteers with an opportunity to meet standard disclosure form
those involved in the befriending scheme and to Contact details were requested for two character
ask questions before formally registering their referees (not relatives), and references were taken
interest. up by the BF. Potential volunteers were also asked
to disclose criminal convictions, including any that
Read the information for potential befriending were spent, as people over the age of 65 (which
volunteers and complete a befriender many carers were) are considered vulnerable
registration form people under the terms of the Rehabilitation of
As the BECCA befriending schemes were part of a Offenders Act 1974. During the start-up of the
research trial, the befriending volunteers were project, procedures for police checks were being
considered a form of research participant. transferred to the new CRB, and participants were
Therefore, the information booklet included asked to complete the CRB disclosure form.
MREC-approved information relevant to research Assistance was provided by the BF where necessary.
trial participants, and the registration form also
included MREC-approved statements akin to Attend the befriender training course
those found on research consent forms. The The befriender training course consisted of six
volunteer registration form was also used to record 2-hour modules, totalling 12 hours of learning
information on existing skills (e.g. experience as a (further details on p. 16). The course was
family carer and/or caring experience, or from compulsory and volunteers were able attend
training within the helping professions or as a sessions from more than one course as long as all
paid carer), and volunteers’ availability (weekdays modules were covered. A record of attendance was
or weekends; daytime or evening) and preferences kept.
for placements (e.g. no pets or smoking; local or
away from own community). Agree to abide by the Code of Conduct,
including the statement of confidentiality
The information booklet and registration form The Code of Conduct outlined the expectations of
had been revised and amended in the light of the work that befrienders would do on the scheme’s
pilot work which identified the risk of dual roles behalf. It included a statement of confidentiality, as
for befrienders and carers. It had been assumed organisers had to be able to trust volunteers with
that all current carers would be too busy to be personal information about the carers who used its
considering voluntary activity; however, some services, and personal information about the cared-
carers expressed an interest in being befrienders for PwD. Volunteers signed to say that they would
themselves. Indeed, some misinterpreted the not pass on confidential information to anyone
carer information sheet used for recruitment of other than their BF, or supporters nominated by
family carers to the project to mean that they the BF. Volunteers could pass on confidential
were being asked to be befrienders, and they information if they had been given the permission
engaged in the research interviews with this of the person concerned. The statement of
express intent. To clarify literature, the confidentiality also emphasised situations where
information sheets were amended, and some of safety took a higher priority than confidentiality,
the terminology was changed to remove any for example in situations of suspected abuse.
possible ambiguities. A procedure was devised
for ensuring that active carers were not taken on Availability
as potential befrienders during their time as a Volunteers were asked to make a minimum
research participant, but to value their offer and commitment to be involved with the scheme for
contribution during later phases of the trial, 6months, at an intensity of an hour per week plus
once their research participation was complete. travel.
It was noted that some carers saw themselves as
better equipped for the befriending role, and Exclusion criteria
not just in need of care. Feedback from pilot The following exclusion criteria were applied:
work also showed that befrienders needed to be
aware of some aspects of the research design, ● volunteers under the age of 18 years
for example making it clear that carers had ● volunteers regarded as unsuitable in the light of
contact with research interviewers before entry references or information from standard
into the trial, and that referrals could not be disclosures from the CRB
taken for the befriending scheme except from ● volunteers with special needs that could not
within the trial. be catered for within the scheme, or which 15
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Intervention
might add to the caring burden of a to highlight the impact of caring for a person
befriender with dementia, to raise befrienders’ awareness
● volunteers who failed to declare convictions of needs that befriending can meet. The four
which later came to light. stages of the befriending relationship were
introduced, and skills developed in stages 1 and
The above criteria were in line with the key 2 (‘breaking the ice’ and ‘getting to know one
principles for the safe involvement of volunteers another’).
with vulnerable clients.78 In the event, no ● Unit 4: Working in other people’s homes: guidelines
volunteers were excluded on the grounds of any of for health and safety when visiting carers at
these criteria. home, including risk assessment, and what to
do in the face of incidents, accidents or
untoward situations.
Befriender training programme ● Unit 5: Dementia and services: this session gave
information about dementia and signposted
The training programme was developed volunteers to a variety of information resources
specifically for the trial, and delivered by the BFs to assist in signposting.
in conjunction with invited others. The aims of the ● Unit 6: Later stages of befriending, and looking after
training were to equip volunteers for their yourself: skills were developed for maintaining
befriending role, and ensure that they were aware companionship (stage 3), including avoiding
of scheme boundaries and guidelines for safe and miscommunication and troubleshooting.
ethical involvement with carers. Certificates of Procedures for ending befriending relationship
attendance were provided on completion. (stage 4) were covered, and the importance of
ongoing self-care was emphasised.
An early version of the training programme was
Carer registration
written by a clinical psychologist with experience
of working with carers and people with dementia, In parallel with the recruitment, screening and
and of training in the voluntary sector. Some training of befriending volunteers, the BFs also
information was drawn from existing training registered carers expressing an interest in
programmes, plus information from organisations receiving visits from a befriending volunteer. All
such as the Alzheimer’s Society. The training carers in contact with the BFs were put in contact
included skills-based work, including listening through the BECCA research trial. The BECCA
skills and maintaining boundaries. It also covered befriending schemes did not accept referrals from
key aspects of policies and procedures, including outside the research project. In the pilot, carers
non-discriminatory practice, health and safety randomised to intervention were asked to opt in to
when working in other people’s homes, and the the befriending scheme by sending an expression
balance of confidentiality versus communication of of interest form to the BF. However, carers
risk. The initial programme was piloted with randomised to intervention during the pilot phase
members of the consultation group, and others did not opt in. The project consultation group
nominated by consultation group members. The suggested that opting in could be perceived by
programme was amended to focus specifically on carers as ‘another hurdle to jump’, rather than as
the befriending role rather than dementia protection of their right to choose whether or not
knowledge, and the use of case vignettes was to be involved. Therefore, a protocol amendment
increased. The final 12-hour training programme was sought and approved such that all carers were
was organised into six 2-hour units which could be asked for permission for their contact details to be
organised into six, three or two sessions. The passed on to the local BF should they be allocated
course curriculum is outlined below. to intervention as a result of the randomisation
process. Following the protocol amendment, those
● Unit 1: Befriending: what is it, and what it isn’t: carers allocated to the befriending intervention
covered the role and responsibilities of through the randomisation procedure received a
befrienders in the BECCA scheme, including letter from the trial administrator informing them
confidentiality and safety. Short ‘carer scenarios’ of their allocation and enclosing a brief
provided a focus for discussion and learning. information leaflet about the befriending scheme.
● Unit 2: Listening skills: theory and practice of Their contact details were forwarded to the
good listening, and establishing a good relevant BF. The introductory leaflet gave a clear
relationship with carers. statement that making use of the befriending
● Unit 3: Carers’ needs; the befriending relationship: scheme was optional. On receipt of a carer’s
16 ‘carer scenarios’ from session 1 were developed details, the BF would make telephone contact to
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
introduce themselves, to answer questions on the were actively encouraged to contact the BF if they
introductory leaflet and, where appropriate, to had any concerns about issues within or relating to
arrange to visit the carer. At the initial face-to-face the befriending activity.
meeting, the BF provided carers with a full
information booklet about using the befriending Previous work has recommended that one full-
scheme. Carers interested in participating at that time befriending coordinator could only
stage completed a registration form and those who successfully support 15–20 matched befrienders.79
declined involvement were given an open Therefore, it was initially intended that the BF
invitation to change their mind at any time during would liaise with counterparts in relevant
the life of the project. In accordance with the organisations to identify potential befriender
suggestions of the consultation group, the BF contacts, and also work to develop a pyramid of
maintained occasional contact with those carers volunteer support in which more experienced
who were not initially interested in having a volunteers within a community take on the role of
befriender. The information booklet and local befriending contact, supporting and training
registration form for carers using the befriending new recruits, matching befrienders with care dyads
scheme corresponded to those used with the and publicising the befriending scheme. For the
befriending volunteers. Suffolk and Havering schemes, the number of
matched did not rise above the recommended
Befriender–carer matches
ceiling. In Norfolk, the BF worked closely with
Matches were made by the BFs on the basis of Alzheimer’s Society outreach workers, with some
locality and knowledge of both the carer and aspects of the BF role delegated.
befriender. Information was used from the
Ending of partnerships
registration forms, most particularly befrienders’
and carers’ preferences for time and location of At the start of their involvement with the scheme,
meetings. There were no requirements or participating carers were told that they could use
restrictions for matches relating to gender, current the befriending scheme as long as there was an
circumstances or prior experience. The BF appropriate BF. If the carer’s active caring
organised an initial meeting to introduce the situation changed because the PwD had either
befriender to the carer, to remind both parties of moved into long-term care or died, the carer was
the ground rules for the befriending partnerships, then given the choice as to whether to continue or
and to set up an informal contract for meeting terminate a befriending relationship. From the
location, duration and frequency. start of the trial, the intervention manager and the
BFs worked towards an exit strategy to ensure that
Monitoring of matches
ongoing matches could be supported beyond the
Both befriender and carer were reminded that the end of the trial-specific schemes.
BF would be contacting each of them individually
Audit and data collection
to review the partnership after 1 month, 6 months
and every subsequent 6 months, but that they Volunteer screening and training procedures were
could contact the BF at any time in between. audited by the BFs, in conjunction with the
intervention manager. Audit data and
Befriender support
demographic information on matched befriending
Local peer-support group meetings were volunteers were collated by the BFs and sent to
organised for befrienders at a minimum of the university-based research team in anonymised
6-monthly intervals. These provided opportunities format. Data included age and gender of
for volunteers to support each other on issues that befriending volunteers, and whether or not they
could be raised without breaching confidentiality, had previous experience as a carer. Dates of
and to have further training and topical matches and partnership end dates were also
information about aspects of volunteering or carer collated for use by the research team.
support, such as telephone support. Newsletters
Volunteer flow
were circulated, also at 6-monthly intervals, giving
information about the BECCA project, volunteer A total of 124 volunteers approached BFs across
recruitment and signposting issues. The BF the three schemes expressing interest in the
maintained individual contact with each volunteer volunteer befriender role. Of these, 81 (65%)
and carer between meetings, usually by telephone, completed a volunteer registration form, 75 (60%)
and 6-monthly reviews of the activity and the were screened using references and 64 (52%)
quality of befriender relationship were routinely completed CRB disclosures. In total, 63 (51%)
carried out. However, both befriender and carer completed the training programme, and 60 (48%) 17
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Intervention
met all four screening criteria of registration, time and travel, overhead expenses
references, CRB disclosures and completion of (administration, stationery, telephone, postage,
befriender training. In other words, two potential insurance, CRB disclosures) and running costs
volunteers had to be recruited to result in one (ongoing and recruitment and publicity costs,
eligible befriender or, alternatively, one in two room hire for support groups).
potential volunteers was lost through the screening
and training process. Half-yearly budget statements were obtained from
the host organisations to collect details on staff
Previous descriptions of befriending schemes, for salaries, travel claims and all expenses related to
example ‘City Support’ Case Study 6,80 have found overheads and running expenses.
that around 15% of befriending applicants may be
Record of activities
considered unsuitable for befriending within
healthcare. The BECCA scheme screening BFs kept accounts of their own work and budget,
procedures did not include any assessment of and basic records of befrienders’ contact with
‘befriender suitability’. Individual applicants were carers. They also collected the records kept by
encouraged to consider this for themselves during befrienders and trainers of their time spent and
the recruitment, screening and training process, expenses. The precise quantities of befriender time
and it was indeed the case that some potential and expenses were recorded on monthly returns.
volunteers withdrew as they decided for Time, out-of-pocket expenses, use of volunteers’
themselves that the befriending role was not right cars and organisational costs of running the
for them. In some cases, BFs were able to direct befriending service were all collected routinely.
volunteers to other volunteering opportunities.
Total cost of intervention
Of the 60 volunteers who completed the screening Intervention costs were calculated as a fixed and
and training process, only 49 became befrienders. variable component, specific to each of the three
As demographic data for volunteers were only centres (Norfolk, Suffolk and Havering). The fixed
passed on to the research team for those who cost was divided equally by centre among all those
became befrienders (i.e. matched with carers), no in the intervention arm, and variable costs were
information is available on potential differences divided equally among those who actually received
between those volunteers who become befrienders befriending.
and those who withdrew earlier in the recruitment,
screening and training process, or on those who
Protocol changes relating to
were eligible to befriend, but not matched.
Anecdotally, non-matching of eligible volunteers intervention
was often due to mismatches in geographical
location between befriender and carer As a consequence of ethical review, a limited-area
recruitment. pilot phase was introduced to the project with the
aim of piloting procedures for the recruitment and
training of befriending volunteers. This had
Costing of befriending services implications for the wider trial timetable, leading
in part to the changes to the recruitment process
Each BECCA befriending scheme was set up described in the section ‘Summary of changes to
specifically for the trial in addition to existing protocol’ (p. 12). As a consequence of the pilot,
services, and therefore each service was uniquely there were changes to the consent procedures for
costed. Cost data were collected from the carers, and associated changes to the information
beginning of the pretrial consultation to the end and consent forms. At this time the opportunity
of the financial year 2005/06. Costs collected was taken to amend the terminology used in these
included set-up costs, training costs (for staff and forms to conform to best practice, in a changing
volunteers), staff salaries and travel, volunteer field.
18
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 4
Results: characteristics and outcomes
Participant flow giving written informed consent to involvement in
the trial. Therefore, it is not known whether non-
A summary of participant flow is provided in the responders systematically differ from responders,
CONSORT diagram (Figure 1). Details at each nor is it known whether eligible carers had
stage are described below. demographic or psychosocial differences compared
with those who declined or were excluded.
Expressions of interest and assessment
for eligibility Randomised allocation
In total, the research team received 316 All 236 carers screened as eligible for the trial
expressions of interest. Of these, 107 (34%) were gave informed consent and were randomised
received as a result of invitations from GP after baseline assessment between April 2000
practices. The greatest proportion of responses and August 2004. A total of 116 carers were
(136; 43%) came about as a consequence of carers’ randomly allocated to intervention and 120 to
contact with voluntary-sector personnel or control.
invitations received through voluntary-sector
mailing lists. Eleven per cent were self-referrals Of the 116 randomised to intervention, all 116
following media publicity. Over the course of were offered contact with their local BF. During
recruitment an increasing number of enquiries the initial pilot stage of the trial carers were asked
came by word of mouth. to initiate this contact through the return of a
response form. However, following discussion with
Of the 316 people initially expressing interest in the consultation group, this was seen as an
the trial, 31 (10%) declined involvement. It is not unnecessary barrier to accessing the service, and a
known whether those who declined involvement change to protocol was applied for and approved
would have been eligible for the trial. A further by the MREC such that all carers consented to
49people were excluded at the screening stage as having their details passed to the BF should they
they did not meet eligibility criteria for the trial. be allocated to intervention. There were 42 carers
The most common reasons for exclusion were the consented into the trial under the original
PwD living in permanent care or having already procedure, with 20 in the intervention arm and 22
passed away. Other reasons included carer ill- in the control. Of the 20 invited to make contact
health and the care recipient having an illness with the BF, 13 did so. For the 96 carers allocated
other than a primary progressive dementia. to intervention under the revised consent
Reasons for exclusion are shown in Table 1. procedures, all had contact with the BF. In
addition, administrative error meant that the
No demographic or psychosocial information was names of three carers allocated to control were
collected about potential participants prior to their forwarded to a BF, and therefore were treated by
the BF as carers in the intervention.
TABLE 1 Reasons for exclusion at screening
Follow-up
Follow-up interviews were carried out as soon as
Reason for exclusion n
could be arranged after the interview due date;
Declined involvement (n= 31) that is, 6, 15 and 24months postrandomisation.
Refused 9 Overall retention in the trial over the 2-year follow-
No reason given 22
up was good at 81% overall (80% intervention and
Did not meet study eligibility criteria (n= 49) 81% control). Loss to follow-up was proportionately
PwD in care, or deceased 19 greater in the intervention arm than in the control
Carer ill-health (physical or emotional) 15
arm for the first two follow-up interviews (at 6 and
Care recipient not having dementia 8
15months), but was very similar by 24months.
Carer spending <20 hours per week caring 4
The main reason for loss to follow-upwas carer
Out of catchment area 2
Paid carer 1 health. Six carers died over the course of the
2-year follow-up. Three carers withdrew from the 19
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
Assessed for eligibility
(n = 316)
Excluded (n = 80)
Not meeting inclusion criteria
(n = 49)
Enrolment Refused to participate
(n = 9)
Other reasons
Is it randomi sed? Yes
(n = 22)
Allocated to interventiona (n = 116) Allocated to control (n = 120)
Received intervention (n = 116) Allocation Received controlb (n = 120)
Analysis Analysis
Analysed (n = 101) Lost to follow-up Lost to follow-up Analysed (n = 111)
(n = 11) (n = 7)
Excluded from Excluded from
Reasons: Reasons:
analysis (n = 4) analysis (n = 2)
Health (7) Follow-up 1c Health (3)
1 missing FU data 2 missing BL
Withdrew (4) Moved away (2)
3 missing BL data
Lost contact (1)
Withdrew (1)
Analysed (n = 93) Lost to follow-up Lost to follow-up Analysed (n = 104)
(n = 20) (n = 14)
Excluded from Excluded from
Reasons: Reasons:
analysis (n = 3) analysis (n = 2)
Health (10) Health (4)
3 missing BL data Follow-up 2 2 missing BL
Died (3) Moved away (5)
Moved away (1) Lost contact (2)
Withdrew (6) Died (1)
Withdrew (2)
Analysed (n = 90) Lost to follow-up Lost to follow-up Analysed (n = 95)
(n = 23) (n = 23)
Excluded from Excluded from
Reasons: Reasons:
analysis (n = 3) analysis (n = 2)
Health (11) Health (6)
3 missing BL data 2 missing BL
Died (4) Moved away (5)
Follow-up 3
Moved away (1) Lost contact (5)
Withdrew (7) Died (2)
Withdrew (2)
Moved on with
life (3)
FIGURE 1 CONSORT summary of participant flow. a Intervention was ‘access to a befriender facilitator’. b Three control carers also
received intervention. For purposes of analysis they were treated as control carers. c Figures for effectiveness analyses. The data set
for 6-, 15- and 24-month economic evaluations comprised data from carers followed up at 6 months, i.e. 218 participants
(105intervention; 113 control). BL, baseline; FU, follow-up.
20
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
trial on the grounds that they felt they had ‘moved The denominators in the tables reflect the number
on with life’ such that they no longer felt they had of carers who answered a given question.
a carer identity following the death of the PwD or
Demographic information
their move into permanent care.
Over the whole sample, two-thirds of carers were
Analysis female (Table 2). The kin relations of the carer to
All carers who were followed up were included in the person with dementia in the sample were: 97
the analyses, with the following exceptions: wives, 62 husbands, 39 daughters, 15 sons, 12
daughters or sons-in-law, four siblings, two nieces,
● three intervention and two control carers had one parent, one cousin and two friends of long
missing data on the HADS at baseline standing, ‘as if related’. Three in five participants
● one further intervention carer had missing lived in ‘urban’ locations (population density
HADS data at 6-month follow-up, so was 10,000 or greater). A majority (86%) of the sample
excluded from 6-month analyses were cohabiting with the PwD. All participants
● 11 intervention and seven control carers had no except for two identified themselves as white.
resource-use data at 6 months, so were excluded Two-thirds of the sample were retired. The mean
from economic analyses. age of carers was 68 years (range 36–91 years) and
the mean age of PwD was older, at 78 years. The
mean duration of caring was just under 4 years.
Baseline characteristics of
randomised carers Almost the complete sample (97%) was providing
some form of assistance to the PwD on a daily
Baseline data are presented for the complete basis (Table 3). Two-thirds considered themselves
sample and by group (intervention versus control). to be ‘on duty’ for 24 hours per day, and over half
TABLE 2 Baseline demographic information
Total Intervention Control
n/N % n/N % n/N %
Female carer 152/236 64 76/116 66 76/120 63
Carer ethnicity: white 232/234 99 116/116 100 116/118 98
Kinship: spouse 159/236 67 76/116 66 83/120 69
Urban location 146/236 62 71/116 61 75/120 63
Cohabiting 204/236 86 99/116 85 105/120 88
Retired 158/235 67 78/115 67 80/120 66
N Mean SD n Mean SD n Mean SD
Carer’s age (years) 236 68.0 11.4 116 68.4 11.3 120 67.6 11.6
PwD age (years) 236 78.2 8.7 116 78.6 8.9 120 77.8 8.5
Duration of caring (years) 232 3.8 5.9 114 3.9 7.7 118 3.7 3.5
TABLE 3 Burden of caring
Total Intervention Control
N % N % N %
Daily assistance 226/234 97 110/114 97 116/120 97
24 hours/day ‘on duty’ 139/216 64 67/105 64 72/111 65
Relative can be left unsupervised 142/233 61 68/114 60 74/119 62
Sleep disturbance 125/221 57 60/109 55 65/112 58
N Mean SD n Mean SD n Mean SD
Objective burden (CADI-F) 232 54.1 10.4 114 53.7 11.0 118 54.4 9.9
21
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
experienced sleep disturbance on account of the Baseline scores on other psychometric measures
PwD. are shown in Table 6. As for the baseline
demographics, the intervention and control
Sixteen per cent of carers were caring for another groups were similar on all measures.
person in addition to a person with dementia and
Support in caring role
16% were working, in full- or part-time paid
employment, or were self-employed (Table 4). It was anticipated that the availability of support
Eighteen carers (89%) identified themselves as for carers would depend in part on their social
being full-time carers. The intervention and network. There were participating carers in each
control groups were notably similar in terms of of the social network categories (Table 7), with the
demographics, burden of caring and multiple roles. largest category being ‘private restricted’. The
private restricted network type includes
Psychological well-being
individuals who have no local relative and have
The level of psychological morbidity for the very little local contact or informal support.
participating carers is shown in Table 5. In total, 40
carers (17%) self-reported case levels of depressive The network typology questionnaire was also used
(cid:3)
symptomology (HADS depression score 11), to generate an index of social isolation based on
either with or without case levels of anxiety. This whether or not the carer has family, friends and
proportion is in keeping with the expected contact with neighbours, and whether they see any
prevalence of clinical depression in family carers of them (family, friends and neighbours) less often
of PwD (expected range 0.15–0.3281). The than once a week. The index does not incorporate
proportion of carers expressing case levels of information on proximity to family (nearest
anxiety (with or without depression) was higher, family/child/sibling), frequency of interaction with
with 63 (27%) scoring 11 or above on the HADS family, friends and neighbours, or information on
anxiety scale. The mean scores on the HADS local social ties (participation in social clubs,
depression and anxiety subscales are comparable groups or religious meetings), but has the
with those found in carers of PwD in day-hospital advantage of creating an ordered scale. On the
settings or in contact with community mental Social Isolation Index, the carer population was
health teams (CMHTs).82 evenly spread across the no-isolation, low- and
TABLE 4 Multiple roles: concurrent caring and paid employment
Total Intervention Control
n/N % n/N % n/N %
Concurrent caring 38/233 16 18/114 16 20/119 17
Caring for dependant under 18 12/36 33 6/17 35 6/19 32
Employment:
Paid work 38/235 16 20/115 17 18/120 15
Full-time carer 18/235 8 10/115 9 8/120 7
TABLE 5 HADS depression and anxiety: caseness (score (cid:3)11) and continuous data
Total Intervention Control
n/N % n/N % n/N %
Depression and anxiety 22/231 9 9/113 8 13/118 11
Depression only 18/231 8 10/113 8 8/118 7
Anxiety only 41/231 18 20/113 18 21/118 18
Non-case 150/231 65 74/113 66 76/118 64
N Mean SD n Mean SD n Mean SD
Depression 231 6.8 3.7 113 6.7 3.6 118 6.9 3.9
Anxiety 231 7.7 4.6 113 7.5 4.5 118 7.9 4.6
22
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
TABLE 6 Affectivity, loneliness, social support, coping, quality of relationship and life events: mean and SD by group
Total (N= 236) Intervention (N= 116) Control (N= 120)
n Mean SD n Mean SD n Mean SD
Negative affectivity (PANAS) 218 20.63 8.21 107 20.13 8.17 111 21.11 8.25
Positive affectivity (PANAS) 219 31.35 7.58 108 31.03 7.50 111 31.67 7.68
Loneliness 227 2.10 2.20 112 2.00 2.20 115 2.20 2.20
Perceived social support (MSPSS) 229 44.21 9.51 113 44.03 9.98 116 44.39 9.08
Active coping (COPE) 230 16.62 6.01 113 16.59 5.73 117 16.64 6.29
Avoidance coping (COPE) 230 7.46 4.40 113 7.30 4.21 117 7.61 4.59
Loss of companionship 228 8.37 2.45 113 8.38 2.59 115 8.35 2.32
MCBS (carer towards PwD) 228 16.89 3.19 111 16.81 3.08 117 16.97 3.29
MCBS (PwD towards carer) 228 14.87 3.93 111 14.77 3.95 117 14.96 3.92
Quality of premorbid relationship 229 3.63 0.65 112 3.63 0.65 117 3.64 0.64
Life events 229 2.28 1.89 112 2.25 2.02 117 2.31 1.77
TABLE 7 Social network (PANT) categories
Total (N= 230) Intervention (N= 113) Control (N= 117)
n % n % n %
Family dependent 41 18 21 19 20 17
Locally integrated 48 21 21 19 27 23
Locally self-contained 46 20 19 17 27 23
Wider community focused 28 12 14 12 14 12
Private restricted 54 24 31 27 23 20
Inconclusive 13 6 7 6 6 5
moderate-isolation categories, with only 22 (10%) In addition to support from family and friends,
falling into the high-isolation category (Table 8). carers received support and assistance from
statutory, private- and voluntary-sector services.
Support from family and friends is summarised in A selection of these is shown in Table 10. Carers’
Table 9. Almost one-third of participants had no support services were predominantly provided
support from family or friends. One-quarter had by the voluntary sector, and included sitting
occasional support only. Just over one in five had services, informational and support groups,
regular support only, and a similar proportion had lunch clubs and outings. Sixty per cent of
both regular and occasional support. Of those participating carers had used some form of carers’
carers reporting details of the regular support support service. In addition, 50% of care
received, the mean number of hours respite recipients had attended some form of day care
received was only 2.2 hours per week (range (including both day centres and day hospitals).
0–23hours), and the mean number of hours Only 26% were in receipt of assistance with home
assistance was 8.2 hours per week (range care and 24% had undertaken residential or
0–42hours, excluding an outlier of 168hours). nursing respite stays.
TABLE 8 Social isolation categories
Total (N= 231) Intervention (N= 113) Control (N= 118)
n % n % n %
Not isolated 74 32 36 32 38 32
Low isolation 70 30 35 31 35 30
Moderate isolation 65 28 32 28 33 28
High isolation 22 10 10 9 12 10
23
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
TABLE 9 Support from family and friends
Total Intervention Control
n/N % n/N % n/N %
Regular support only 49/226 22 28/109 26 21/117 18
Occasional support only 59/226 26 26/109 24 33/117 28
Both regular and occasional 49/226 22 16/109 15 33/117 28
No support 69/226 31 39/109 36 30/117 26
n Mean SD n Mean SD n Mean SD
Respite (hours/week) 92 2.2 4.3 43 2.2 4.6 49 2.2 4.0
Assistance (hours/week) 87 8.2 19.0 40 6.5 7.7 47 9.6a 25.0a
aData include an outlier which was four times greater than the next highest number of hours.
TABLE 10 Receipt of support from services
Total Intervention Control
n/N % n/N % n/N %
Carer services 138/231 60 71/113 63 67/118 57
Day care 117/234 50 58/114 51 59/120 49
Home care 61/236 26 29/116 25 32/120 27
Respite stays 56/232 24 27/115 23 29/117 25
Summary There is no evidence to suggest a benefit of
The demographic, psychometric and support intervention compared with control for spouse
variables at baseline demonstrate that the carers (Table 12). However, results of the per-
population under study is typical of carers of PwD. protocol analysis (Table 13) show a marginally
Comparison of the data for the two groups significant difference in favour of intervention at
(intervention and control) demonstrates the 15 months.
success of the use of the urban/rural and
Secondary analyses
horizontal/vertical kinship stratifications.
There is no evidence of any benefit of the
intervention with respect to any of the secondary
Main outcomes outcomes (HADS anxiety subscale, loneliness,
positive affectivity and the global VAS score of the
Primary analysis EQ-5D) at any time-point (Tables 14–17).
The primary analysis on the ITT population
Admission to long-term care
did not demonstrate any evidence of an
advantage of intervention over control on the As disabilities increase for the PwD, the level of
HADS depression subscale (Table 11) at any dependency on family carers can become
time-point. unsustainable, and a common outcome is for the
person with dementia to move into residential or
Subgroup analyses nursing accommodation, or into NHS continuing
The primary analysis was repeated for two care, where such facilities still exist. Whereas
subgroups: first, an analysis of the subgroup of all care recipients were living at home at baseline,
spouse carers (N = 158; 83 control and 75 32 care recipients had been admitted to permanent
intervention) and, secondly, a per-protocol care (institutionalised) at 15-month follow-up
analysis comparing those intervention carers (Figure 2). The proportion of PwD still in home
who are known to have been matched with a care was compared with those institutionalised by
befriender for at least 6 months before the each time-point (Table 18). Those carers for whom
15-month interview (N = 37) and control carers the PwD had died were removed from the analysis.
known not to have had a befriender As for other secondary analyses, there is no evidence
24 (N = 177). of any advantage of the intervention over control.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
TABLE 11 HADS depression subscale: primary analysis
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 120) (N= 116)
Baseline
n 118a 113a
Mean (SD) 6.96 (3.94) 6.73 (3.62)
6 months
n 113 104 –0.193 –0.485
Mean (SD) 5.84 (3.96) 6.03 (3.63) (–1.21 to 0.83) (–1.23 to 0.26)
p= 0.709 p= 0.201
15 months
n 106 96 0.676 0.468
Mean (SD) 6.71 (4.18) 6.03 (4.00) (–0.46 to 1.81) (–0.50 to 1.44)
p= 0.241 p= 0.342
24 months
n 97 93 0.103 –0.207
Mean (SD) 6.35 (4.59) 6.25 (4.12) (–1.15 to 1.35) (–1.32 to 0.90)
p= 0.871 p= 0.713
aBaseline data missing for two control and three intervention subjects.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
TABLE 12 HADS depression subscale: spouse carers
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 83) (N= 75)
Baseline
n 82a 75
Mean (SD) 6.90 (3.94) 7.07 (3.48)
6 months
n 78 68 –0.427 –0.309
Mean (SD) 5.88 (3.81) 6.30 (3.71) (–1.66 to 0.81) (–1.20 to 0.58)
p= 0.495 p= 0.492
15 months
n 73 60 0.043 0.269
Mean (SD) 6.48 (4.09) 6.43 (4.24) (–1.39 to 1.48) (–0.93 to 1.47)
p= 0.952 p= 0.659
24 months
n 69 57 0.457 0.493
Mean (SD) 6.91 (4.80) 6.46 (4.05) (–1.13 to 2.04) (–0.87 to 1.85)
p= 0.570 p= 0.474
aBaseline data missing for one control subject.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
25
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
TABLE 13 HADS depression subscale: per protocol
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 117) (N= 37)
Baseline
n 115a 36a
Mean (SD) 6.98 (3.95) 6.86 (3.54)
6 months
n 111 34 0.383 0.107
Mean (SD) 5.86 (3.97) 5.47 (3.37) (–1.11 to 1.87) (–1.00 to 1.21)
p= 0.612 p= 0.848
15 months
n 104 31 1.684 1.377
Mean (SD) 6.75 (4.21) 5.06 (3.45) (0.04 to 3.32) (–0.09 to 2.84)
p= 0.044 p= 0.066
24 months
n 95 30 1.402 1.038
Mean (SD) 6.37 (4.63) 4.97 (4.11) (–0.47 to 3.27) (–0.63 to 2.71)
p= 0.140 p= 0.220
aBaseline data missing for two control subjects and one intervention subject.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
TABLE 14 HADS anxiety subscale
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 120) (N= 116)
Baseline
n 118a 113a
Mean (SD) 7.97 (4.68) 7.55 (4.58)
6 months
n 113 104 0.610 0.218
Mean (SD) 6.96 (4.37) 6.35 (4.46) (–0.57 to 1.79) (–0.43 to 0.97)
p= 0.311 p= 0.568
15 months
n 106 96 1.005 0.610
Mean (SD) 7.55 (4.47) 6.55 (4.54) (–0.25 to 2.26) (–0.33 to 1.55)
p= 0.115 p= 0.200
24 months
n 97 93 0.419 –0.037
Mean (SD) 6.97 (4.50) 6.55 (4.49) (–0.87 to 1.71) (–1.10 to 1.03)
p= 0.521 p= 0.946
aBaseline data missing for two control and three intervention subjects.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline HADS score.
26
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
TABLE 15 PANAS: positive affect
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 120) (N= 116)
Baseline
n 111a 108a
Mean (SD) 31.7 (4.68) 31.0 (7.50)
6 months
n 111 103 1.40 0.922
Mean (SD) 31.5 (8.31) 30.1 (8.13) (–0.82 to 3.62) (–0.98 to 2.83)
p= 0.214 p= 0.341
15 months
n 106 96 0.03 –0.079
Mean (SD) 30.5 (8.02) 30.5 (8.22) (–2.22 to 2.29) (–2.13 to 1.97)
p= 0.976 p= 0.940
24 months
n 95 92 1.10 1.17
Mean (SD) 31.2 (8.34) 30.1 (8.73) (–1.36 to 3.57) (–1.26 to 3.59)
p= 0.378 p= 0.344
aBaseline data missing for nine control and eight intervention subjects.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline positive affect PANAS score.
TABLE 16 Loneliness scale
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 120) (N= 116)
Baseline
n 115a 112a
Mean (SD) 2.29 (2.21) 2.07 (2.28)
6 months
n 112 104 0.148 0.016
Mean (SD) 2.21 (2.21) 2.06 (2.04) (–0.42 to 0.72) (–0.41 to 0.45)
p= 0.611 p= 0.945
15 months
n 106 96 0.358 0.320
Mean (SD) 2.57 (2.23) 2.21 (2.27) (–0.27 to 0.98) (–0.20 to 0.84)
p= 0.260 p= 0.230
24 months
n 97 93 0.392 0.173
Mean (SD) 2.63 (2.30) 2.24 (2.39) (–0.28 to 1.06) (–0.37 to 0.72)
p= 0.251 p= 0.529
aBaseline data missing for five control and four intervention subjects.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline Loneliness Scale.
27
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: characteristics and outcomes
TABLE 17 EQ-5D global VAS
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 120) (N= 116)
Baseline
n 114a 112a
Mean (SD) 73.1 (18.1) 74.0 (16.8)
6 months
n 112 101 –2.81 –2.06
Mean (SD) 72.9 (17.7) 75.7 (17.0) (–7.51 to 1.89) (–5.51 to 1.38)
p= 0.240 p= 0.239
15 months
n 106 95 –3.87 –2.33
Mean (SD) 69.9 (18.1) 73.8 (18.3) (–8.94 to 1.19) (–6.88 to 2.23)
p= 0.133 p= 0.315
24 months
n 96 92 –4.35 –3.03
Mean (SD) 68.1 (18.2) 72.5 (19.7) (–9.82 to 1.11) (–8.42 to 2.35)
p= 0.119 p= 0.268
aBaseline data missing for five control and four intervention subjects.
bBased on a pooled t-test.
cBased on a GLM adjusting for area, kinship and baseline EQ-5D global VAS.
Baseline 6 months 15 months 24 months
236 T 179 T 130 T 96
At home I 87 I 63 I 50
C 92 C 67 C 46
T 24 T 32 T 38
Residential/
I 13 I 19 I 21
nursing care
C 11 C 13 C 17
T 15 T 40 T 56
PwD deceased I 5 I 14 I 22
C 10 C 26 C 34
Lost to follow-up 18 34 46
FIGURE 2 Status of PwD at each follow-up. C, control group; I, intervention group; T, total.
28
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
TABLE 18 Location of PwD by 6, 15 or 24 months
Control Intervention Unadjusted analysisb Adjusted analysisc
(N= 116) (N= 120)
6 months
Na 103 100 OR = 1.25 OR = 1.18
PwD at home 92 (89%) 87 (87%) (0.53 to 2.94) (0.49 to 2.86)
p= 0.609 p= 0.717
15 months
Na 80 82 OR = 1.42 OR = 1.41
PwD at home 67 (83%) 63 (77%) (0.66 to 3.08) (0.65 to 3.08)
p= 0.372 p= 0.388
24 months
Na 63 71 OR = 1.14 OR = 1.05
PwD at home 46 (73%) 50 (70%) (0.53 to 2.42) (0.48 to 2.26)
p= 0.740 p= 0.911
aExcluding those subjects lost to follow-up and where the PwD had died.
bOdds ratio (OR) estimated using a logistic regression model with group alone as an explanatory variable.
cOdds ratio estimated using a logistic regression model with group, kinship and area as explanatory variables.
29
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 5
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
Costs Cost–utility analysis
Total costs are summarised in Table 19. Full cost The total cost from a societal point of view was
tables and quantities are in Appendices 3 and 4. £1813 greater in the intervention arm, although
this was not statistically significant. The quality of
life of the carer was slightly higher at +0.017
Quality-adjusted life-years QALYs, although this was not statistically
significant either (Table 21). Based on these point
Total QALYs gained for the intervention and estimates, the extra cost per extra QALY gained is
control for carers, PwD and the sum of each are £105,954.
presented in Table 20.
TABLE 19 Total cost summary at 15 months per participating carer (£ sterling 2005 prices; 105 intervention; 113 control)
Mean Median Max. Min. SD
Intervention cost
Intervention £1,138 £907 £1,722 £589 £395
Controla £11 £0 £318 £0 £65
PwD and carer resource use
Intervention £13,580 £8,839 £48,471 £1,113 £13,426
Control £13,583 £10,427 £43,758 £2,482 £12,037
PwD care following admission to care/nursing home
Intervention £4,176 £0 £44,205 £0 £12,306
Control £2,174 £0 £34,826 £0 £7,894
Miscellaneous other costs
Intervention £374 £0 £2,283 £0 £2,080
Control £166 £0 £1,299 £0 £714
Time spent caring for PwD by carer and family and friends, and time spent befriending
Intervention £103,398 £119,322 £153,288 £10,118 £46,625
Control £104,918 £122,176 £151,230 £9,455 £46,708
Grand total
Intervention £122,665 £137,134 £194,926 £19,932 £46,843
Control £120,852 £134,852 £203,977 £22,014 £45,778
aThree control carers had contact with the BF.
TABLE 20 QALYs (based on EQ-5D) at 15 months
Mean Median Max. Min. SD
Carer QALYs
Intervention 0.946 0.980 1.270 –0.020 0.245
Control 0.929 0.980 1.250 0.010 0.260
PwD QALYs
Intervention 0.365 0.330 1.070 –0.330 0.292
Control 0.314 0.290 1.040 –0.450 0.317
Carer + PwD QALYs
Intervention 1.311 1.330 2.150 0.088 0.416
Control 1.243 1.270 2.283 –0.320 0.449
31
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
TABLE 21 Cost–utility analysis (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
£/carer–PwD QALYs/carer ICER
Intervention £122,665 0.946
Control £120,852 0.929
Increment £1,813 0.017 £105,954
(95% CI of increment, from bootstrap) (–£11,312 to £14,984) (–0.051 to 0.083) NA
The scatterplot of bootstrapped increments in cost Alternative scenarios
and QALYs (Figure 3) shows points in all four
Varying perspectives
quadrants of the cost-effectiveness plane, although
the majority are to the east of the y-axis, and A comparison of the results from the perspectives
somewhat to the north of the x-axis, suggesting a of the statutory sector, voluntary sector and
trend towards befriending being both more household sectors is shown in Table 22.
effective and more expensive than control. The
resulting CEAC (Figure 4) suggests only a 42.2% The societal perspective costs are much higher
probability that the ICER is below a typical than the statutory, voluntary or household costs,
willingness to pay of £30,000 per QALY gained. as societal costs include the indirect costs valuing
carers’, family and friends’ time, which are the
An alternative means of presenting these results is biggest single component of resource input, when
as a net monetary benefit chart (Figure 5). This valued as described earlier (see Table 19).
suggests that there is unlikely to be a net benefit
from the intervention, even when the willingness It should be noted that none of the cost or QALY
to pay for a QALY is above £100,000. However, differences reached statistical significance at a
there is a wide confidence interval around the level of 95%. Nevertheless, the intervention
point estimates. appears to show a trend towards being slightly
£40,000
£30,000
£20,000
£10,000
£0
–0.15 –0.1 –0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15
–£10,000
–£20,000
–£30,000
Incremental QALYs
32
tsoc
latnemercnI
FIGURE 3 Scatterplot of increments (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Willingness to pay for a QALY (£000s)
33
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
ytilibaborP
FIGURE 4 CEAC (societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
20
15
10
5
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
–5
–10
–15
–20
Willingness to pay for a QALY (000s)
)s000£(
tifeneb
yratenom
teN
FIGURE 5 Net monetary benefit per carer–PwD (mean and 95% CI, societal perspective, 15-month time-horizon, carer quality of life
only)
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
TABLE 22 Cost–utility analysis from societal, statutory, voluntary and household perspectives (15-month time-horizon, carer quality of
life only)
Cost Carer QALYs Increments (95% CI) ICER p(cost-
effective)a
Perspective Intervention Control Intervention Control Cost QALYsb
Societal £122,665 £120,852 0.946 0.929 £1,813 0.017 £105,954 42.2%
(basecase) (–£11,312 to (–0.051 to
£14,984) 0.083)
Statutory £13,740 £11,737 0.946 0.929 £2,003 0.017 £117,039 29.4%
(–£1,981 to (–0.049 to
£6,884) 0.084)
Voluntary £716 £707 0.946 0.929 £9 0.017 £521 69.9%
(–£418 to (–0.052 to
£441) 0.087)
Household £4,811 £3,489 0.946 0.929 £1,322 0.017 £77,236 29.8%
(–£655 to (–0.048 to
£3,147) 0.086)
aProbability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
bConfidence intervals estimated using non-parametric bootstrap, therefore differences between scenarios is due to random
variation.
more costly than the control from all perspectives. (Table23). This is because while the QALY
Given a typical willingness to pay of £30,000 per increment increases over time, the cost increment
QALY gained, there is a less than 50% probability increases at a faster rate, and thus the cost-
that befriending is ‘cost-effective’ from every effectiveness deteriorates. In general, a longer
perspective except for the voluntary sector. This is time-horizon is preferable to a shorter one as it
because the voluntary sector bears only a small allows for longer term costs and benefits to be
proportion of the total costs. Note that this accrued. These results suggest that over the longer
analysis only includes direct costs borne by the term, befriending is not cost-effective at
voluntary sector. The value of volunteers’ time in conventional thresholds.
caring and befriending (indirect cost) is
Complete case analysis
incorporated in the societal perspective.
The results from the complete case analysis are
Varying time-horizon
in marked contrast to the imputed analysis results,
As the time-horizon extends, the cost-effectiveness suggesting a positive cost-effectiveness ratio (the
of the befriending intervention deteriorates intervention is both less costly and
TABLE 23 Cost–utility analysis from a societal perspective at 6, 15 and 24 months
Time- Cost Carer QALYs Increments (95% CI) ICER p(cost-
horizon effective)a
Intervention Control Intervention Control Cost QALYs
6 months £54,509 £54,854 0.388 0.379 –£344 0.008 –£40,996 59.6%
(–£5,155 to (–0.017 to
£4,465) 0.034)
15 months £122,665 £120,852 0.946 0.929 £1,813 0.017 £105,954 42.2%
(basecase) (–£11,312 to (–0.051 to
£14,984) 0.083)
24 months £188,683 £179,492 1.474 1.450 £9,191 0.024 £380,939 17.2%
(–£7,864 to (–0.083 to
£26,377) 0.136)
aProbability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
34
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
more effective than control, with 87.7% probability Summary of cost-effectiveness
that the ICER is below £30,000 per QALY gained) analyses
(Table 24). However, these results are based on
only 61 observations (versus 218 in the imputed There are trends towards both increased quality of
data set), and are likely biased owing to potential life and higher costs to society among carers
correlations between health status (and hence randomised to intervention, although neither
resource use) and probability of providing trend is statistically significant. The point estimate
complete responses to all questions. of the ICER is £106,000 per QALY gained. This is
above conventionally accepted thresholds of cost-
Incorporating PwD quality of life effectiveness (approximately £20,000–30,000 per
When the quality of life of the PwD is taken into QALY gained). Indeed, there is only an estimated
account as well as that of the carer, the point 42.2% probability that the ICER is below £30,000
estimate ICER is £26,848, which is within the per QALY gained.
conventionally accepted threshold of cost-
effectiveness (Table 25). Taking into account From the point of view of the statutory sector,
uncertainty, the authors estimate a 51.4% probability ‘access to a BF’ has an even lower probability of
that the ICER is below £30,000 per QALY gained. being the cost-effective choice. This is due to the
Therefore, when including PwD quality of life too, statutory sector bearing a greater proportion of
befriending may be a cost-effective intervention. the incremental cost.
TABLE 24 Cost–utility analysis: comparison of imputed data versus complete case analysis (societal perspective, 15-month
time-horizon, carer quality of life only)
Cost Carer QALYs Increments (95% CI) ICER p(cost-
effective)a
Scenario Intervention Control Intervention Control Cost QALYs
Imputed data £122,665 £120,852 0.946 0.929 £1,813 0.017 £105,954 42.2%
(basecase) (–£11,312 to (–0.051 to
£14,984) 0.083)
Complete £121,615 £132,717 0.900 0.872 –£11,103 0.028 –£393,866 87.7%
case analysisb (–£31,469 to (–0.091 to
£8,755) 0.150)
aProbability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
bN= 30 + 31.
TABLE 25 Cost–utility analysis: comparison of base case versus inclusion of PwD quality of life (societal perspective, 15-month
time-horizon)
Cost Carer QALYs Increments (95% CI) ICER p(cost-
effective)a
Scenario Intervention Control Intervention Control Cost QALYs
Carer QALYs £122,665 £120,852 0.946 0.929 £1,813 0.017 £105,954 42.2%
only (basecase) (–£11,312 to (–0.051 to
£14,984) 0.083)
Carer and £122,665 £120,852 1.311 1.243 £1,813 0.068 £26,848 51.4%
PwD QALYs (–£11,163 to (–0.045 to
£15,024) 0.185)
aProbability intervention is cost-effective at a willingness to pay of £30,000.
35
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Results: overall costs and economic analysis
The results from the voluntary sector perspective this emphasises the need to consider the societal
are in contrast to other sectors, for which there is perspective when making societal resource
an estimated 69.9% probability that the ICER will allocation decisions.
be below £30,000. However, this is because the
voluntary sector bears only a small proportion of As the time-horizon extended, the cost-
the overall costs of caring for carers or PwD. [Note effectiveness deteriorated. Whereas the
that this analysis only includes direct costs borne intervention was in a dominant situation at
by the voluntary sector. The value of volunteers’ 6months (intervention appeared to result in
time in caring and befriending (indirect cost) is health-related quality of life gains and be less
incorporated in the societal perspective.] This costly), at 24months the point estimate ICER was
result underlines the importance of considering £381,000 per QALY gained. The apparent
cost-effectiveness from the societal perspective, as deterioration in cost-effectiveness is because the
an intervention can appear cost-effective to one costs were increasing at a faster rate than the
individual or sector, when in fact this is simply an corresponding health gain; therefore, the cost-
artefact of arbitrary budgetary boundaries. effectiveness deteriorates.
From the household perspective, there is an Complete data were available for only 61 out of
estimated 29.8% probability that access to a BF is 218 care dyads included in the economic
a cost-effective intervention (at a threshold of evaluation. The results from this limited analysis
£30,000 per QALY gained). It is questionable, were strongly in favour of befriending; however,
however, whether this is an appropriate analysis the authors believe this to be a biased analysis as,
for evaluating cost-effectiveness from a household first, only a small proportion of the valid data was
perspective. Cost–utility analysis is a useful tool to used in this analysis and, secondly, the probability
assist population-level rationing decisions, and the of a respondent providing a complete data set is
threshold is a general rule of thumb as to whether likely to be related to the health status of the carer
the benefits (generating a statistical QALY) are and/or PwD. Therefore, the imputed data set is
worth the cost, thus leading to more equitable likely to provide a more appropriate
distribution of finite societal resources. An representation of costs and outcomes.
individual’s willingness to pay for a QALY for a
named relative or friend is likely to be very When taking into account quality of life of the
different. Furthermore, the relevant budget PwD as well as the carers, the analysis found
constraint is the household’s, not a ‘community slightly in favour of befriending: the point
chest’. The household may therefore value estimate ICER was approximately £27,000 per
health gains to a specific person much more QALY gained, with a 51% probability of being
highly than those to society as a whole. Again, under £30,000.
36
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Chapter 6
Discussion and conclusions
The BECCA trial evaluated the impact of access analysis comparing control carers with the small
to a befriender facilitator for family carers of number of intervention carers who engaged with
people with dementia. The trial represents the befrienders for at least 6 months before 15-month
largest RCT of befriending for carers of PwD, and follow-up reported a difference in HADS
involved an ambitious framework for costing care depression scores that approached statistical
for carers of PwD. significance in favour of the intervention. While
providing only weak evidence of any beneficial
effect, this finding indicates that if uptake can be
Main findings improved, positive findings in the ITT population
are more likely.
The primary cost and cost-effectiveness analyses
did not show any benefit of intervention over
control in terms of psychological well-being or Implications for healthcare
cost. That is, at 15 months postrandomisation,
Should befriending interventions be
access to a BF in the context of usual care did not
withdrawn?
significantly improve carer well-being as measured
by HADS depression, and was associated with a Given the largely negative findings, should
trend towards higher costs to society. There was a befriending still be provided as a support
trend towards increased health-related quality of intervention for carers? It should be emphasised
life for those randomised to intervention, but this that the negative results reported here are for the
was not statistically significant. In terms of the intervention ‘access to a befriender facilitator’ and
main outcomes for the ITT analyses, therefore, not ‘receipt of befriending’. Given that only
this is a strongly negative study. around half of the carers offered befriending
chose to take up the offer, should it be concluded
Secondary analyses on measures of carer anxiety, that befriending is not a service that carers want?
loneliness, positive affect and perceived global Lack of service uptake by carers is well known for
health showed no significant benefits for both standard services and research interventions.
intervention over control, and similarly there were Although awareness is a vital precursor to service
no differences between intervention and control use,83 awareness alone does not account for
on either a subgroup analysis with spouse carers or whether or not carers uptake services. Other
a comparison of proportions of people with factors include work status, socio-economic status
dementia entering residential or nursing care. and level of burden.84,85 Lack of time is associated
Looking from alternative perspectives (statutory, with non-uptake,86 although increased burden,
household and voluntary sector) did not offer any depression or distress may increase uptake.86–88
convincing evidence for the value of the It is apparent that no one service is appropriate
intervention, and extending the time-frame for all carers, and that each carer may have
strengthened the evidence against the differing needs over the years spent supporting
intervention. the care recipient. In their work on the ‘caregiving
career’, Aneshensel and colleagues20 suggested
However, two further analyses that suggest the that different interventions are appropriate at
negative findings may be due to methodological difference stages of the care recipient’s illness, for
limitations. First, a cost–utility analysis using the example, before and after diagnosis, during in-
QALYs for the PwD in addition to the carer home care, before and after admission of the care
indicated that access to a BF may be a cost- recipient into long-term residential or nursing
effective intervention. Given the importance of care, and after the death of the care recipient.
care recipient well-being to family carers, it could This research had been expected to show that a
be argued that health economic analyses of social support intervention would be of greatest
interventions for family carers should include care relevance to those carers for whom the demands
recipient quality of life as part of the primary of caring had impacted adversely on their social
analysis. Secondly, a per-protocol subgroup networks, but were still providing care for the PwD 37
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Discussion and conclusions
at home. This study used the ‘time spent caring’ Is the cost of intervention data
marker of 20 hours or more per week to increase generalisable to locally commissioned
the chance that participants were immersed in the schemes?
caring role. Further analysis of the demographic, The mean cost of the intervention was £1138 per
psychological and social characteristics of carers carer at 15months. Costs varied by scheme, with
who did and did not take up the offer of the largest and longest running scheme having
befriending may inform the inclusion or exclusion lower costs per carer than the smaller schemes.
criteria for any future research on befriending There are economies of scale for both fixed and
interventions or referral criteria for befriending running costs, but once a scheme grows beyond
services. the size at which a BF can support the befrienders
and carers within it, additional staff costs will be
An important consideration for provision of necessary.
befriending services and funding of befriending
schemes is the ‘minimum effective dose’ of The BECCA befriending schemes were set up
befriending. When drawing up the protocol, the specifically for the research trial. The local
researchers proposed providing befriending voluntary organisations involved in setting up the
weekly for 6 months. For the 60 carers who were county-wide BECCA befriending services
matched with befrienders, 42 (71%) were commented on the difference between the scope
befriended for at least 6 months before the end of of these services and the more localised scope of
the befriending scheme (37 before 15-month the services that they would usually run. Factors
follow-up). Many carers found weekly commitment that would increase the expense of the
difficult in the context of their caring role. A large intervention include the ratio of carers to
proportion opted for fortnightly contact, but there befrienders, the travel distances involved and
was no frequency that suited all participants. Once criteria for matching.
relationships were established, they endured, with
39 matches lasting over 1 year, and 30 matched In terms of carer to befriender ratios, 49
carers continuing to meet their befriender beyond befriending volunteers were matched with carers,
the end of the befriending scheme. Of these, 22 giving a ratio of 1.2 to 1. Nationally, the average
became informal friendships and moved away number of users to volunteers is 170 to 52 (3.3 to
from ‘managed’ befriending schemes. That is, 37% 1) for befriending services to older people, with an
befriending relationships became friendships (22 average of 44 users and 32 volunteers (1.4 to 1)
out of 60 matched carers) over the course of the for people with mental health difficulties.80 In a
intervention. The remaining eight remained Norfolk-wide audit of befriending schemes for
‘formal’ befriending relationships, transferred to people who are aged 65 and over,89 the average
being supported within other ongoing befriending number of users and volunteers was 210 and 42,
schemes. The percentage of matches lasting for at respectively (5 to 1). In a befriending scheme
least 6 months was slightly below expectation, specifically for carers of people with dementia, ten
whereas the percentage lasting for 1 year was volunteers support 50 family carers (Mid-Essex
within the expected range. As a comparison, the Alzheimer’s Society befriending programme,
UK-wide survey of 234 general befriending personal communication). In this context, the
services indicated that 89% of befriending BECCA schemes required more trained volunteers
relationships lasted for over 6 months.80 For per scheme user than any of the previously
befriending services for older people, 96% reported schemes, and would therefore be more
of befriending relationships lasted for 6 months costly per carer. This, in part, was due to a policy
and 87% lasted for over 1 year, whereas for decision to require all volunteers to establish one
people with mental ill-health the corresponding match before volunteering for a second match, so
figures were 90% and 54%. For matches lasting that they could assess for themselves the level of
for at least 6 months, the mean duration of emotional demand that they experienced in their
match (to the end of the relationship or the befriending role.
end of the befriending schemes, whichever was
sooner) was 677 days (just under 1 year and 10 Voluntary sector-generated befriending services
months), ranging from 6months and 13 days would more often cover a town and its immediate
to 3 years and 6 months for one of the earliest rural hinterland in order to minimise volunteer
matches. The duration is in keeping with other travel costs and times. Some BECCA volunteers
schemes. For example, in the Norfolk befriending living in rural areas sometimes had to travel for
audit, users received services for between 1 and 4 up to an hour each way to undertake their
38 years.89 befriending task. In some instances this led to
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
decisions to minimise volunteer travel by mixing comment on project information sheets and in
face-to-face meetings with telephone befriending planning recruitment strategies. Consultation
or to meet fortnightly rather than weekly, but for groups can also suggest local links and small area
2hours rather than 1 hour. This will also have initiatives. Such microknowledge is useful in all
meant that initial face-to-face assessment and areas, but especially so in rural areas, where the
introductory visits by BFs would have entailed difficulties with disseminating information to
more travel than non-BECCA befriending schemes hidden communities has already been highlighted.
might have entailed. For these reasons, costs for
Volunteer support
the BECCA befriending service may have been
higher than in a more usual locally implemented Many of the volunteers were above retirement age
befriending service. and there were instances where befriending
arrangements needed also to take account of
Is it safe to involve volunteers?
volunteer health. Some had episodes of ill-health
Overall, few risk issues arose. Active steps were which in some cases prevented them from driving
taken to follow guidelines on good practice in to visit carers or meant that they had to withdraw
supporting volunteers working in settings with from volunteering completely. Both volunteers
potentially vulnerable people.90,91 A code of and carers were supported by the BF through such
confidentiality was maintained, risk assessments episodes to maintain the continuity of the
carried out by BFs, and health and safety befriending relationship according to the wishes of
guidelines were developed in partnership with the the participants. Recent studies such as that of
voluntary organisations helping to provide the older volunteers in Newcastle92 have illustrated
befriending services. Written information and how older people have valued their own
training were provided to ensure that volunteers engagement as befrienders of frailer elders, in
were fully informed about these issues and about which they were able to connect meaningfully with
how they needed to be applied in practice. previous roles in which they had been able to
make a contribution.
There were a few occasions where issues affecting
the safety of befrienders as well as the safety of
Factors to consider in carer
carers, people cared for or other family members
had to be explicitly considered and responded to support research
by the BF. These usually followed instances where
Recruitment
the carer sought to step outside the boundaries of
the befriending relationship in some way. These Recruitment to the project was one of the main
were picked up at an early stage by the befriender, challenges for BECCA, and led to both the
who brought them to the attention of the BF. extension of the recruitment period and the
It was found that the early development of a risk- consequent changes in follow-up schedule. There
assessment procedure as well as befriender were considerable difficulties in recruiting only
training in risk management proved useful in through primary care, and the recognition of
deciding how to respond to such incidents, and carers in primary care is an ongoing area of
responses ranged from BF reminders to the carer concern.93 A move towards multiple strategies, as
involved about their agreement to respect recommended by Adams and colleagues94 and
boundaries to changes in the terms of the DiBartolo and McCrone,95 improved overall
befriender arrangement. These, on two occasions, recruitment, but barriers remained, including
included a change of befriender and type of non-identification with the term ‘carer’, non-
contact from face-to-face visits to telephone facilitative gatekeepers, burden of written
befriending. In all such cases, good working information and a disperse client group.96
relationships were successfully maintained.
Reflecting on the recruitment activity, from the
User involvement
identification of potential participants through to
The local consultation groups were formed to randomisation, it appears that the recruitment
support and develop the befriending scheme strategy that produced the highest number of
intervention. However, their remit soon expanded expressions of interest was not necessarily the most
to include consultation on aspects of research productive strategy for identifying eligible
design and project literature. The authors would participants. Twenty-seven out of 54 GP practices
strongly endorse the involvement of carers and (20 out of 35 in Norfolk; seven out of 19 in
their representatives from the early stages of Suffolk) sent out a total of 484 standard invitation
project development, including opportunity to letters and approved participant information 39
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Discussion and conclusions
sheets. There were 107 responses to the research continence and complementary therapy, carer use
team, representing a response rate of 22% in of support services such as telephone helplines
primary care. Of the 107 respondees, 86 were and support groups, visits to professionals
randomised; that is, 18% of invitees and 80% of (counsellor, chiropodist or other) and childcare
respondees were randomised. From the figures costs were excluded. The costs associated with lost
available from some of the voluntary- and employment to care for a PwD were also excluded,
charitable-sector organisations (especially in for two reasons: first, approximately 66% of carers
Havering and Suffolk), 303 invitations resulted in were retired and therefore had zero cost of lost
45 responses (response rate of 15%) and 25 employment and, secondly, caring time was valued
randomisations; that is, 8% invitees and 55% at a shadow price equal to the average gross wage
respondees were randomised. Figures from the rate. Therefore, forgoing employment to care for a
voluntary- and charitable-sector mailings do not PwD does not represent a loss of productivity to
represent all of the organisations involved, but society, merely a transfer of direct cost from the
seem to indicate that although most expressions of household (lost wages) to indirect benefit (value of
interest for the trial arose from recruitment activity care given). Thus, there is no net change in
within the voluntary sector, activity within primary productivity from a societal perspective, although
care produced a higher proportion of eligible this would have impacts on the analysis from a
carers from those expressing interest. household perspective.
Improving uptake
The value of carer time was calculated on the basis
The issue of intervention uptake arises in much of of the simple question: ‘how many hours in a
the research on carer intervention. A possible 24-hour day are you “on duty” to care for your
strategy for increasing uptake could be to use a relative?’ Many carers responded ‘24 hours per
patient preference design, or to use eligibility day’. This is undoubtedly the case for many, but
criteria that narrow the participant population to for others this was interpreted as being available
those most likely to take up the intervention on the telephone at any time. This is not the
offered. Both strategies would reduce the same as actually being present for 24 hours,
generalisability to the total carer population, but and thus the value of the time may be
increase specificity. In the BECCA trial, the overestimated.
researchers sought the opinion of the user
consultation group on the reasons for low uptake. To obtain a societal cost within the BECCA trial,
The term ‘befriending’ was seen as offputting, in the aim was to measure resource use in the key
that it could imply that a carer was unable to make sectors affected, namely statutory services (health
friends and needed to have one provided. Other and social care), voluntary sector and the
schemes have used terms such as ‘friendly visiting’ household. Data were collected for service use by
or ‘peer support’. Another point made was the both the carer and the PwD, as difficulties arise in
time taken by carers to choose to take up a service. identifying the boundaries of costs between family
Lack of initial uptake does not mean that the carers and care recipients, and the aim was to
service is not wanted, simply that it is not wanted construct a comprehensive longitudinal model of
at that time. In the BECCA trial, a proportion of costs, rather than taking repeated cross-sectional
carers did indeed take up the service some time snapshots of services at the time of each follow-up.
after it was initially offered; on one occasion a Carer and PwD resource-use data were collected
carer came back to the facilitator after 2 years. through carer interview, and therefore the data are
The befriending scheme was still running, but it subject to the vagaries of the individual carer’s
was after the completion of the research interviews recall. Data were not collected from agencies’
for that individual. records, given the large number of agencies
potentially involved, sensitivity to data protection
Measures and data collection
issues and the limitations of using primary care
Costs reported include PwD and carer medication, records to measure secondary and tertiary care
primary and secondary care use, day-care services, use.97 The economic data were collected alongside
home-care and other service use such as meals on clinical data and therefore a balance had to be
wheels, specialist consultant, nurse or other found between comprehensive data collection
healthcare professional visits to the home, respite and the need to minimise interview burden
stays, aids and adaptations, and time spent caring on carers. Resource-use diaries were not used in
for the PwD by carer and friends and family. this trial as it was thought that face-to-face
However, questions on PwD visits from other interviewers would be more engaging for
40 professionals (counsellor, chiropodist or other), participants in a longitudinal trial. Diaries form
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Recommendations for future
part of the methodology for the Canadian
Outcomes Study in Dementia (COSID). Analysis research
of the economic data for the COSID trial was
hampered by the non-return of the monthly This research is strongly suggestive that further
diaries, with 22% of participants failing to return research into access to a befriender facilitator is
at least six out of 12 diaries over the course of redundant. However, the weak evidence of efficacy
the year.98 in the analysis of befrienders receiving at least
6months’ intervention may suggest that further
Measures research into befriending as a form of carer
The main quality of life measure for the trial was support is warranted. Based on the per-protocol
the EQ-5D. Given the limited information on analysis, the effect size was 0.31. A future study
reliability and validity of the EQ5D with the carer with 90% power at 5% significance would need
population, and the measure being limited to around 220 participants per group. In addition,
health-related quality of life, broader measures of the befriending interventions could be used as a
quality of life should be considered in any future control for more formal psychotherapeutic
research. The HTA review panel recommended interventions for carers.
use of the Carer Generated Index of Quality of
Life (CGI-QoL) as a user-defined outcome in Before undertaking further intervention research
addition to a measure of health-related quality of on befriending, it would be of value to establish
life. The CGI-QoL was still under development at the characteristics of carers most likely to take up
the start of 2002. Its use was piloted within the befriending and the befriender–carer
BECCA project and found to be very time- characteristics of successful matches. Information
consuming, leading to interviewee burden. It was relevant to these areas could be derived from
therefore dropped from the interview schedule. further analysis of the BECCA data.
Health-related quality of life for the PwD also
relied on the EQ-5D, using proxy ratings by the Carer intervention research is complicated by the
carer. Although the EQ-5D has better wide range of services offered to and used by
measurement qualities than some other health- carers over the course of the dementia. The
related quality of life measures when carers are service receipt of carers is often not fully taken
used as proxies,99 proxy ratings are known to into account, nor is the interplay between statutory
differ from patients’ ratings.99,100 Given the and voluntary support services and support from
suggestion that cost-effectiveness analyses should families. Greater knowledge of the interaction
take account of the outcomes for both the carer between formal and informal care is needed.101
and PwD, future carer intervention research The BECCA database could be exploited to
should include direct measurement of the clinical explore the interplay of statutory and voluntary
characteristics of the PwD, including behavioural sectors and the family, and indeed a Small Grant
and psychological symptoms. has been provided by the Economic and Social
Research Council (ESRC) to do so. A further
Impact of interviewers complication in carer intervention research is
In carer intervention research, good relations assessing well-being in the context of receipt of
between the interviewers and carers were vital to befriending and placement of the care recipient in
ensure completion of interviews at each time- long-term residential or nursing care. The BECCA
point, and retention in the study over time. In the trial completed follow-up irrespective of location
BECCA trial, many participating carers expressed of the PwD, as carers were keen to see support
an appreciation of having the space to talk with continue beyond their life as a hands-on carer.
someone about their caring experiences. While Such ongoing support should be considered in
there are advantages to carers feeling positive other carer interventions.
about their interview involvement, this also leads
to the potential narrowing of the difference Future cost-effectiveness evaluations of carer
between intervention and control conditions in a support should include outcomes for both the
low-level social support trial. carer and care recipient, and further work is
required on economic methods for carer
Blinding intervention research, including:
Although interviewers did not ask directly about
befriending, it was not possible for interviewers to ● explorations of the relationship between
remain blind to group when carers specifically health-related quality of life measures and
commented on their befriending receipt. other outcome measures 41
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Discussion and conclusions
● identification of methods for minimising work support of carers of people with dementia,
for respondents and interviewers of resource- although there is a suggestion of cost-effectiveness
use data collection in economic studies for the care dyad (carer and care recipient). In
● methods for measuring and valuing carer time common with many services for carers of PwD,
and other informal care inputs for economic uptake of befriending services was not high.
analysis However, the small number of carers who engaged
● additional work to confirm or refute the cost- with befrienders for 6 months or more reported a
effectiveness of befriending from a societal reduction in scores on HADS depression that
point of view. approached statistical significance compared with
controls. Although this study provides only weak
evidence of any beneficial effect, further research
Conclusions into befriending interventions for carers is
warranted.
Access to a befriender facilitator is neither an
effective nor a cost-effective intervention in the
42
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Acknowledgements
The Befriending and Costs of Caring (BECCA) The Steering and Advisory Group is also thanked
project (ISRCTN 08130075) was funded by for their support throughout the project, and
the Health Technology Assessment (HTA) included Emeritus Professor Tom Arie (Chair),
Programme (project 99/34/07) granted to whose suggestion inspired the project, and Ionne
Charlesworth (University College London), Hammond (formerly of the Alzheimer’s Society,
Mugford, Poland, Harvey, Price, Reynolds and Eastern Region).
Shepstone (University of East Anglia). Befriender
expenses were funded by Norfolk and Suffolk Administrative support was provided by Lesley
Social Services, the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Barrett, Lynne Wright, Claire Powell and Helen
Branch of the Alzheimer’s Society and an AdHoc Sayer at different stages of the project.
grant from the Department of Health to North
Contribution of authors
East London Mental Health Trust.
Georgina Charlesworth (Lecturer in Clinical and
The views expressed in this report do not Health Psychology of Old Age) had overall
necessarily reflect those of the funders. responsibility for all aspects of the trial including
drafting of the final report. Miranda Mugford
The Project Management Group met throughout (Professor in Health Economics) had overall
the project, and included the Grantholders Shirley responsibility for economic evaluation and its
Reynolds (Professor in Clinical Psychology, UEA) reporting. Lee Shepstone (Lecturer in Medical
David Price (University of Aberdeen) and Ian Statistics) carried out the efficacy analysis. Edward
Harvey (in addition to the authors contributing to Wilson (Health Foundation Research Training
this report). Fellow) carried out and reported the economic
analyses. Mariamma Thalanany (Research
The befriender facilitators in the three host Associate) drew up the resource-use data collection
schemes are thanked for their support of carers instrument, identified unit costs and designed the
and volunteers. The BFs were: Susan Vaughan costing of the befriending intervention. Fiona
(Norwich and Norfolk Voluntary Services), Carol Poland (Senior Lecturer in Therapy Research)
Higgins, Wendy Herber and Thelma Wingfield held overall responsibility for the befriending
(Age Concern Suffolk), and Jacqui Burke, Lyn intervention.
Taylor and Elizabeth Palfreman (Age Concern
Papers published in other peer-reviewed
Havering).
journals relating to this research
Research staff on the project included Sylvia Charlesworth G, Tzimoula X, Higgs P, Poland F.
Morley, Liz Hooper, Kim Shutt, Sandra Picken and Social networks, befriending and support for
Nicky Knights at UEA; Hilary Clarke and Amy family carers of people with dementia. Quality in
Bartlett in North East London Mental Health Ageing: Policy, Practice and Research 2007;8:37–44.
Trust (London Borough of Havering) and
Xanthippe Tzimoula at UCL, with additional Charlesworth GM, Tzimoula XM, Newman SP.
support from Jamie Murdoch (SAND), Nick Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index (CADI):
Healey (UEA) and Sarah Pennington (UEA). psychometric properties for use with carers of
people with dementia. Aging Ment Health 2007;
The staff and volunteers from the contributing 11:218–25.
voluntary organisations (Appendix 1) are thanked,
especially those who contributed to the Hooper E, Charlesworth G, Poland F, Vaughan S.
consultation groups and in befriender training Recruiting carers and befrienders – experiences
and support, as are all the participating family from the Befriending and Cost of Caring (BECCA)
carers. study. Signpost 2004;9:7–10.
43
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
References
1. Department of Health. Carers (Recognition and 14. Rook KS. Social support versus companionship:
Services) Act 1995. London: HMSO; 1995. effects on life stress, loneliness, and evaluations by
others. J Pers Soc Psychol1987;52:1132–47.
2. Department of Health. Caring about carers:
a national strategy for carers. London: Department 15. Hall-Elston C, Mullins LC. Social relationships,
of Health; 1999. emotional closeness, and loneliness among older
meal program participants. Soc Behav Pers1999;
3. Department of Health. National Service Framework
27:503–18.
for Mental Health. London: Department of Health;
16. The role of the voluntary and community sector in
1999.
service delivery: a cross cutting review. London: The
4. Department of Health. National Service Framework Stationery Office; 2002. URL: http://www.hm-
for Older People. London: Department of Health; treasury.gov.uk/media/8/4/CCRVolSec02.pdf
2001.
17. Taylor M. The best of both worlds: partnership between
5. Office for National Statistics. Carers in Britain. government and voluntary organisations. York: Joseph
2002. URL: www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/ Rowntree Foundation; 1997.
cib0602.pdf. Accessed 13 October 2006.
18. Ware P, Matosevic T, Forder J, Hardy B, Kendall J,
6. Schulz R, O’Brien AT, Bookwala J, Fleissner K. Knapp K, et al. Movement and change:
Psychiatric and physical morbidity effects of independent sector domiciliary care providers
dementia caregiving: prevalence, correlates, and between 1995 and 1999. Health Soc Care Community
causes. Gerontologist1995;35:771–91. 2001;9:334–40.
7. Ory MG, Hoffman RR, Yee JL, Tennstedt S, 19. Ware T, Matosevic T, Hardy B, Knapp K, Kendall J,
Schulz R. Prevalence and impact of caregiving: Forder J. Commissioning care services for older
people in England: the view from care managers,
a detailed comparison between dementia and
nondementia caregivers. Gerontologist1999; users and carers. Ageing Soc2003;23:411–28.
39:177–85. 20. Aneshensel CS, Pearlin LI, Mullan JT, Zarit SH,
Whitlatch CJ. Profiles in caregiving, the unexpected
8. Schulz R, Beach SR. Caregiving as a risk factor for
career. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1995.
mortality – the caregiver health effects study. JAMA
1999;282:2215–19. 21. Schulz R, O’Brien A, Czaja S, Ory M, Norris R,
Martire LM, et al. Dementia caregiver intervention
9. Bowling A. Social support and social networks –
research: in search of clinical significance.
their relationship to the successful and
Gerontologist2002;42:589–602.
unsuccessful survival of elderly people in the
community – an analysis of concepts and a review 22. Charlesworth G, Newman S. Lessons from
of the evidence. Fam Pract1991;8:68–83. psychosocial interventions aimed at caregivers of
people with dementia. In Rockwood G, editor. Trial
10. Bowling A, Grundy E. The association between designs and outcomes in dementia therapeutic research.
social networks and mortality in later life. Rev Clin London: Taylor & Francis; 2005. pp. 235–49.
Gerontol1998;8:353–61.
23. Brodaty H, Green A, Koschera A. Meta-analysis of
11. Lofgren AC, Bucht G, Eriksson S, Winblad B. psychosocial interventions for caregivers of people
A comparative study of the social conditions of with dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc2003;51:657–64.
spouses of long term patients cared for either in
24. Marriott A, Donaldson C, Tarrier N, Burns A.
nursing home or home care. Scand J Caring Sci
Effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural family
1992;6:45–52.
intervention in reducing the burden of care in
12. Croog SH, Burleson JA, Sudilovsky A, Baume RM. carers of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Br J
Spouse caregivers of Alzheimer patients: problem Psychiatry2000;176:557–62.
responses to caregiver burden. Aging Ment Health 25. Barker C, Pistrang N. Psychotherapy and social
2006;10:87–100. support. Clin Psychol Rev2002;22:361–79.
13. Sharlach A, Del Santo T, Greenlee J, Whittier S, 26. Faust D, Zlotnick C. Another dodo bird verdict?
Coon D, Kietzman K, et al. Family caregivers in Revisiting the comparative effectiveness of
California: needs, interventions and programs. San professional and paraprofessional therapists. Clin
Francisco, CA: University of California; 2001. Psychol Psychother1995;2:157. 45
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
References
27. Andersson L. Loneliness research and 41. Drummond MF, Mohide EA, Tew M, Streiner DL,
interventions: a review of the literature. Aging Ment Pringle DM, Gilbert JR. Economic evaluation of a
Health1998;2:264–74. support program for caregivers of demented
elderly. Int J Technol Assess Health Care1991;
28. Cattan M, White M, Bond J, Learmouth A.
7:209–19.
Preventing social isolation and loneliness among
older people: a systematic review of health 42. Knapp M, Marks I, Wolstenholme J, Beecham J,
promotion interventions. Ageing Soc2005; Astin J, Audini B, et al. Home-based versus
25:41–67. hospital-based care for serious mental illness –
29. Hogan BE, Linden W, Najarian B. Social support controlled cost-effectiveness study over four years.
interventions: do they work? Clin Psychol Rev2002; Br J Psychiatry1998;172:506–12.
22:381–440. 43. Donaldson C, Gregson B. Prolonging life at home
30. Taggart AV, Short SD, Barclay L. She has made me – what is the cost? Community Med1989;11:200–9.
feel human again; an evaluation of a volunteer 44. Payton FC, Brennan PF, Silvers JB. Cost
home-based visiting project for mothers. Health justification of a community health information
Soc Care Community2000;8:1–8.
network: the ComputerLink for AD caregivers. In
31. Andrews GJ, Gavin N, Begley S, Brodie D. Proceedings of the 19th Annual Symposium on
Assessing friendships, combating loneliness: users’ Computer Applications in Medical Care; 1995.
views on a ‘befriending scheme’ scheme. Aging Soc pp.566–70.
2003;23:349–62.
45. Brouwer WBF, van Exel NJA, Koopmanschap MA,
32. Brown SL, Ness RM, Vinkour AD, Smith DM. Rutten FFH. The valuation of informal care in
Providing social support may be more beneficial economic appraisal – a consideration of individual
than receiving it: results from a prospective study choice and societal costs of time. Int J Technol Assess
of mortality. Psychol Sci2003;14:320–7. Health Care1999;15:147–60.
33. Sensky T, Turkington D, Kingdon D, Scott JL, 46. McDaid D. Estimating the costs of informal care
Scott J, Siddle R, et al. A randomized controlled for people with Alzheimer’s disease:
trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy for persistent methodological and practical challenges. Int J
symptoms in schizophrenia resistant to Geriatr Psychiatry2001;16:400–5.
medication. Arch Gen Psychiatry2000;57:165–73.
47. Wimo A, Jonsson B, Karlsson G, Winblad B. Health
34. Milne D, Wharton S, James I, Turkington D. economics of dementia. Chichester: John Wiley &
Befriending versus CBT for schizophrenia: Sons; 1998.
a convergent and divergent fidelity check.
48. Koopmanschap MA, Rutten FFH, Vanineveld BM,
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy2006;
Vanroijen L. The friction cost method for
34:25–30.
measuring indirect costs of disease. J Health Econ
35. Harris T, Brown GW, Robinson R. Befriending as 1995;14:171–89.
an intervention for chronic depression among
49. Lipsey MW, Wilson DB. The efficacy of
women in an inner city I: Randomised controlled
trial. Br J Psychiatry1999;174:219–24. psychological, educational, and behavioral
treatment. Confirmation from meta-analysis. Am
36. Calsyn RJ, Munson M, Peaco D, Kupferberg J, Psychol1993;48:1181–209.
Jackson J. A comparison of the effectiveness of
50. Elashoff JD. nQuery Advisor version 5.0 user’s guide.
various approaches to visiting various community
elders. J Gerontol Soc Work1984;7:31–7. Los Angeles, CA; 2002.
37. MacIntyre I, Corradetti P, Roberts J, Browne G, 51. Grant G, Goodenough T, Harvey I. A randomised
Watt S, Lane A. Pilot study of a visitor volunteer controlled trial and economic evaluation of a
programme for community elderly people referrals facilitator between primary care and the
receiving home health care. Health Soc Care voluntary sector. BMJ2000;320:419–23.
Community1999;7:225–8.
52. Milne A, Hatzidimitriadou E,
38. Pillemer K, Suitor JJ. Peer support for Alzheimer’s Chryssamthoupoulou C, Owen T. Caring in later
caregivers: is it enough to make a difference? life. Reviewing the role of older carers. Executive
Research on Aging2002;24:171–92. Summary. University of Kent; 2001.
39. Patel A, Knapp M, Evans A, Perez I, Kalra L. 53. Carers UK. Rural carers. Policy Briefing. London:
Training care givers of stroke patients: economic Carers UK; 2003.
evaluation. BMJ2004;328:1102–4A.
54. Rybarczyk B, Lopez M. Research methods with
40. Brodaty H, Peters KE. Cost effectiveness of a older adults. In Kendall PC, Butcher JN, editors.
training program for dementia carers. Int Handbook of research methods in clinical psychology.
46 Psychogeriatr1991;3:11–22. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley; 1999. pp. 662–80.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
55. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The Hospital Anxiety and 70. Blesa R. Galantamine: therapeutic effects beyond
Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand1983; cognition. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord2000;
67:361–70. 11:28–34.
56. Stroebe W, Stroebe M, Abakoumkin G, Schut H. 71. Davis KL, Marin DB, Kane R, Patrick D, Peskind ER,
The role of loneliness and social support in Raskind MA, et al. The Caregiver Activity Survey
adjustment to loss: a test of attachment versus (CAS): development and validation of a new
stress theory. J Pers Soc Psychol1996;70:1241–9. measure for caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s
disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry1997;12:978–88.
57. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development
and validation of brief measures of positive and 72. Marin DB, Dugue M, Schmeidler J, Santoro J,
negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol Neugroschl J, Zaklad G, et al. The Caregiver
1988;54:1063–70. Activity Survey (CAS): longitudinal validation of an
instrument that measures time spent caregiving
58. Nolan MR, Grant GJ. Regular respite: an evaluation
for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J
of a hospital rota bed scheme for elderly people.
Geriatr Psychiatry2000;15:680–6.
London: Age Concern; 1992.
73. Rubin D. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in
59. Charlesworth G, Tzimoula X, Newman S.
surveys. New Jersey: Wiley & Sons; 1987.
Carers Assessment of Difficulties Index (CADI):
psychometric properties for use with carers of 74. Matthews J. An introduction to randomized controlled
people with dementia. Aging Ment Health2007; trials. London: Arnold/Hodder Headline; 2000.
11:218–25. 75. Dolan P. Modelling valuations for EuroQol health
60. Williamson GM, Schulz R. Caring for a family states. Med Care1997;35:1095–108.
member with cancer – past communal behavior 76. Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Torrance GW,
and affective reactions. J Appl Soc Psychol1995; O’Brien BJ, Stoddart GL. Methods for the economic
25:93–116. evaluation of healthcare programmes. 3rd ed. Oxford:
61. Wenger GC. Support networks and dementia. Int J Oxford University Press; 2005.
Geriatr Psychiatry1994;9:181–94. 77. Rawlins MD. 5 NICE years. Lancet2005;365:907–8.
62. Scharf T, Smith AE. Older people in urban 78. National Centre for Volunteering. Safe and alert:
neighbourhoods: addressing the risk of social good practice advice on volunteers working with
exclusion in later life. In Phillipson C, Allan G, vulnerable clients. London: National Centre for
Morgan D, editors. Social networks and social Volunteering; 2000.
exclusion: sociological and policy perspectives.
79. Scottish Befriending Development Forum.
Aldershot: Ashgate; 2004.
Code of Practice: working together to promote
63. Zimet GD, Dahlem NW, Zimet SG, Farley GK. good practice in befriending. Falkirk: Scottish
The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Befriending Development Forum; 1997.
Support. J Pers Assess1988;52:30–41.
80. Dean J, Goodlad R. Supporting community
64. Stanley MA, Beck JG, Zebb BJ. Psychometric participation: the role and impact of befriending.
properties of the MSPSS in older adults. Aging Pavilion Publishing/Joseph Rowntree Foundation;
Ment Health1998;2:186–93. 1998.
65. Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your 81. Cuijpers P. Depressive disorders in caregivers of
protocol’s too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J dementia patients: a systematic review. Aging Ment
Behav Med1997;4:92–100. Health2005;9:325–30.
66. Brugha T, Bebbington P, Tennant C, Hurry J. 82. Richards K, Moniz-Cook E, Duggan P, Carr I,
The list of threatening experiences – a subset of Wang M. Defining ‘early dementia’ and
12 life event categories with considerable long- monitoring intervention: what measures are useful
term contextual threat. Psychol Med1985; in family caregiving? Aging Ment Health2003;
15:189–94. 7:7–14.
67. Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. 83. Brodaty H, Thomson C, Thompson C, Fine M.
Health Policy1996;37:53–72. Why caregivers of people with dementia and
memory loss don’t use services. Int J Geriatr
68. Dixon S, Deverill M, Gannon M, Brazier J,
Psychiatry2005;20:537–46.
Haggard M. Improving the validity of economic
evaluations alongside controlled trials. J Health 84. Bass DM, Noelker LS. The influence of family
Serv Res Pol1999;4:161–3. caregivers on elders’ use of in-home services.
J Health Soc Behav1987;28:184–96.
69. Beecham J. The Client Service Receipt Inventory.
Discussion Paper 1492. Canterbury: University of 85. Miller B, McFall S. The effect of caregivers’ burden
Kent at Canterbury, Personal Social Services on change in frail older person’s use of formal
Research Unit; 1995. helpers. J Health Soc Behav1991;32:165–79. 47
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
References
86. Monahan DJ, Green VL, Coleman P. Caregiver 98. Herrmann N, Lanctot KL, Sambrook R,
support groups: factors affecting use of services. Lesnikova N, Hebert R, McCracken P, Robillard A,
Soc Work1992;37:254–60. Nguyen E and The COSID Investigators. The
contribution of neuropsychiatric symptoms to the
87. Curry C, Cossich T, Matthews JP, Beresford J,
cost of dementia care. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
McLachlan SA. Uptake of psychosocial referrals in
2006;21:972–76.
an outpatient cancer setting: improving service
accessibility via the referral process. Support Cancer 99. Naglie G, Tomlinson G, Tansey C, Irvine J, Ritvo P,
Care2002;10:549–55. Black SE, et al. Utility-based quality of life
measures in Alzheimer’s disease. Qual Life Res
88. Cowley M, Orbell S. Towards a psychology of
2006;15:631–43.
service use in informal care: social and
psychological variables associated with service 100. Coucill W, Bryan S, Bentham P, Buckley A,
need and uptake amongst carers of learning Laight A. EQ-5D in patients with dementia: an
disabled adults. Psychol Health1999;14:217–39. investigation of inter-rater agreement. Med Care
2001;39:760–71.
89. Moseley A. Befriending schemes in Norfolk; how
should these be developed? Discussion Paper. 101. Nordberg G, von Strauss E, Kareholt I,
Norwich: Norfolk Social Services; 2000. Johansson L, Wimo A. The amount of informal
and formal care among non-demented and
90. Green T, Stuart M. The good practice guide, National
demented elderly persons – results from a Swedish
Centre for Volunteering. London: National Centre
population-based study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
for Volunteering; 1998.
2005;20:862–71.
91. Hawkins S, Restall M. Volunteers across the NHS:
102. Netten A, Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care
improving the patient experience and creating a patient-
2002. Canterbury: Personal Social Services
led service. London: Volunteering England; 2006.
Research Unit, University of Kent; 2002.
92. Baines S, Lie M, Wheelock J. Volunteering, self-help
103. Department of Health. National schedule of
and citizenship in later life. Newcastle: University of
performance costs 2005. URL: http://www.dh.
Newcastle; 2006.
gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/
93. Princess Royal Trust. Primary carers – identifying and PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_4133221.
providing support to carers in primary care. Executive Accessed 10 December 2007.
Summary. Princess Royal Trust; 2003.
104. Netten A, Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care
94. Adams J, Silverman M, Musa D, Peele P. 2005. Canterbury: Personal Social Services
Recruiting older adults for clinical trials. Control Research Unit, University of Kent; 2005.
Clin Trials1997;18:14–26.
105. National Audit Office. NHS Direct in England.
95. DiBartolo MC, McCrone S. Recruitment of rural Report 2002. URL: http://www.nao.org.uk/
dwelling older adults: barriers, challenges, publications/nao_reports/01-02/0102505.pdf.
strategies. Aging Ment Health2003;7:75–82. Accessed 10 December 2007.
96. Hooper E, Charlesworth G, Poland F, Vaughan S. 106. The AA. Motoring costs 2005.URL:http://www.
Recruiting carers and befrienders: experiences theaa.com/motoring_advice/running_costs/
from the Befriending and Cost of Caring (BECCA) petrol2005.pdf. Accessed 10 December 2007.
study. Signpost2004;9:7–10.
107. Office for National Statistics. 2005 Annual survey
97. Byford S, Leese M, Knapp M, Seivewright H, of hours and earnings. Analysis by all employees,
Cameron S, Jones V, et al. Comparison of Table 1.5a. URL: http://www.statistics.gov.uk/
alternative methods of collection of service use downloads/theme_labour/ASHE_2005/
data for the economic evaluation of health care 2005_all_employees.pdf. Accessed 10 December
interventions. Health Econ2007;16:531–6. 2007.
48
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Appendix 1
Organisations involved in the trial
ACCESS, Age Concern Suffolk Rookery Medical Centre, Newmarket, Suffolk
ACCESS, Younger People with Dementia, Age Suffolk Social Services
Concern Suffolk Stowmarket Volunteer Centre, Stowmarket, Suffolk
Age Concern, Havering, London Suffolk Acre, Ipswich, Suffolk
Age Concern, Norfolk Suffolk Association Voluntary Organisation (SAVO)
Alzheimer’s Society Suffolk Carers, Suffolk
Beccles Volunteer Bureau, Beccles, Suffolk Waveney Primary Care Trust, Suffolk
Bury Volunteer Group, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk
Community Mental Health Nursing Services, The SAND group of practices (Thorpewood
Norwich Surgery; Manor Farm Close, Drayton; Bacon Road
Experience Corps, Cambridge Medical Centre; Orchard St 1; Botesdale H/C,
Hadleigh Volunteer Centre, Suffolk Diss; Bungay) is thanked for their assistance in
Halesworth Volunteer Group, Suffolk recruitment, as are the following: Acle, Coastal
Health Centre, Ipswich, Suffolk Villages Practices (Mensby, Ormesby, Caister,
Ipswich Volunteer Centre, Suffolk Martham), King Street, Great Yarmouth; Central
Ixworth GP Surgery, Ixworth, Suffolk Surgery, Great Yarmouth; Aldborough; Holt
Julian Hospital, Norwich Medical Practice; Old Palace Medical Practice;
Lowestoft Volunteer Group, Suffolk Castle Partnership; Trinity St (& Bowthorpe); Oak
Norfolk Social Services St Medical Practice; Manor Dr, Litcham;
Norwich & Norfolk Voluntary Services (NVS) Watlington Medical Centre; Carole Brown H/C,
Norwich & District Carers Forum, Norwich Dersingham; Gayton Road; Grimston Medical
Nursing & Patient Services, Ipswich Hospital NHS Centre, Kings Lynn; Woodbridge Road, Ipswich;
Trust, Suffolk Chesterfield Drive, Ipswich; Dr Jones & Partners,
Pabulum Project, Norwich Bury.
Rethink Disability, Stowmarket, Suffolk
49
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Appendix 2
Unit costs and sources
Item Unit Cost Source/notes
Hospital visits
NHS inpatient per night £309.77 2002 cost of £273 inflated to 2005 (PSSRU, 2002)102
NHS A&E attendance per visit £106.00 NHS reference costs 2005,103NHS trust and PCT
combined schedule, TOPS FA, code 180
NHS outpatient attendance per visit £93.04 2002 cost of £82 inflated to 2005 (PSSRU, 2002)102
NHS day-case attendance per visit £93.04 Assumed same as outpatient cost
NHS other attendance per visit £93.04 Assumed same as outpatient cost
Primary care
GP surgery visit per visit £24.00 Per surgery consultation lasting 10 minutes (PSSRU,
2005, P133)104
GP home visit per visit £69.00 Per home visit lasting 13.2 minutes +12 minutes travel
(PSSRU 2005, P133)104
GP telephone contact per call £25.00 Per telephone conversation lasting 10.8 minutes (PSSRU,
2005, P133)104
Nurse surgery visit per visit £10.00 Per consultation, including qualification costs (PSSRU,
2005, P130)104
Nurse home visit per visit £23.00 Per district nurse home visit, including qualification costs
(PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
Nurse telephone contact per call £18.02 National Audit Office report on NHS Direct in England,
2002, inflated to 2005105
Other surgery visit per visit £10.00 Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Other home visit per visit £23.00 Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Other telephone contact per call £18.02 Assumed same as nurse surgery visit
Travel costs
Private car per mile £0.34 AA motoring costs (2005)106
Community transport per mile £1.75 Trial data, average patient transport service journey
Visits to other professionals
NHS counsellor, home visit per visit £167.81 NHS psychologist domiciliary visit (NHS reference costs,
2005)103
NHS counsellor, clinic visit per visit £39.00 Per hour counselling service in primary care (PSSRU,
2005, P160)104
NHS chiropodist, home visit per visit £20.00 Per home visit, community chiropodist (PSSRU, 2005,
P120)104
NHS chiropodist, clinic visit per visit £11.00 Per clinic visit, community chiropodist (PSSRU, 2005,
P120)104
NHS other, home visit per visit £20.00 Assumed same as chiropodist
NHS other, clinic visit per visit £11.00 Assumed same as chiropodist
Day care/day hospital
Local authority day care per day £38.00 Per day, local authority social services day care for
people with mental health problems (PSSRU, 2005,
P58)104
continued
51
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 2
Item Unit Cost Source/notes
Voluntary-sector day care per day £37.00 Per day, voluntary/not-for-profit organisation providing
day care for people with mental health problems
(PSSRU, 2005, P59)104
Day hospital per day £57.00 Per day, NHS trust day care for people with mental
health problems (PSSRU, 2005, P57)104
Home care
Sitting service per session £11.50 Mean cost of five agencies in Torbay
Home care per weekday £13.00 Local authority home care worker (PSSRU, 2005,
hour P141)104
Other per session £12.25 Assumed mean of sitting service and home care service
Other services
Meals on wheels per meal £2.27 Mean cost of ten councils (Haringey, Trafford,
Manchester, Powys, Isle of Man, Northamptonshire,
Medway, North Tyneside, Birmingham, Tameside)
Other per unit £13.00 1 hour of housework, local authority care worker
(PSSRU, 2005, P141)104
Occasional visits to the home/community services
NHS district nurse, home visit per visit £23.00 District nurse home visit (PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
NHS district nurse, clinic visit per visit £46.00 District nurse per hour in clinic (PSSRU, 2005, P125)104
NHS district nurse, telephone per call £46.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
contact
NHS occupational therapist, per visit £54.00 Per home visit, NHS community occupational therapist
home visit (PSSRU, 2005, P118)104
NHS occupational therapist, per visit £20.00 Per clinic visit, NHS community occupational therapist
clinic visit (PSSRU, 2005, P118)104
NHS occupational therapist, per call £20.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
telephone contact
NHS psychiatrist, home visit per visit £87.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS psychiatrist, clinic visit per visit £87.00 Consultant: psychiatric cost per hour, including
qualification costs (PSSRU, 2005, P186)104
NHS psychiatrist, telephone contact per call £87.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS psychologist, home visit per visit £167.81 Domiciliary visit, clinical/consultant psychologist (NHS
reference, costs, 2005)104
NHS psychologist, clinic visit per visit £44.00 Per professional chargeable hour, clinic psychologist
(PSSRU, 2005, P121)104
NHS psychologist, telephone contact per call £44.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS CPN, home visit per visit £31.00 Per home visit, including qualification costs (PSSRU,
2005, P126)104
NHS CPN, clinic visit per visit £64.00 Per hour clinic contact, including qualification costs
(PSSRU, 2005, P126)104
NHS CPN, telephone contact per call £64.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
Social worker, home visit per visit £58.00 Per hour of home visiting (PSSRU, 2005, P139)104
(children social worker; adult home visit cost not
available)
Social worker, clinic visit per visit £35.00 Per hour of client-related work (PSSRU, 2005, P139)104
Social worker, telephone contact per call £35.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
NHS physiotherapist, home visit per visit £54.00 Per physiotherapist home visit, including qualification
cost (PSSRU, 2005, P117)104
continued
52
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Item Unit Cost Source/notes
NHS physiotherapist, clinic visit per visit £20.00 Per physiotherapist clinic visit, including qualification cost
(PSSRU, 2005, P117)104
NHS physiotherapist, telephone per call £20.00 Assumed same as clinic cost
contact
NHS other, home visit per visit £23.00 Assumed same as district nurse
NHS other, clinic visit per visit £46.00 Assumed same as district nurse
NHS other, telephone contact per call £46.00 Assumed same as district nurse
Respite stays and care-home admission
NHS residential care per day £62.43 Local authority residential care, based on weekly rate/7
(PSSRU, 2005, P49)104
NHS respite care per day £62.43 Assumed same as residential care
NHS nursing care per day £75.14 Private nursing home for older people, based on weekly
rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P31)104
NHS EMI care per day £175.14 Psychiatric reprovision package, nursing home
placement, weekly rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P64)104
Voluntary residential care per day £55.00 Voluntary agency residential care, based on weekly
rate/7 (PSSRU, 2005, P51)104
Voluntary respite care per day £62.43 Assumed same as NHS residential care
Voluntary nursing care per day £75.14 Assumed same as NHS nursing care
Voluntary EMI care per day £175.14 Assumed same as NHS EMI care
Dual registered per week £437.00 Assumed same as local authority residential care, weekly
rate
Other per week £437.00 Assumed same as local authority residential care, weekly
rate
Complementary therapy
Complementary therapy per session £35.00 Notional average cost of range of interventions costing
between £20 and £65 per session, collected from
Internet price lists from range of clinics
Carer’s assessment
Carer’s assessment per £74.25 Community mental health team per hour of patient
assessment contact, including travel costs (PSSRU, 2005, P150)104
Carer social support
Social support per session £10.00 Notional cost, e.g. of yoga class, outings, tea dance club
Indirect costs – value of caring time
Gross average wage rate per hour £13.11 Gross hourly rate for women and men, UK, 2005
(ONS)107
EMI, elderly mentally infirm; PSSRU, Personal Social Services Research Unit.
53
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Appendix 3
Resource-use quantities at 15 months
(complete case analysis)
Intervention Control Difference
in mean
Units Valid n Mean SD Valid n Mean SD
PwD hospital visits
Inpatient nights nights 93 6.89 16.25 102 11.51 24.80 –4.63
A&E visit visits 94 0.30 0.96 103 0.31 1.24 –0.01
Outpatient visit visits 94 1.78 2.73 103 1.57 2.40 0.21
Day case visits 94 0.13 0.58 103 0.23 1.09 –0.10
PwD GP surgery visits
Surgery visits visits 94 4.32 6.46 102 4.91 7.56 –0.59
Home visits visits 94 1.82 3.53 102 3.52 12.91 –1.69
Telephone calls calls 94 1.54 4.18 102 1.58 7.60 –0.04
PwD day care/day hospital visits 94 54.97 86.27 104 51.43 68.55 3.54
PwD home care hours 87 185.80 549.98 100 99.72 177.91 86.08
PwD other services
Meals meals 90 5.25 26.22 97 7.62 49.58 –2.37
Other service NHS/voluntary hours 90 1.08 5.44 97 0.27 2.64 0.81
Other service private weeks 90 13.61 26.46 97 19.72 39.61 –6.11
PwD occasional visits to home
Home visits visits 93 5.87 7.39 104 8.52 18.41 –2.65
Clinic visits visits 94 1.50 4.19 104 2.01 5.22 –0.51
Telephone calls call 94 1.10 5.09 104 0.22 1.15 0.87
PwD respite stays
Residential care nights 94 6.54 16.11 104 6.24 17.14 0.31
Respite care nights 94 2.31 8.51 104 0.37 2.78 1.94
Nursing home nights 94 1.00 6.58 104 1.87 9.84 –0.86
EMI nights 94 1.28 5.17 104 2.33 21.09 –1.05
Hours spent caring for PwD hours 94 7529.64 3448.35 105 7768.59 3587.45 –238.95
by carer
Hours spent caring for PwD hours 81 282.70 720.84 87 269.55 364.79 13.14
by family/friends
Carer assessment number 94 0.26 0.53 100 0.23 0.47 0.03
Carer GP surgery visits
Surgery visits visits 99 6.70 7.22 106 6.61 5.88 0.08
Home visits visits 99 0.19 0.84 106 0.49 2.35 –0.30
Telephone calls calls 99 0.39 1.32 106 0.65 1.85 –0.25
Carer hospital visits
Inpatient nights nights 99 0.49 1.53 105 1.20 3.62 –0.71
A&E visit visits 99 0.12 0.58 105 0.29 1.12 –0.17
Outpatient visit visits 98 2.21 3.38 105 2.16 4.12 0.05
Day case visits 99 0.81 6.32 105 0.12 0.43 0.69
Other visits 99 0.13 0.89 105 0.05 0.25 0.08
Carer community services
Home visits visits 99 1.13 4.87 106 0.68 3.89 0.45
Clinic visits visits 99 0.22 1.17 106 0.41 2.28 –0.18
Carer complementary therapy sessions 98 3.11 12.60 106 2.60 8.05 0.51
Carer social support sessions 98 30.65 51.07 103 31.21 52.66 –0.56
Carer social worker visits 115 0.35 2.56 118 0.14 0.42 0.21
Carer other services units 98 6.79 16.78 104 4.79 13.60 2.01
PwD in care weeks 88 5.47 13.95 98 2.58 10.21 2.89
55
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.

Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Appendix 4
Detailed breakdown of per-carer/person with
dementia costs at 15 months
57
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Appendix 4
58
puorg
lortnoC
puorg
noitnevretnI
tceridnI
stsoc
tceriD
tceridnI
stsoc
tceriD
lateicoS
dlohesuoH
yratnuloV
yrotutatS
lateicoS
dlohesuoH
yratnuloV
yrotutatS
048£
25£
0£
887£
887£
37£
0£
517£
noitacidem
DwP
255,3£
34£
0£
905,3£
314,2£
1£
0£
314,2£
stisiv latipsoh
DwP
711£
82£
0£
98£
03£
41£
0£
71£
latipsoh ot levart
DwP
242£
0£
0£
242£
712£
0£
0£
712£
stisiv yregrus PG
DwP
7£
7£
0£
0£
6£
6£
0£
1£
yregrus
PG ot levart
DwP
269,1£
331£
591£
436,1£
521,2£
292£
942£
385,1£
latipsoh
yad/erac yad
DwP
464£
06£
0£
504£
855£
641£
0£
214£
erac yad ot levart
DwP
143,2£
480,1£
232£
520,1£
988,3£
006,1£
643£
349,1£
erac emoh
DwP
983£
463£
0£
42£
903£
792£
1£
01£
secivres rehto
DwP
863£
1£
84£
023£
003£
2£
91£
972£
emoh
ot
stisiv lanoisacco
DwP
377£
861£
65£
945£
136£
352£
74£
233£
syats etipser
DwP
942£
212£
7£
03£
112£
581£
2£
52£
snoitatpada
dna sdia
DwP
403,11£
251,2£
735£
416,8£
874,11£
968,2£
566£
549,7£
157,001£
157,001£
117,89£
117,89£
DwP
rof
gnirac
tneps emit fo
eulaV
661£
821£
83£
473£
371£
002£
erac ni DwP ot
levarT
619,001£
157,001£
821£
83£
480,99£
117,89£
371£
002£
841,4£
841,4£
682,4£
682,4£
morf
troppus/pleh
ni emit fo
eulaV
sdneirf/ylimaf
71£
71£
02£
02£
tnemssessa
reraC
974£
601£
373£
488£
371£
117£
noitacidem
reraC
661£
661£
241£
0£
241£
stisiv yregrus PG
reraC
11£
8£
3£
11£
8£
3£
yregrus
PG ot levart
reraC
820,1£
104£
726£
425£
57£
944£
stisiv latipsoh
reraC
12£
61£
5£
32£
02£
4£
stisiv
latipsoh
rerac ot tropsnarT
94£
51£
43£
53£
3£
1£
13£
secivres
ytinummoc
reraC
77£
83£
71£
22£
95£
15£
4£
3£
ypareht
yratnemelpmoc
reraC
21£
01£
3£
02£
02£
0£
0£
snoitatpada
dna sdia
reraC
272£
09£
35£
821£
112£
66£
64£
99£
troppus laicos
reraC
07£
66£
4£
24£
73£
5£
levart
troppus laicos
reraC
11£
11£
22£
22£
rekrow laicos
reraC
86£
86£
901£
901£
secivres rehto
reraC
082,2£
718£
17£
293,1£
101,2£
165£
15£
984,1£
471,2£
393£
99£
286,1£
671,4£
802,1£
869,2£
erac otni enog
DwP
tsoc noitnevretnI
11£
11£
831,1£
831,1£
tceriD
02£
02£
104£
104£
tceridnI
258,021£
819,401£
984,3£
707£
737,11£
566,221£
893,301£
118,4£
617£
047,31£
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Health Technology Assessment reports
published to date
Volume 1, 1997 No. 11 No. 6
Newborn screening for inborn errors of Effectiveness of hip prostheses in
No. 1
metabolism: a systematic review. primary total hip replacement: a critical
Home parenteral nutrition: a systematic
By Seymour CA, Thomason MJ, review of evidence and an economic
review.
Chalmers RA, Addison GM, Bain MD, model.
By Richards DM, Deeks JJ, Sheldon
Cockburn F,et al. By Faulkner A, Kennedy LG,
TA, Shaffer JL.
Baxter K, Donovan J, Wilkinson M,
No. 2 No. 12 Bevan G.
Routine preoperative testing:
Diagnosis, management and screening
a systematic review of the evidence. No. 7
of early localised prostate cancer.
By Munro J, Booth A, Nicholl J. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in colorectal
A review by Selley S, Donovan J,
surgery: a systematic review of
Faulkner A, Coast J, Gillatt D.
No. 13 randomised controlled trials.
No. 3 Systematic review of the effectiveness By Song F, Glenny AM.
The diagnosis, management, treatment of laxatives in the elderly.
and costs of prostate cancer in England By Petticrew M, Watt I, Sheldon T. No. 8
Bone marrow and peripheral blood
and Wales.
No. 14 stem cell transplantation for malignancy.
A review by Chamberlain J, Melia J,
When and how to assess fast-changing A review by Johnson PWM, Simnett SJ,
Moss S, Brown J.
technologies: a comparative study of Sweetenham JW, Morgan GJ, Stewart LA.
No. 4 medical applications of four generic
No. 9
Screening for fragile X syndrome. technologies.
Screening for speech and language
A review by Murray J, Cuckle H, A review by Mowatt G, Bower DJ,
delay: a systematic review of the
Taylor G, Hewison J. Brebner JA, Cairns JA, Grant AM,
literature.
McKee L.
No. 5 By Law J, Boyle J, Harris F, Harkness
A review of near patient testing in A, Nye C.
primary care. Volume 2, 1998 No. 10
By Hobbs FDR, Delaney BC,
Resource allocation for chronic stable
Fitzmaurice DA, Wilson S, Hyde CJ, No. 1
angina: a systematic review of
Thorpe GH,et al. Antenatal screening for Down’s
effectiveness, costs and
syndrome.
No. 6 A review by Wald NJ, Kennard A, cost-effectiveness of alternative
Systematic review of outpatient services Hackshaw A, McGuire A. interventions.
for chronic pain control. By Sculpher MJ, Petticrew M,
By McQuay HJ, Moore RA, Eccleston No. 2 Kelland JL, Elliott RA, Holdright DR,
C, Morley S, de C Williams AC. Screening for ovarian cancer: Buxton MJ.
a systematic review.
No. 7 No. 11
By Bell R, Petticrew M, Luengo S,
Neonatal screening for inborn errors of Detection, adherence and control of
Sheldon TA.
metabolism: cost, yield and outcome. hypertension for the prevention of
A review by Pollitt RJ, Green A, No. 3 stroke: a systematic review.
McCabe CJ, Booth A, Cooper NJ, Consensus development methods, and By Ebrahim S.
Leonard JV,et al. their use in clinical guideline No. 12
No. 8 development. Postoperative analgesia and vomiting,
Preschool vision screening. A review by Murphy MK, Black NA, with special reference to day-case
A review by Snowdon SK, Lamping DL, McKee CM, Sanderson surgery: a systematic review.
CFB, Askham J,et al.
Stewart-Brown SL. By McQuay HJ, Moore RA.
No. 9 No. 4 No. 13
Implications of socio-cultural contexts A cost–utility analysis of interferon Choosing between randomised and
for the ethics of clinical trials. beta for multiple sclerosis. nonrandomised studies: a systematic
A review by Ashcroft RE, Chadwick By Parkin D, McNamee P, Jacoby A, review.
DW, Clark SRL, Edwards RHT, Frith L, Miller P, Thomas S, Bates D. By Britton A, McKee M, Black N,
Hutton JL. McPherson K, Sanderson C, Bain C.
No. 5
No. 10 Effectiveness and efficiency of methods No. 14
A critical review of the role of neonatal of dialysis therapy for end-stage renal Evaluating patient-based outcome
hearing screening in the detection of disease: systematic reviews. measures for use in clinical
congenital hearing impairment. By MacLeod A, Grant A, trials.
By Davis A, Bamford J, Wilson I, Donaldson C, Khan I, Campbell M, A review by Fitzpatrick R, Davey C,
Ramkalawan T, Forshaw M, Wright S. Daly C,et al. Buxton MJ, Jones DR. 59
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 15 No. 5 No. 17 (Pt 1)
Ethical issues in the design and conduct Methods for evaluating area-wide and The debridement of chronic wounds:
of randomised controlled trials. organisation-based interventions in a systematic review.
A review by Edwards SJL, Lilford RJ, health and health care: a systematic By Bradley M, Cullum N, Sheldon T.
Braunholtz DA, Jackson JC, Hewison J, review.
Thornton J. By Ukoumunne OC, Gulliford MC, No. 17 (Pt 2)
Chinn S, Sterne JAC, Burney PGJ. Systematic reviews of wound care
No. 16 management: (2) Dressings and topical
Qualitative research methods in health No. 6 agents used in the healing of chronic
technology assessment: a review of the Assessing the costs of healthcare wounds.
literature. technologies in clinical trials. By Bradley M, Cullum N, Nelson EA,
By Murphy E, Dingwall R, Greatbatch A review by Johnston K, Buxton MJ, Petticrew M, Sheldon T, Torgerson D.
D, Parker S, Watson P. Jones DR, Fitzpatrick R.
No. 18
No. 17 No. 7 A systematic literature review of spiral
The costs and benefits of paramedic Cooperatives and their primary care and electron beam computed
skills in pre-hospital trauma care. emergency centres: organisation and tomography: with particular reference to
By Nicholl J, Hughes S, Dixon S, impact. clinical applications in hepatic lesions,
Turner J, Yates D. By Hallam L, Henthorne K.
pulmonary embolus and coronary artery
No. 18 No. 8 disease.
Systematic review of endoscopic Screening for cystic fibrosis. By Berry E, Kelly S, Hutton J,
ultrasound in gastro-oesophageal A review by Murray J, Cuckle H, Harris KM, Roderick P, Boyce JC, et al.
cancer. Taylor G, Littlewood J, Hewison J.
No. 19
By Harris KM, Kelly S, Berry E,
Hutton J, Roderick P, Cullingworth J, et al. No. 9 What role for statins? A review and
A review of the use of health status economic model.
No. 19 measures in economic evaluation. By Ebrahim S, Davey Smith G,
Systematic reviews of trials and other By Brazier J, Deverill M, Green C, McCabe C, Payne N, Pickin M, Sheldon
studies. Harper R, Booth A. TA,et al.
By Sutton AJ, Abrams KR, Jones DR,
Sheldon TA, Song F. No. 10 No. 20
Methods for the analysis of quality-of- Factors that limit the quality, number
No. 20 life and survival data in health and progress of randomised controlled
Primary total hip replacement surgery: technology assessment. trials.
a systematic review of outcomes and A review by Billingham LJ, Abrams A review by Prescott RJ, Counsell CE,
modelling of cost-effectiveness KR, Jones DR. Gillespie WJ, Grant AM, Russell IT,
associated with different prostheses. Kiauka S,et al.
A review by Fitzpatrick R, Shortall E, No. 11
Sculpher M, Murray D, Morris R, Lodge Antenatal and neonatal No. 21
M,et al. haemoglobinopathy screening in the Antimicrobial prophylaxis in total hip
UK: review and economic analysis. replacement: a systematic review.
Volume 3, 1999 By Zeuner D, Ades AE, Karnon J, By Glenny AM, Song F.
Brown J, Dezateux C, Anionwu EN.
No. 1 No. 22
Informed decision making: an annotated No. 12 Health promoting schools and health
bibliography and systematic review. Assessing the quality of reports of promotion in schools: two systematic
randomised trials: implications for the reviews.
By Bekker H, Thornton JG,
conduct of meta-analyses. By Lister-Sharp D, Chapman S,
Airey CM, Connelly JB, Hewison J,
A review by Moher D, Cook DJ, Jadad Stewart-Brown S, Sowden A.
Robinson MB,et al. AR, Tugwell P, Moher M, Jones A,et al.
No. 23
No. 2 No. 13 Economic evaluation of a primary care-
Handling uncertainty when performing ‘Early warning systems’ for identifying based education programme for patients
economic evaluation of healthcare new healthcare technologies. with osteoarthritis of the knee.
interventions. By Robert G, Stevens A, Gabbay J.
A review by Lord J, Victor C,
A review by Briggs AH, Gray AM.
No. 14 Littlejohns P, Ross FM, Axford JS.
No. 3 A systematic review of the role of human
The role of expectancies in the placebo papillomavirus testing within a cervical Volume 4, 2000
effect and their use in the delivery of screening programme.
health care: a systematic review. No. 1
By Cuzick J, Sasieni P, Davies P,
By Crow R, Gage H, Hampson S, Adams J, Normand C, Frater A,et al. The estimation of marginal time
Hart J, Kimber A, Thomas H. preference in a UK-wide sample
No. 15 (TEMPUS) project.
No. 4 Near patient testing in diabetes clinics: A reviewby Cairns JA, van der Pol
A randomised controlled trial of appraising the costs and outcomes. MM.
different approaches to universal
By Grieve R, Beech R, Vincent J,
antenatal HIV testing: uptake and No. 2
Mazurkiewicz J.
acceptability. Annex: Antenatal HIV Geriatric rehabilitation following
testing – assessment of a routine No. 16 fractures in older people: a systematic
voluntary approach. Positron emission tomography: review.
By Simpson WM, Johnstone FD, Boyd establishing priorities for health By Cameron I, Crotty M, Currie C,
FM, Goldberg DJ, Hart GJ, Gormley technology assessment. Finnegan T, Gillespie L, Gillespie W,
60 SM,et al. A review by Robert G, Milne R. et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 3 No. 14 No. 24
Screening for sickle cell disease and The determinants of screening uptake Outcome measures for adult critical
thalassaemia: a systematic review with and interventions for increasing uptake: care: a systematic review.
supplementary research. a systematic review. By Hayes JA, Black NA,
By Davies SC, Cronin E, Gill M, By Jepson R, Clegg A, Forbes C, Jenkinson C, Young JD, Rowan KM,
Greengross P, Hickman M, Normand C. Lewis R, Sowden A, Kleijnen J. Daly K,et al.
No. 4 No. 15 No. 25
Community provision of hearing aids The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness A systematic review to evaluate the
and related audiology services. of prophylactic removal of wisdom effectiveness of interventions to
A review by Reeves DJ, Alborz A, teeth. promote the initiation of
Hickson FS, Bamford JM. A rapid review by Song F, O’Meara S, breastfeeding.
Wilson P, Golder S, Kleijnen J. By Fairbank L, O’Meara S, Renfrew
No. 5
MJ, Woolridge M, Sowden AJ,
False-negative results in screening No. 16
Lister-Sharp D.
programmes: systematic review of Ultrasound screening in pregnancy: a
impact and implications. systematic review of the clinical No. 26
By Petticrew MP, Sowden AJ, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and Implantable cardioverter defibrillators:
Lister-Sharp D, Wright K. women’s views. arrhythmias. A rapid and systematic
By Bricker L, Garcia J, Henderson J, review.
No. 6
Mugford M, Neilson J, Roberts T,et al. By Parkes J, Bryant J, Milne R.
Costs and benefits of community
postnatal support workers: a No. 17 No. 27
randomised controlled trial. A rapid and systematic review of the Treatments for fatigue in multiple
By Morrell CJ, Spiby H, Stewart P, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of sclerosis: a rapid and systematic
Walters S, Morgan A. the taxanes used in the treatment of review.
No. 7 advanced breast and ovarian cancer. By Brañas P, Jordan R, Fry-Smith A,
Implantable contraceptives (subdermal By Lister-Sharp D, McDonagh MS, Burls A, Hyde C.
implants and hormonally impregnated Khan KS, Kleijnen J. No. 28
intrauterine systems) versus other forms No. 18 Early asthma prophylaxis, natural
of reversible contraceptives: two Liquid-based cytology in cervical history, skeletal development and
systematic reviews to assess relative screening: a rapid and systematic review. economy (EASE): a pilot randomised
effectiveness, acceptability, tolerability By Payne N, Chilcott J, McGoogan E. controlled trial.
and cost-effectiveness. By Baxter-Jones ADG, Helms PJ,
By French RS, Cowan FM, Mansour No. 19 Russell G, Grant A, Ross S, Cairns JA,
DJA, Morris S, Procter T, Hughes D, Randomised controlled trial of non- et al.
et al. directive counselling,
cognitive–behaviour therapy and usual No. 29
No. 8
general practitioner care in the Screening for hypercholesterolaemia
An introduction to statistical methods
management of depression as well as versus case finding for familial
for health technology assessment.
mixed anxiety and depression in hypercholesterolaemia: a systematic
A review by White SJ, Ashby D,
primary care. review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
Brown PJ.
By King M, Sibbald B, Ward E, Bower By Marks D, Wonderling D,
No. 9 P, Lloyd M, Gabbay M,et al. Thorogood M, Lambert H, Humphries
Disease-modifying drugs for multiple SE, Neil HAW.
No. 20
sclerosis: a rapid and systematic
Routine referral for radiography of No. 30
review.
patients presenting with low back pain: A rapid and systematic review of the
By Clegg A, Bryant J, Milne R.
is patients’ outcome influenced by GPs’ clinical effectiveness and cost-
No. 10 referral for plain radiography? effectiveness of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Publication and related biases. By Kerry S, Hilton S, Patel S, Dundas antagonists in the medical management
A review by Song F, Eastwood AJ, D, Rink E, Lord J. of unstable angina.
Gilbody S, Duley L, Sutton AJ. By McDonagh MS, Bachmann LM,
No. 21
Golder S, Kleijnen J, ter Riet G.
No. 11 Systematic reviews of wound care
Cost and outcome implications of the management: (3) antimicrobial agents No. 31
organisation of vascular services. for chronic wounds; (4) diabetic foot A randomised controlled trial of
By Michaels J, Brazier J, Palfreyman ulceration. prehospital intravenous fluid
S, Shackley P, Slack R. By O’Meara S, Cullum N, Majid M, replacement therapy in serious trauma.
Sheldon T. By Turner J, Nicholl J, Webber L,
No. 12
Cox H, Dixon S, Yates D.
Monitoring blood glucose control in No. 22
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Using routine data to complement and No. 32
By Coster S, Gulliford MC, Seed PT, enhance the results of randomised Intrathecal pumps for giving opioids in
Powrie JK, Swaminathan R. controlled trials. chronic pain: a systematic review.
By Lewsey JD, Leyland AH, By Williams JE, Louw G, Towlerton G.
No. 13
Murray GD, Boddy FA.
The effectiveness of domiciliary health No. 33
visiting: a systematic review of No. 23 Combination therapy (interferon alfa
international studies Coronary artery stents in the treatment and ribavirin) in the treatment of
and a selective review of the British of ischaemic heart disease: a rapid and chronic hepatitis C: a rapid and
literature. systematic review. systematic review.
By Elkan R, Kendrick D, Hewitt M, By Meads C, Cummins C, Jolly K, By Shepherd J, Waugh N,
Robinson JJA, Tolley K, Blair M,et al. Stevens A, Burls A, Hyde C. Hewitson P. 61
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 34 No. 5 No. 15
A systematic review of comparisons of Eliciting public preferences for Home treatment for mental health
effect sizes derived from randomised healthcare: a systematic review of problems: a systematic review.
and non-randomised studies. techniques. By Burns T, Knapp M,
By MacLehose RR, Reeves BC, By Ryan M, Scott DA, Reeves C, Bate Catty J, Healey A, Henderson J,
Harvey IM, Sheldon TA, Russell IT, A, van Teijlingen ER, Russell EM,et al. Watt H,et al.
Black AMS.
No. 6 No. 16
No. 35 General health status measures for How to develop cost-conscious
Intravascular ultrasound-guided people with cognitive impairment: guidelines.
interventions in coronary artery disease: learning disability and acquired brain By Eccles M, Mason J.
a systematic literature review, with injury.
No. 17
decision-analytic modelling, of outcomes By Riemsma RP, Forbes CA,
The role of specialist nurses in multiple
and cost-effectiveness. Glanville JM, Eastwood AJ, Kleijnen J.
sclerosis: a rapid and systematic review.
By Berry E, Kelly S, Hutton J,
No. 7 By De Broe S, Christopher F,
Lindsay HSJ, Blaxill JM, Evans JA,et al.
An assessment of screening strategies for Waugh N.
No. 36 fragile X syndrome in the UK.
No. 18
A randomised controlled trial to By Pembrey ME, Barnicoat AJ,
A rapid and systematic review of the
evaluate the effectiveness and cost- Carmichael B, Bobrow M, Turner G.
clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of counselling patients with
No. 8 effectiveness of orlistat in the
chronic depression.
Issues in methodological research: management of obesity.
By Simpson S, Corney R, Fitzgerald P,
perspectives from researchers and By O’Meara S, Riemsma R,
Beecham J.
commissioners. Shirran L, Mather L, ter Riet G.
No. 37 By Lilford RJ, Richardson A, Stevens
Systematic review of treatments for A, Fitzpatrick R, Edwards S, Rock F,et al. No. 19
The clinical effectiveness and cost-
atopic eczema.
No. 9 effectiveness of pioglitazone for type 2
By Hoare C, Li Wan Po A, Williams H.
Systematic reviews of wound care diabetes mellitus: a rapid and systematic
No. 38 management: (5) beds; (6) compression; review.
Bayesian methods in health technology (7) laser therapy, therapeutic By Chilcott J, Wight J, Lloyd Jones
assessment: a review. ultrasound, electrotherapy and M, Tappenden P.
By Spiegelhalter DJ, Myles JP, electromagnetic therapy.
No. 20
Jones DR, Abrams KR. By Cullum N, Nelson EA, Flemming
Extended scope of nursing practice: a
K, Sheldon T.
No. 39 multicentre randomised controlled trial
The management of dyspepsia: a No. 10 of appropriately trained nurses and
systematic review. Effects of educational and psychosocial preregistration house officers in pre-
By Delaney B, Moayyedi P, Deeks J, interventions for adolescents with operative assessment in elective general
Innes M, Soo S, Barton P,et al. diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. surgery.
By Hampson SE, Skinner TC, Hart J, By Kinley H, Czoski-Murray C,
No. 40
Storey L, Gage H, Foxcroft D,et al. George S, McCabe C, Primrose J,
A systematic review of treatments for
Reilly C,et al.
severe psoriasis. No. 11
By Griffiths CEM, Clark CM, Chalmers Effectiveness of autologous chondrocyte No. 21
RJG, Li Wan Po A, Williams HC. transplantation for hyaline cartilage Systematic reviews of the effectiveness of
defects in knees: a rapid and systematic day care for people with severe mental
Volume 5, 2001 review. disorders: (1) Acute day hospital versus
By Jobanputra P, Parry D, Fry-Smith admission; (2) Vocational rehabilitation;
No. 1 A, Burls A. (3) Day hospital versus outpatient
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of care.
No. 12
donepezil, rivastigmine and By Marshall M, Crowther R, Almaraz-
Statistical assessment of the learning
galantamine for Alzheimer’s disease: a Serrano A, Creed F, Sledge W,
rapid and systematic review. curves of health technologies. Kluiter H,et al.
By Ramsay CR, Grant AM,
By Clegg A, Bryant J, Nicholson T,
Wallace SA, Garthwaite PH, Monk AF, No. 22
McIntyre L, De Broe S, Gerard K,et al.
Russell IT. The measurement and monitoring of
No. 2 surgical adverse events.
No. 13
The clinical effectiveness and cost- By Bruce J, Russell EM, Mollison J,
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
effectiveness of riluzole for motor Krukowski ZH.
of temozolomide for the treatment of
neurone disease: a rapid and systematic
recurrent malignant glioma: a rapid and No. 23
review.
systematic review. Action research: a systematic review and
By Stewart A, Sandercock J, Bryan S,
By Dinnes J, Cave C, Huang S, guidance for assessment.
Hyde C, Barton PM, Fry-Smith A,et al.
Major K, Milne R. By Waterman H, Tillen D, Dickson R,
No. 3 de Koning K.
No. 14
Equity and the economic evaluation of
A rapid and systematic review of the No. 24
healthcare.
clinical effectiveness and cost- A rapid and systematic review of the
By Sassi F, Archard L, Le Grand J.
effectiveness of debriding agents in clinical effectiveness and cost-
No. 4 treating surgical wounds healing by effectiveness of gemcitabine for the
Quality-of-life measures in chronic secondary intention. treatment of pancreatic cancer.
diseases of childhood. By Lewis R, Whiting P, ter Riet G, By Ward S, Morris E, Bansback N,
62 By Eiser C, Morse R. O’Meara S, Glanville J. Calvert N, Crellin A, Forman D,et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 25 No. 35 No. 9
A rapid and systematic review of the A systematic review of controlled trials Zanamivir for the treatment of influenza
evidence for the clinical effectiveness of the effectiveness and cost- in adults: a systematic review and
and cost-effectiveness of irinotecan, effectiveness of brief psychological economic evaluation.
oxaliplatin and raltitrexed for the treatments for depression. By Burls A, Clark W, Stewart T,
treatment of advanced colorectal cancer. By Churchill R, Hunot V, Corney R, Preston C, Bryan S, Jefferson T,et al.
By Lloyd Jones M, Hummel S, Knapp M, McGuire H, Tylee A,et al.
No. 10
Bansback N, Orr B, Seymour M.
No. 36 A review of the natural history and
No. 26 Cost analysis of child health epidemiology of multiple sclerosis:
Comparison of the effectiveness of surveillance. implications for resource allocation and
inhaler devices in asthma and chronic By Sanderson D, Wright D, Acton C, health economic models.
obstructive airways disease: a systematic Duree D. By Richards RG, Sampson FC,
review of the literature. Beard SM, Tappenden P.
By Brocklebank D, Ram F, Wright J, Volume 6, 2002
No. 11
Barry P, Cates C, Davies L,et al.
No. 1 Screening for gestational diabetes: a
No. 27 A study of the methods used to select systematic review and economic
The cost-effectiveness of magnetic review criteria for clinical audit. evaluation.
resonance imaging for investigation of By Hearnshaw H, Harker R, Cheater By Scott DA, Loveman E, McIntyre L,
the knee joint. F, Baker R, Grimshaw G. Waugh N.
By Bryan S, Weatherburn G, Bungay No. 12
H, Hatrick C, Salas C, Parry D,et al. No. 2 The clinical effectiveness and cost-
Fludarabine as second-line therapy for effectiveness of surgery for people with
No. 28
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: morbid obesity: a systematic review and
A rapid and systematic review of the
a technology assessment. economic evaluation.
clinical effectiveness and cost-
By Hyde C, Wake B, Bryan S, Barton By Clegg AJ, Colquitt J, Sidhu MK,
effectiveness of topotecan for ovarian
P, Fry-Smith A, Davenport C,et al. Royle P, Loveman E, Walker A.
cancer.
By Forbes C, Shirran L, Bagnall A-M, No. 3 No. 13
Duffy S, ter Riet G. Rituximab as third-line treatment for The clinical effectiveness of trastuzumab
refractory or recurrent Stage III or IV for breast cancer: a systematic review.
No. 29
follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a By Lewis R, Bagnall A-M, Forbes C,
Superseded by a report published in a
systematic review and economic Shirran E, Duffy S, Kleijnen J,et al.
later volume.
evaluation.
No. 30 By Wake B, Hyde C, Bryan S, Barton No. 14
The role of radiography in primary care P, Song F, Fry-Smith A,et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of vinorelbine for breast
patients with low back pain of at least 6 No. 4 cancer: a systematic review and
weeks duration: a randomised A systematic review of discharge economic evaluation.
(unblinded) controlled trial. arrangements for older people. By Lewis R, Bagnall A-M, King S,
By Kendrick D, Fielding K, Bentley E, By Parker SG, Peet SM, McPherson A, Woolacott N, Forbes C, Shirran L,et al.
Miller P, Kerslake R, Pringle M. Cannaby AM, Baker R, Wilson A,et al.
No. 15
No. 31 No. 5 A systematic review of the effectiveness
Design and use of questionnaires: a The clinical effectiveness and cost- and cost-effectiveness of metal-on-metal
review of best practice applicable to effectiveness of inhaler devices used in hip resurfacing arthroplasty for
surveys of health service staff and the routine management of chronic treatment of hip disease.
patients. asthma in older children: a systematic By Vale L, Wyness L, McCormack K,
By McColl E, Jacoby A, Thomas L, review and economic evaluation. McKenzie L, Brazzelli M, Stearns SC.
Soutter J, Bamford C, Steen N,et al. By Peters J, Stevenson M, Beverley C,
No. 16
Lim J, Smith S.
No. 32 The clinical effectiveness and cost-
A rapid and systematic review of the No. 6 effectiveness of bupropion and nicotine
clinical effectiveness and cost- The clinical effectiveness and cost- replacement therapy for smoking
effectiveness of paclitaxel, docetaxel, effectiveness of sibutramine in the cessation: a systematic review and
gemcitabine and vinorelbine in non- management of obesity: a technology economic evaluation.
small-cell lung cancer. assessment. By Woolacott NF, Jones L, Forbes CA,
By Clegg A, Scott DA, Sidhu M, By O’Meara S, Riemsma R, Shirran Mather LC, Sowden AJ, Song FJ,et al.
Hewitson P, Waugh N. L, Mather L, ter Riet G.
No. 17
No. 33 No. 7 A systematic review of effectiveness and
Subgroup analyses in randomised The cost-effectiveness of magnetic economic evaluation of new drug
controlled trials: quantifying the risks of resonance angiography for carotid treatments for juvenile idiopathic
false-positives and false-negatives. artery stenosis and peripheral vascular arthritis: etanercept.
By Brookes ST, Whitley E, disease: a systematic review. By Cummins C, Connock M,
Peters TJ, Mulheran PA, Egger M, By Berry E, Kelly S, Westwood ME, Fry-Smith A, Burls A.
Davey Smith G. Davies LM, Gough MJ, Bamford JM,
et al. No. 18
No. 34 Clinical effectiveness and cost-
Depot antipsychotic medication in the No. 8 effectiveness of growth hormone in
treatment of patients with schizophrenia: Promoting physical activity in South children: a systematic review and
(1) Meta-review; (2) Patient and nurse Asian Muslim women through ‘exercise economic evaluation.
attitudes. on prescription’. By Bryant J, Cave C, Mihaylova B,
By David AS, Adams C. By Carroll B, Ali N, Azam N. Chase D, McIntyre L, Gerard K,et al. 63
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 19 No. 28 No. 2
Clinical effectiveness and cost- Clinical effectiveness and cost – Systematic review of the effectiveness
effectiveness of growth hormone in consequences of selective serotonin and cost-effectiveness, and economic
adults in relation to impact on quality of reuptake inhibitors in the treatment of evaluation, of home versus hospital or
life: a systematic review and economic sex offenders. satellite unit haemodialysis for people
evaluation. By Adi Y, Ashcroft D, Browne K, with end-stage renal failure.
By Bryant J, Loveman E, Chase D, Beech A, Fry-Smith A, Hyde C. By Mowatt G, Vale L, Perez J, Wyness
Mihaylova B, Cave C, Gerard K,et al. L, Fraser C, MacLeod A,et al.
No. 29
No. 20 Treatment of established osteoporosis: No. 3
Clinical medication review by a a systematic review and cost–utility Systematic review and economic
pharmacist of patients on repeat analysis. evaluation of the effectiveness of
prescriptions in general practice: a By Kanis JA, Brazier JE, Stevenson M, infliximab for the treatment of Crohn’s
randomised controlled trial. Calvert NW, Lloyd Jones M. disease.
By Zermansky AG, Petty DR, Raynor By Clark W, Raftery J, Barton P,
DK, Lowe CJ, Freementle N, Vail A. No. 30 Song F, Fry-Smith A, Burls A.
Which anaesthetic agents are cost-
No. 4
No. 21 effective in day surgery? Literature
A review of the clinical effectiveness and
The effectiveness of infliximab and review, national survey of practice and
cost-effectiveness of routine anti-D
etanercept for the treatment of randomised controlled trial.
prophylaxis for pregnant women who
rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review By Elliott RA Payne K, Moore JK,
are rhesus negative.
and economic evaluation. Davies LM, Harper NJN, St Leger AS,
By Chilcott J, Lloyd Jones M, Wight
By Jobanputra P, Barton P, Bryan S, et al.
J, Forman K, Wray J, Beverley C,et al.
Burls A.
No. 31 No. 5
No. 22 Screening for hepatitis C among Systematic review and evaluation of the
A systematic review and economic injecting drug users and in use of tumour markers in paediatric
evaluation of computerised cognitive genitourinary medicine clinics: oncology: Ewing’s sarcoma and
behaviour therapy for depression and systematic reviews of effectiveness, neuroblastoma.
anxiety. modelling study and national survey of By Riley RD, Burchill SA, Abrams KR,
By Kaltenthaler E, Shackley P, Stevens current practice. Heney D, Lambert PC, Jones DR,et al.
K, Beverley C, Parry G, Chilcott J. By Stein K, Dalziel K, Walker A,
McIntyre L, Jenkins B, Horne J, et al. No. 6
No. 23 The cost-effectiveness of screening for
A systematic review and economic No. 32 Helicobacter pylorito reduce mortality
evaluation of pegylated liposomal The measurement of satisfaction with and morbidity from gastric cancer and
doxorubicin hydrochloride for ovarian healthcare: implications for practice peptic ulcer disease: a discrete-event
cancer. from a systematic review of the simulation model.
By Forbes C, Wilby J, Richardson G, literature. By Roderick P, Davies R, Raftery J,
Sculpher M, Mather L, Reimsma R. By Crow R, Gage H, Hampson S, Crabbe D, Pearce R, Bhandari P,et al.
Hart J, Kimber A, Storey L,et al.
No. 24 No. 7
A systematic review of the effectiveness No. 33 The clinical effectiveness and cost-
of interventions based on a stages-of- The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness effectiveness of routine dental checks: a
change approach to promote individual of imatinib in chronic myeloid systematic review and economic
behaviour change. leukaemia: a systematic review. evaluation.
By Riemsma RP, Pattenden J, Bridle C, By Garside R, Round A, Dalziel K, By Davenport C, Elley K, Salas C,
Sowden AJ, Mather L, Watt IS,et al. Stein K, Royle R. Taylor-Weetman CL, Fry-Smith A,
Bryan S,et al.
No. 25 No. 34
No. 8
A systematic review update of the A comparative study of hypertonic
A multicentre randomised controlled
clinical effectiveness and cost- saline, daily and alternate-day
trial assessing the costs and benefits of
effectiveness of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa rhDNase in children with cystic
using structured information and
antagonists. fibrosis.
analysis of women’s preferences in the
By Robinson M, Ginnelly L, Sculpher By Suri R, Wallis C, Bush A,
management of menorrhagia.
M, Jones L, Riemsma R, Palmer S,et al. Thompson S, Normand C, Flather M,
By Kennedy ADM, Sculpher MJ,
et al.
No. 26 Coulter A, Dwyer N, Rees M,
A systematic review of the effectiveness, No. 35 Horsley S,et al.
cost-effectiveness and barriers to A systematic review of the costs and No. 9
implementation of thrombolytic and effectiveness of different models of Clinical effectiveness and cost–utility of
neuroprotective therapy for acute paediatric home care. photodynamic therapy for wet age-related
ischaemic stroke in the NHS. By Parker G, Bhakta P, Lovett CA, macular degeneration: a systematic review
By Sandercock P, Berge E, Dennis M, Paisley S, Olsen R, Turner D,et al. and economic evaluation.
Forbes J, Hand P, Kwan J,et al. By Meads C, Salas C, Roberts T,
Volume 7, 2003 Moore D, Fry-Smith A, Hyde C.
No. 27
A randomised controlled crossover No. 1 No. 10
trial of nurse practitioner versus How important are comprehensive Evaluation of molecular tests for
doctor-led outpatient care in a literature searches and the assessment of prenatal diagnosis of chromosome
bronchiectasis clinic. trial quality in systematic reviews? abnormalities.
By Caine N, Sharples LD, Empirical study. By Grimshaw GM, Szczepura A,
Hollingworth W, French J, Keogan M, By Egger M, Jüni P, Bartlett C, Hultén M, MacDonald F, Nevin NC,
64 Exley A,et al. Holenstein F, Sterne J. Sutton F,et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 11 No. 21 No. 30
First and second trimester antenatal Systematic review of the clinical The value of digital imaging in diabetic
screening for Down’s syndrome: the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness retinopathy.
results of the Serum, Urine and of tension-free vaginal tape for By Sharp PF, Olson J, Strachan F,
Ultrasound Screening Study treatment of urinary stress Hipwell J, Ludbrook A, O’Donnell M,
(SURUSS). incontinence. et al.
By Wald NJ, Rodeck C, By Cody J, Wyness L, Wallace S,
Hackshaw AK, Walters J, Chitty L, Glazener C, Kilonzo M, Stearns S, No. 31
Mackinson AM. et al. Lowering blood pressure to prevent
myocardial infarction and stroke:
No. 12 No. 22 a new preventive strategy.
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness The clinical and cost-effectiveness of By Law M, Wald N, MorrisJ.
of ultrasound locating devices for patient education models for diabetes:
central venous access: a systematic a systematic review and economic No. 32
review and economic evaluation. Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
evaluation.
By Calvert N, Hind D, McWilliams capecitabine and tegafur with uracil for
By Loveman E, Cave C, Green C,
RG, Thomas SM, Beverley C, the treatment of metastatic colorectal
Royle P, Dunn N, Waugh N.
Davidson A. cancer: systematic review and economic
No. 23 evaluation.
No. 13
The role of modelling in prioritising By Ward S, Kaltenthaler E, Cowan J,
A systematic review of atypical
and planning clinical trials. Brewer N.
antipsychotics in schizophrenia.
By Chilcott J, Brennan A, Booth A,
By Bagnall A-M, Jones L, Lewis R, No. 33
Karnon J, Tappenden P.
Ginnelly L, Glanville J, Torgerson D, Clinical and cost-effectiveness of new
et al. No. 24 and emerging technologies for early
Cost–benefit evaluation of routine localised prostate cancer: a systematic
No. 14
influenza immunisation in people 65–74 review.
Prostate Testing for Cancer and
years of age. By Hummel S, PaisleyS, Morgan A,
Treatment (ProtecT) feasibility
By Allsup S, Gosney M, Haycox A, Currie E, Brewer N.
study.
Regan M.
By Donovan J, Hamdy F, Neal D, No. 34
Peters T, Oliver S, Brindle L,et al.
No. 25 Literature searching for clinical and
No. 15 The clinical and cost-effectiveness of cost-effectiveness studies used in health
Early thrombolysis for the treatment pulsatile machine perfusion versus cold technology assessment reports carried
of acute myocardial infarction: a storage of kidneys for transplantation out for the National Institute for
systematic review and economic retrieved from heart-beating and non- Clinical Excellence appraisal
evaluation. heart-beating donors. system.
By Boland A, Dundar Y, Bagust A, By Wight J, Chilcott J, Holmes M, By Royle P, Waugh N.
Haycox A, Hill R, Mujica Mota R, Brewer N.
No. 35
et al.
No. 26 Systematic review and economic
No. 16 Can randomised trials rely on existing decision modelling for the prevention
Screening for fragile X syndrome: electronic data? A feasibility study to and treatment of influenza
a literature review and modelling. explore the value of routine data in A and B.
By Song FJ, Barton P, Sleightholme V, health technology assessment. By Turner D, Wailoo A, Nicholson K,
Yao GL, Fry-Smith A. By Williams JG, Cheung WY, Cooper N, Sutton A, Abrams K.
Cohen DR, Hutchings HA, Longo MF,
No. 17 No. 36
Russell IT.
Systematic review of endoscopic sinus A randomised controlled trial to
surgery for nasal polyps. No. 27 evaluate the clinical and cost-
By Dalziel K, Stein K, Round A, Evaluating non-randomised intervention effectiveness of Hickman line
Garside R, Royle P. studies. insertions in adult cancer patients by
By Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, D’Amico R, nurses.
No. 18
Sowden AJ, Sakarovitch C, Song F, et al. By Boland A, Haycox A, Bagust A,
Towards efficient guidelines: how to
Fitzsimmons L.
monitor guideline use in primary No. 28
care. A randomised controlled trial to assess No. 37
By Hutchinson A, McIntosh A, Cox S, the impact of a package comprising a Redesigning postnatal care: a
Gilbert C. patient-orientated, evidence-based self- randomised controlled trial of
No. 19 help guidebook and patient-centred protocol-based midwifery-led care
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of consultations on disease management focused on individual women’s
acute hospital-based spinal cord injuries and satisfaction in inflammatory bowel physical and psychological health
services: systematic review. disease. needs.
By Bagnall A-M, Jones L, By Kennedy A, Nelson E, Reeves D, By MacArthur C, Winter HR,
Richardson G, Duffy S, Richardson G, Roberts C, Robinson A, Bick DE, Lilford RJ, Lancashire RJ,
Riemsma R. et al. Knowles H, et al.
No. 20 No. 29 No. 38
Prioritisation of health technology The effectiveness of diagnostic tests for Estimating implied rates of discount in
assessment. The PATHS model: the assessment of shoulder pain due to healthcare decision-making.
methods and case studies. soft tissue disorders: a systematic review. By West RR, McNabb R,
By Townsend J, Buxton M, By Dinnes J, Loveman E, McIntyre L, Thompson AGH, Sheldon TA,
65
Harper G. Waugh N. Grimley Evans J.
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 39 No. 7 No. 15
Systematic review of isolation policies in Clinical effectiveness and costs of the Involving consumers in research and
the hospital management of methicillin- Sugarbaker procedure for the treatment development agenda setting for the
resistant Staphylococcus aureus: a review of of pseudomyxoma peritonei. NHS: developing an evidence-based
the literature with epidemiological and By Bryant J, Clegg AJ, Sidhu MK, approach.
economic modelling. Brodin H, Royle P, Davidson P. By Oliver S, Clarke-Jones L,
By Cooper BS, Stone SP, Kibbler CC,
Rees R, Milne R, Buchanan P,
Cookson BD, Roberts JA, Medley GF, No. 8 Gabbay J, et al.
et al. Psychological treatment for insomnia in
the regulation of long-term hypnotic No. 16
No. 40
drug use. A multi-centre randomised controlled
Treatments for spasticity and pain in
By Morgan K, Dixon S, Mathers N, trial of minimally invasive direct
multiple sclerosis: a systematic review.
By Beard S, Hunn A, Wight J. Thompson J, Tomeny M. coronary bypass grafting versus
percutaneous transluminal coronary
No. 9
No. 41 angioplasty with stenting for proximal
The inclusion of reports of randomised Improving the evaluation of therapeutic
stenosis of the left anterior descending
trials published in languages other than interventions in multiple sclerosis:
coronary artery.
English in systematic reviews. development of a patient-based measure
By Reeves BC, Angelini GD, Bryan
By Moher D, Pham B, Lawson ML, of outcome.
AJ, Taylor FC, Cripps T, Spyt TJ, et al.
Klassen TP. By Hobart JC, Riazi A, Lamping DL,
Fitzpatrick R, Thompson AJ. No. 17
No. 42
The impact of screening on future No. 10 Does early magnetic resonance imaging
health-promoting behaviours and health A systematic review and economic influence management or improve
beliefs: a systematic review. evaluation of magnetic resonance outcome in patients referred to
By Bankhead CR, Brett J, Bukach C, cholangiopancreatography compared secondary care with low back pain?
Webster P, Stewart-Brown S, Munafo M, with diagnostic endoscopic retrograde A pragmatic randomised controlled
et al. cholangiopancreatography. trial.
By Kaltenthaler E, Bravo Vergel Y, By Gilbert FJ, Grant AM, Gillan
Volume 8, 2004 Chilcott J, Thomas S, Blakeborough T, MGC, Vale L, Scott NW, Campbell MK,
No. 1 Walters SJ, et al. et al.
What is the best imaging strategy for No. 11 No. 18
acute stroke? The use of modelling to evaluate new The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
By Wardlaw JM, Keir SL, Seymour J,
drugs for patients with a chronic anakinra for the treatment of
Lewis S, Sandercock PAG, Dennis MS,
condition: the case of antibodies against rheumatoid arthritis in adults: a
et al.
tumour necrosis factor in rheumatoid systematic review and economic analysis.
No. 2 arthritis. By Clark W, Jobanputra P, Barton P,
Systematic review and modelling of the By Barton P, Jobanputra P, Wilson J, Burls A.
investigation of acute and chronic chest Bryan S, Burls A.
pain presenting in primary care. No. 19
By Mant J, McManus RJ, Oakes RAL, No. 12 A rapid and systematic review and
Delaney BC, Barton PM, Deeks JJ, et al. Clinical effectiveness and cost- economic evaluation of the clinical and
effectiveness of neonatal screening for cost-effectiveness of newer drugs for
No. 3
inborn errors of metabolism using treatment of mania associated with
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
tandem mass spectrometry: a systematic bipolar affective disorder.
of microwave and thermal balloon
review. By Bridle C, Palmer S, Bagnall A-M,
endometrial ablation for heavy
By Pandor A, Eastham J, Beverley C, Darba J, Duffy S, Sculpher M, et al.
menstrual bleeding: a systematic review
Chilcott J, Paisley S.
and economic modelling. No. 20
By Garside R, Stein K, Wyatt K, No. 13 Liquid-based cytology in cervical
Round A, Price A. Clinical effectiveness and cost- screening: an updated rapid and
No. 4 effectiveness of pioglitazone and systematic review and economic
A systematic review of the role of rosiglitazone in the treatment of analysis.
bisphosphonates in metastatic disease. type 2 diabetes: a systematic By Karnon J, Peters J, Platt J,
By Ross JR, Saunders Y, Edmonds PM, review and economic Chilcott J, McGoogan E, Brewer N.
Patel S, Wonderling D, Normand C, et al. evaluation.
By Czoski-Murray C, Warren E, No. 21
No. 5 Chilcott J, Beverley C, Psyllaki MA, Systematic review of the long-term
Systematic review of the clinical Cowan J. effects and economic consequences of
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
treatments for obesity and implications
capecitabine (Xeloda®) for locally No. 14 for health improvement.
advanced and/or metastatic breast cancer. Routine examination of the newborn: By Avenell A, Broom J, Brown TJ,
By Jones L, Hawkins N, Westwood M, the EMREN study. Evaluation of an Poobalan A, Aucott L, Stearns SC, et al.
Wright K, Richardson G, Riemsma R. extension of the midwife role
No. 6 including a randomised controlled No. 22
Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline trial of appropriately trained midwives Autoantibody testing in children with
dissemination and implementation and paediatric senior house newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes
strategies. officers. mellitus.
By Grimshaw JM, Thomas RE, By Townsend J, Wolke D, Hayes J, By Dretzke J, Cummins C,
MacLennan G, Fraser C, Ramsay CR, Davé S, Rogers C, Bloomfield L, Sandercock J, Fry-Smith A, Barrett T,
66 Vale L, et al. et al. Burls A.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 23 No. 32 No. 41
Clinical effectiveness and cost- The Social Support and Family Health Provision, uptake and cost of cardiac
effectiveness of prehospital intravenous Study: a randomised controlled trial and rehabilitation programmes: improving
fluids in trauma patients. economic evaluation of two alternative services to under-represented groups.
By Dretzke J, Sandercock J, Bayliss S, forms of postnatal support for mothers By Beswick AD, Rees K, Griebsch I,
Burls A. living in disadvantaged inner-city areas. Taylor FC, Burke M, West RR, et al.
By Wiggins M, Oakley A, Roberts I,
No. 24 No. 42
Turner H, Rajan L, Austerberry H, et al.
Newer hypnotic drugs for the short- Involving South Asian patients in
term management of insomnia: a No. 33 clinical trials.
systematic review and economic Psychosocial aspects of genetic screening By Hussain-Gambles M, Leese B,
evaluation. Atkin K, Brown J, Mason S, Tovey P.
of pregnant women and newborns:
By Dündar Y, Boland A, Strobl J,
a systematic review. No. 43
Dodd S, Haycox A, Bagust A,
By Green JM, Hewison J, Bekker HL, Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
et al.
Bryant, Cuckle HS. continuous subcutaneous insulin
No. 25 infusion for diabetes.
No. 34
Development and validation of methods By Colquitt JL, Green C, Sidhu MK,
Evaluation of abnormal uterine
for assessing the quality of diagnostic Hartwell D, Waugh N.
bleeding: comparison of three
accuracy studies.
outpatient procedures within cohorts No. 44
By Whiting P, Rutjes AWS, Dinnes J,
defined by age and menopausal status. Identification and assessment of
Reitsma JB, Bossuyt PMM, Kleijnen J.
By Critchley HOD, Warner P, ongoing trials in health technology
No. 26 Lee AJ, Brechin S, Guise J, Graham B. assessment reviews.
EVALUATE hysterectomy trial: a By Song FJ, Fry-Smith A, Davenport
multicentre randomised trial comparing No. 35 C, Bayliss S, Adi Y, Wilson JS, et al.
abdominal, vaginal and laparoscopic Coronary artery stents: a rapid systematic
No. 45
methods of hysterectomy. review and economic evaluation.
Systematic review and economic
By Garry R, Fountain J, Brown J, By Hill R, Bagust A, Bakhai A,
evaluation of a long-acting insulin
Manca A, Mason S, Sculpher M, et al. Dickson R, Dündar Y, Haycox A, et al.
analogue, insulin glargine
No. 27 No. 36 By Warren E, Weatherley-Jones E,
Methods for expected value of Review of guidelines for good practice Chilcott J, Beverley C.
information analysis in complex health in decision-analytic modelling in health No. 46
economic models: developments on the technology assessment. Supplementation of a home-based
health economics of interferon-(cid:4)and By Philips Z, Ginnelly L, Sculpher M, exercise programme with a class-based
glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis. Claxton K, Golder S, Riemsma R, et al. programme for people with osteoarthritis
By Tappenden P, Chilcott JB, of the knees: a randomised controlled
No. 37
Eggington S, Oakley J, McCabe C. Rituximab (MabThera®) for aggressive trial and health economic analysis.
By McCarthy CJ, Mills PM,
No. 28 non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: systematic
Pullen R, Richardson G, Hawkins N,
Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of review and economic evaluation.
Roberts CR, et al.
imatinib for first-line treatment of By Knight C, Hind D, Brewer N,
chronic myeloid leukaemia in chronic Abbott V. No. 47
phase: a systematic review and economic Clinical and cost-effectiveness of once-
analysis. No. 38 daily versus more frequent use of same
By Dalziel K, Round A, Stein K, Clinical effectiveness and cost- potency topical corticosteroids for atopic
Garside R, Price A. effectiveness of clopidogrel and eczema: a systematic review and
modified-release dipyridamole in the economic evaluation.
No. 29
secondary prevention of occlusive By Green C, Colquitt JL, Kirby J,
VenUS I: a randomised controlled trial
vascular events: a systematic review and Davidson P, Payne E.
of two types of bandage for treating
economic evaluation.
venous leg ulcers. No. 48
By Jones L, Griffin S, Palmer S, Main
By Iglesias C, Nelson EA, Cullum NA, C, Orton V, Sculpher M, et al. Acupuncture of chronic headache
Torgerson DJ on behalf of the VenUS disorders in primary care: randomised
Team. No. 39 controlled trial and economic analysis.
Pegylated interferon (cid:2)-2a and -2b in By Vickers AJ, Rees RW, Zollman CE,
No. 30
combination with ribavirin in the McCarney R, Smith CM, Ellis N, et al.
Systematic review of the effectiveness
treatment of chronic hepatitis C: a
and cost-effectiveness, and economic No. 49
systematic review and economic
evaluation, of myocardial perfusion Generalisability in economic evaluation
evaluation.
scintigraphy for the diagnosis and studies in healthcare: a review and case
By Shepherd J, Brodin H, Cave C,
management of angina and myocardial studies.
infarction. Waugh N, Price A, Gabbay J. By Sculpher MJ, Pang FS, Manca A,
By Mowatt G, Vale L, Brazzelli M, No. 40 Drummond MF, Golder S, Urdahl H,
Hernandez R, Murray A, Scott N, et al. et al.
Clopidogrel used in combination with
No. 31 aspirin compared with aspirin alone in No. 50
A pilot study on the use of decision the treatment of non-ST-segment- Virtual outreach: a randomised
theory and value of information analysis elevation acute coronary syndromes: a controlled trial and economic evaluation
as part of the NHS Health Technology systematic review and economic of joint teleconferenced medical
Assessment programme. evaluation. consultations.
By Claxtoonn KK, Ginnelly L, Sculpher By Main C, Palmer S, Griffin S, By Wallace P, Barber J, Clayton W,
M, Philips Z, Palmer S. Jones L, Orton V, Sculpher M, et al. Currell R, Fleming K, Garner P, et al. 67
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
Volume 9, 2005 No. 10 No. 18
Measurement of health-related quality A randomised controlled comparison of
No. 1
of life for people with dementia: alternative strategies in stroke care.
Randomised controlled multiple
development of a new instrument By Kalra L, Evans A, Perez I,
treatment comparison to provide a
(DEMQOL) and an evaluation of Knapp M, Swift C, Donaldson N.
cost-effectiveness rationale for the
current methodology.
selection of antimicrobial therapy in No. 19
By Smith SC, Lamping DL,
acne. The investigation and analysis of critical
Banerjee S, Harwood R, Foley B,
By Ozolins M, Eady EA, Avery A, incidents and adverse events in
Smith P, et al.
Cunliffe WJ, O’Neill C, Simpson NB, healthcare.
et al. By Woloshynowych M, Rogers S,
No. 11
Taylor-Adams S, Vincent C.
No. 2 Clinical effectiveness and cost-
Do the findings of case series studies effectiveness of drotrecogin alfa No. 20
vary significantly according to (activated) (Xigris®) for the treatment of Potential use of routine databases in
methodological characteristics? severe sepsis in adults: a systematic health technology assessment.
By Dalziel K, Round A, Stein K, review and economic evaluation. By Raftery J, Roderick P, Stevens A.
Garside R, Castelnuovo E, Payne L. By Green C, Dinnes J, Takeda A, No. 21
Shepherd J, Hartwell D, Cave C,
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of newer
No. 3 et al.
immunosuppressive regimens in renal
Improving the referral process for
transplantation: a systematic review and
familial breast cancer genetic No. 12
modelling study.
counselling: findings of three A methodological review of how
By Woodroffe R, Yao GL, Meads C,
randomised controlled trials of two heterogeneity has been examined in Bayliss S, Ready A, Raftery J, et al.
interventions. systematic reviews of diagnostic test
By Wilson BJ, Torrance N, Mollison J, accuracy. No. 22
Wordsworth S, Gray JR, Haites NE, et al. By Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kirby J, A systematic review and economic
Roderick P. evaluation of alendronate, etidronate,
No. 4 risedronate, raloxifene and teriparatide
Randomised evaluation of alternative No. 13 for the prevention and treatment of
electrosurgical modalities to treat Cervical screening programmes: can postmenopausal osteoporosis.
bladder outflow obstruction in men with automation help? Evidence from By Stevenson M, Lloyd Jones M,
benign prostatic hyperplasia. systematic reviews, an economic analysis De Nigris E, Brewer N, Davis S,
By Fowler C, McAllister W, Plail R, and a simulation modelling exercise Oakley J.
Karim O, Yang Q.
applied to the UK.
No. 23
By Willis BH, Barton P, Pearmain P,
No. 5 A systematic review to examine the
Bryan S, Hyde C.
A pragmatic randomised controlled trial impact of psycho-educational
of the cost-effectiveness of palliative interventions on health outcomes and
therapies for patients with inoperable No. 14 costs in adults and children with difficult
oesophageal cancer. Laparoscopic surgery for inguinal asthma.
By Shenfine J, McNamee P, Steen N, hernia repair: systematic review of By Smith JR, Mugford M, Holland R,
Bond J, Griffin SM. effectiveness and economic evaluation. Candy B, Noble MJ, Harrison BDW, et al.
By McCormack K, Wake B, Perez J,
No. 6 Fraser C, Cook J, McIntosh E, et al. No. 24
Impact of computer-aided detection An evaluation of the costs, effectiveness
prompts on the sensitivity and specificity No. 15 and quality of renal replacement
of screening mammography. Clinical effectiveness, tolerability and therapy provision in renal satellite units
By Taylor P, Champness J, Given- cost-effectiveness of newer drugs for in England and Wales.
Wilson R, Johnston K, Potts H. epilepsy in adults: a systematic review By Roderick P, Nicholson T, Armitage
A, Mehta R, Mullee M, Gerard K, et al.
and economic evaluation.
No. 7
By Wilby J, Kainth A, Hawkins N, No. 25
Issues in data monitoring and interim Epstein D, McIntosh H, McDaid C, et al. Imatinib for the treatment of patients
analysis of trials.
with unresectable and/or metastatic
By Grant AM, Altman DG, Babiker
No. 16 gastrointestinal stromal tumours:
AB, Campbell MK, Clemens FJ,
A randomised controlled trial to systematic review and economic
Darbyshire JH, et al.
compare the cost-effectiveness of evaluation.
No. 8 tricyclic antidepressants, selective By Wilson J, Connock M, Song F, Yao
Lay public’s understanding of equipoise serotonin reuptake inhibitors and G, Fry-Smith A, Raftery J, et al.
and randomisation in randomised lofepramine. No. 26
controlled trials. By Peveler R, Kendrick T, Buxton M, Indirect comparisons of competing
By Robinson EJ, Kerr CEP, Stevens Longworth L, Baldwin D, Moore M, interventions.
AJ, Lilford RJ, Braunholtz DA, Edwards
et al.
By Glenny AM, Altman DG, Song F,
SJ, et al. Sakarovitch C, Deeks JJ, D’Amico R, et al.
No. 17
No. 9 Clinical effectiveness and cost- No. 27
Clinical and cost-effectiveness of effectiveness of immediate angioplasty Cost-effectiveness of alternative
electroconvulsive therapy for depressive for acute myocardial infarction: strategies for the initial medical
illness, schizophrenia, catatonia and systematic review and economic management of non-ST elevation acute
mania: systematic reviews and economic evaluation. coronary syndrome: systematic review
modelling studies. By Hartwell D, Colquitt J, Loveman and decision-analytical modelling.
By Greenhalgh J, Knight C, Hind D, E, Clegg AJ, Brodin H, Waugh N, By Robinson M, Palmer S, Sculpher
68 Beverley C, Walters S. et al. M, Philips Z, Ginnelly L, Bowens A, et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 28 No. 38 No. 46
Outcomes of electrically stimulated The causes and effects of socio- The effectiveness of the Heidelberg
gracilis neosphincter surgery. demographic exclusions from clinical Retina Tomograph and laser diagnostic
By Tillin T, Chambers M, Feldman R. trials. glaucoma scanning system (GDx) in
By Bartlett C, Doyal L, Ebrahim S, detecting and monitoring glaucoma.
No. 29
Davey P, Bachmann M, Egger M, By Kwartz AJ, Henson DB,
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness et al. Harper RA, Spencer AF,
of pimecrolimus and tacrolimus for
McLeod D.
atopic eczema: a systematic review and No. 39
economic evaluation. Is hydrotherapy cost-effective? A No. 47
By Garside R, Stein K, Castelnuovo E, randomised controlled trial of combined Clinical and cost-effectiveness of
Pitt M, Ashcroft D, Dimmock P, et al. hydrotherapy programmes compared autologous chondrocyte implantation
with physiotherapy land techniques in for cartilage defects in knee joints:
No. 30
children with juvenile idiopathic systematic review and economic
Systematic review on urine albumin
arthritis. evaluation.
testing for early detection of diabetic
By Epps H, Ginnelly L, Utley M, By Clar C, Cummins E, McIntyre L,
complications. Southwood T, Gallivan S, Sculpher M, Thomas S,Lamb J, Bain L, et al.
By Newman DJ, Mattock MB, Dawnay et al.
ABS,Kerry S,McGuire A, Yaqoob M, et al. No. 48
No. 40 Systematic review of effectiveness of
No. 31
A randomised controlled trial and cost- different treatments for childhood
Randomised controlled trial of the cost-
effectiveness study of systematic retinoblastoma.
effectiveness of water-based therapy for
screening (targeted and total population By McDaid C, Hartley S,
lower limb osteoarthritis.
screening) versus routine practice for Bagnall A-M, Ritchie G, Light K,
By Cochrane T, Davey RC,
the detection of atrial fibrillation in Riemsma R.
Matthes Edwards SM.
people aged 65 and over. The SAFE
No. 49
No. 32 study.
Towards evidence-based guidelines
Longer term clinical and economic By Hobbs FDR, Fitzmaurice DA,
for the prevention of venous
benefits of offering acupuncture care to Mant J, Murray E, Jowett S, Bryan S,
patients with chronic low back pain.
et al. thromboembolism: systematic
reviews of mechanical methods, oral
By Thomas KJ, MacPherson H,
No. 41 anticoagulation, dextran and regional
Ratcliffe J, Thorpe L, Brazier J,
Displaced intracapsular hip fractures anaesthesia as thromboprophylaxis.
Campbell M, et al.
in fit, older people: a randomised By Roderick P, Ferris G, Wilson K,
No. 33 comparison of reduction and fixation, Halls H, Jackson D, Collins R,
Cost-effectiveness and safety of epidural bipolar hemiarthroplasty and total hip et al.
steroids in the management of sciatica. arthroplasty.
No. 50
By Price C, Arden N, Coglan L, By Keating JF, Grant A, Masson M,
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
Rogers P. Scott NW, Forbes JF.
of parent training/education
No. 34 No. 42 programmes for the treatment of
The British Rheumatoid Outcome Study Long-term outcome of cognitive conduct disorder, including oppositional
Group (BROSG) randomised controlled behaviour therapy clinical trials in defiant disorder, in children.
trial to compare the effectiveness and central Scotland. By Dretzke J, Frew E, Davenport C,
cost-effectiveness of aggressive versus By Durham RC, Chambers JA, Barlow J, Stewart-Brown S,
symptomatic therapy in established Power KG, Sharp DM, Macdonald RR, Sandercock J, et al.
rheumatoid arthritis. Major KA, et al.
By Symmons D, Tricker K, Roberts C, Volume 10, 2006
No. 43
Davies L, Dawes P, Scott DL.
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness No. 1
No. 35 of dual-chamber pacemakers compared The clinical and cost-effectiveness of
Conceptual framework and systematic with single-chamber pacemakers for donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine
review of the effects of participants’ and bradycardia due to atrioventricular and memantine for Alzheimer’s
professionals’ preferences in randomised block or sick sinus syndrome: disease.
controlled trials. systematic review and economic By Loveman E, Green C, Kirby J,
By King M, Nazareth I, Lampe F, evaluation. Takeda A, Picot J, Payne E,
Bower P, Chandler M, Morou M, et al. By Castelnuovo E, Stein K, Pitt M, et al.
Garside R, Payne E.
No. 36 No. 2
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of No. 44 FOOD: a multicentre randomised trial
implantable cardioverter defibrillators: Newborn screening for congenital heart evaluating feeding policies in patients
a systematic review. defects: a systematic review and admitted to hospital with a recent
By Bryant J, Brodin H, Loveman E, cost-effectiveness analysis. stroke.
Payne E, Clegg A. By Knowles R, Griebsch I, Dezateux By Dennis M, Lewis S, Cranswick G,
C, Brown J, Bull C, Wren C. Forbes J.
No. 37
A trial of problem-solving by community No. 45 No. 3
mental health nurses for anxiety, The clinical and cost-effectiveness of left The clinical effectiveness and cost-
depression and life difficulties among ventricular assist devices for end-stage effectiveness of computed tomography
general practice patients. The CPN-GP heart failure: a systematic review and screening for lung cancer: systematic
study. economic evaluation. reviews.
By Kendrick T, Simons L, By Clegg AJ, Scott DA, Loveman E, By Black C, Bagust A, Boland A,
Mynors-Wallis L, Gray A, Lathlean J, Colquitt J, Hutchinson J, Royle P, Walker S, McLeod C, De Verteuil R,
Pickering R, et al. et al. et al. 69
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 4 No. 12 No. 20
A systematic review of the effectiveness A series of systematic reviews to inform A systematic review of the clinical
and cost-effectiveness of neuroimaging a decision analysis for sampling and effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
assessments used to visualise the treating infected diabetic foot enzyme replacement therapies for
seizure focus in people with refractory ulcers. Fabry’s disease and
epilepsy being considered for By Nelson EA, O’Meara S, Craig D, mucopolysaccharidosis type 1.
surgery. Iglesias C, Golder S, Dalton J, By Connock M, Juarez-Garcia A, Frew
By Whiting P, Gupta R, Burch J, et al. E, Mans A, Dretzke J, Fry-Smith A, et al.
Mujica Mota RE, Wright K, Marson A,
et al. No. 13 No. 21
Randomised clinical trial, observational Health benefits of antiviral therapy for
No. 5 study and assessment of cost- mild chronic hepatitis C: randomised
Comparison of conference abstracts effectiveness of the treatment of varicose controlled trial and economic
and presentations with full-text veins (REACTIV trial). evaluation.
articles in the health technology By Michaels JA, Campbell WB, By Wright M, Grieve R, Roberts J,
assessments of rapidly evolving Brazier JE, MacIntyre JB, Palfreyman Main J, Thomas HC on behalf of the
technologies. SJ, Ratcliffe J, et al. UK Mild Hepatitis C Trial Investigators.
By Dundar Y, Dodd S, Dickson R,
Walley T, Haycox A, Williamson PR. No. 14 No. 22
Pressure relieving support surfaces: a
The cost-effectiveness of screening for
No. 6 randomised evaluation.
oral cancer in primary care.
Systematic review and evaluation of By Nixon J, Nelson EA, Cranny G,
By Speight PM,Palmer S, Moles DR,
methods of assessing urinary Iglesias CP, Hawkins K, Cullum NA, et al.
Downer MC, Smith DH, Henriksson M
incontinence.
et al. No. 23
By Martin JL, Williams KS, Abrams
A systematic review and economic
KR, Turner DA, Sutton AJ, Chapple C,
et al. No. 15 model of the effectiveness and cost-
Measurement of the clinical and cost- effectiveness of methylphenidate,
No. 7 effectiveness of non-invasive diagnostic dexamfetamine and atomoxetine for the
The clinical effectiveness and cost- testing strategies for deep vein treatment of attention deficit
effectiveness of newer drugs for children thrombosis. hyperactivity disorder in children and
with epilepsy. A systematic review. By Goodacre S, Sampson F, Stevenson adolescents.
By Connock M, Frew E, Evans B-W, M, Wailoo A, Sutton A, Thomas S,et al. By King S, Griffin S, Hodges Z,
Bryan S,Cummins C, Fry-Smith A, Weatherly H, Asseburg C, Richardson G,
et al. No. 16 et al.
Systematic review of the effectiveness
No. 8 and cost-effectiveness of HealOzone® No. 24
Surveillance of Barrett’s oesophagus: for the treatment of occlusal pit/fissure The clinical effectiveness and cost-
exploring the uncertainty through caries and root caries. effectiveness of enzyme replacement
systematic review, expert workshop and By Brazzelli M, McKenzie L, Fielding therapy for Gaucher’s disease:
economic modelling. S, Fraser C, Clarkson J, Kilonzo M, a systematic review.
By Garside R, Pitt M, Somerville M, et al. By Connock M, Burls A, Frew E,
Stein K, Price A, Gilbert N. Fry-Smith A, Juarez-Garcia A,
No. 17 McCabe C, et al.
No. 9
Randomised controlled trials of
Topotecan, pegylated liposomal No. 25
conventional antipsychotic versus new
doxorubicin hydrochloride and Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
atypical drugs, and new atypical drugs
paclitaxel for second-line or subsequent salicylic acid and cryotherapy for
versus clozapine, in people with
treatment of advanced ovarian cancer: a cutaneous warts. An economic decision
schizophrenia responding poorly
systematic review and economic model.
to, or intolerant of, current drug
evaluation. By Thomas KS, Keogh-Brown MR,
treatment.
By Main C, Bojke L, Griffin S, Chalmers JR, Fordham RJ, Holland RC,
By Lewis SW, Davies L, Jones PB,
Norman G, Barbieri M, Mather L, Armstrong SJ, et al.
Barnes TRE, Murray RM, Kerwin R,
et al.
et al. No. 26
No. 10 A systematic literature review of the
Evaluation of molecular techniques No. 18 effectiveness of non-pharmacological
in prediction and diagnosis of Diagnostic tests and algorithms used in interventions to prevent wandering in
cytomegalovirus disease in the investigation of haematuria: dementia and evaluation of the ethical
immunocompromised patients. systematic reviews and economic implications and acceptability of their
By Szczepura A, Westmoreland D, evaluation. use.
Vinogradova Y, Fox J, Clark M. By Rodgers M, Nixon J, Hempel S, By Robinson L, Hutchings D, Corner
Aho T, Kelly J, Neal D, et al. L, Beyer F, Dickinson H, Vanoli A, et al.
No. 11
Screening for thrombophilia in high-risk No. 19 No. 27
situations: systematic review and cost- Cognitive behavioural therapy in A review of the evidence on the effects
effectiveness analysis. The Thrombosis: addition to antispasmodic therapy for and costs of implantable cardioverter
Risk and Economic Assessment of irritable bowel syndrome in primary defibrillator therapy in different patient
Thrombophilia Screening (TREATS) care: randomised controlled groups, and modelling of cost-
study. trial. effectiveness and cost–utility for these
By Wu O, Robertson L, Twaddle S, By Kennedy TM, Chalder T, groups in a UK context.
Lowe GDO, Clark P, Greaves M, McCrone P, Darnley S, Knapp M, By Buxton M, Caine N, Chase D,
70 et al. Jones RH, et al. Connelly D, Grace A, Jackson C, et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 28 No. 37 No. 46
Adefovir dipivoxil and pegylated Cognitive behavioural therapy in Etanercept and efalizumab for the
interferon alfa-2a for the treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomised treatment of psoriasis: a systematic
chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review controlled trial of an outpatient group review.
and economic evaluation. programme. By Woolacott N, Hawkins N,
By Shepherd J, Jones J, Takeda A, By O’Dowd H, Gladwell P, Rogers CA, Mason A, Kainth A, Khadjesari Z,
Davidson P, Price A. Hollinghurst S, Gregory A. Bravo Vergel Y, et al.
No. 29 No. 38 No. 47
An evaluation of the clinical and cost- A comparison of the cost-effectiveness of Systematic reviews of clinical decision
effectiveness of pulmonary artery five strategies for the prevention of non- tools for acute abdominal pain.
catheters in patient management in steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced By Liu JLY, Wyatt JC, Deeks JJ,
intensive care: a systematic review and a gastrointestinal toxicity: a systematic Clamp S, Keen J, Verde P, et al.
randomised controlled trial. review with economic modelling.
By Harvey S, Stevens K, Harrison D, By Brown TJ, Hooper L, Elliott RA, No. 48
Young D, Brampton W, McCabe C,et al. Payne K, Webb R, Roberts C, et al. Evaluation of the ventricular assist
device programme in the UK.
No. 30 No. 39 By Sharples L, Buxton M, Caine N,
Accurate, practical and cost-effective The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness Cafferty F, Demiris N, Dyer M,
assessment of carotid stenosis in the UK. of computed tomography screening for et al.
By Wardlaw JM, Chappell FM, coronary artery disease: systematic
Stevenson M, De Nigris E, Thomas S, review. No. 49
Gillard J, et al. By Waugh N, Black C, Walker S, A systematic review and economic
McIntyre L, Cummins E, Hillis G. model of the clinical and cost-
No. 31
No. 40 effectiveness of immunosuppressive
Etanercept and infliximab for the
What are the clinical outcome and cost- therapy for renal transplantation in
treatment of psoriatic arthritis:
effectiveness of endoscopy undertaken children.
a systematic review and economic
by nurses when compared with doctors? By Yao G, Albon E, Adi Y, Milford D,
evaluation. A Multi-Institution Nurse Endoscopy Bayliss S, Ready A,et al.
By Woolacott N, Bravo Vergel Y,
Trial (MINuET).
Hawkins N, Kainth A, Khadjesari Z, No. 50
Misso K, et al. By Williams J, Russell I, Durai D, Amniocentesis results: investigation of
Cheung W-Y, Farrin A, Bloor K, et al.
anxiety. The ARIA trial.
No. 32
No. 41 By Hewison J, Nixon J, Fountain J,
The cost-effectiveness of testing for
The clinical and cost-effectiveness of Cocks K, Jones C, Mason G, et al.
hepatitis C in former injecting drug
oxaliplatin and capecitabine for the
users.
adjuvant treatment of colon cancer:
By Castelnuovo E, Thompson-Coon J,
systematic review and economic Volume 11, 2007
Pitt M, Cramp M, Siebert U, Price A,
evaluation.
et al.
By Pandor A, Eggington S, Paisley S, No. 1
No. 33 Tappenden P, Sutcliffe P. Pemetrexed disodium for the treatment
of malignant pleural mesothelioma:
Computerised cognitive behaviour
No. 42 a systematic review and economic
therapy for depression and anxiety
A systematic review of the effectiveness evaluation.
update: a systematic review and
of adalimumab, etanercept and By Dundar Y, Bagust A, Dickson R,
economic evaluation.
infliximab for the treatment of Dodd S, Green J, Haycox A, et al.
By Kaltenthaler E, Brazier J,
rheumatoid arthritis in adults and an
De Nigris E, Tumur I, Ferriter M,
economic evaluation of their cost- No. 2
Beverley C, et al.
effectiveness. A systematic review and economic
No. 34 By Chen Y-F, Jobanputra P, Barton P, model of the clinical effectiveness and
Cost-effectiveness of using prognostic Jowett S, Bryan S, Clark W, et al. cost-effectiveness of docetaxel in
information to select women with breast No. 43 combination with prednisone or
cancer for adjuvant systemic therapy. Telemedicine in dermatology: prednisolone for the treatment of
By Williams C, Brunskill S, Altman D, a randomised controlled trial. hormone-refractory metastatic prostate
Briggs A, Campbell H, Clarke M, By Bowns IR, Collins K, Walters SJ, cancer.
et al.
McDonagh AJG.
By Collins R, Fenwick E, Trowman R,
Perard R, Norman G, Light K,
No. 35 No. 44 et al.
Psychological therapies including Cost-effectiveness of cell salvage and
dialectical behaviour therapy for alternative methods of minimising No. 3
borderline personality disorder: perioperative allogeneic blood A systematic review of rapid diagnostic
a systematic review and preliminary transfusion: a systematic review and tests for the detection of tuberculosis
economic evaluation. economic model. infection.
By Brazier J, Tumur I, Holmes M, By Davies L, Brown TJ, Haynes S, By Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kunst H,
Ferriter M, Parry G, Dent-Brown K, et al. Payne K, Elliott RA, McCollum C. Gibson A, Cummins E, Waugh N, et al.
No. 36 No. 45 No. 4
Clinical effectiveness and cost- Clinical effectiveness and cost- The clinical effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of tests for the diagnosis effectiveness of laparoscopic surgery for effectiveness of strontium ranelate for
and investigation of urinary tract colorectal cancer: systematic reviews and the prevention of osteoporotic
infection in children: a systematic review economic evaluation. fragility fractures in postmenopausal
and economic model. By Murray A, Lourenco T, women.
By Whiting P, Westwood M, Bojke L, de Verteuil R, Hernandez R, Fraser C, By Stevenson M, Davis S,
Palmer S, Richardson G, Cooper J, et al. McKinley A, et al. Lloyd-Jones M, Beverley C. 71
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 5 No. 13 No. 21
A systematic review of quantitative and A systematic review and economic The clinical effectiveness and cost-
qualitative research on the role and evaluation of epoetin alfa, epoetin beta effectiveness of treatments for children
effectiveness of written information and darbepoetin alfa in anaemia with idiopathic steroid-resistant
available to patients about individual associated with cancer, especially that nephrotic syndrome: a systematic review.
medicines. attributable to cancer treatment. By Colquitt JL, Kirby J, Green C,
By Raynor DK, Blenkinsopp A, By Wilson J, Yao GL, Raftery J, Cooper K, Trompeter RS.
Knapp P, Grime J, Nicolson DJ, Bohlius J, Brunskill S, Sandercock J,
Pollock K, et al. et al. No. 22
A systematic review of the routine
No. 6 No. 14 monitoring of growth in children of
Oral naltrexone as a treatment for A systematic review and economic primary school age to identify
relapse prevention in formerly evaluation of statins for the prevention growth-related conditions.
opioid-dependent drug users: of coronary events. By Fayter D, Nixon J, Hartley S,
a systematic review and economic By Ward S, Lloyd Jones M, Pandor A, Rithalia A, Butler G, Rudolf M, et al.
evaluation. Holmes M, Ara R, Ryan A, et al.
By Adi Y, Juarez-Garcia A, Wang D, No. 23
Jowett S, Frew E, Day E, et al. No. 15 Systematic review of the effectiveness of
A systematic review of the effectiveness preventing and treating Staphylococcus
No. 7 and cost-effectiveness of different aureuscarriage in reducing peritoneal
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: models of community-based respite catheter-related infections.
a systematic review and cost–utility care for frail older people and their By McCormack K, Rabindranath K,
analysis. carers. Kilonzo M, Vale L, Fraser C, McIntyre L,
By Kanis JA, Stevenson M, By Mason A, Weatherly H, Spilsbury et al.
McCloskey EV, Davis S, Lloyd-Jones M. K, Arksey H, Golder S, Adamson J,
et al. No. 24
No. 8
The clinical effectiveness and cost of
Epidemiological, social, diagnostic and
No. 16 repetitive transcranial magnetic
economic evaluation of population
Additional therapy for young children stimulation versus electroconvulsive
screening for genital chlamydial
with spastic cerebral palsy: therapy in severe depression:
infection.
a randomised controlled trial. a multicentre pragmatic randomised
By Low N, McCarthy A, Macleod J,
By Weindling AM, Cunningham CC, controlled trial and economic
Salisbury C, Campbell R, Roberts TE,
Glenn SM, Edwards RT, Reeves DJ. analysis.
et al.
By McLoughlin DM, Mogg A,
No. 17 Eranti S, Pluck G, Purvis R, Edwards D,
No. 9
Screening for type 2 diabetes: literature et al.
Methadone and buprenorphine for the
review and economic modelling.
management of opioid dependence:
By Waugh N, Scotland G, No. 25
a systematic review and economic
McNamee P, Gillett M, Brennan A, A randomised controlled trial and
evaluation.
Goyder E, et al. economic evaluation of direct versus
By Connock M, Juarez-Garcia A,
indirect and individual versus group
Jowett S, Frew E, Liu Z, Taylor RJ,
No. 18 modes of speech and language therapy
et al.
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness for children with primary language
No. 10 of cinacalcet for secondary impairment.
Exercise Evaluation Randomised Trial hyperparathyroidism in end-stage By Boyle J, McCartney E, Forbes J,
(EXERT): a randomised trial comparing renal disease patients on dialysis: a O’Hare A.
GP referral for leisure centre-based systematic review and economic
exercise, community-based walking and evaluation. No. 26
advice only. By Garside R, Pitt M, Anderson R, Hormonal therapies for early breast
By Isaacs AJ, Critchley JA, Mealing S, Roome C, Snaith A, cancer: systematic review and economic
See Tai S, Buckingham K, Westley D, et al. evaluation.
Harridge SDR, et al. By Hind D, Ward S, De Nigris E,
No. 19 Simpson E, Carroll C, Wyld L.
No. 11 The clinical effectiveness and
Interferon alfa (pegylated and cost-effectiveness of gemcitabine for No. 27
non-pegylated) and ribavirin for the metastatic breast cancer: a systematic Cardioprotection against the toxic
treatment of mild chronic hepatitis C: review and economic evaluation. effects of anthracyclines given to
a systematic review and economic By Takeda AL, Jones J, Loveman E, children with cancer: a systematic
evaluation. Tan SC, Clegg AJ. review.
By Shepherd J, Jones J, Hartwell D, By Bryant J, Picot J, Levitt G,
Davidson P, Price A, Waugh N. No. 20 Sullivan I, Baxter L, Clegg A.
A systematic review of duplex
No. 12 ultrasound, magnetic resonance No. 28
Systematic review and economic angiography and computed tomography Adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab
evaluation of bevacizumab and angiography for the diagnosis for the treatment of ankylosing
cetuximab for the treatment of and assessment of symptomatic, lower spondylitis: a systematic review and
metastatic colorectal cancer. limb peripheral arterial disease. economic evaluation.
By Tappenden P, Jones R, Paisley S, By Collins R, Cranny G, Burch J, By McLeod C, Bagust A, Boland A,
72 Carroll C. Aguiar-Ibáñez R, Craig D, Wright K, et al. Dagenais P, Dickson R, Dundar Y,et al.
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
No. 29 No. 37 No. 46
Prenatal screening and treatment A randomised controlled trial Drug-eluting stents: a systematic review
strategies to prevent group B examining the longer-term outcomes of and economic evaluation.
streptococcal and other bacterial standard versus new antiepileptic drugs. By Hill RA, Boland A, Dickson R,
infections in early infancy: cost- The SANAD trial. Dündar Y, Haycox A, McLeod C,
effectiveness and expected value of By Marson AG, Appleton R, Baker GA, et al.
information analyses. Chadwick DW, Doughty J, Eaton B, et al.
By Colbourn T, Asseburg C, Bojke L, No. 47
Philips Z, Claxton K, Ades AE,et al. No. 38 The clinical effectiveness and cost-
Clinical effectiveness and cost- effectiveness of cardiac resynchronisation
No. 30 effectiveness of different models (biventricular pacing) for heart failure:
Clinical effectiveness and cost- of managing long-term oral systematic review and economic model.
effectiveness of bone morphogenetic anticoagulation therapy: a systematic By Fox M, Mealing S, Anderson R,
proteins in the non-healing of fractures review and economic modelling. Dean J, Stein K, Price A, et al.
and spinal fusion: a systematic By Connock M, Stevens C, Fry-Smith A,
review. Jowett S, Fitzmaurice D, Moore D, et al. No. 48
By Garrison KR, Donell S, Ryder J, Recruitment to randomised trials:
Shemilt I, Mugford M, Harvey I, No. 39 strategies for trial enrolment and
et al. A systematic review and economic participation study. The STEPS study.
model of the clinical effectiveness and By Campbell MK, Snowdon C,
No. 31 cost-effectiveness of interventions for Francis D, Elbourne D, McDonald AM,
A randomised controlled trial of preventing relapse in people with Knight R, et al.
postoperative radiotherapy following bipolar disorder.
breast-conserving surgery in a By Soares-Weiser K, Bravo Vergel Y, No. 49
minimum-risk older population. The Beynon S, Dunn G, Barbieri M, Duffy S, Cost-effectiveness of functional
PRIME trial.
et al. cardiac testing in the diagnosis and
management of coronary artery disease:
By Prescott RJ, Kunkler IH, Williams
No. 40 a randomised controlled trial.
LJ, King CC, Jack W, van der Pol M,
et al. Taxanes for the adjuvant treatment of The CECaT trial.
early breast cancer: systematic review By Sharples L, Hughes V, Crean A,
No. 32 and economic evaluation. Dyer M, Buxton M, Goldsmith K, et al.
By Ward S, Simpson E, Davis S,
Current practice, accuracy, effectiveness
Hind D, Rees A, Wilkinson A. No. 50
and cost-effectiveness of the school
Evaluation of diagnostic tests when
entry hearing screen.
No. 41 there is no gold standard. A review of
By Bamford J, Fortnum H, Bristow K,
The clinical effectiveness and cost- methods.
Smith J, Vamvakas G, Davies L, et al.
effectiveness of screening for open angle By Rutjes AWS, Reitsma JB,
No. 33 glaucoma: a systematic review and Coomarasamy A, Khan KS,
The clinical effectiveness and economic evaluation. Bossuyt PMM.
By Burr JM, Mowatt G, Hernández R,
cost-effectiveness of inhaled insulin
Siddiqui MAR, Cook J, Lourenco T, No. 51
in diabetes mellitus: a systematic
et al. Systematic reviews of the clinical
review and economic evaluation.
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
By Black C, Cummins E, Royle P,
No. 42 proton pump inhibitors in acute upper
Philip S, Waugh N.
Acceptability, benefit and costs of early gastrointestinal bleeding.
No. 34 screening for hearing disability: a study By Leontiadis GI, Sreedharan A,
Surveillance of cirrhosis for of potential screening tests and Dorward S, Barton P, Delaney B,
models. Howden CW, et al.
hepatocellular carcinoma: systematic
By Davis A, Smith P, Ferguson M,
review and economic analysis.
Stephens D, Gianopoulos I. No. 52
By Thompson Coon J, Rogers G,
A review and critique of modelling in
Hewson P, Wright D, Anderson R, No. 43 prioritising and designing screening
Cramp M, et al. Contamination in trials of educational programmes.
interventions. By Karnon J, Goyder E, Tappenden P,
No. 35
By Keogh-Brown MR, Bachmann McPhie S, Towers I, Brazier J, et al.
The Birmingham Rehabilitation Uptake
MO, Shepstone L, Hewitt C, Howe A,
Maximisation Study (BRUM). Home- Ramsay CR, et al. No. 53
based compared with hospital-based
An assessment of the impact of the
cardiac rehabilitation in a multi-ethnic No. 44 NHS Health Technology Assessment
population: cost-effectiveness and Overview of the clinical effectiveness of Programme.
patient adherence. positron emission tomography imaging By Hanney S, Buxton M, Green C,
By Jolly K, Taylor R, Lip GYH, in selected cancers. Coulson D, Raftery J.
Greenfield S, Raftery J, Mant J, et al. By Facey K, Bradbury I, Laking G,
Payne E.
No. 36
Volume 12, 2008
A systematic review of the clinical, No. 45
public health and cost-effectiveness The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of No. 1
of rapid diagnostic tests for the carmustine implants and temozolomide A systematic review and economic
detection and identification of for the treatment of newly diagnosed model of switching from non-
bacterial intestinal pathogens in high-grade glioma: a systematic review glycopeptide to glycopeptide antibiotic
faeces and food. and economic evaluation. prophylaxis for surgery.
By Abubakar I, Irvine L, Aldus CF, By Garside R, Pitt M, Anderson R, By Cranny G, Elliott R, Weatherly H,
Wyatt GM, Fordham R, Schelenz S, et al. Rogers G, Dyer M, Mealing S, et al. Chambers D, Hawkins N, Myers L, et al. 73
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment reports published to date
No. 2 No. 3 No. 4
‘Cut down to quit’ with nicotine A systematic review of the effectiveness Does befriending by trained lay
replacement therapies in smoking of strategies for reducing fracture risk in workers improve psychological well-
cessation: a systematic review of children with juvenile idiopathic being and quality of life for carers of
effectiveness and economic analysis. arthritis with additional data on long- people with dementia, and at what cost?
By Wang D, Connock M, Barton P, term risk of fracture and cost of disease A randomised controlled trial.
Fry-Smith A, Aveyard P, Moore D. management. By Charlesworth G, Shepstone L,
By Thornton J, Ashcroft D, O’Neill T, Wilson E, Thalanany M, Mugford M,
Elliott R, Adams J, Roberts C, et al. Poland F.
74
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Health Technology Assessment
Programme
Director, Deputy Director,
Professor Tom Walley, Professor Jon Nicholl,
Director, NHS HTA Programme, Director, Medical Care Research
Department of Pharmacology & Unit, University of Sheffield,
Therapeutics, School of Health and Related
University of Liverpool Research
Prioritisation Strategy Group
Members
Chair, Professor Bruce Campbell, Dr Edmund Jessop, Medical Dr Ron Zimmern, Director,
Professor Tom Walley, Consultant Vascular & General Adviser, National Specialist, Public Health Genetics Unit,
Director, NHS HTA Programme, Surgeon, Royal Devon & Exeter Commissioning Advisory Group Strangeways Research
Department of Pharmacology & Hospital (NSCAG), Department of Laboratories, Cambridge
Therapeutics, Health, London
Professor Robin E Ferner,
University of Liverpool
Consultant Physician and Professor Jon Nicholl, Director,
Director, West Midlands Centre Medical Care Research Unit,
for Adverse Drug Reactions, University of Sheffield,
City Hospital NHS Trust, School of Health and
Birmingham Related Research
HTA Commissioning Board
Members
Programme Director, Professor Deborah Ashby, Professor Jenny Donovan, Professor Ian Roberts,
Professor Tom Walley, Professor of Medical Statistics, Professor of Social Medicine, Professor of Epidemiology &
Director, NHS HTA Programme, Department of Environmental Department of Social Medicine, Public Health, Intervention
Department of Pharmacology & and Preventative Medicine, University of Bristol Research Unit, London School
Therapeutics, Queen Mary University of of Hygiene and Tropical
University of Liverpool London Professor Freddie Hamdy, Medicine
Professor of Urology,
C Prh oa fi er s, sor Jon Nicholl, Professor Ann Bowling, University of Sheffield Professor Mark Sculpher,
Director, Medical Care Research Professor of Health Services Professor Allan House, Professor of Health Economics,
Unit, University of Sheffield, Research, Primary Care and Professor of Liaison Psychiatry, Centre for Health Economics,
School of Health and Related Population Studies, University of Leeds Institute for Research in the
Research University College London Social Services,
Professor Sallie Lamb, Director, University of York
Deputy Chair, Professor John Cairns, Warwick Clinical Trials Unit,
Dr Andrew Farmer, Professor of Health Economics, University of Warwick
Professor Kate Thomas,
University Lecturer in General Public Health Policy,
Practice, Department of London School of Hygiene Professor Stuart Logan, Professor of Complementary
Primary Health Care, and Tropical Medicine, Director of Health & Social and Alternative Medicine,
University of Oxford London Care Research, The Peninsula University of Leeds
Medical School, Universities of
Professor Nicky Cullum, Exeter & Plymouth Professor David John Torgerson,
Director of Centre for Evidence Professor Miranda Mugford, Director of York Trial Unit,
Based Nursing, Department of Professor of Health Economics, Department of Health Sciences,
Health Sciences, University of University of East Anglia University of York
Dr Jeffrey Aronson, York
Reader in Clinical Dr Linda Patterson, Professor Hywel Williams,
Pharmacology, Department of Professor Jon Deeks, Consultant Physician, Professor of
Clinical Pharmacology, Professor of Health Statistics, Department of Medicine, Dermato-Epidemiology,
Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford University of Birmingham Burnley General Hospital University of Nottingham
75
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2008. All rights reserved.
Health Technology Assessment Programme
Diagnostic Technologies & Screening Panel
Members
Chair, Dr Paul Cockcroft, Consultant Dr Jennifer J Kurinczuk, Dr Margaret Somerville,
Dr Ron Zimmern, Director of Medical Microbiologist and Consultant Clinical Director of Public Health
the Public Health Genetics Unit, Clinical Director of Pathology, Epidemiologist, National Learning, Peninsula Medical
Strangeways Research Department of Clinical Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, School, University of Plymouth
Laboratories, Cambridge Microbiology, St Mary's Oxford
Hospital, Portsmouth Dr Graham Taylor, Scientific
Dr Susanne M Ludgate, Director & Senior Lecturer,
Professor Adrian K Dixon, Clinical Director, Medicines & Regional DNA Laboratory, The
Professor of Radiology, Healthcare Products Regulatory Leeds Teaching Hospitals
Ms Norma Armston, University Department of Agency, London
Radiology, University of
Freelance Consumer Advocate, Professor Lindsay Wilson
Cambridge Clinical School
Bolton Mr Stephen Pilling, Director, Turnbull, Scientific Director,
Centre for Outcomes, Centre for MR Investigations &
Dr David Elliman, Consultant in
Professor Max Bachmann, Community Child Health, Research & Effectiveness, YCR Professor of Radiology,
Professor of Health Care Islington PCT & Great Ormond Joint Director, National University of Hull
Interfaces, Department of Street Hospital, London Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health Policy and Practice, Health, University College Professor Martin J Whittle,
University of East Anglia Professor Glyn Elwyn, London Clinical Co-director, National
Research Chair, Centre for Co-ordinating Centre for
Professor Rudy Bilous Health Sciences Research, Mrs Una Rennard, Women’s and Childhealth
Professor of Clinical Medicine & Cardiff University, Department Service User Representative,
Consultant Physician, of General Practice, Cardiff Oxford Dr Dennis Wright,
The Academic Centre, Consultant Biochemist &
South Tees Hospitals NHS Trust Professor Paul Glasziou, Dr Phil Shackley, Senior Clinical Director,
Director, Centre for Lecturer in Health Economics, The North West London
Ms Dea Birkett, Service User Evidence-Based Practice, Academic Vascular Unit, Hospitals NHS Trust,
Representative, London University of Oxford University of Sheffield Middlesex
Pharmaceuticals Panel
Members
Chair, Professor Imti Choonara, Dr Jonathan Karnon, Senior Dr Martin Shelly,
Professor Robin Ferner, Professor in Child Health, Research Fellow, Health General Practitioner,
Consultant Physician and Academic Division of Child Economics and Decision Leeds
Director, West Midlands Centre Health, University of Science, University of Sheffield
for Adverse Drug Reactions, Nottingham Mrs Katrina Simister, Assistant
City Hospital NHS Trust, Dr Yoon Loke, Senior Lecturer Director New Medicines,
Birmingham Professor John Geddes, in Clinical Pharmacology, National Prescribing Centre,
Professor of Epidemiological University of East Anglia Liverpool
Psychiatry, University of
Oxford Ms Barbara Meredith, Dr Richard Tiner, Medical
Lay Member, Epsom Director, Medical Department,
Mrs Barbara Greggains, Association of the British
Non-Executive Director, Dr Andrew Prentice, Senior Pharmaceutical Industry,
Greggains Management Ltd Lecturer and Consultant London
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Dr Bill Gutteridge, Medical Department of Obstetrics &
Adviser, National Specialist Gynaecology, University of
Commissioning Advisory Group Cambridge
Ms Anne Baileff, Consultant (NSCAG), London
Nurse in First Contact Care, Dr Frances Rotblat, CPMP
Southampton City Primary Care Mrs Sharon Hart, Delegate, Medicines &
Trust, University of Consultant Pharmaceutical Healthcare Products Regulatory
Southampton Adviser, Reading Agency, London
76
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
Health Technology Assessment2008; Vol. 12: No. 4
Therapeutic Procedures Panel
Members
Chair, Professor Matthew Cooke, Dr Simon de Lusignan, Dr John C Pounsford,
Professor Bruce Campbell, Professor of Emergency Senior Lecturer, Primary Care Consultant Physician,
Consultant Vascular and Medicine, Warwick Emergency Informatics, Department of Directorate of Medical Services,
General Surgeon, Department Care and Rehabilitation, Community Health Sciences, North Bristol NHS Trust
of Surgery, Royal Devon & University of Warwick St George’s Hospital Medical
Exeter Hospital School, London Dr Karen Roberts, Nurse
Mr Mark Emberton, Senior Consultant, Queen Elizabeth
Lecturer in Oncological Dr Peter Martin, Consultant Hospital, Gateshead
Urology, Institute of Urology, Neurologist, Addenbrooke’s
University College Hospital Hospital, Cambridge
Dr Vimal Sharma, Consultant
Psychiatrist/Hon. Senior
Professor Paul Gregg, Professor Neil McIntosh,
Lecturer, Mental Health
Professor of Orthopaedic Edward Clark Professor of Child
Resource Centre, Cheshire and
Dr Mahmood Adil, Deputy Surgical Science, Department of Life & Health, Department of
Wirral Partnership NHS Trust,
Regional Director of Public General Practice and Primary Child Life & Health, University
Wallasey
Health, Department of Health, Care, South Tees Hospital NHS of Edinburgh
Manchester Trust, Middlesbrough
Professor Jim Neilson, Professor Scott Weich,
Dr Aileen Clarke, Ms Maryann L Hardy, Professor of Obstetrics and Professor of Psychiatry,
Consultant in Public Health, Lecturer, Division of Gynaecology, Department of Division of Health in the
Public Health Resource Unit, Radiography, University of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Community, University of
Oxford Bradford University of Liverpool Warwick
Disease Prevention Panel
Members
Chair, Dr Elizabeth Fellow-Smith, Professor Yi Mien Koh, Dr Carol Tannahill, Director,
Dr Edmund Jessop,Medical Medical Director, Director of Public Health and Glasgow Centre for Population
Adviser, National Specialist West London Mental Health Medical Director, London Health, Glasgow
Commissioning Advisory Group Trust, Middlesex NHS (North West London
(NSCAG), London Strategic Health Authority), Professor Margaret Thorogood,
Mr Ian Flack, Director PPI London Professor of Epidemiology,
Forum Support, Council of University of Warwick,
Ethnic Minority Voluntary Ms Jeanett Martin, Coventry
Sector Organisations, Director of Clinical Leadership
Stratford & Quality, Lewisham PCT, Dr Ewan Wilkinson,
London Consultant in Public Health,
Dr John Jackson, Royal Liverpool University
General Practitioner, Dr Chris McCall, General Hospital, Liverpool
Newcastle upon Tyne Practitioner, Dorset
Mrs Veronica James, Chief Dr David Pencheon, Director,
Mrs Sheila Clark, Chief Officer, Horsham District Age Eastern Region Public Health
Executive, St James’s Hospital, Concern, Horsham Observatory, Cambridge
Portsmouth
Professor Mike Kelly, Dr Ken Stein, Senior Clinical
Mr Richard Copeland, Director, Centre for Public Lecturer in Public Health,
Lead Pharmacist: Clinical Health Excellence, Director, Peninsula Technology
Economy/Interface, National Institute for Health Assessment Group,
Wansbeck General Hospital, and Clinical Excellence, University of Exeter,
Northumberland London Exeter
77
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
Health Technology Assessment Programme
Expert Advisory Network
Members
Professor Douglas Altman, Professor Carol Dezateux, Professor Stan Kaye, Cancer Professor Chris Price,
Professor of Statistics in Professor of Paediatric Research UK Professor of Visiting Professor in Clinical
Medicine, Centre for Statistics Epidemiology, London Medical Oncology, Section of Biochemistry, University of
in Medicine, University of Medicine, Royal Marsden Oxford
Oxford Dr Keith Dodd, Consultant Hospital & Institute of Cancer
Paediatrician, Derby Research, Surrey Professor William Rosenberg,
Professor John Bond, Professor of Hepatology and
Director, Centre for Health Mr John Dunning, Dr Duncan Keeley, Consultant Physician, University
Services Research, University of Consultant Cardiothoracic General Practitioner (Dr Burch of Southampton, Southampton
Newcastle upon Tyne, School of Surgeon, Cardiothoracic & Ptnrs), The Health Centre,
Population & Health Sciences, Surgical Unit, Papworth Thame Professor Peter Sandercock,
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospital NHS Trust, Cambridge Professor of Medical Neurology,
Dr Donna Lamping, Department of Clinical
Professor Andrew Bradbury, Mr Jonothan Earnshaw, Research Degrees Programme Neurosciences, University of
Professor of Vascular Surgery, Consultant Vascular Surgeon, Director & Reader in Psychology, Edinburgh
Gloucestershire Royal Hospital,
Solihull Hospital, Birmingham Health Services Research Unit,
Gloucester Dr Susan Schonfield, Consultant
London School of Hygiene and
M Chr i eS fh Eau xn ec B utr io vg ea , n R, i dgeway Professor Martin Eccles, Tropical Medicine, London i Pn C P Tu , b Mli ic d H dle ea selt xh, Hillingdon
Professor of Clinical
Primary Care Group, Aylesbury Effectiveness, Centre for Health Mr George Levvy, Dr Eamonn Sheridan,
Mrs Stella Burnside OBE, Services Research, University of Chief Executive, Motor Consultant in Clinical Genetics,
Chief Executive, Newcastle upon Tyne Neurone Disease Association, Genetics Department,
Regulation and Improvement Northampton St James’s University Hospital,
Authority, Belfast P Pr ro off ee ss ss oo rr oPa f m Co E mn mde ur nb iy t, y Professor James Lindesay, Leeds
Rehabilitation, Institute of Professor of Psychiatry for the Professor Sarah Stewart-Brown,
Ms Tracy Bury,
General Practice and Primary Elderly, University of Leicester, Professor of Public Health,
Project Manager, World
Care, University of Sheffield Leicester General Hospital University of Warwick,
Confederation for Physical
Division of Health in the
Therapy, London
Professor Gene Feder, Professor Professor Julian Little, Community Warwick Medical
Professor Iain T Cameron, of Primary Care Research & Professor of Human Genome School, LWMS, Coventry
Development, Centre for Health Epidemiology, Department of
Professor of Obstetrics and
Sciences, Barts & The London Epidemiology &Community Professor Ala Szczepura,
Gynaecology and Head of the
Queen Mary’s School of Medicine, University of Ottawa Professor of Health Service
School of Medicine,
Medicine & Dentistry, London Research, Centre for Health
University of Southampton
Professor Rajan Madhok, Services Studies, University of
Dr Christine Clark, Mr Leonard R Fenwick, Consultant in Public Health, Warwick
Chief Executive, Newcastle South Manchester Primary
Medical Writer & Consultant
upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust Care Trust, Manchester Dr Ross Taylor,
Pharmacist, Rossendale
Senior Lecturer, Department of
Professor Collette Clifford, Mrs Gillian Fletcher, Professor Alexander Markham, General Practice and Primary
Professor of Nursing & Head of Antenatal Teacher & Tutor and Director, Molecular Medicine Care, University of Aberdeen
Research, School of Health President, National Childbirth Unit, St James’s University
Sciences, University of Trust, Henfield Hospital, Leeds Mrs Joan Webster,
Consumer member, HTA –
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Professor Jayne Franklyn, Professor Alistaire McGuire, Expert Advisory Network
Birmingham Professor of Medicine,
Professor of Health Economics,
Department of Medicine,
Professor Barry Cookson, London School of Economics
University of Birmingham,
Director, Laboratory of
Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
Healthcare Associated Infection, Dr Peter Moore,
Edgbaston, Birmingham
Health Protection Agency, Freelance Science Writer, Ashtead
London Dr Neville Goodman,
Dr Andrew Mortimore, Public
Consultant Anaesthetist,
Dr Carl Counsell, Clinical Southmead Hospital, Bristol Health Director, Southampton
Senior Lecturer in Neurology, City Primary Care Trust,
Department of Medicine & Professor Robert E Hawkins, Southampton
Therapeutics, University of CRC Professor and Director of
Aberdeen Medical Oncology, Christie CRC Dr Sue Moss, Associate Director,
Cancer Screening Evaluation
Research Centre, Christie
Professor Howard Cuckle, Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester Unit, Institute of Cancer
Professor of Reproductive Research, Sutton
Epidemiology, Department of Professor Allen Hutchinson,
Paediatrics, Obstetrics & Director of Public Health & Mrs Julietta Patnick,
Gynaecology, University of Deputy Dean of ScHARR, Director, NHS Cancer Screening
Leeds Department of Public Health, Programmes, Sheffield
University of Sheffield
Dr Katherine Darton, Professor Robert Peveler,
Information Unit, MIND – Professor Peter Jones, Professor Professor of Liaison Psychiatry,
The Mental Health Charity, of Psychiatry, University of Royal South Hants Hospital,
London Cambridge, Cambridge Southampton
78
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk)
HTA
How to obtain copies of this and other HTA Programme reports.
An electronic version of this publication, in Adobe Acrobat format, is available for downloading free of
charge for personal use from the HTA website (http://www.hta.ac.uk). A fully searchable CD-ROM is
also available (see below).
Printed copies of HTA monographs cost £20 each (post and packing free in the UK) to both public and
private sector purchasers from our Despatch Agents.
Non-UK purchasers will have to pay a small fee for post and packing. For European countries the cost is
£2 per monograph and for the rest of the world £3 per monograph.
You can order HTA monographs from our Despatch Agents:
– fax (with credit card or official purchase order)
– post (with credit card or official purchase order or cheque)
– phone during office hours (credit card only).
Additionally the HTA website allows you either to pay securely by credit card or to print out your
order and then post or fax it.
Contact details are as follows:
HTA Despatch Email: orders@hta.ac.uk
c/o Direct Mail Works Ltd Tel: 02392 492 000
4 Oakwood Business Centre Fax: 02392 478 555
Downley, HAVANT PO9 2NP, UK Fax from outside the UK: +44 2392 478 555
NHS libraries can subscribe free of charge. Public libraries can subscribe at a very reduced cost of
£100 for each volume (normally comprising 30–40 titles). The commercial subscription rate is £300
per volume. Please see our website for details. Subscriptions can only be purchased for the current or
forthcoming volume.
Payment methods
Paying by cheque
If you pay by cheque, the cheque must be in pounds sterling, made payable to Direct Mail Works Ltd
and drawn on a bank with a UK address.
Paying by credit card
The following cardsare accepted by phone, fax, post or via the website ordering pages: Delta, Eurocard,
Mastercard, Solo, Switch and Visa. We advise against sending credit card details in a plain email.
Paying by official purchase order
You can post or fax these, but they must be from public bodies (i.e. NHS or universities) within the UK.
We cannot at present accept purchase orders from commercial companies or from outside the UK.
How do I get a copy of HTA on CD?
Please use the form on the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk/htacd.htm). Or contact Direct Mail Works (see
contact details above) by email, post, fax or phone. HTA on CD is currently free of charge worldwide.
The website also provides information about the HTA Programme and lists the membership of the various
committees.
Health Technology Assessment 2008;Vol. 12: No. 4
Does befriending by trained lay workers
improve psychological well-being and
quality of life for carers of people
with dementia, and at what cost?
A randomised controlled trial
G Charlesworth, L Shepstone, E Wilson,
M Thalanany, M Mugford and F Poland
Feedback
The HTA Programme and the authors would like to know
your views about this report.
The Correspondence Page on the HTA website
(http://www.hta.ac.uk) is a convenient way to publish
your comments. If you prefer, you can send your comments
to the address below, telling us whether you would like
us to transfer them to the website.
We look forward to hearing from you.
March 2008
The National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment, HTA
Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood, Health Technology Assessment
University of Southampton,
NHS R&D HTA Programme
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
www.hta.ac.uk
Fax: +44 (0) 23 8059 5639 Email: hta@hta.ac.uk
http://www.hta.ac.uk ISSN 1366-5278
Health
Technology
Assessment
2008;Vol.
12:
No.
4
Psychological
well-being
and
quality
of
life
for
carers
of
people
with
dementia
