Psychological Reports, 1996, 78, 339-348 0 Psychological Reports 1996
AVIAN COMPANIONSHIP IN ALLEVIATION OF DEPRESSION,
LONELINESS, AND LOW MORALE OF OLDER ADULTS IN
SKILLED REHABILITATION UNITS '
JILL JESSEN, FRANK CAKDIELLO, MARA IM. BAUN
U>~iversofi ~N ebraska Medical Cer~ter
College of Nzrrsing
Sz~mmary.-To assess effects of a companion bird on the depression, morale, and
lonehess of 40 older adults in a skilled rehabilitation unit, self-reporred measures of
depression, loneliness, and morale were completed on admission and 10 days later.
With the presence of a companion bird the experimental group (n=20) showed a sig-
nificant decrease in depression but none in morale or loneliness from the control
group (t1=20) who were without a bird. Use of a companion bird may lessen negative
effects of change of res~dencef or older adults.
L~kean y other period in Me, old age is acconlpanied by transitions that
require adaptation (Ferrini & Ferrini, 1989). One of these transitions, hospi-
taltzation, frequently requires another transition to a rehabhtation center.
These transitions may require the elderly to face events that induce stress
(Lieberman & Tobin, 1983). Two potential stressors, loss of residence and
loss of independence, may be precipitating factors in lonehess (Perlrnan &
Peplau, 1984). Relocation has even been implicated in increased death rates.
According to Pablo (1977), excessively high death rates during the first 3
months following change of residence have been attributed to decreased ac-
tivity, low morale, poor Me satisfaction, and depression. Other common emo-
tions and reactions include restlessness, boredom, and feelings of uselessness
(Ferrini & Ferrini, 1989). Davis, Thorson, and Copenhaver (1990) reported
an increase in either mortality or morbidity in a group of nursing home resi-
dents after a carefully planned mass move. Although previous studies were
conducted in long-term care facihties, similar effects of loss of residence and
independence can be expected to occur in hospital and rehabhtacion set-
tlngs.
In recent years, companion animals have been described as having ben-
eficial effects on humans. Animals can enrich human lives in ways that help
keep people healthy and happy, including decreased blood pressure and
heart rate (Baun, Bergstrom, Langston, & Thoma, 1984; Grossberg & Alf,
1985) and increased survival rate after myocardial infarction (Friedmann,
Su ported in part by NIH Biomedical Research Support Grant No. 2 SO7 RR05942-05.
Adgess correspondence to Dr. Man M. Baun, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Col-
lege of Nursing, 600 South 42nd Street, Omaha, NE 68198-5330.
a.
340 J. JESSEN, ET
Katcher, Lynch, & Thomas, 1980; Friedmann, Katcher, Thomas, Lynch, &
Messent, 1983).
Birds are one companion animal used with a variety of subjects. When
caged birds were placed in rooms of adult patients in a psychiatric hospital
where daily sessions of group therapy were held, the presence of the birds
significantly improved participation and attendance at the sessions (Beck,
Seraydarian, & Hunter, 1986). Patients in the bird group were significantly
less hostile than patients in the nonbird group. An extensive investigation
exploring the effect of a resident cat or bird (cockateel) on the morale, men-
tal status, and functional health of older adults living in a residential care fa-
chty showed that subjects in the bird group experienced significant positive
effects on factors related to loneliness and agitation, whereas no difference
was found in the control (no anunal) and a cat group (Small, 1984).
Mugford and M'Comisky (1976) placed either a plant (begonia) or a
bird (budgerigar) in the residences of older adults ranging from 75 to 81
years of age. Items measured on a questionnaire reflected attitudes toward
people, self-regard, physical and psychological well-being, and feehgs to-
ward the environment. Those subjects with birds showed improvements on
items related to attitudes toward people and attitudes toward their own psy-
chological health. The bird apparently acted as a social catalyst.
Since beneficial effects of association with birds have been demonstrat-
ed for free-hvmg and institutionalized adults and nongeriatric psychiatric
patients, ~t was hypothesized that the presence of a bird could lessen the
negative effects of relocation to a slulled rehabilitation unit for the older
adult. The purpose of this study, then, was to examine the effect of a caged
bird on depression, lonehess, and morale of older adults in skilled rehabili-
tation units.
Subjects
A sample of older adults admitted to two midwestern, skilled rehabilita-
tion units participated. Criteria for inclusion were men and women (a) ages
65 or older, (b) able to read, write, and speak English, (c) w h g t o have a
bird as a companion in their rooms, (d) having no allergies to birds, and (e)
scoring 24 or greater on the Mini-Mental State Examination. Subjects were
assigned randomly to experimental or control groups. Subjects were equally
divided between the experimental and control groups within each setting.
All newly admitted persons were approached, but participation was volun-
tary. Only those willtng to give written consent were included.
- over a period of 5 months, 59 older adults agreed to participate. These
individuals were asked to complete the Mini-Mental State Examination to
screen for the presence of cognitive impairment. Nineteen scored below 24
AVIAN COMPANIONSHIP AND DEPRESSION 341
on the Mini-Mental State Examination and were not ehgible. Forty subjects
scored greater than or equal to 24, met the other inclusion criteria, and com-
prised the sample. Subjects were assigned randomly to the control group
(n=20) and to the experimental group (n=20). There were 13 men and 27
women ages 65 to 91 years (M = 76).
Setting
The two skded rehabhtation units were located in two midwestern cit-
ies 50 miles apart. The units have total capacities of 30 and 60 beds with an
average dady census of 16 and 60 patients, respectively. These two units
were comparable in relation to types of subjects, staffing ratios, and quahty
of care.
Measures of Dependent Variables
Morale.-The Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale (Lawton,
1975), a multidimensional measure of morale, is a self-administered scale
that takes less than 10 minutes to complete with yes/no answers. Subjects
are scored as having low nzorale (0) to high morale (17). Scores of nine or
higher are representative of high morale. Factor analysis in a sample of older
outpatients and institutionahzed subjects yielded three factors whch ex-
plained 43% of the total variance: agitation, attitude toward own aging, and
lonely dissatisfaction. The internal consistency coefficient (Kuder-Richardson
Formula 21) for that sample was .81 (Lawton, 1975).
Depression.-The Geriatric Depression Scale is a 30-point, self-adrninis-
tered scale of depression requesting yes/no responses. Reliability among old-
er adults was indicated by a Cronbach alpha (Yesavage, Brink, Rose, Lum,
Huang, Adey, & Leirer, 1983) of .94. Test-retest reliabhty was calculated by
having 20 subjects complete the questionnaire twice 1 wk. apart. A correla-
tion of .85 was obtained (p<.OOI), suggesting that within the time-frame
considered, scores ". . . reflect stable individual hfferences" (Yesavage, et
al., 1983, p. 44).
The Geriatric Depression Scale's validity was indicated by successful
screening for de~ress~omn populations of normal and psychiatrically dl old-
er adults (Yesavage, el 01, 1983) and in older, hospitalized patients with
medcal illnesses (Koenig, Meador, Cohen, & Blazer, 1988). Cronbach alpha
was 0.94. Scores of > 10 are inlcative of depressed states in older adults
(Yesavage, et al., 1983). Koenig and colleagues found that when using a
score of 11 or higher as indicative of depression, the scale had a 92% sensi-
tivity, 89% specificity, 56% positive prelctive value, and 99% negative
predictive value.
Loneliness.-The Revised UCLA Lonehess Scale (Russell, Peplau, &
Cutrona, 1980) is a 20-item scale designed to measure loneliness. The three
dimensions of the scale derived from factor analysis are intimate others, so-
342 J. JESSEN, ET AL.
cial others, and belonging (Austin, 1983). Each item is rated on a 4-point
scale of often, sometimes, rarely, and never. The range of scores is from 20
to 80 with higher scores indicating greater loneliness. There are no estab-
lished cut-points, but college students had mean scores of 36 to 56 (Russell,
et al., 1980), and nursing home residents had mean scores of 38, 22, and
42.85 (Calvert, 1989). Concurrent vahdity was demonstrated by significant
correlations with scores on the Beck Depression Inventory (r = .62) and the
Costell-Comrey Depression Scale (r= .55) (Russell, et al., 1980). Discrimi-
nant validity was inferred from intercorrelations with measures of mood and
personality as self-esteem -.49 and rejection .28 (Russell, et al., 1980). Re-
ported test-retest reliabhty was .73 over 2 months, and coefficient alpha was
.94.
Independent Vavzable
The independent variable was avian companionship provided by a bud-
gerigar in a cage. Budgerigars were chosen because they are inexpensive and
small so a relatively small cage could be used. In the room of each subject in
the experimental group was placed one budgerigar in a standard 18- x 20-
in. bird cage placed on a 24-in. x 24-in. table situated in a corner. Four
budgerigars with identical cages were used in the study. The subjects re-
ceived verbal and written instructions relating to the bird. Since subjects had
varying abhties to perform physical care for the birds, a decision was made
not to have any subject provide care. In this way interactions between sub-
jects and birds would be comparable for the entire experimental group.
Procedure
Individuals being admitted to the rehabilitation units received written
information describing the study and informing them that they would be
contacted by an investigator. Within 5 days after admission, an investigator
contacted each new resident. The purpose of the study was explained, and
written consent to participate was obtained. The investigators read from a
script to h i t d ifferences in instructions.
Subjects were informed that based on their answers to several questions
(the Mini-Mental State Examination) in stage I, they might proceed to stage
I1 of the study. The Mini-Mental State Examination was chosen for stage I
because it is easy to administer and has reported vali&ty and r&abhty in
screening older adults for cognitive status. The variables examined were ori-
entation, recall, attention, concentration, language, and motor slulls. The
examination is a 30-point scale that can be administered by a health profes-
sional in 10 minutes. A score below 24 is indicative of cognitive impairment.
Concurrent vahdity has been established with the Wechsler Adult Intelh-
gence Scale. Test-retest reliabhty was .89 when the examination was given
AVIAN COMPANIONSHIP AND DEPRESSION 343
by the same tester on two occasions 24 hours apart (Folstein, Folstein, &
McHugh, 1975). Interrater agreement was 0.83 in the same circumstance.
Subjects scoring below 24 were thanked for their participation and elim-
inated from the study. The remaining subjects were randomized into experi-
mental and control groups. The investigators then administered the Phila-
delphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale, Geriatric Depression Scale, and Re-
vised UCLA Lonehness Scale (pretests). Demographic data also were col-
lected.
After obtaining baselme data, a bird was placed in the room of each
subject in the experimental group. Care for the birds was provided either at
times the subject was not m the room or by having a staff member bring the
bird and cage out of the room so that there was no intervention by the in-
vestigator through interaction with the subject. The control group had no
intervention other than their routine care in the unit. At the end of 10 days,
the three instruments were administered again to all subjects (posttest), and
the bird was removed. Although a relatively short time period, 10 days were
the maximum amount of time it could be predicted that a sufficiently large
sample would still be in the institution. The experimental group was asked
several open-ended questions regarding their feelings about participating in
the study and having a bird. The study was approved by the University of
Nebraska Institutional Review Board and the Animal Review Committee of
the University of Nebraska Medical Center/University of Nebraska at Oma-
ha.
Data Analyrls
Multivariate analyses of variance were used to assess whether self-re-
ported measures of morale, depression, and loneliness were affected over
time in both the control (no bird) and experimental groups (bird). Demo-
graphic variables regarding sex of subject, previous living arrangement, and
pet ownership history were included to examine their possible influence on
subjects' responses. Means and frequency distributions were calculated for
the demographic data. Open-ended questions were subjected to content anal-
ysis.
RESULTS
The typical subject was female, widowed, had previously been living
alone, and had owned a pet which most often was a dog. There were no sta-
tistically significant differences between groups for marital status, previous
living arrangements, previous pet ownership, and type of pet owned. Neither
sex of the subjects, mode of residence (alone or with another), or previous
pet ownership had any significant effect on outcomes of the study.
Self-reported measures of morale, depression, and Ionelmess of an older
adult hospitabzed in a sk~Uedr ehabhtation unit were affected over time by
344 J. JESSEN, ET AL.
the intervention of placing a caged bird in the room. A significant effect was
found between groups for scores on depression (F,,,, = 6.75, p = .01) with the
group with a caged bird being less depressed (see Table 1).
TABLE 1
MEANSS, TANDARDDE VIATIONASN,D SIGNIFICANFCOER D IFFERENCBEEST WEETNI MESI A ND I1
Group and Measure Time I Time I1
M SD M SD
Control (n = 20)
Morale 10.0 3.4 10.4 3.0
Depression 8.8 6.5 8.6 5.8
Loneliness 53.3 3.1 52.7 2.1
Experimental (tz = 20)
Morale 9.9 3.0 10.9 3.3
Depression 8.9 4.9 5.9* 4.4
Loneliness 53.9 4.2 54.1 4.4
"p=.Ol.
At admission, mean scores on the Geriatric Depression Scale were 8.8
and 8.9 at Time I (pretest) for control and experimental groups. Scores of
> 11 are accepted as an indicator of possible depression in older adults (Ye-
savage, et al., 1983). Thirty percent (n= 12) of all subjects in the sample
population had scores in the depressed range (11 to 25). Four of six subjects
in the experimental group who scored in the depressed range on the pretest
&d not have posttest scores in that range. One experimental group subject
scored nondepressed on the pretest and in the depressed range at posttest.
None of the six subjects in the concrol group who scored in the depressed
range scored outside that range at posttest; two other control subjects'
scores moved them from the nondepressed to [he depressed range.
Pretest mean morale scores for each group were within normal range
with a slight improvement at posttest by the experimental group. Analysis of
individual scores on the Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale showed
that at pretest 18 (45%) subjects scored less than 9 which is indicative of
low morale (Lawton, 1975). Pretest mean scores on the UCLA Lonehess
Scale were 53.3 for the control group and 53.9 for the experimental group.
Bgher scores are indicative of greater Ionelmess (Russell, et al., 1980). All
subjects' scores were in [he lonely range.
Subjects in the experimental group (n=20) were asked to respond to
five open-ended questions that reflected their feehgs about having a caged
bird laced in their rooms. The first question was what having the bird
meant. Responses were positive and included such statements as the bird (a)
was good company (n = 7), (b) helped pass time/was entertaining (n = 6), (c)
made me happy (n=4),a nd (d) was interesting (n=3). In answer to a ques-
AVIAN COMPANIONSHIP AND DEPRESSION 343
tion of whether the bird helped in adjusting to the move to the skilled reha-
bditation unit, 15 of the 20 subjects stated the bird dld help, 3 said it did
not, and 2 were unsure. The third question asked for two positive aspects
about having the bird in the room.-positive responses were that the-bird
helped to pass time, made subjects feel happier, served as a conversation
piece, and helped to increase the number of visitors the subjects received.
The fourth question requested two negative aspects about having the caged
bird. Twelve of the 20 subjects gave none; three thought the bird was too
noisy, two felt the bird was too wdd, two felt the bird was messy, and one
stated, "I was just too sick to enjoy the bird." The last question asked was
whether they would recommend having a bird for others. AU 20 subjects
stated they would recommend this arrangement for others hospitalized in
the unit.
DISCUSSION
A significant findmg was the presence of self-reported depression
(3O%), low morale (45x1, and lonetmess (100%) on the pretest in this par-
ticular sample of older adults in skilled rehabhtation units. It can be as-
sumed that such factors may affect a patient's rehabhtation negatively. Re-
sults support the hypothesis that the presence of a caged bird can affect gen-
eral well-being as those who had the bird during the first 10 days of their
stay had decreased self-reported depression.
Animal therapy assumes there is a potential for the formation of a bond
between a human being and the involved animal (Hamilton, 1985) and that
bond is beneficial to both. A bond with an animal promotes conversation
and fachtates social interaction which may help increase older adults' sense
of self-worth. The ~otentialf or significant benefit seems greatest among el-
derly persons; research has shown that a pet may enhance recovery from an
dness (Cusack & Smith, 1984).
The present findings in relation to depression are similar to those of
Reed (1986) in which self-reported depression, as measured by the Depres-
sion Adjective Checbst, was significantly lower when a mascot dog was
present in a long-term care facdity for older adults than when the dog was
absent. These findings are similar to other studies with caged birds although
depression was not measured. Caged birds (finches) positively influenced
scores on psychological well-being of hospitalized psychiatric clients (Beck,
et a/., 1986), and when caged birds (budgerigars) were placed in homes of
older adults, positive changes in scores on social and psychological status
were noted (Mugford & M'Comisky, 1976).
The positive effect of a caged bird in decreased depression may be re-
lated to an increase in the number of people entering a patient's room when
- -
the bird was present. During posttreatment interviews, many patients stated
J. JESSEN, ET AL.
that health care providers and support staff spent more time in their rooms
when the bird was present. One subject reported in delight that her physi-
cian, a geriatrician, would sing a short song to her bird each morning. More
than one staff member made comments suggesting disappointment that the
study concluded and said they would miss the enjoyment of going into
rooms and visiting with the birds and patients. Visiting with other people
may have alleviated depression. Hart (1989), in a study of effects of a fish
aquarium placed in a coronary care unit, reported that medical visits to
rooms where fish were present lasted longer than in rooms without fish.
The presence of a caged bird, however, was not reflected in scores on
morale and loneliness. These findings are similar to those of Small (1984)
who reported that the presence of a mascot bird, a cockateel, was not asso-
ciated with a significant effect on the Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale
Scale scores of older adults living in a long-term care facdity when compared
to those in a control group or cat group. Conversely, Reed's (1986) finding
that self-reported feehgs of lonehess in older adults residing in a long-
term care facility were significantly lower when a mascot dog was present
than at times when the dog was not present was not supported. Decreased
lonehess, together with less depression, was expected in this study. Theo-
retically the presence of the bird as well as the increased attention brought
by having the bird in the room should have led to the lessening of loneh-
ness. Since nearly all subjects scored considerably above the means previ-
ously reported, the effect of the bird does not appear to have been strong
enough to move their scores out of the lonehess range. Possibly a longer or
more permanent relationship with the bird would be needed.
AU subjects scored 46 or greater (M=53.5) on both pre- and posttest
scores of the Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale. Higher scores are indicative of
greater lonehess (Russell, et al., 1980). Russell and colleagues reported the
mean score of college students was 36.6. In nursing home residents with a
mean age of 73.8 yr., Calvert (1989) found mean lonehess scores for high
and low pet interaction groups were 38.2 and 42.9, respectively. All scores in
this study were higher than any previously reported.
The differences among present results and those of similar studies also
may be a result of design differences. Factors which might influence out-
comes include where the animal is placed (patient's room, common area, or
free to roam on unit), type of animal, patient's length of stay, and type of fa-
chty. This study differed in design which called for placing a companion
animal in the patient's room rather than having one aLnal on the general
unit (Reed, 1986) or in a common area (Beck, et al., 1986; Small, 1984) as
in the mascot studies. The companion approach here gave subjects the op-
portunity to have a more long-term, private, and possibly more personal in-
AVIAN COMPANIONSHIP AND DEPRESSION 347
teraction with the bird. An advantage of using a caged bird is that it can be
placed in a patient's room on a continuing basis with less difficulty than a
dog or cat. Also, a caged bird requires less care.
Other variables may include clients' severity of ~llnessa nd factors re-
lated to a change in health status. For instance, one client who arrived hope-
ful that daily radiation treatments would reduce the size of a mahgnant tu-
mor was informed on the final day of the investigation that the tumor would
have to be removed surgically. Thus, it is difficult to state what influenced
the manner in which she responded to the three scales on that particular
day.
Since there was no difference in subjects who previously lived alone
versus those who resided with another person(s) in scores on the three mea-
sures, this study also did not support the findings of Goldmeier (1986), who
reported for older women residing in their homes, pet ownership made a
difference in psychological well-being only if subjects lived alone. Subjects in
this study were in a skilled rehabhtation unit and were involved in daily
multiple therapies.
REFERENCES
AUSTINB, . A. (1983) Factorial structure of the UCLA Loneliness Scale. Psychological Reports,
53, 883-889.
BAUNM, ., BERGSTRONM.,, LANGSTONN,. , &THOMAL, . (1984) Physiological effects of human/
companion animal bonding. Nursi~zgR esearch, 33, 125-129.
BECKA, . M., SERAYDARIAL.N, ,& HUNTERF., (1986) Use of animals in the rehabilitation of psy-
chiatric inpatients. Prychological Reports, 58, 63-66.
CALVERMT,. (1989) Human-pet interaction and loneliness: a test of concepts from Roy's adap-
tation model. Nz,rsLtg Science Quarterly, 2, 194-202.
CUSACKO, ., & SMITH,E . (1984) Pets and the elderly: the fherapeutic bond. New York: Ha-
worth.
DAVISR, . E.. THORSON1.. A, &COPENHAVJE. RH, . (1990) Effects of a forced institutional relo-
cation on the morality and morbidity of nursing home residents. Psychological Reports, 67,
263-266.
FERRINAI., F., &FERRINRI,. L. (1989) Health irz the later years. Dubuque, 1.4: Brown.
FOLSTEINM, . F. FOLSTEINS,. E., & MCHUGHI.? R. (1975) "Mini-Mental State": a practical
method tor gr.id~ngth e cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Jozrrnal of Psychialric
Research, 12, 189-198.
FRIEDMANEN.,, KATCHER. A,. LYNCH, J., &THOMAS,S . (1980) Animal companions and one-year
survival of patients after discharge Erom a coronary care unit. Ptrblic Health Reports. 95,
307-312.
FRIEDMANEN., , KATCHERA, . THOMASS, ., LYNCHJ,. , & MSSENT, I? (1983) Social interaction
and blood pressure: influence of animal companions. Journal oj Neruozrs alzd Mental Dis-
ease, 171, 461-465.
GOLDMEIEJ.R (,1 986) Pets or people: another research note. The Gerontologirt, 26, 203-206.
GROSSBERJ.,G ,& ALF,E . (1985) Interaction with per dogs: effects on human cardiovascular re-
sponse. Jourrzal ojthe Delta Socjety, 2, 20-27.
HAMILTONG., I? (1985) The roles of pet and music [herdpy in providing sensory stimulation to
institutionalized elderly persons. Unpublished docroral dissertation, Univer. 06 Pennsylva-
nia, Newton, PA.
HART. L. (1989) The social correlation of animals to relaxed conversations among people.
Abstracts of Presentatiotzs of the FiJlh ltzternatio~lalC onfere~zceo n [he Refofionship between
348 J. JESSEN, ET AL.
Humans and Animals. Paris: Association Francaise D'Information et de Recherche sur
L'Animal De Compagnie de Paris (AFLRAC).
KOENIGH, . G., MEADOR.K . G., COHEN,H . 1.. &BLAZERD, . G. (1988) Self-rated depression
scales and screening for major depression in the older hospitahzed patient with medical
illness. Journal of the American Geriarrics Society, 36, 699-706.
h o ~M., l? (1975) The Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale: a revision. Journal of
Gerorrtology, 30, 85-89.
LIEBERMAMN.,, &TOBINS, . (1983) The experience of old age: stress, coping, and survival. New
York: Basic Books.
MUGFORDR,. A,, &M'COMISKYJ., G. (1976) Some recent work on the psychotherapeutic value
of cage birds with old people. In R. S. Anderson (Ed.), Pet animals and society. London:
Badiere Tindall. Pp. 54-65.
PABLOR, . (1977) Incra-institutional relocation: its impact on long-term care padents. The Ger-
on&o/ogist,1 7, 426-435.
PERLMAND, ., &PEPLAUL,. (1984) Loneliness research: a survey of empirical Findings. In L. A.
Peplau & S. E. Goldston (Eds.), Preuenting the harrnfirl conseque~rceso f severe and persis-
tent lo~reliness(. DHHS Publication No. ADM 84-1312) Rockville, MD: National Institute
of Mental Health. Pp. 13-46.
REED,M . E. (1986) The mascot model of human/companion animal interaction: its effects on
levels of lonehess and depression among residents of a nursing home. Western Conser-
vative Baptist Seminary, Portland, Oregon.
RUSSELLD, ., PEPLAUL,. A., &CUTRONAC,. F. (1980) The Revised UCLA Lonehness Scale: con-
current and discriminant validity evidence. Jourtial of Personality and Sonal Psychology,
39, 472-480.
SMALLN, . R. (1984) The effects of a resident corn anion animal on the morale, mental status,
and functional health of instirutionalized ol&r persons. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, Univer. of Maryland, Baltimore, MD.
YESAVAG1E. .A ., BRINKT, . L., ROSE,T . L., LUM,O ., HUANGV,. . ADEY, M.. & LEIRERV, . (1983)
Development and vahdation o€ a geriatric depression screening scale: a preliminary re-
port. Iournal of Psychiarric Research, 17, 37-49.
Accepfed January 22, 1796.
