INT’L.J.AGINGANDHUMANDEVELOPMENT,Vol.57(4)313-337,2003
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIESTHROUGHA
VOLUNTEERROLE: IMPLICATIONSFOR
OLDER-ADULTS’PSYCHOLOGICALHEALTH*
KARENS.ROOK
DARAH.SORKIN
UniversityofCalifornia,Irvine
ABSTRACT
This study examined the effects on older adults’ psychological health of
participation in a volunteer role that afforded opportunities to form friend-
shipswithagepeersandtoexpressnurturancetowardanotherperson.Access
to these important social provisions was expected, in turn, to contribute to
greaterself-esteem,lessloneliness,andlessdepression.Thestudyhypotheses
weretestedbycomparingolderadultswhoservedasfostergrandparentstoa
developmentallydisabledchild(N=52)witholderadultsintwocomparison
groups (Ns = 69, 59). Three assessments were conducted over a two-year
period. The analyses revealed that the foster grandparents exhibited a sig-
nificant increaseinthenumberofnewtiesformed,butparticipation inthe
Foster Grandparent Program was not associated with the expected gains
in emotional health. Explanations for the limited findings and implications
forfutureresearcharediscussed.
Evidenceamassedfromseveraldifferenttraditionsofresearchhasdemonstrated
persuasivelythatsocialrelationshipsfunctionasasourceofimportantprovisions
that enhance health and well-being (e.g., House, Landis & Umberson, 1988;
Seeman, 1996). These provisions are most often conceptualized in terms of
*ThisresearchwassupportedbyagrantfromtheNationalInstituteonAging,AG03975.
313
(cid:1) 2003,BaywoodPublishingCo.,Inc.
314 / ROOKANDSORKIN
various forms of support and companionship that people receive from others
(Barrera,1986;Cohen&Wills,1985).Accesstoemotionalsupport,instrumental
support,andcompanionshiphasbeenlinkedtoawidevarietyofhealthoutcomes
in diverse age groups, including older adults (Everard, Lach, Fisher, & Baum,
2000;Seemanetal.,1995;Uchino,Cacioppo,&Kiecolt-Glaser,1996).Moreover,
althoughmuchofthisworkhasbeencross-sectionalinnature,anemergingbody
of longitudinal work has yielded evidence that the support and companionship
available through one’s informal social ties are associated prospectively with
important health outcomes, including mortality (House, Robbins, & Metzner,
1982;Krause,1997).
Anexclusiveemphasisontheaidandaffectionreceivedfromothers,however,
overlooks another important element of many social relationships—the oppor-
tunity to provide aid and affection to others. Giving support to others has been
identifiedasanaspectofinvolvementininformalsocialrelationshipsthatconfers
health-related benefits in its own right (Krause, Herzog, & Baker, 1992). An
early proponent of this view was Weiss (1973, 1974), who argued that the
opportunity to express nurturance toward another person is a core provision of
social relationships. Without opportunities to express nurturance, in his view,
people will experience psychological distress, most often in the form of dimin-
ished feelings of self-worth (Weiss, 1974). Consistent with this, the feelings of
independenceandself-worththatarisefrombeingabletoreciprocatesupportto
membersofone’ssocialnetworkhasbeenfoundtobeassociatedwithenhanced
well-beingintheelderly(e.g.,Krauseetal.,1992;Roberto,1989).
Obviously, unique life circumstances may impose upper limits on, or even
reverse, these associations. Having to provide inordinate amounts of support to
others may compromise rather than enhance health (Schulz & Beach, 1999).
Similarly, receiving excessive support from others may contribute to feelings
of dependence or indebtedness, thereby detracting from well-being (Barrera,
2000; Newsom,1999). More typically,though, receiving and providing aid and
affectionconstitutebasicfunctionsofinformalsocialbondsthatservetoenhance
psychologicalhealth.
Formanyolderadults,thesedual“receivingandgiving”functionsarereadily
available in their close relationships with other people (Antonucci, Fuhrer, &
Jackson, 1990; Rook, 1987). For others, however, opportunities to express one
orbothfunctionsmaybemissing.Widowhood, retirement,andothersocialrole
losses that affect the elderly may limitopportunities for maintaining and devel-
oping close relationships that involve reciprocal exchanges of support (Crohan
& Antonucci, 1989). Given this, it is important to learn how opportunities can
becreatedthatbothfacilitatetheformationofsupportivesocialbondsandallow
fortheexpressionofnurturance.Thegoalofthecurrentstudywastoinvestigate
the effect of participating in a volunteer program that afforded both kinds of
opportunitiesonolderadults’psychologicalhealth.Thetheoreticalunderpinnings
ofthestudyaredevelopedbelow.
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 315
FacilitatingtheFormationofSupportive
SocialBondsinLaterLife
The burgeoning literature on the health-related benefits of receiving social
supportandcompanionshiphasofferedrelativelyfewguidelinesaboutprograms
or interventions that might be effective in fostering the formation of supportive
social bonds (Cohen, Gottlieb, & Underwood, 2000; Rook & Dooley, 1985).
Theory-driven interventions to facilitate the formation of social ties in later
life have been quite scarce. Most of the interventions conducted thus far have
focusedonmobilizingsocialsupportprogramsforpeopleexperiencingstressful
lifechanges,suchasthosewhoarecopingwithalife-threateningillness(Helgeson
& Cohen, 1996) or caring for a disabled family member (Kennet, Burgio, &
Schulz,2000).
AnotableexceptioninthisregardisaninfluentialstudybyHeller,Thompson,
Trueba, Hogg, and Vlachos-Weber (1991). These researchers sought to foster
the formation of supportive peer ties among lonely older women living in a
rural area. They drew upon the available theoretical and empirical literature to
identifyseveralinterventionobjectivesthat,ifrealized,wereexpectedtoaffectthe
elderly participants’ psychological well-being in the following ways: 1) to help
participantsformaclosetiewithanotherperson(confidant)(Crohan&Antonucci,
1989); 2) to increase their receipt of emotional support (given the distinctive
importanceof emotionalsupport) (Seemanetat., 1995); 3) to encourage recip-
rocalexchanges of support (thereby allowing participantstodraw benefitsfrom
both providing as well as receiving support) (Roberto, 1989; Rook, 1987); and
4) to facilitate the formation of indigenous peer networks that could become
self-sustainingaftertheterminationoftheintervention(Rook&Dooley,1985).
The rural location of the study influenced the mode of delivery of the inter-
vention. Given the logistical difficulties of arranging in-person contacts among
the geographically dispersed participants, the researchers sought to foster social
tiesthatcouldbemaintainedthroughregulartelephonecontact.Theolderwomen
were helped to become comfortable with such telephone contact through an
initial 10-week period in which they had weekly telephone conversations with
trainedstaffmembers.Afterthisperiod,thewomenwererandomlyassignedto:
1)continuewithregularstaffcontacts;2)initiateorreceiveweeklytelephonecalls
withafellowstudyparticipant;or3)becomeno-contactcontrols.Anadditional
control group completed the study assessments only and did not participate
in any staff or peer telephone contacts. Detailed measures of women’s social
networkmembershipandpsychologicalwell-beingwereobtainedatbaselineand
atseveralfollow-upassessments.
Thus,theinterventionwascarefullyconceivedonthebasisofexistingtheory
andresearch,painstakinglyimplemented,andrigorouslyevaluated.Despitethis,
the intervention proved to have little impact on the elderly participants’ social
tiesoremotionalhealth.Relativelyfewofthewomenformedenduringtieswith
316 / ROOKANDSORKIN
their telephone partners, and those who did exhibited few significant psycho-
logical benefits. Additionally, the significant psychological benefits that were
observedgenerallydidnotpersistovertime.
Numerous ideas have been offered about why this intervention yielded null
results(seecommentariesintheAmericanJournalofCommunityPsychology,19,
1991).Onesetofideas,derivedfromthesocialpsychologicalliteratureonfriend-
shipformation,suggeststhatfriendshipsdevelopmosteasilywhenpeopleengage
inregularcontactstructuredaroundsharedactivitiesandmeaningfulsocialroles
(Helleretal.,1991;Rook,1991).Consistentwiththis,Blieszner(1989)foundthat
friendships in later life tend to be initiated through casual interactions between
peoplewhohavesimilarinterestsorwhoareengagedincollaborativeactivities.
Volunteer work, adult education classes, and other activities help to structure
participants’interactions,therebyreducingambiguityandsocialanxiety(Jerome,
1981). Such shared activities and roles not only permit people to avoid the
inhibiting self-consciousness and awkward expectations that often accompany
interactionsexplicitlydirectedtowardfriendshipformation,theyallowpeopleto
make discrete assessments of each other’s potential as friends and also provide
the“grist”fortheirinteractions:topicstodiscuss,experiencestocompare,andso
forth (Rook, 1991). Thus, programs that take an indirect approach to fostering
friendships by providing comfortable, natural bases for social engagement are
likelytobemoresuccessfulthanprogramsthatdirectlyandexplicitlyemphasize
friendshipformationastheirobjective(Pilisuk&Minkler,1980;Rook,1984).
Althoughtheseconditionshavebeenhypothesizedtoprovideanoptimalfoun-
dation for friendship formation, they have rarely been investigated empirically.
The current study investigated the effects of involvement in a program that
broughtolderadultsintodailycontactwithagepeerswhowereinvolvedinsimilar
activities—helping to care for a developmentally-disabled child through par-
ticipation in a local chapter of the nationwide Foster Grandparent Program. We
anticipated that such regular contact, organized around shared activities, would
facilitatetheacquaintanceshipprocess.Moreover,theprograminvolvedfrequent
contact extended over a sufficiently long period of time to allow such relation-
ships to emerge gradually and in the relatively natural and familiar context of
sharedactivities.Forthesereasons,weexpectedinvolvementinthisprogramto
contribute to the formation of new friendships among participants and, in turn,
togreateremotionalwell-being.
FacilitatingOpportunitiesto
ProvideCaretoOthers
Another key feature of the Foster Grandparent Program that we expected to
contribute to the older adults’ psychological health was the fact that the work
involvedprovidingcaretoanotherperson,inthiscaseadevelopmentally-disabled
child with significant needs. Although some older adults may have adequate
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 317
opportunitiestoexpressnurturanceintheirexistingsocialrelationships,othersdo
not.Certainkindsofvolunteerworkcanprovidesuchopportunities.
Research on older adults’ motivations for volunteer work indicates that the
desire to feel useful or to fulfill altruistic strivings is often cited as a primary
reason for volunteering (Morrow-Howell & Mui, 1989; Okun, Barr, & Herzog,
1998). Consistent with this, participation in volunteer roles has been shown to
be asignificant predictor of older adults’ feelings of usefulness and self-respect
(Cutler,1982;Hunter&Linn,1981;Rietschlin,1998).Volunteeringhasalsobeen
described assatisfyingcommunicationneeds, helping tocombatloneliness, and
providingasourceofsocialstatus(Kuehne&Sears,1993;Midlarsky&Kahana,
1994). Volunteers, relative to nonvolunteers, report greater satisfaction with
theirlives,astrongerwilltolive,andfewersymptomsofpsychologicaldistress
(Hunter&Linn,1981;Wheeler,Gorey,&Greenblatt,1998).Theelderlyvolun-
teersinthecurrentresearchwereeachinvolvedinprovidingaidandaffectiontoa
child with special needs, and we hypothesized that this outlet for the regular
expression of nurturance would contribute to their self-esteem and emotional
well-being.
TheCurrentStudy
Insum,thecurrentstudyinvestigatedtheeffectsofinvolvementinasocialrole
thatwasconceptualizedascontributingtoolderadults’psychologicalwell-being
through two different pathways:first, by creating conditions hypothesized to be
conducive to friendship formation, the participants’ activities were expected to
facilitate the formation of new social ties and thereby enhance their psycho-
logicalhealth;andsecond,byprovidingacontextinwhichparticipantsregularly
helpedtonurtureandcareforadevelopmentally-disabledchild,theprogramwas
expectedtobolsterfeelingsofself-worth.Investigatingthehypothesizedbenefits
of this program was appealing for pragmatic as well as theoretical reasons.
Volunteerprogramssimilartotheonewestudiedexistinmanycommunities.If
suchprogramswerefoundtobebeneficialandtheirunderlyingmechanismswere
understood, they could represent cost-effective alternatives to expensive and
typicallytime-limitedinterventionsaimedatthesameobjectives.
METHOD
StudyDesign
Thestudyinvolvedcomparisonofthreegroupsofolderadults:1)participants
inthenationwideFosterGrandparentProgram(FGP);2)participantsinanalter-
nativegroupprogramforolderadults(AGP);and3)acommunitysampleofolder
adults (CS). The first two groups consisted of individuals who had expressed
an interest in participating in the FGP, with actual participation determined
by random assignment. Inclusion of the second group (AGP) controlled for
318 / ROOKANDSORKIN
participationinanon-volunteerprogramthatofferedaccesstoagepeers.Inclusion
ofthethirdgroup(CS)controlledforvolunteerism(individualdifferencesasso-
ciatedwiththewillingnesstoperformvolunteerwork).
Extensive assessments of study participants’ psychosocial and psychobio-
logicalfunctioning(e.g.,informationprocessing,memory,cardiopulmonaryfunc-
tioning, perceptual-motorskills,sleeppatterns) wereconducted atbaseline(T1)
and then annually for a two-year period (T2, T3). The current study, however,
focused exclusively on participants’ emotional well-being and specific social
networkcharacteristics.1
Participants
SampleRecruitment
The study recruitment strategies were designed to recruit a total of 75 older
adultstoeachofthethreegroups(FGP,AGP,CS)byenrolling25participantsper
groupperyearoverathree-yearperiod.Thetargetfigureof25individualsperyear
pergroupwasbasedonthemaximumnumberofopeningsforvolunteersexpected
to become available annually (N = 20-25) as the existing foster grandparents
vacated their positions through naturally occurring program attrition. (It would
havebeenunethicaltodisplacetheexistingfostergrandparentsfromtheirrolesfor
thesakeofthestudy,anditwouldhavebeenprohibitivelyexpensivetoestablish
an entirely new foster grandparent program.) Analyses revealed no significant
effects of enrollment cohort (year of enrollment). Therefore, the analyses to be
reportedarebasedondatathatcollapseacrossenrollmentcohorts.
TheFGPandAGPparticipantswererecruitedfromthepoolofolderadultswho
attended regional centers that provide subsidized lunches and limited activity
programming for lower-income older adults on a daily basis. Standardized oral
andslidepresentationsabouttheFGPweremadeatcenterswithina15-mileradius
of the project site, and prospective volunteers were recruited at the end of each
presentation.
Participants in the CS group were recruited through mailings and follow-up
telephonecallstoolderadultschosenrandomlyfromanage-andeconomically-
stratified sampling frame for the local region that was purchased from a com-
mercial vendor. The mailings invited prospective participants to take part in a
longitudinalstudyofaging.Eligibilityscreeningwasconductedbytelephoneto
ensurethattheCSparticipantswerecomparableinageandsocioeconomicstatus
totheFGPandAGPparticipants.
1Findings from the same longitudinal study have been reported in earlier papers, but these
findingshavedealtwiththedifferentialassociationsbetweenpsychologicalwell-beingandpositive
andnegativesocialexchanges(usingdiarydata)(Rook,2001),andwiththeeffectsofsocialcontrol
asanelementofparticipants’socialnetworktransactions(Rook&Ituarte,1999;Rook,Thuras,&
Lewis,1990).
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 319
EligibilityCriteria
FollowingfederalguidelinesforparticipatingintheFGP,allstudyparticipants
wererequiredtobe60orolderandhaveanincomethatdidnotexceedthepoverty
level by 20%. In addition, participants in the FGP group had to pass annual
healthexaminationstoruleoutcontraindicatedhealthconditions.
RandomAssignment
Those individuals who volunteered to become foster grandparents were ran-
domly assigned either to the FGP or AGP groups. Those assigned to the FGP
conditionwereassignedaprimary“client”(adevelopmentally-disabledchildin
residence at the state hospital) and, after receiving a standard orientation and
training,weregivendutiestypicalofafostergrandparent(e.g.,spendingtimewith
their client, taking their client on excursions available on the hospital grounds,
transporting the client to on-site clinics and doctors’ appointments). The foster
grandparentsworkedfourhoursperdayforfivemorningseachweek,andreceived
a modest stipend for their work (set by federal policy to correspond roughly to
minimumwage). In addition, thefoster grandparents atelunch (provided bythe
program)togetherattheendofeachworkday.
Those older adults assigned to the AGP group continued their participation
in the meals and activity programming at the regional nutrition centers. They
received a monthly stipend of $50, to both provide a symbolic control for the
effects of the monetary compensation received by the foster grandparents, and
tocompensatethemforthetimespentintheannualassessments.Theyunderstood
that they were important participants in the research study but that they were
not on a waiting list for eventual inclusion in the Foster Grandparent Program.
Participants in the CS group received $50 annually, plus travel expenses, to
compensatethemforthetimeandcostsassociatedwiththeannualassessments.
SampleCharacteristics
Recruitment difficulties and funding cutbacks experienced over the course
of the study made it difficult to reach the targeted figure of 75 participants
per group, yielding a sample of 180 elderly individuals who met the eligibility
criteria.Theresultinggroupsizeswere:FGP(N=52),AGP(N=69),CS(N=59).
Participants’ demographic characteristics and health status at baseline (T1) are
summarized in Table 1. Participants ranged in age from 60 to 92 years, with
a mean age of 70.52 years. The majority of participants (65.6%) were women,
and most (90%) were Caucasian. Nearly two-thirds (63.9%) were widowed,
divorced, or single, and 68.9% had annual incomes of $15,000 or less. Most
participants (85%) reported that they enjoyed good or excellent health.
Analyses that address the initial equivalence of the three participant groups are
reportedlater.
320 / ROOKANDSORKIN
Table1. SampleCharacteristicsatT1
Fullsample FGP AGP CS
Variable Category (N=180) (N=52) (N=69) (N=59)
Age — 70.52 69.63 68.91 73.17
(6.89) (6.71) (6.30) (7.03)
Sex Male 34.4% 32.7% 30.4% 40.7%
Female 65.6 67.3 69.6 59.3
Education — 3.94 3.75 4.33 3.64
(1.51) (1.55) (1.32) (1.61)
Marital Nevermarried 2.8% 3.8% 1.4% 3.4%
status Widowed 44.4 48.1 39.1 47.5
Divorced/separated 16.7 15.4 21.7 11.9
Married 36.1 32.7 37.7 37.3
Ethnicity White 90.0% 76.9% 95.7% 94.9%
Non-white 10.0 23.1 4.3 5.1
Income $<5,000 6.8% 5.8% 6.1% 8.5%
$5,000-7,5000 14.1 19.2 9.1 15.3
$7,500-10,000 19.8 34.6 10.6 16.9
$10,000-15,000 28.2 30.8 31.8 22.0
$>15,000 31.1 9.6 42.4 37.3
Numberof — 2.26 2.62 1.78 2.49
chronichealth (1.56) (1.66) (1.24) (1.71)
problems
Note: Forthecategoricalvariables,entriesshownarepercentages.Forthecontinuous
variables,entriesshownaremeansand,inparentheses,standarddeviations.FGP=Foster
Grandparent Program; AGP = Alternative Group Program; CS = Community Sample.
Education is coded 1 “Grade school or less,” 2 “Some high school,” 3 “High school
degree,” 4 “Some college,” 5 “College degree,” 6 “Some post-graduate training,” and
7“Post-graduatedegree.”
StudyAttrition
Weanticipatedanannualattritionrateof20%basedonpreviouslongitudinal
studies with older adults, and also on the average annual attrition rate in the
particular Foster Grandparent Program studied. The actual rate of attrition was
higher,however:28.3%(N=51)fromT1toT2,and23.3%(N=30)fromT2to
T3.Inaddition,theratesofattritiondifferedacrossthestudygroups,withhigher
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 321
ratesintheFGPgroup(50.0%fromT1toT2,N=26;23.1%fromT2toT3,N=6)
andtheCSgroup(35.6%fromT1toT2,N=21;28.9%fromT2toT3,N=11)
relativeto the AGP group (5.8% fromT1 to T2, N= 4; 20.06% fromT2 to T3,
N=13).
Thereasonsforattritionoverthethree-yearstudyincludeddeath(8.4%,N=7),
healthproblemsorillness(36.1%,N=30),andnonhealth-relatedfactors(55.4%,
N = 46). The latter category included residential relocation, time constraints
(expressed by participantswho felttheywere too busy to continue theirpartici-
pation in the study), and difficulty in meeting the demands of some of the
psychobiological assessment protocols (e.g., having to spend time in a sleep
laboratory or to undergo electrophysiological testing). In addition, some of the
participants who were accepted into the Foster Grandparent Program found the
volunteer role (which involved helping to provide care for a developmentally-
disabled child or adolescent) to be more demanding than they had anticipated,
based on exit interviews with those who left the program. Chi-square analyses
indicated that the specific reasons for attrition did not differ across the three
groups. Analyses of the differences between participants who did versus those
whodidnotcompletethestudyarereportedlater.
Measures
In-person interviews lasting approximately 90 minutes were conducted
annually by trained interviewers in an interview room at the project site. The
interviewers were blind to the study hypotheses and to participants’ assign-
ment to groups. The interviews included extensive questions about partici-
pants’ background characteristics, social networks, activity patterns, and emo-
tionalwell-being.
EmotionalHealth
Three dimensions of psychological health were assessed: self-esteem, loneli-
ness, and depression. Self-esteem was assessed with the 10-item Rosenberg
Self-EsteemScale(Rosenberg, 1965), which hasbeen widelyused instudiesof
theelderlyandwasfoundtobehighlyreliableinthissample((cid:2) =.80).Loneliness
was assessed with 10 items drawn from the 20-item UCLA Loneliness Scale
(Russell,Peplau,&Cutrona,1980).Abbreviatedandfull-lengthversionsofthis
scale have been used frequently to assess loneliness in varying age groups,
including the elderly. The 10-item scale had adequate reliability in the current
sample ((cid:2) = .80). Depression was assessed with the 20-item Center for
EpidemiologicalStudies–Depression Scale(CES-D) (Radloff, 1977), which has
been validated against clinical measures (Himmelfarb & Murrell, 1983) and
has been used extensively in community surveys, including surveys of older
adults (Pachana, Gallagher-Thompson, & Thompson, 1994). The CES-D had
good internal consistency in this sample ((cid:2) = .87). Ratings for these three
322 / ROOKANDSORKIN
measures of emotional health were made on a 4-point scale (0 = “Never,”
3=“Mostofthetime”).Themeanlevelsforself-esteem,loneliness,anddepres-
sionatT1were34.54,14.85(equivalentto29.70onthe20-itemUCLALoneliness
scale), and 11.04, respectively. These values are comparable to those reported
inotherstudiesofcommunity-residingolderadults(e.g.,Gatz&Hurwicz,1990;
Himmelfarb&Murrell,1983;Russell,1996;Schultz&Moore,1984).
SocialTies
Participants’ social ties were assessed using name-elicitingquestions adapted
from the work of Fischer and his colleagues (Fischer, 1982; McCallister &
Fischer,1978).Thismethodhasbeenusedinanumberofstudiesofolderadults
(e.g., Finch, Okun, Barrera, Zautra, & Reich, 1989; Rook, 1994). A series of
questions asked participants who, if anyone, performed particular functions in
their lives such as providing social support or companionship. Questions asked
about negative as well as positive exchanges with others. In response to each
question,participantsprovidedthefirstnamesofanyindividualswhoperformed
thespecifiedfunction.Afterthecompletesetofname-elicitingquestionshadbeen
presented, the interviewer compiled a list of the unique names that had been
generatedandelicitedadditionalinformationabouteachpersonnamed,including
the role relationship (responses were coded as: spouse, child, other relative,
in-law,friend,neighbor,co-worker,supervisor/staffmember,acquaintance,foster
grandchild, romantic partner, and other) and the duration of the relationship
(numberofyears).Inaddition,forallnon-kinnetworkmembers,wealsoinquired
howtherelationshiphadoriginated.Specifically,foreachnon-kintieweaskedthe
participantshowtheyhadmettheindividualnamed.Participants’responseswere
coded as: friend of friend, neighbor, Foster Grandparent Program, alternative
groupprogram(countytransportation,lunch,andcounselingprogram),work(for
participantswithfull-orpart-timejobs),childhood/school/college,andother.
Participantsalsowereshownalistofthepeopletheyhadmentionedinresponse
to the name-eliciting questions, and were asked whether anyone important to
themwasmissing.Fewadditionalnamesweregeneratedthisway(Mdn=2.00);
thosementionedweretypicallygrandchildren, nieces,ornephews. Thus,theset
of name-eliciting questions appeared to succeed in capturing participants’ most
importantsocialties.
Wederivedfromthisinformationameasureofthenumberofnewrelationships,
ifany,formedinthepastyear.Anyrelationshipswithareporteddurationofone
yearorlessatT1wereclassifiedasnewpriortoT1.Thosewithareportedduration
of one year or less at T2 were classified as new for the T1-T2 timeperiod, and
those with a reported duration of two years or less were classified as new for
the T1-T3 time period. We believe that this procedure is less susceptible to
socialdesirabilitybiasthan simplyasking participantswhether theyhad formed
new relationships. This measure allowed us to evaluate whether participants in
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 323
the FGP condition were more likely than participants in the other groups to
forge new socialtiesover thecourse of thestudy.Theavailabilityof ameasure
of new relationships formed prior to the start of the study also allowed us to
determine whether the rate of new relationship formation was greater after the
study began (as a result of participation in the Foster Grandparent Program, for
example) or merely reflected a continuation of relationship-seeking processes
initiatedbeforethestudybegan.
The information we obtained from all participants about the nature of the
role relationship with their social network members,how they had met non-kin
social network members, and the kinds of positive and negative exchanges in
which each network member was engaged allowed us to gain a more complete
understanding of the kinds of new social relationships that might have formed
as a result of participation in the Foster Grandparent Program. Specifically,
we used this information in the analyses reported below to determine whether
thenewrelationshipsreportedbythefostergrandparentsincludedpeoplewhom
theyregardedasfriends,peoplewhofunctionedasasourceofpositiveexchanges
(vs. negative exchanges), and people whom they had met through the Foster
GrandparentProgram.
Finally, because this study focused on support provision as well as support
receipt,wealsoexaminedtheextenttowhichparticipantsfeltthatotherscounted
on them for support. One of the name-eliciting questions asked participants
whether anyone depended on them on a regular basis for care, help, or social
contact and, if so, who depended on them. From their responses, we derived a
countofthenumberofpeoplewhodependedontheparticipant.Weanticipated
that this number would increase for FGP participants, relative to the other par-
ticipants, because of their involvement in providing care on daily basis to a
developmentally-disabledchild.
BackgroundCharacteristics
In addition to assessing standard demographic characteristics such as age,
sex, marital status, income, and ethnicity, we also assessed chronic health
problems that participants might have experienced by asking whether they had
been diagnosed with any of 10 chronic conditions (e.g., high blood pressure,
diabetes, arthritis, 0 = “health problem not reported,” 1 = “health problem
reported”).Ameasureofthenumberofchronichealthproblemswasderivedfrom
theirresponses.
RESULTS
InitialEquivalenceandAttrition
The first set of analyses examined the initial equivalence (at T1) of the three
groupsofparticipantsandthefactorsassociatedwithattritionfromthestudy.The
324 / ROOKANDSORKIN
analysesexaminedparticipants’backgroundcharacteristicsandT1scoresonthe
primary outcome measures. For the continuous variables, 3 × 2 analyses of
variance (ANOVA) were conducted in which the two independent variables
werecondition(FGP,AGP,orCS)andattritionstatus(didvs.didnotcomplete
the study), and the dependent variables were participants’ background charac-
teristics (age, number of chronic health conditions, and education), emotional
health(self-esteem,loneliness,anddepression),andcharacteristicsoftheirsocial
ties(numberofnewrelationshipsformedintheyearpriortothebaselineassess-
ment;numberofnetworkmemberswhodependedontheparticipantatbaseline).
A main effect of condition would indicate that the groups of participants were
not equivalent at baseline; a main effect of attrition status would indicate that
participants who completed the study differed from those who did not, and a
significant interaction would indicate that the effects of attrition differed across
conditions(Jurs&Glass,1971).Forcategoricalvariables,theinitialequivalence
of participants in the conditions and the effects of attrition were examined with
chi-squareanalyses.
The ANOVAs revealed no significant interaction effects, but several main
effectsofconditionandofattritionstatusdidemerge.SignificantunivariateFsare
reported below. For significant effects of condition, post-hoc contrast analyses
wereconductedtoclarifythegroupdifferences.
InitialEquivalence
Theseanalysesindicatedthatsomebaseline(T1)differencesexistedamongthe
three groups, despite random assignment to two of the groups (FGP, AGP) and
effortstorecruitasocioeconomicallymatchedgroupofolderadultsforthethird
group(CS).ParticipantsintheCSgroupwereolderthanwereparticipantsinthe
FGPandAGPgroups,F(2,174)=8.24,p<.001,(cid:1)2=.09(seeTable1forMs).
Participants in the AGP group had fewer chronic health problems than did
participants in the FGP and CS groups, F(2, 174) = 3.86, p < .02, (cid:1)2 = .04 (see
Table 1). Participants in the three groups did not differ with respect to sex
or marital status (married vs. not married), but the FGP group included more
non-white participants than did the other two groups, (cid:2)2 (2) = 13.91, p < .001;
(see Table 1). Additionally, income (dichotomized for the chi-square analysis,
<$10,000vs.(cid:1)$10,000)variedacrosstheconditions,withmoreparticipantsinthe
FGP and CS conditions falling into the lower income group (58.8% and 40.7,
respectively)thanintheAGPcondition(25.8%),(cid:2)2(2)=13.07,p<.001.
Withrespecttotheirbaselineemotionalhealth,participantsintheFGPgroup
had higher depression scores than did participants in the AGP and CS groups
(Ms = 12.23, 8.28, and 7.92, respectively, F(2, 179) = 4.96, p < .01), (cid:1)2 = .05,
but no differences were observed for self-esteem or loneliness. The analysis of
baselinesocialnetwork characteristicsindicatedthatthethreegroups of partici-
pantsdidnotdiffersignificantlywithrespecttothenumberofnewrelationships
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 325
theyhadformedinthepreviousyearorthenumberofpeoplewhodependedon
theparticipantsforsupport.
Becausesomebaselinegroupdifferencesemerged,theanalysesthatexamined
the effects of participation in the FGP included controls for participants’
age, number of chronic health conditions, ethnicity, income (0 = “<$10,000,”
1=“(cid:1)$10,000”), anddepression. Theimplicationsofthesebaselinedifferences
willbeconsideredmorefullylater.
Attrition
TheANOVAsandchi-squareanalysesrevealedseveralsignificantdifferences
betweenparticipantswhodidversusdidnotcompletethestudy.Ofthisgenerally
low-income group of participants, those with lower incomes (<$10,000) were
less likely to complete the study than were participants with higher incomes
((cid:1)$10,000)(39.4%vs.64.8%,respectively,(cid:2)2(2)=10.96,p<.001).Participants
who did not complete the study also had less education than did those who
completedthestudy,Ms=4.36vs.3.45,F(1,174)=12.18,p<.001,(cid:1)2=.07.No
significantdifferenceswereobservedforage,sex,maritalstatus(marriedvs.not
married),ethnicity,numberofchronichealthproblems,depression, self-esteem,
loneliness, the number of new relationships formed prior to the baseline assess-
ment,orthenumberofpeoplewhodependedontheparticipantatbaseline.
Thedifferencesthatemergedareconsistentwithpriorresearchonthecharac-
teristicsofolderadultswhodropoutoflongitudinalstudies(e.g.,Cooney,Schaie,
& Willis, 1988). They suggest that the findings of the current study may not
generalizetoolderadultswithverylowincomesorlimitededucation.2
EffectsofParticipationinthe
FosterGrandparentProgram
EmotionalHealth
AprimaryhypothesisofthestudywasthatolderadultsintheFGPcondition,
relativetothoseintheothertwoconditions,wouldshowgreaterimprovementsin
emotionalhealthfrombaseline(T1)tothefollow-upassessmentsconductedone
andtwoyearslater(T2,T3).TheparticipantsincludedintheT1-T2analyseswere
those who completed the assessments at both T1 and T2, and the participants
includedintheT1-T3analyseswerethosewhocompletedtheassessmentsatall
time periods. To examine the hypothesized changes from T1 to T2, univariate
analysesofcovariancewereconductedinwhicheachoftheT2emotionalhealth
2Parellelinitialequivalenceandattritionanalysesexaminedthebaseline(T1)characteristicsof
thosewhocompletedthefirstfollow-upassessment(T2),ratherthanparticipantswhocompletedboth
follow-upassessments(T2andT3).Theseanalysesrevealedvirtuallyidenticalresultstothosereported
here.Asummaryoftheseanalysesisavailableuponrequestfromthefirstauthor.
326 / ROOKANDSORKIN
measures (self-esteem,loneliness, and depression) was treated as the dependent
measure,condition(FGP,AGP,CS)wastreatedastheindependentvariable,and
the T1 emotional health measure was included as a covariate, as were T2 age,
numberof chronic healthconditions, ethnicity,income,and depression. Parallel
analyses examined changes between T1 and T3, with the T3 emotional health
measuretreatedasthedependentvariable,conditionastheindependentvariable,
and the T1 emotional health measure and T3 age, chronic health problems,
ethnicity, income, and depression included as covariates. The latter analyses
allowedustoevaluatewhetheranygainsobservedbetweenT1andT2persistedto
T3,andalsoallowedustodetectanygainsthatmighthaverequiredlongerthan
oneyeartoemerge(i.e.,evidentbyT3butnotbyT2).
The means and standard deviations of the emotional health variables for the
three conditions at each assessment (T1, T2, T3) are shown in Table 2, upper
panel.Contrarytoexpectation,nosignificantgroupdifferencesemerged.3
SocialTies
Our next analysis examined whether participants in the three groups were
differentiallylikelytoformnewsocialnetworktiesduringthecourseofthestudy.
WefirstreportfindingsfornewrelationshipsformedfromT1toT2(thosewith
a reported duration of one year or less at T2), and then report findings for new
relationshipsformedfromT1toT3(thosewithareporteddurationoftwoyears
orlessatT3).
An analysis of covariance revealed that participants in the FGP reported sig-
nificantlymorenewrelationshipsfromT1toT2(M=2.26)thandidparticipants
intheAGP(M=.52)orCS(M=.44),F(2,120)=15.66,p<.001,(cid:1)2=.22(see
Table2,lowerpanel).4Moreover,participationintheFGPdidappeartoaccount
for the significantly greater formation of new social ties, as indicated by par-
ticipants’ responses to questions about how they had met each of the people
named in response to the name-eliciting questions. Of the new ties formed
from T1 to T2 by FGP participants, 70.3% involved people affiliated with the
FGP,andtheseincludedfriendsmadethroughtheprogram(40.0%),individuals
who the participant identified as a co-worker but not as a friend (20.0%), the
fostergrandchild(20.0%),staffmembersandsupervisors(15.6%),andromantic
partnersmetthroughtheprogram(4.4%).IntheAGPandCSgroups,themajor
categoriesofnewtiesformedfromT1toT2involvedfriends,neighbors,in-laws,
andotherrelatives(suchasagrandchildbornduringthistimeperiod).
3TheseT1-T2andT1-T3analysesofemotionalhealthoutcomeswererepeatedwithallcovariates
excepttherelevantT1emotionalhealthmeasureremoved.Thefindingswereunchanged.Asummary
oftheanalyseswiththecovariatestrimmedisavailableuponrequestfromthefirstauthor.
4TheT1-T2analysesofsocialnetworkcharacteristicswererepeatedwithallcovariatesexcept
therelevantT1variableremoved.Thefindingswereunchanged.Asummaryoftheanalyseswiththe
covariatestrimmedisavailableuponrequest.
Table2. GroupDifferencesinEmotionalHealthandSocialNetworkCharacteristics
FGP AGP CS
Variable T1 T2 T3 T1 T2 T3 T1 T2 T3
EmotionalHealth
Self-esteem
M 34.54 35.83 35.22 36.33 36.35 36.53 36.42 36.16 36.59
(SD) (4.37) (3.08) (4.32) (3.11) (3.34) (3.23) (4.34) (4.60) (3.92)
Loneliness
M 16.08 15.08 14.39 13.86 13.34 13.70 15.33 14.66 14.19
(SD) (4.46) (4.24) (3.27) (3.81) (3.51) (3.85) (5.67) (5.12) (3.86)
Depression
M 11.04 9.39 9.94 7.77 7.95 6.98 7.03 8.46 7.70
(SD) (7.90) (6.97) (5.57) (5.98) (5.68) (6.94) (6.73) (9.26) (5.48)
SocialNetworkCharacteristics
Relationshipsformed
M 0.65 2.26 1.94 0.66 0.52 0.94 0.35 0.44 1.00
a c b d b d
(SD) (1.20) (2.00) (1.92) (1.10) (0.88) (1.48) (0.92) (0.56) (1.39)
Numberofpeoplewho
dependontheparticipant
M 0.85 0.96 1.00 1.06 0.97 1.18 1.08 1.26 1.48
(SD) (0.88) (1.10) (0.94) (1.02) (0.92) (1.22) (0.97) (1.29) (1.45)
Note: FGP = Foster Grandparent Program; AGP = Alternative Group Program; CS = Community Sample. The T1 means and standard
deviations,andtheT1-T2comparisonsarebasedonallparticipantswhocompletedtheT1andT2assessments(N=128);theT1-T3comparisons
includedthosewhocompletedallthreeassessments(N=92).TheanalysesofgroupdifferencesincludedcontrolsfortheT1dependentvariable
and(notshown)forcurrentage,income,ethnicity,chronichealthproblems,anddepression.Meanswithdifferentsubscriptsdiffersignificantly
from each other (T1-T2 analysis, a vs. b; T1-T3 analyses,c vs. d). Original scores, rather than covariate-adjusted scores, are shown for ease
ofinterpretation.
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES
/
327
328 / ROOKANDSORKIN
We also examined the supportive or nonsupportive nature of these new ties
byclassifyingeachnewtieasasourceofpositiveexchangesexclusively,asource
of negative exchanges exclusively, or a source of both positive and negative
exchanges(Finchetal.,1989;Rook1984)basedonparticipants’responsesabout
thepeoplewithwhomtheyexperiencedthepositiveandnegativeexchangeswe
assessed. The number of new network members who functioned as a source
ofbothpositiveandnegativeexchangeswastoosmalltoanalyzeasafunctionof
participants’ group status. We conducted chi-square analyses to examine the
percentofparticipantsineachgroup whoformednewsocialtiesfromT1toT2
thatweresourcesofeitherpositiveornegativeexchangesexclusively.Theoverall
ratesofpositiveandnegativeinteractiondidnotdiffersignificantlyacrossgroups,
buttheFGPparticipantsweremorelikelythanotherparticipantstohaveformed
newpositivetiesaswellasnewnegativetiesfromT1toT2.Theresultsindicated
that61.5%oftheFGPparticipantsformedoneormoreexclusivelypositivenew
socialtiesfromT1 toT2, ascomparedwith23.4% of theAGP participantsand
31.6%oftheCSparticipants,(cid:2)2(2)=12.13,p<.01.TheFGPparticipantsalso
were marginally more likely to form an exclusively negative social tie from T1
toT2,with21.3%ofthemdoingsoascomparedwith9.4%ofAGPparticipants
and5.3%ofCSparticipants,(cid:2)2(2)=5.35,p<.07.
Because the FGP participants were somewhat more likely to have formed
negative,aswellaspositive,socialtiesthroughtheirinvolvementintheFGPfrom
T1 to T2, we conducted additional analyses to determine who in the program
servedastheprimarysourceofnegativeexchanges.Theseanalysesindicatedthat
supervisors and staffmemberswere engaged inthegreatestnumberof negative
exchanges (M = .43, SD = .54), followed by fellow FGP participants identified
as friends (M = .20, SD = .41), and by those identified as co-workers (M = .11,
SD = .33). The foster grandchildren were never named by the participants as
a source of negative exchanges. Fellow FGP participants identified as friends
also functioned as sources of positive exchanges in this setting (M = 1.93,
SD =2.31), asdid those identifiedasco-workers (M=1.22, SD =.67), and the
foster grandchild (M = 1.00, SD = 0). Staff members and supervisors were the
sourceofthefewestpositiveexchanges(M=.71,SD=.95).
Our next analyses examined changes in participants’ social network charac-
teristicsoveratwo-yearperiod,fromT1toT3.Theseanalysesarebasedonthose
participants who remained in the study by T3. The FGP participants reported a
significantlylargernumberofnewsocialties(M=2.11,SD=1.88)thandideither
AGP(M=.94,SD=1.50)orCSparticipants(M=1.00,SD=1.39),F(2,90)=
3.05,p<.05,(cid:1)2=.07.Thesedatasuggestthatthenewsocialtiesformedbythe
FGPparticipantsinthefirstyearofthestudypersistedintothesecondyear.
In the next analysis, we examined the extent to which participants felt that
others counted on them for support. We anticipated that this number would
increase for FGP participants, relative to the other participants, because of their
involvement with the foster grandchildren. The results indicated, however, that
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 329
there were no group differences in the number of people named by the study
participantsasdepending on thematT2or T3, relativetothenumbernamedas
dependingonthematT1(seeTable2,lowerpanel).
Finally,becauseparticipants’emotionalhealthdidnotvarysignificantlyacross
groups overtime,wecouldnotexaminewhethertheformationofnew,positive
socialtiesmediatedtheeffectsofparticipationintheFosterGrandparentProgram.
Therefore,mediationalanalyseswerenotundertaken.
DISCUSSION
The goal of this study was to investigate the effects on older adults’ psycho-
logical health of participating in a volunteer role that provided opportunities to
form ties with age peers and to express nurturance toward another person, in
thiscaseadevelopmentally-disabledchild.Theseinterpersonalbenefits,inturn,
were expected to reduce feelings of loneliness and depression and to boost
participants’self-esteem.
Theresultsofthestudy,however,didnotbearouttheseexpectationsentirely.
Participation in the Foster Grandparent Program did appear to facilitate the
formation of peer ties, by providing opportunities for regular social contract
structured around shared activities and meaningful social roles. The formation
of these new ties was not associated, however, with the expected gains in
emotionalhealth.
ExplanationsandImplications
Akeyquestionraisedbytheseresultsiswhytheanticipatedgainsinemotional
health did not occur. We consider substantive and methodological explanations
inthissection,andwesuggestimplicationsforfutureresearch.
SubstantiveConsiderations
Thefostergrandparentswereimmersedinafairlycomplexsocialsystemthat
exposedthemtothepossibilityofnegative,aswellaspositive,interactionswith
others. As indicated by our results, the foster grandparents were more likely
than other study participants to form an exclusively negative social tie, as well
asoneormoreexclusivelypositivenewsocialties.Manyofthesenewnegative
ties were with supervisors and staff members. The detrimental impact of these
negative interactions may have served to cancel the beneficial impact of the
positiveinteractions.Thisinterpretationreceivedonlylimitedsupport,however,
inpost-hocanalysesthatexaminedthenumberofnewpositiveandnewnegative
socialtiesformedaspredictorsofemotionalhealth(atT2orT3),whilecontrolling
forT1emotionalhealth,newpositiveandnegativesocialtiesformedpriortoT1,
and thecovariatesincluded inthecore hypothesis tests(age, numberof chronic
health conditions, ethnicity, income, and depression). These analyses indicated
330 / ROOKANDSORKIN
that neither new positive nor new negative social ties formed during the course
ofthestudypredictedemotionalhealthattheT2orT3follow-upassessments.5
We also had anticipated that the opportunity to provide care to a child with
specialneedswould contributetothefostergrandparent’sself-esteemandemo-
tional well-being. Although many of the foster grandparents listed their foster
grandchild as a new social tie, they did not tend to regard the foster grandchild
assomeonewhocountedonthem,astherewerenosignificantdifferencesinthe
numberofpeoplewhotheparticipantsnamedasregularlydependingonthemfor
supportandcompanionship.
We also considered whether participation in the Foster Grandparent Program
mighthave caused participants to reduce their contact with pre-existing friends,
therebycancelingpossiblebenefitsoftheprogram.Weexaminedchangesinboth
the number of friends named by participants at each time period and in the
frequencyofcontactwiththesefriends.Theseanalysesrevealedthatdecreasesin
either the number of, or frequency of contact with, friends were relatively rare.
More importantly, such decreases were not more common among the foster
grandparentsthanamongparticipantsinthetwocomparisongroups.Thus,wedo
not believe that participation in the Foster Grandparent Program caused partici-
pantstorestricttheircontactswithpre-existingfriends.
The Foster Grandparent Program involved a substantial commitmentof time
each week (20 hours) and interaction not only with age peers and a vulnerable
child, but also with supervisors and other staff members. Volunteer work that
requires a significant commitment of time and that involves interactions with
supervisors maytakeonsomeofthequalitiesofaworkrole,therebydetracting
from the potential benefits of the volunteer role. Assessment of participants’
expectations and reactions to the volunteer work would be valuable in future
studies to evaluate how often such shifts occur in volunteers’ perceptions of
theirwork.
In a related vein, some research suggests that the benefits of volunteering in
laterlifedecline,andmayevenreverse,asthetimecommitmentexceedscertain
optimalthresholds.Volunteeringwasassociatedwithareducedriskofmortality
inastudybyMusick,Herzog,andHouse(1999),butthislinkwasonlyfoundfor
those individuals who reported having volunteered fewer than 40 hours in the
past year; individuals who volunteered for more than 40 hours did not exhibit
areducedriskofmortality.VanWilligen(2000)found,inananalysisofthesame
dataset,thatvolunteeringmorethan140hoursperyear(or2.7hoursperweek)
wasrelatedtopoorerperceivedhealthamongolderadults.Theelderlyvolunteers
inthecurrentstudycommitted20hours perweektothevolunteer roleandalso
assumedchallengingresponsibilities.Masteryofthisdemandingrolecouldhave
contributed to beneficial effects on self-esteem for some participants, but the
5Asummaryofthesepost-hocanalysesisavailableuponrequest.
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 331
intensity of the volunteer work may have caused other participants to derive
limitedbenefitsfromtheirinvolvement.
ThemodeofrecruitmentintotheFosterGrandparentProgram,necessitatedby
the experimental design of the study, also may have changed the experience of
beingafostergrandparentinsubtlebutimportantwaysthatofferlessonsforfuture
research. Acommonmodeof recruitmentintotheFosterGrandparent Program,
andintomanyothervolunteerprograms,isbywordofmouth.Infact,amajority
ofvolunteers report becominginvolved attherequestofanother person suchas
a friend or acquaintance (Morrow-Howell & Mui, 1989). People who enjoy a
volunteerprogramtellothersaboutit,andmaytrytoenlistfriendstojointhem.
During the course of this study, some of the elderly individuals who were
randomly assigned to the Foster Grandparent Program asked to have a friend
or neighbor admitted into the study. Similarly, some of the older adults who
were already in the Foster Grandparent Program sought to nominate friends or
neighbors for inclusion in the project (and, specifically, into the FGP group).
Such requests could not be honored without compromising the study design,
whichmeantthattheparticipantsinourFosterGrandparentProgram,unlikethose
inotherprograms,wouldnothavethebenefitofsharingtheirvolunteerworkwith
pre-existingfriends.Futureresearchersmaywanttoconsiderastudydesignthat
allows for dyadic recruitment (e.g., two friends entering the program together)
because it mirrors a naturally-occurring mode of recruitment. Whether people
recruited as part of a dyad would exhibit less attrition and greater benefits than
those recruited individually is an interesting question that could have important
implicationsfortheoperationandevaluationofvolunteerprograms.
MethodologicalConsiderations
Methodologicalfactorsalsomayhavecontributedtothenonsignificanteffects
on emotional health. It is possible, for example, that the measures of emotional
healthusedtoevaluatetheeffectsofvolunteerparticipation(self-esteem,depres-
sion, and loneliness) were too global or insensitive to change (cf. Heller et al.,
1991). To explore this possibility, we conducted post-hoc analyses of measures
of daily positive and negative mood collected from daily diary assessments
conductedannually(describedmorefullyinRook,2001).Theseanalysesrevealed
the same pattern of null results. Nonetheless, it remains possible that other
measures,suchasthosethatexplicitlytapasenseofpurposeorusefulness,might
have revealed greater evidence of the hypothesized benefits of involvement as
afostergrandparent.
It is also possible that participants in the AGP group, who had expressed an
interestintheFosterGrandparentProgramattheoutsetofthestudybutwhowere
not assigned to the program, subsequently became involved in other forms of
volunteer work, thereby diluting the hypothesized group differences. Analyses
thatexaminedchangesovertimeinthetotalnumberofcommunityandvolunteer
332 / ROOKANDSORKIN
organizationstowhichparticipantsbelongedrevealednosignificantgroupdiffer-
encesfromT1toT2orT1toT3.Similarly,itispossiblethatparticipantsinthe
communitysamplewereinvolvedinorganizationsthatprovidedsomeofthesame
benefits as the foster grandparent program. The three groups did not differ
significantlyatthestartofthestudyinthenumberoforganizationalaffiliations,
but we lack information about the extent to which these affiliations involved
frequentormeaningfulinteractionwithotherpeople.
The attrition rate from this study was higher than anticipated, and it left a
relatively healthy, robust sample with which to test hypotheses about improve-
mentovertime.Totheextentthattheremainingparticipantswerecharacterized
by relatively high self-esteemand low depression and loneliness, it would have
been difficult to show improvement over time. Attrition also limited the power
of the analyses to detect effects. When the study was designed, the anticipated
sample size was projected to have sufficient power to detect effects of medium
size.Theobservedpowerwaslowerthanthisinmostofouranalyses,M =.29.
power
Compounding this, the effect sizes were smaller than anticipated, M(cid:1)2 = .04.
These problems are common, however, in intervention studies. Maddock and
Rossi(2001)recentlyexaminedstatisticalpowerin187journalarticlesandfound
thatinterventionstudiestendtohavelesspowerthandononinterventionstudies.
For example, average power was .17 for intervention studies versus .42 for
nonintervention studieswhen smalleffectswere reported. With respecttoettect
sizes,Wheeleretal.(1998)reportedinameta-analysisofstudiesexaminingthe
effects of volunteering for older adults that the average effect size was smallto
medium(meanr-indices=.186;correspondingto(cid:1)2=.035)whencontrollingfor
the potentially confounding influence of health or socioeconomic status. Thus,
althoughouraveragepowerandeffectsizesarecomparabletothosereportedin
previous studies of this type, they make the interpretation of our nonsignificant
findingsinconclusive.
The substantial attrition in the study also precluded subgroup analyses to
determine whether a particular subset of the elderly participants derived greater
benefits from the volunteer role. Some researchers (e.g., Fengler, 1984) believe
that volunteer participation contributes to health and well-being only when it
servestocompensatefor personalandsocialresources thatmaybemissingina
person’slife.Thedesignofthestudyandthemodestsamplesizedidnotallowus
to test hypotheses about compensation for specific kinds of social deficits that
participantsmayhaveexperienced.
ThefactthattherateofattritionwasdistinctivelyhighintheFGPgroupduring
thefirstyearof thestudywasalsounexpected, butitappears thatattritionfrom
volunteer programs in general is higher in the first year than in subsequent
years (Fischer & Schaffer, 1993). This attrition also pointed to another factor
that may have worked against our finding more evidence of the hypothesized
benefitsofthevolunteerrole.Atthetimethestudywasconceived,manyofthe
developmentally-disabledchildrenresidinginstatefacilitieshadamoderatelevel
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 333
of disability. By the time the study was funded and implemented, however, a
change in state policies had led most of the higher-functioning children to be
placedincommunitysettings.Thosewhoremainedinthestatefacilitiestendedto
bemoreseverelyimpairedandolderthanhadbeentypicalearlier.Thus,although
some of the foster grandparents in this study did work with higher-functioning
infants and children, many worked with older children and adolescents whose
leveloffunctioningwasquitelimitedandwhooftenlackedcommunicationskills.
This meant that the foster grandparent role was considerably more emotionally
andphysicallydemandingthananticipated.Someoftheolderadultswhovolun-
teeredfortheFosterGrandparentPrograminthisstudyweresimplyunprepared
fortherigorsoftheprogram.Ifoldervolunteers’workisparticularlydemanding
in nature, it may be important for them to have access to social support in the
volunteersetting(Morrow-Howell&Mui,1989).
In a related vein, the severe level of disability among many of the foster
grandchildren mayhave led some foster grandparents to feel that they were not
making a meaningful contribution to the quality of life of their clients. We lack
informationaboutthefostergrandparents’expectationsof,andreactionsto,their
work. Wecanreportanecdotally,however, thatthenursing personnel andother
hospital staff generally regarded the work of the foster grandparents as quite
valuable both because it was perceived as improving the quality of the clients’
lives,evenifmodestly,andbecauseithelpedtoalleviatetheday-to-daydemands
on the staff, allowing them to concentrate more on the patients’ medical needs
thantheirpsychosocialneeds.Thefostergrandparentswererecognizedfortheir
work formally and informally throughout the year (e.g., annual appreciation
ceremonies, birthday cards, etc.). Thus, we believe that the social environment
in which the foster grandparents functioned underscored the value of their
contributions, although we do not have information about the perceptions and
reactions of individual participants in the program. In future studies, it would
be valuable to examine how the expectations and reactions of the participants
evolveovertime.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WewishtothankMarthaRyanPedersenandPaulThurasfortheirinvaluable
help in overseeing the data collection and data management, and a large group
of undergraduate students who provided assistance with data collection and
datacoding.
REFERENCES
Antonucci,T.C.,Fuhrer,R.,&Jackson,J.S.(1990).Socialsupportandreciprocity:
A cross-ethnic and cross-national perspective. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships,7,519-530.
334 / ROOKANDSORKIN
Barrera, M. (1986). Distinctions between social support concepts, measures, and
models.AmericanJournalofCommunityPsychology,14,413-445.
Barrera, M., Jr. (2000). Social support research in community psychology. In
J. Rappaport & E. Seidman (Eds.), Handbook of community psychology (pp. 215-245).
NewYork:KluwerAcademic/PlenumPublishers.
Blieszner, R. (1989). Developmental processes of friendship. In R. G. Adams
& R. Blieszner (Eds.), Older adult friendship (pp. 108-126). Newbury Park, CA:Sage.
Cohen,S.,Gottlieb,B.H.,&Underwood,L.G.(2000).Socialrelationshipsandhealth.
In S. Cohen, L. G. Underwood, & B. H. Gottlieb (Eds.), Social support measurement
and intervention: A guide for health and social psychologists. New York: Oxford
UniversityPress.
Cohen,S.,&Wills,T.A.(1985).Stress,socialsupport,andthebufferinghypothesis.
PsychologicalBulletin,98,310-357.
Cooney,T.M.,Schaie,K.W.,&Willis,S.L.(1988).Therelationshipbetweenprior
functioningoncognitiveandpersonalitydimensionsandsubjectattritioninlongitudinal
research.JournalofGerontology:PsychologicalSciences,43,P12-P17.
Crohan,S.E.,&Antonucci,T.C.(1989).Friendsasasourceofsocialsupportinold
age.InR.G.Adams&R.Blieszner(Eds.),Olderadultfriendship:Structureandprocess.
NewburyPark,CA:Sage.
Cutler, N. E. (1982). Voluntary association participation and life satisfaction: Repli-
cation,revision,andextension.InternationalJournalofAgingandHumanDevelopment,
14,127-137.
Everard, K. M., Lach, H. W., Fisher, E. B., & Baum, M. C. (2000). Relationship of
activityandsocialsupporttothefunctionalhealthofolderadults.JournalofGerontology:
SocialSciences,55,S208-S212.
Fengler,A.P.(1984).Lifesatisfactionofsubpopulationsofelderly:Thecomparative
effectsofvolunteerism,employment, andmealsiteparticipation. ResearchonAging,6,
189-212.
Finch,J.F.,Okun,M.A.,Barrera,M.,Jr.,Zautra,A.J.,&Reich,J.W.(1989).Positive
and negative social ties among older adults: Measurement models and the prediction of
psychological distressandwell-being. AmericanJournalofCommunityPsychology, 17,
585-605.
Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends: Personal networks in town and city.
Chicago:UniversityofChicago.
Fischer, L. R., & Schaffer, K. B. (1993). Older volunteers: A guide to research and
practice.NewburyPark,CA:Sage.
Gatz,M.,&Hurwicz,M.L.(1990).Areoldpeoplemoredepressed?Cross-sectional
data on Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale Factors. Psychology and
Aging,5,284-290.
Helgeson, V., & Cohen, S. (1996). Social support and adjustment to cancer: Recon-
ciling descriptive, correlational, and intervention research. Health Psychology, 15,
135-148.
Heller, K., Thompson, M. G., Trueba, P. E., Hogg, J. R., & Vlachos-Weber, I.
(1991).Peersupporttelephonedyadsforelderlywomen:Wasthisthewrongintervention?
AmericanJournalofCommunityPsychology,19,53-74.
Himmelfarb,S.,&Murrell,S.A.(1983).Reliabilityandvalidityoffivementalhealth
scalesinolderpersons.JournalofGerontology,38,333-339.
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 335
House,J.S.,Landis,K.R.,&Umberson,D.(1988).Socialrelationshipsandhealth.
Science,241,540-545.
House,J.S.,Robbins,C.,&Metzner,H.L.(1982).Theassociationofsocialrelation-
shipsandactivitieswithmortality:ProspectiveevidencefromtheTecumsehCommunity
HealthStudy.AmericanJournalofEpidemiology,116,123-140.
Hunter, K. I., & Linn, M. Q. (1981). Psychosocial difference between the elderly
volunteersandnon-volunteers.InternationalJournalofAgingandHumanDevelopment,
12,205-213.
Jerome,D.(1981).Thesignificanceoffriendshipforwomeninlaterlife.Ageingand
Society,1,175-197.
Jurs,S.G.,&Glass,G.V.(1971).Theeffectofmortalityontheinternalandexternal
validityoftherandomizedcomparativeexperiment.JournalofExperimentalEducation,
40,62-66.
Kennet, J., Burgio, L., & Schulz, R. (2000). Interventions for in-home caregivers:
A review of research 1990 to present. In R. Schulz (Ed.), Handbook on dementia
caregiving:Evidence-basedinterventionsforfamilycaregivers(pp.61-125).NewYork:
Springer.
Krause,N.(1997).Receivedsupport,anticipatedsupport,socialclass,andmortality.
ResearchonAging,19,387-422.
Krause, N., Herzog, A. R., & Baker, E. (1992). Providing support to others
and well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 47,
P300-P311.
Kuehne, V. S., & Sears, H. A. (1993). Beyond the call of duty: Older volunteers
committedtochildrenandfamilies.JournalofAppliedGerontology,12,425-438.
Maddock, J. E., & Rossi, J. S. (2001). Statistical power in three health-psychology
relatedjournals.HealthPsychology,20,76-78.
McCallister,L.,&Fischer,C.S.(1978).Aprocedureforsurveyingpersonalnetworks.
SociologicalMethodsandResearch,7,131-148.
Midlarsky,E.,&Kahana,E.(1994).Altruisminlatelife.ThousandOaks,CA:Sage.
Morrow-Howell,N.,&Mui,A.(1989).Elderlyvolunteers:Reasonsforinitiatingand
terminatingservice.JournalofGerontologicalSocialWork,13,21-34.
Musick,M.A.,Herzog,A.R.,&House,J.S.(1999).Volunteeringandmortalityamong
olderadults:Findingsfromanational sample.JournalofGerontology:SocialSciences,
54,S173-S180.
Newsom,J.T.(1999).Anothersidetocaregiving:Negativereactionstobeinghelped.
CurrentDirectionsinPsychologicalScience,6,183-187.
Okun, M. A., Barr, A., & Herzog, A. R. (1998). Motivation to volunteer by older
adults:Atestofcompetingmeasurementmodels.PsychologyandAging,13,608-621.
Pachana,N.A.,Gallagher-Thompson,D.,&Thompson,L.W.(1994).Assessmentof
depression. In M. P. Lawton & J. Teresi (Eds.), Annual Review of Gerontology and
Geriatrics(Vol.14,pp.234-256).NewYork:Springer.
Pilisuk, M., & Minkler, M. (1980). Supportive networks: Life ties for the elderly.
JournalofSocialIssues,36,95-116.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research
inthegeneralpopulation.AppliedPsychologyandMeasurement,1,385.
Rietschlin, J. (1998). Voluntary association membership and psychological distress.
JournalofHealthandSocialBehavior,39,348-355.
336 / ROOKANDSORKIN
Roberto,K.(1989).Exchangeandequityinfriendships.InR.G.Adams&R.Blieszner
(Eds.),Olderadultfriendship:Structureandprocess.NewburyPark,CA:Sage.
Rook, K. S. (1984). The negative side of social interaction. Journal of Personality
andSocialPsychology,46,1097-1108.
Rook, K. S. (1987). Reciprocity of social exchange and social satisfaction among
olderwomen.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,52,145-154.
Rook,K.S.(1991).Facilitatingfriendshipformationinlatelife:Puzzlesandchallenges.
AmericanJournalofCommunityPsychology,19,103-110.
Rook,K.S.(2001).Emotionalhealthandpositiveversusnegative socialexchanges:
Adailydiaryanalysis.AppliedDevelopmentalScience,5,87-97.
Rook, K. S., & Dooley, D. (1985). Applying social support research: Theoretical
problemsandfuturedirections.JournalofSocialIssues,41,5-28.
Rook,K.S.,&Ituarte,P.H.G.(1999).Socialcontrol,socialsupport,andcompanion-
ship in older adults’ family relationships and friendships. Personal Relationships, 6,
199-211.
Rook, K. S., Thuras, R. D., & Lewis, M. (1990). Social control, health-risk-taking,
andpsychologicaldistress.PsychologyandAging,5,327-334.
Rosenberg,M.(1965).Societyandtheadolescentself-image.Princeton,NJ:Princeton
UniversityPress.
Russell, D. W. (1996). UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity,
andfactorstructure.JournalofPersonalityAssessment,66,20-40.
Russell, D. W., Peplau, L. A., & Cutrona, C. (1980). The revised UCLA Loneliness
Scale:Concurrentanddiscriminantvalidity.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,
39,472-480.
Schulz, R., & Beach, S. R. (1999). Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: The
caregiving health effects study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 282,
2215-2219.
Schultz, N. R., & Moore, D. (1984). Loneliness: Correlates, attributions, and coping
amongolderadults.PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin,10,67-77.
Seeman,T.E.(1996).Socialtiesandhealth:Thebenefitsofsocialintegration.Annals
ofEpidemiology,6,442-451.
Seeman, T. E., Berkman, L. F., Charpentier, P. A., Blazer, D. G., Albert, M. S., &
Tinetti, M. E. (1995). Behavioral and psychosocial predictors of physical performance:
MacArthur studies of successful aging. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 50,
M177-M183.
UchinoB.N.,Cacioppo,J.T.,&Kiecolt-GlaserJ.K.(1996).Therelationshipbetween
social support and physiological processes: A review with emphasis on underlying
mechanismsandimplicationsforhealth.PsychologicalBulletin,119,488-531.
VanWilligen,M.(2000).Differentialbenefitsofvolunteeringacrossthelifecourse.
JournalofGerontology:SocialSciences,55B,S308-S318.
WeissR.S.(Ed.)(1973).Loneliness:Theexperienceofemotionalandsocialisolation.
Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Weiss,R.S.(1974).Theprovisionsofsocialrelationships.InZ.Rubin(Ed.),Doing
untoothers:Joiningmolding,conforming,helping,loving(pp.17-26).EnglewoodCliffs,
NJ:Prentice-Hall.
FOSTERINGSOCIALTIES / 337
Wheeler, J. A., Gorey, K. M., & Greenblatt, B. (1998). The beneficial effects of
volunteeringforoldervolunteersandthepeopletheyserve:Ameta-analysis.International
JournalofAgingandHumanDevelopment,47,69-79.
Directreprintrequeststo:
KarenS.Rook
DepartmentofPsychologyandSocialBehavior
3340SocialEcologyII
UniversityofCalifornia
Irvine,CA 92697-7085
e-mail: ksrook@uci.edu
