This article was downloaded by: [McMaster University]
On: 17 November 2014, At: 10:15
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office:
Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Aging & Mental Health
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription
information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/camh20
A randomized controlled trial of the
psychosocial impact of providing internet
training and access to older adults
H. White a , E. McConnell a , E. Clipp b , L. G. Branch a , R. Sloane a , C. Pieper a
& T. L. Box a
a Duke University Medical Center , USA
b Veterans Administration Medical Center , Durham, USA
Published online: 09 Jun 2010.
To cite this article: H. White , E. McConnell , E. Clipp , L. G. Branch , R. Sloane , C. Pieper & T. L. Box (2002) A
randomized controlled trial of the psychosocial impact of providing internet training and access to older adults,
Aging & Mental Health, 6:3, 213-221, DOI: 10.1080/13607860220142422
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13607860220142422
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”)
contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our
licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or
suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are
the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with
primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever
caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the
Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial
or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can
be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
Aging & Mental Health 2002; 6(3): 213–221
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A randomized controlled trial of the psychosocial impact of providing
internet training and access to older adults
H. WHITE,1 E. MCCONNELL,1 E. CLIPP,2 L. G. BRANCH,1 R. SLOANE,1 C. PIEPER1 &
T. L. BOX1
1Duke University Medical Center & 2Veterans Administration Medical Center, Durham, USA
Abstract
The Internet (electronic mail and the World Wide Web) may provide new opportunities for communication that can help
older adults avoid social isolation. This randomized controlled trial assessed the psychosocial impact of providing Internet
access to older adults over a five-month period. One hundred volunteers from four congregate housing sites and two
nursing facilities were randomly assigned to receive Internet training or to a wait list control group. The pre & post
measures included the UCLA Loneliness scale, modified CES Depression scale, a measure of locus of control, computer
attitudes, number of confidants, and overall quality of life. Participants received nine hours of small group training in six
sessions over two weeks. Computers were available for continued use over five months and the trainer was available two
hours/week for questions. At the end of the trial, 60% of the intervention group continued to use the Internet on a weekly
basis. Although there was a trend toward decreased loneliness and depression in intervention subjects compared to
controls, there were no statistically significant changes from baseline to the end of trial between groups. Among Internet
users (n = 29) in the intervention group there were trends toward less loneliness, less depression, more positive attitudes
toward computers, and more confidants than among intervention recipients who were not regular users (n = 19) of this
technology. Most elderly participants in this trial learned to use the Internet and the majority continued to use it on a
weekly basis. The psychosocial impact of Internet use in this sample suggested trends in a positive direction. Further
research is needed to determine more precisely, which older adults, residing in which environmental contexts are more
likely than others to benefit from this rapidly expanding information and communication link.
Introduction (Hutchison, Eastman, Tirrito, 1997; Kubeck et al.,
1999; Post, 1996). Although an age bias against
Many older adults face barriers to communication, older adults using computer technology may still
which impair their ability to gather information and exist (Ryan et al., 1992), increasing numbers of
engage in social interaction. Numerous studies older adults are beginning to utilize this tech-
suggest that social and emotional isolation is associ- nology. A national survey conducted in November
ated with adverse health outcomes and diminished of 1995 found that of older adults aged 55 and
quality of life (Chappell & Badger, 1989; Dugan & over, 29% reported owning a personal computer
Kivett, 1994; Mullins et al., 1991; Thompson & (PC) (Adler, 1996) and, among these PC owners,
Heller, 1990). Particularly among older individuals, 28% reported regularly using an on-line service.
research indicates that social support network size The Internet, including e-mail, has the potential
(i.e., family members, friends and others with whom to enhance social support and psychosocial well-
the person interacts) and satisfaction with social being for many older adults in a variety of ways.
support affect health outcomes including affective Primarily, older adults can use computers to
states, such as feelings of depression or loneliness communicate frequently, easily and inexpensively
(Kahn & Antonucci, 1980; Kaplan et al., 1987; with family and friends who also have access to e-
Kaplan & Strawbridge, 1994). mail at work or at home. Elders can explore
The Internet (i.e., World Wide Web and elec- interests and hobbies through the Internet, or
tronic mail) is a novel vehicle of communication obtain consumer information and access to
that has in recent years become more accessible to community resources. They can meet new people
all persons and may provide a means of overcoming with similar interests through chat rooms and
barriers to social interaction for the elderly bulletin boards. In addition, the Internet may
Correspondence to: Heidi White, MD, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3003, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Tel: 919
660 7516. Fax: 919 684 8569. E-mail: white031@mc.duke.edu
Received for publication 6th April 2001. Accepted 10th December 2001.
ISSN 1360–7863 print/ISSN 1364–6915 online/02/030213–09 © Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13607860220142422
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
214 H. White et al.
provide a novel way to control choices about inter- participate. At the nursing facilities health care
actions with others and time use that is not personnel were asked to identify residents whom
otherwise available, thus providing more autonomy they thought had the cognitive ability to partici-
for older adults. In essence, relatively isolated and pate. Enrollment began in the autumn of 1996 and
disabled older adults can reconnect, strengthen and data collection was completed in January 1998. A
broaden their connection with the outside world by total of 100 participants provided informed consent
incorporating computer technology into their lives. and entered the trial. At each of the six sites
Only a few attempts have been made to investigate individual participants were randomly assigned to
the role of computers in the lives of older adults. either intervention or control group.
Early studies simply described the use of computer There were 51 participants randomized to the
games (Riddick et al., 1986; Schueren, 1986; intervention group. Nine participants dropped out
Weisman, 1983; Zemke, 1986). One very early study of the training but nevertheless completed the
introduced older adult congregate housing residents follow-up interview. Reasons for not completing
to the computer. Investigators observed that the training were health problems (n = 7) and insuffi-
participants enjoyed the more interactive functions cient time (n = 2). One additional participant
including a game that simulated a conversation and dropped out of training and refused to complete
the ability to ‘message’ with another computer user the follow-up interview. One participant died
at a distant site (Danowski & Sacks, 1980). Another before the study ended and one participant could
study incorporated e-mail and Internet training in a not be tested at the time of the follow-up interview
nursing home setting (McConatha et al., 1994; due to progression of physical illness. A total of 39
McConatha, et al., 1995). While generally showing intervention participants (76% of the initial 51)
positive effects, this study was small and required completed training and the follow-up interview
intensive one-on-one assistance throughout the after five months. A total of 48 intervention partici-
intervention. pants (94% of the initial 51) were used in the
In a pilot study of 15 participants from a contin- statistical analysis, including nine who dropped out
uing care retirement community we recently of training. Of the 49 participants randomized to
examined the feasibility and psychosocial impact of the control group, one participant died, one moved
introducing older adults to the World Wide Web away, and two were not tested at the time of the
(WWW) and e-mail (White et al., 1999). The follow-up interview. Therefore, 45 control partici-
majority of this group of older adults was willing pants (92% of the initial 49) were included in the
and eager to learn and utilize this new technology. statistical analysis. Of the 100 participants, 15%
In addition to the practical aspects learned from were African-American and 2% were Hispanic.
this feasibility study, we observed a trend towards There were no statistically significant differences
decreased loneliness among the 15 participants in between the intervention and control groups on the
comparison to a group of eight residents from the 13 demographic variables at baseline (see Table 1).
community who did not participate in the project. Although more than 60% in each group rated their
Based on these findings, the present randomized health as good or better, about the same percentage
trial was undertaken to determine the psychosocial of participants indicated that their activity was
effects of providing Internet access to older adults. limited due to their health. Of note, the majority
(> 60% in each arm) of participants had no
previous computer experience.
Methods
Subjects and design Intervention
Four congregate housing sites and two nursing After the baseline interview, subjects were randomly
facilities agreed to participate. Each site received assigned to one of two study arms: (1) Internet
IBM style computers, 386 or better (one site used training; or (2) wait list control. Control subjects
Macintosh PerformaTM) and cost-free Internet were offered a token gift to compensate them for
service provider access. Donations made to several waiting five months for training. Intervention
sites allowed for the purchase of a printer or other subjects received nine hours of group training (three
hardware. Sites were required to pay for phone line two-hour sessions and three one-hour sessions, two
installation and maintenance and to provide a elderly participants per computer with four to six in a
dedicated secured area where the computers could class) over a two-week period, which covered basic
be used on a 24-hour per day basis. computer operation, use of e-mail, and an introduc-
Information sessions open to all residents on the tion to accessing the WWW. We primarily used
general use of computers and the Internet were SimeonTM, version 4.1.1, as the electronic-mail inter-
provided at each facility. Volunteers were sought at face and a NetscapeTM, version 2.02, browser for the
these sessions and through posted flyers. All WWW. A training manual covering these topics was
residents of these communities were eligible to developed specifically for this study and distributed
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
Younger people in dementia care 215
TABLE 1. Baseline characteristics
Intervention (n = 48) (%) Control (n = 45) (%)
Age (mean ± SD) 71 ± 12 72 ± 11
Gender (% female) 71 82
Living situation (% alone) 81 89
Educational level (% High School graduate) 71 77
Self-rated health (% good or better) 64 67
Activity limitation due to health 63 64
IADL assistance 29 29
ADL assistance 13 9
Marital status (% married) 19 9
Work status (% paid employment) 8 7
Living environment
Nursing facility 19 20
Congregate housing 81 80
Experience with computers
None 69 62
Little 23 33
A lot 8 4
PC ownership 8 4
to each participant. The trainer was a young college sive symptoms (scale 0–20). A scale previously
graduate, well versed in the use of the Internet, who validated in an elderly sample was used to measure
interacted well with older adults. After the initial Perceived Control of Life Situations using eight
training sessions the computer trainer was available items answered on a four-point scale (1: agree
at each site for about two hours per week to answer strongly through to 4: disagree strongly) with higher
questions and help those who experienced difficulty. scores indicating greater control (range 8–32)
The trainer helped participants find places (websites) (Eizenman et al., 1997). Attitudes towards personal
of interest on the WWW and, some participants computers, the World Wide Web, and electronic
agreed to be e-mail pals with middle school students mail were assessed with nine questions scored on a
in Kansas. The trainer also was available at other five-point Likert scale regarding efficacy, interest,
times by phone or e-mail. To avoid contamination, and utility of computers (Jay & Willis, 1992). Scores
members of the intervention group were asked not to on this measure ranged from 9–36; lower scores
share what they were learning with members of the indicated more favorable attitudes. A single life satis-
control group. Also, control group members were not faction item was included with five possible response
provided access to the computer equipment. categories ranging from ‘not satisfied’ to ‘very satis-
fied’. Subjects also were asked to report the number
of confidants in their lives (none, 1–2, 3 or more). At
Outcome measures baseline participants were asked open-ended ques-
tions with regard to specific goals, concerns, and
Interviews were conducted by two trained inter- benefits they expected as a result of study participa-
viewers, at baseline and follow-up, approximately 20 tion. At follow-up they were asked whether they had
weeks after training started. Demographic informa- met their goals, what problems they encountered,
tion, health status, functional status, and social and the benefits they perceived from the interven-
contacts (in person, by phone, by letter, or by e- tion. They also were asked to estimate the average
mail) were collected in addition to the outcome number of hours per week they spent on the
measures. The UCLA Loneliness scale (Russell computer using the WWW and e-mail.
et al., 1980; Russell & Daniel, 1996) recently
revised and validated with a sample of older adults
and used successfully in the feasibility study, was Statistical analysis
included in a slightly modified form. The 20 ques-
tions are answered on a four-point scale; the anchors Baseline differences in general characteristics and
were modified to read: ‘almost never’, ‘sometimes’, outcome measures were assessed by either the non-
‘often’, and ‘almost always’ for a more evenly parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous
balanced expression of frequency (Bass et al., 1974). measures or a Chi Square test for categorical
Scores range from 20–80 with higher scores indi- measures. An intention-to-treat model of analysis
cating higher levels of loneliness. A modified form of was used to compare the intervention and control
the CES-Depression scale was used to assess depres- groups (i.e., the full potential of a randomized
sive symptoms (Kohout et al., 1993). The 10 control trial to eliminate the influence of baseline
questions utilize a three-point scale (anchors: ‘hardly confounding variables is only realized when the
ever or never’, ‘some of the time’, ‘much or most of results are examined with all study subjects analyzed
the time’) with higher scores indicating more depres- according to their random assignments). Thus,
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
216 H. White et al.
TABLE 2. Outcome measures at baseline
Intervention Control
n = 48 n = 45
median (interquartile range) median (interquartile range) p value
UCLA Loneliness scale 35 (31, 49) 34 (29,40) 0.17
Lower score = less lonely
Range: 20–60, 20 items
Modified CES Depression scale 4 (2,7) 4 (2,6) 0.82
Lower score = less depressed
Range: 0–20, 10 items
Perceived Control scale 15 (12,17) 15 (13,18) 0.60
Lower score = less control
Range: 8–32, 8 items
Attitudes Toward Computers scale 12 (10,14) 13 (10,15) 0.23
Lower score = more favorable attitude
Range: 9–36, 9 items
Life satisfaction 0.21
Very satisfying 34 47
Fairly satisfying 23 22
Moderately satisfying 23 16
Somewhat satisfying 13 13
Not satisfying 7 2
Number of confidants 0.17
Zero 2 0
1–2 44 33
3 or more 54 67
subjects who did not complete the computer training outcome measures (see Table 2). The scores on the
but were willing to complete the follow-up interview modified CES-D scale were quite low indicating few
were included. Change scores were calculated for symptoms of depression and thus not allowing much
the UCLA Loneliness, modified CES-D, Perceived room for improvement. As might be expected from a
Control, and Attitudes Toward Computers scales by group of volunteers, the attitudes toward computers
subtracting the baseline score from the follow-up were very positive. Also, life satisfaction was high and
score. Again, differences in change scores between almost all participants had at least one confidant.
the two groups were assessed using the Wilcoxon There were no statistically significant differences
rank sum test. For the life satisfaction and confidant in the change scores on the outcome measures
questions change was categorized as better, worse or comparing the intervention and control groups (see
unchanged. Differences in change categories Table 3). Overall, both groups became less lonely
between the two groups were assessed using the according to the UCLA Loneliness scale with a
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel Chi Square test. slightly greater tendency towards less loneliness in
Chi Square tests were used to further evaluate the intervention group. There was very little change
potential differences in characteristics of the for both groups on the other measures.
subgroup in the intervention group who actually
used the technology on a regular basis compared to
the subgroup that did not. The Wilcoxon test was A description of Internet users
used to identify differences in outcome measures.
E-mail users were defined as having a non-zero Among members of the intervention group, 29
answer to one or more of three questions stated (60%) reported using the WWW at least once a
‘How many times per week do you communicate week. Of these 29, 14 reported using e-mail on a
with (your children, other relatives, or friends) on weekly basis to communicate with family or friends.
e-mail?’ WWW users were defined as having a non- Despite the lack of statistically significant improve-
zero answer to the question ‘How many hours a ment in the psychosocial outcome measures,
week do you spend using the World Wide Web or additional analyses were done to better characterize
Netscape?’ Internet users were defined as those the members of the intervention group who used this
participants using either e-mail or WWW.
technology on a regular basis.
Among World Wide Web users increased age
was not a deterrent for using the WWW (users
Results
mean age = 71, n = 29; non-users mean age = 69,
Psychosocial outcome measures n = 19). Those in the intervention group who lived
with someone else (89%) were more likely to use
At baseline there were no significant differences the WWW than those who lived alone (54%). Lack
between the intervention and control groups on the of education was not a hindrance to learning to use
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
Younger people in dementia care 217
TABLE 3. Change scores for the outcome measures
Intervention Control
n = 48 n = 45
median (interquartile range) median (interquartile range) p value
UCLA Loneliness scale -2 (-8,3) -1 (-5,2) 0.52
Negative value = less lonely at exit
Modified CES Depression scale 0 (-2,1) 0 (-1,2) 0.39
Negative value = less depressed at exit
Perceived Control scale 0 (-2,1) -1 (-3,1) 0.42
Negative value = less control at exit
Attitudes Toward Computers scale -1 (-3,1) 0 (-3,1)
Negative value = more favorable at exit
Life satisfaction 0.90
Worse 29 24
Unchanged 48 56
Better 23 20
Number of confidants 0.66
Less 12.5 15
Unchanged 75 78
More 12.5 7
the WWW; nine members of the intervention group the intervention group who did not regularly use the
had less than a high school diploma and six of these Internet on the change scores of the predetermined
used the WWW regularly. A higher percentage of outcome measures (see Table 4). In this analysis
men (79%) than women (53%) used the WWW. there were trends in the direction expected on four of
More than half (51%) of those with no prior the outcome measures, but again no statistically
computer experience used the WWW weekly. significant differences. In general, the Internet users
Those with previous computer experience were reported less loneliness, less depression, more posi-
especially likely to use the WWW (80%) at least tive attitudes toward computers, and more confidants
once a week. Self-reported health did not appear to than the intervention recipients who were not regular
be related to use of the WWW; 65% of those with users of this technology.
good to excellent health used WWW compared to
53% of those with fair to poor health. Similarly,
activity limitation due to health and need for assist- Observations
ance with IADLs did not differentiate WWW users
compared to non-users. Many observations made during the course of this
Electronic-mail users were a smaller and perhaps trial indicated that study participants benefited from
more select group. Again, age was not a deterrent the intervention in meaningful ways. For example, at
(users mean = 72, n = 14; non-users mean = 70, one congregate housing site participants formed a
n = 34), and participants who lived with someone computer interest group and started publishing a
community-wide newsletter using the computers.
else (55%) used e-mail more than those who lived
We also gained insights through recorded observa-
alone (23%) did. Perhaps education is more of a
tions made of each participant by the computer
factor for e-mail use since only one of our subjects
trainer after training. In addition, participants in the
with less than a high school diploma used e-mail.
intervention group answered open-ended questions
The gender trend was opposite that seen for WWW
at the end of the trial about their goals, difficulties
users; a higher percentage of women (35%) than
and challenges encountered using the computer, and
men (14%) used e-mail. More of those with prior
the benefits of computer use. Several excerpts from
computer experience (47%) used e-mail compared
this database follow:
to those without experience (21%). Those with
self-reported health of good or excellent tended to (cid:149) Ms. A (78-year-old female from a nursing facility
use e-mail regularly (42%) compared to those with site)
fair or poor health (6%). However, there was a Trainer: Ms. A is very persistent and stubborn on
higher percentage of e-mail users among those who the computer, but it has been remarkable tool for
needed assistance with IADLs (43%) than those her. She is able to write to her priest, whom she
who did not need assistance (24%). Similarly, there adores. She also reads the Pope Page and the
were more e-mail users among those reporting Vatican news.
activity limitation due to health (38%) compared to Ms. A: E-mail is the best. It helps me to be able
those without limitation (16%). to send letters instead of putting them in the
As a final step, we contrasted the subgroup of 29 mail.
Internet users, which included the smaller group that (cid:149) Ms. B (84-year-old female from congregate
also used e-mail with the subgroup of 19 members of housing site)
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
218 H. White et al.
TABLE 4. Change scores for the outcome measures of the Internet (e-mail &/or www) users vs. non-users in the interven-
tion group
Internet users* Internet non-users
n = 29 n = 19
median (interquartile range) median (interquartile range) p value
UCLA Loneliness scale -3 (-8,1) 1 (-6,3) 0.14
Negative value = less lonely at exit
Modified CES Depression scale 0 (-3,1) 1 (-1,2) 0.10
Negative value = less depressed at exit
Perceived Control scale -1 (-3,0) 0 (-2,7) 0.08
Negative value = less control at exit
Attitudes Toward Computers scale -1 (-3,1) 0 (-1,3) 0.10
Negative value = more favorable at exit
Life satisfaction 0.74
Worse 24 37
Unchanged 55 37
Better 21 26
Number of confidants 0.08
Less 10 16
Unchanged 69 84
More 21 0
*Internet user is defined by a non-zero answer to 1 or more of 3 questions stated ‘How many hours a week do you spend
using (email, the World Wide Web, or the Internet)?’
Trainer: Having problems because of vision, Trainer: Ms. E was my first ‘born computer user’.
colors on screen, and chair too low. But still She was concerned initially that she would learn
trying! I’ll see what kinds of things we can come it all, but then realized that the web would
up with to help. (Later) Seems to be doing quite provide constant education.
well, after modifying colors on the screen and Ms. E: (Goal) To learn all I could. (Benefits) It’s
adjusting chair. become my whole life. I eat, sleep…I look for
Ms. B: (Problems) I had trouble remembering people who have them [computers] or know
the procedure. The only thing that was really about them.
discouraging was my eyesight. (Benefits) It was a (cid:149) Ms. F (71-year-old female from congregate
benefit in that it was something I wanted to do housing site)
and I did it! Trainer: Ms. F did very well on the computer.
(cid:149) Mr. C (48-year-old male, confined permanently She enjoys sending e-mail to family members and
to wheelchair due to disability, from congregate using the web to read her ‘bitchuaries’ from the
housing site) Charleston Daily Mail.
Trainer: Great guy, great on the computer, and a Ms. F: (Goal) Wanted to learn all about it.
lot of fun. Emerged as a leader of the class. (Benefits) Gives me something to do and I’ve
Mr. C: (Goal) To learn to use a personal always wanted to learn how to do it.
computer. (Problems) Learning the basics: how
to get on the World Wide Web, Internet, and
Simeon (e-mail). I didn’t know anything about Discussion
it. (Benefits) It’s allowed me to have more
reading information: to not rely on the news, but In a group of frail older adult volunteers with
to go out and find things that I’m interested in. minimal prior computer experience, we were able to
(cid:149) Ms. D (51-year-old female living with parent teach Internet and computer skills successfully. We
because of chronic disability, from congregate made computer training and Internet use available
housing site) to older adults in subsidized housing and nursing
Trainer: Did extremely well. Very competent on facilities that might not otherwise have had access.
the computer, just lacks confidence, maybe not Indeed, very few had previous computer experience
getting a lot of confidence and self-esteem from and almost none owned a computer. Yet, to a great
(other sources). extent we found older adults eager to learn to use
Ms. D: (Goals) To learn how to operate the the Internet. A high percentage of the intervention
computer, surf the Internet and use the e-mail. group (60% of the total or 74% of those who
(Problems) Problems using the mouse. (Benefits) completed training) were using the Internet on a
Helped me to learn how to communicate with my weekly basis at the end of the five months.
family, keep in touch with information on the This study expands our previously published
Internet. pilot study (White et al., 1999) in three important
(cid:149) Ms. E (80-year-old female from congregate ways. First, this trial recruited a much larger and
housing site) more diverse sample of 100 frail elderly. The pilot
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
Younger people in dementia care 219
study involved 33 residents of a continuing care inclined to use the WWW and women were more
retirement community all of whom were highly likely to use the communication-based e-mail.
educated and with adequate financial resources. Those who lived with someone else were more
The present study cast a much broader net, likely than others to use the Internet; perhaps
soliciting volunteers from subsidized housing units, because they received encouragement from their
a veteran’s administration nursing facility, and a companion. Interestingly, those who perceived
community nursing facility. This recruitment their health to be good were much more likely to
resulted in a more educationally, socially, and use e-mail, yet many of these participants did
racially diverse sample. Second, this was a rand- report functional impairments.
omized design, which advertised and recruited Unfortunately, health or time constraints kept a
interested and eager elderly into one of two groups: substantial number of participants (24% of the
one that received Internet training and access and intervention group) from completing their training
one that did not receive training until after comple- even in this group of motivated volunteers.
tion of the study. Our pilot study was not Although the perception may be that older adults
randomized, but included a comparison group have a lot of time on their hands, in reality this may
derived from a small convenience sample of elderly, not be the case. In fact, many older adults are
many of whom were either unable to attend or not taking care of other family members and friends.
interested in attending the computer training Additionally, seeking and obtaining health care can
sessions. Third, we were motivated and able to take a substantial amount of time. Our participants
modify our research protocol and computer were frail, over 60% reported activity limitation
training procedure based on lessons learned from due to health. Such individuals are at risk for acute
the pilot experience. This served to strengthen the illness, which can hinder the acquisition of these
overall methodological rigor of the randomized new skills.
controlled trial. Although the trial results were not Despite successful implementation of the inter-
as positive as anticipated, the strong RCT study vention, there were no statistically significant
design and the multiple strong trends, all in differences between intervention and control
expected directions position the present study as a groups on the psychosocial scales. We were
model for future research on Internet use in special particularly interested in the UCLA Loneliness
or vulnerable populations. scale, which we had used in our pilot study. In the
These observations are encouraging for several present study, both groups showed a decrease in
reasons. First, the Internet can only become an loneliness, and the decrease was more pronounced
effective tool for health promotion, health care in the intervention group. However, the change in
delivery and other social services if the older adults loneliness between intervention and control
who are likely to benefit from such programs are participants was not statistically different. Looking
willing and motivated to access it (Redford & only at the intervention group and comparing users
Whitten, 1997). Second, these results help to dispel to non-users there were trends toward decreased
any lingering assumptions that older adults are not loneliness and depression.
interested or unwilling to learn to use this tech- Contamination of the control group by members
nology. Even though most of our participants had a of the intervention group seems unlikely, since the
high school diploma, even those without a diploma intervention group members were asked not to
were among those who used the Internet regularly. share what they were learning with control group
Although seniors with more education are more members and control group members did not have
likely to own a computer (Adler, 1996), it may be access to the computers. The fact that we did not
that those with more education simply have greater observe statistically significant differences may be
financial capabilities or other means of access to due to ceiling effects on the measures. The scores
computers. Presently, senior centers, libraries, and on the modified CES-D were low at baseline indi-
other public institutions are beginning to bring this cating low levels of depression and little room for
technology to a broader group of seniors. improvement. Similarly, the attitudes toward
These participants found it easier to learn to use computers were quite positive at the start of the
the World Wide Web than e-mail and were more trial and thus could not improve appreciably.
likely at five months to be using the WWW rather Participants may still have been learning the tech-
than e-mail. Using the WWW may have been easier nology. Therefore, a longer follow-up period may
because it required fewer steps and did not require have been necessary to capture the full effect of this
typing. Those with previous computer experience intervention. Although the psychosocial effects of
were more likely to use e-mail. communication via the Internet were of primary
Socio-demographic and health characteristics interest, we recognize that effects experienced in
may help predict who is most likely to use the group training and through communal computer
Internet capability. We detected a gender equipment constitute potential confounding influ-
difference between the use of the World Wide Web ences. Other potential problems include
and e-mail, in that men in this sample were more inadequate targeting of the intervention to those
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
220 H. White et al.
most likely to benefit and perhaps a need for a the older user, this expansion may include more
more intense intervention. frequent contacts with family and friends, new
There was no evidence of adverse effects from opportunities to pursue former interests, as well as
Internet use, although negative psychosocial avenues to meet new friends and to ‘travel’ to places
outcomes have been reported in younger adults no longer accessible due to health limitations.
introduced to the Internet. A study of 169 subjects Computers are now more affordable that ever
including 28% adolescents found that greater use and the potential uses of the Internet are becoming
of the Internet was associated with declines in limitless. For instance, there are on-line libraries
participants’ communication with family members that allow users to read books for free; holiday
in the household, declines in the size of their social shopping and banking can be done on-line through
circles, and increases in their depression and loneli-
secure websites. Further research in this area is
ness (Kraut et al., 1998). Whereas younger people
needed to determine more precisely, which older
may use the Internet to displace more engaging
adults, residing in which environmental contexts
social activity for less engaging activity and strong
are more likely than others to benefit from this
social ties for weak and less meaningful social inter-
rapidly expanding information and communication
action, older adults seem more likely to use the
link. Such knowledge will move research to the
Internet to develop new social activity to replace
next level, of tailoring Internet instruction to older
activities that have become more difficult for them
learners, and providing access that, despite disa-
to perform and to strengthen existing social ties
bility, is user friendly and equipped with services
with family and friends through the Internet.
attractive to older adults.
Although we did not automatically track Internet
usage, we found many older adults who expressed
concern about becoming ‘addicted’ to this tech-
Acknowledgements
nology and in general they did not spend large
amounts of time on-line.
The authors thank Meredith Drosback and Andrew
Despite the statistical equivalence of the study
Barnes for their assistance with data collection for
arms, the findings should be of interest to investiga-
this study.
tors curious about the psychosocial effects of this
technology on older adults and serve to influence
the design of future research studies. A priori we
References
chose an array of standardized outcome measures
covering a variety of psychosocial domains that
may have been affected by this intervention. ADLER, R.P. (1996). Older adults and computers: report of a
national survey. http://www.seniornet.org/intute/survey2.
However, older adults in this study appeared to
html.
gain from exposure to this technology in several BASS, B.M., CASCIO, W.F. & O’CONNOR, E.J. (1974).
ways not captured in our measures including self- Magnitude estimations of expressions of frequency and
efficacy, mastery, and empowerment. Measures of amount. Journal of Applied Psychology, 59 (3), 313–320.
these concepts should be considered for inclusion CHAPPELL, N.L. & BADGER, M. (1989). Social isolation
and well-being. Journal of Gerontology, 44, S169–S176.
in future studies. Considering the expense of
DANOWSKI J.A. & SACKS, W. (1980). Computer commu-
providing this intervention at multiple sites, we
nication and the elderly. Experimental Aging Research, 6
believed that a randomized controlled design was (2), 125–135.
important in order to compare this new technology DUGAN, E. & KIVETT, V.R. (1994). The importance of
to other usual activities in which older adults emotional and social isolation to loneliness among very
participate. Targeting the intervention to a specific old rural adults. The Gerontologist, 34 (3), 340–346.
group of older adults who are more likely to benefit
EIZENMAN, D.R., NESSELROADE, J.R., FEATHERMAN, D.L.
& ROWE, J.W. (1997). Intra-individual variability in
may be important. Strengthening the intervention
perceived control in an elderly sample: the MacArthur
may be feasible by using computer interfaces that successful aging studies. Psychology and Aging, 12 (3),
are simpler to learn, adding more individualized 489–502.
training, and providing individualized resources HUTCHISON, D., EASTMAN, C. & TIRRITO, T. (1997).
rather than relying on shared resources. Designing user interfaces for older adults. Educational
Gerontology, 23, 497–513.
Subsequent studies should include an automatic
JAY, G.M. & WILLIS, S.L. (1992). Influence of direct
computer measure of Internet time to more
computer experience on older adult’s attitudes toward
accurately track individual participants’ use.
computers. Journal of Gerontology, 47 (4), P250–P257.
In summary, the Internet is an exciting new tech- KAHN, R.L. & ANTONUCCI, T.C. (1980). Convoys over
nology with much potential for enriching the lives of the life course: attachment, roles, and social support.
many older adults. As a source of information, social Life-Span Development and Behavior, 3, 253–286.
activity, and interpersonal communication, the
KAPLAN, G., ROBERTS, R.E., CAMACHO, T.C. & COYNE,
J.C. (1987). Psychosocial predictors of depression:
Internet may expand the constrained boundaries of
prospective evidence from the Human Population
congregate housing, retirement communities, and
Laboratory Studies. American Journal of Epidemiology,
even skilled care nursing facilities. Depending on 125 (2), 206–220.
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
Younger people in dementia care 221
KAPLAN, G.A. & STRAWBRIDGE, W.J. (1994). Behavioral REDFORD, L.J. & WHITTEN P. (1997). Ensuring access to
and social factors in healthy aging. In R.P. ABELES, H. care in rural areas: the role of communications technology.
GIFT & M. ORY (Eds.), Aging and Quality of Life Generations, 21 (3), 19–23.
(pp. 57–78). New York: Springer. RIDDICK, C.C., SPECTOR, S.G. & DROGIN, E.B. (1986).
KOHOUT, F.J., BERKMAN, L.F., EVANS, D.A. & CORONI- The effects of videogame play on the emotional states
HUNTLEY, J. (1993). Two shorter forms of the CES-D and affiliative behavior of nursing home residents.
Depression Symptoms Index. Journal of Aging and Activities, Adaptation & Aging, 8, 95–107.
Health, 5 (2), 179–193. RUSSELL, D., PEPLAU, L.A. & CUTRONE, C.E. (1980).
KRAUT, R., PATTERSON, M., LUNDMARK, V., KIESLER, S., The revised UCLA Loneliness scale: concurrent and
MUKOPADHYAY, T. & SCHERLIS, W. (1998). Internet discriminant validity evidence. Journal of Personality and
paradox: a social technology that reduces social involve- Social Psychology, 39, 472–480.
ment and psychological well-being. American Psychologist, RUSSELL, D. & DANIEL, W. (1996). UCLA Loneliness
53 (9), 1017–1031. scale (Version 3): reliability, validity and factor structure.
KUBECK, J.E., MILLER-ALBRECHT, S.A. & MURPHY, M.D. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 20–40.
(1999). Finding information on the World Wide Web: RYAN E.B., SZECHTMAN, B. & BODKIN, J. (1992). Atti-
exploring older adults’ exploration. Educational Geron- tudes toward younger and older adults learning to use
tology, 25, 167–183. computers. Journals of Gerontology, 47 (2), P96–P101.
MCCONATHA, J.T., MCCONATHA, D., DEANER, S.L. & SCHUEREN, B. (1986). Video games: an exploration of
DERMIGNY, R. (1995). A computer-based intervention their potential as recreational activity programs in
for the education and therapy of institutionalized older nursing homes. Activities, Adaptation & Aging, 8, 49–57.
adults. Educational Gerontology, 21, 129–138. THOMPSON, M.G. & HELLER, K. (1990). Facets of
MCCONATHA, J.T., MCCONATHA, D. & DERMIGNY, R. support related to well-being: quantitative social isola-
(1994). The use of interactive computer services to tion and perceived family support in a sample of elderly
enhance the quality of life for long-term care residents. women. Psychology and Aging, 5, 535–544.
The Gerontologist, 34, 553–556. WEISMAN, S. (1983). Computer games for the frail elderly.
MULLINS, L.C., SHEPPARD, H.L. & ANDERSSON, L. The Gerontologist, 23, 361–363.
(1991). Loneliness and social isolation in Sweden: WHITE, H., MCCONNELL, E., CLIPP, E., BYNUM, L.,
differences in age, sex, labor force status, self-rated TEAGUE, C., NAVAS, L., CRAVEN, S. & HALBRECHT, H.
health, and income adequacy. Journal of Applied (1999). Surfing the net in later life: a review of the liter-
Gerontology, 10, 455–468. ature and pilot study of computer use and quality of life.
POST, J.A. (1996). Internet resources on aging: Seniors on Journal of Applied Gerontology, 18, 358–378.
the Net. The Gerontologist, 36, 565–569. ZEMKE, R. (1986). Taking a byte of the apple: computer
activities in a senior day care center. Physical &
Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 4, 42–48.
4102
rebmevoN
71
51:01
ta
]ytisrevinU
retsaMcM[
yb
dedaolnwoD
