Document downloaded from http://http://www.revespcardiol.org, day 24/04/2013. This copy is for personal use. Any transmission of this document by any media or format is strictly prohibited.
EdItoRIAl
Sedentary Behaviour and Biomarkers of Cardiometabolic
Health Risk in Adolescents: An Emerging Scientific
and Public Health Issue
Genevieve N. Healya,b and Neville Owena,b
aCancer Prevention Research Centre, School of Population Health, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia
bBaker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia
A highlight of this issue of Revista Española de behaviours, such as television (TV) viewing time,
Cardiología is the report of original research by sitting at school, and computer use have metabolic
Martínez-Gómez et al,1 in which they examine the equivalent (MET) values in the range of 1-1.5.2 In
associations of objectively assessed sedentary time contrast, moderate-to-brisk-paced walking involves
(too much sitting, as distinct from too little exercise) an energy expenditure of some 3-5 METs; running
and body fatness with cardiovascular risk factors in and vigorous sports can involve energy expenditures
a subsample of 201 adolescent participants of the of 8 METs or more.2
Madrid AFINOS study. The key scientific features Research on physical activity and health has in
of their investigation are the objective measurement the main concentrated on quantifying the amount of
of ambulatory movement (and non-movement) time spent in activities involving these higher levels
using accelerometers, from which they derive the of energy expenditure (>3 METs), labeling those
amount of time spent sedentary. In their study, they with no participation as “sedentary.”3 However,
conducted careful anthropometric measurements this definition ignored the substantial contribution
to determine central and overall adiposity, and that light-intensity (1.6-2.9 METs) activities make
measured a range of biomarkers of cardiovascular to overall daily energy expenditure,4 as well as the
risk. They report significant associations of time potential health benefits of participating in these
spent sedentary and body fatness with biomarkers light intensity activities, rather than being sedentary
of cardiovascular risk in this group of young people (which from our perspective is prolonged sitting
aged 13 to 16 years. time, as distinct from not engaging in physical
activity).5,6 Furthermore, although individuals can
be both sedentary and inactive, there is also the
What is Sedentary Behaviour, as distinct
potential for high sedentary time and high exercise
From the lack of Physical Activity?
time to co-exist, for example among athletes in
Sedentary behaviours are those pursuits which training who must spend significant amounts of
generate very low energy expenditures.2 They time in rest and recovery from intense physical
include behaviours that involve sitting or reclining efforts. Physiologically, distinct effects are observed
(but not standing), and occur across the domains between prolonged sedentary time and too little
of work (including paid and unpaid), travel, and exercise.7 These findings have been supported by
leisure-time. Time spent in these behaviours is population-based epidemiological research, which
regarded as sedentary time. Common sedentary has generally reported the associations of sedentary
time with health outcomes to be independent
See article on pageS 277-85 of physical activity (exercise) levels. Indeed,
detrimental associations of TV viewing time with
cardiometabolic biomarkers have been observed
even in those that meet the public health guidelines
Funding source: G. N. Healy is supported by a NHMRC (#569861) / for physical activity (and would thus be considered
National Heart Foundation of Australia (PH 08B 3905) Postdoctoral
Fellowship. N. Owen is supported by a Queensland Health Core Research “active”).8
Infrastructure grant and by NHMRC Program Grant funding (#301200). Increasingly, sedentary behaviours are ubiquitous
Correspondence: Dr. G. N. Healy, and environmentally-driven.9 The economic,
Cancer Prevention Research Centre, School of Population Health, social, and physical environments in which modern
The University of Queensland,
humans now move very little and sit a great deal
Herson Rd. Herston, QLD Australia 4006
E-mail: g.healy@uq.edu.au within the contexts of their daily lives have been
Full English text available from: www.revespcardiol.org evolving rapidly, and particularly so since the
Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63(3):261-4 261
Document downloaded from http://http://www.revespcardiol.org, day 24/04/2013. This copy is for personal use. Any transmission of this document by any media or format is strictly prohibited.
Healy GN et al. Sedentary Behaviour and Biomarkers of Cardiometabolic Health Risk in Adolescent
middle of the last century. These changes in personal (such as diet, exercise, and sedentary time) may
transportation, communication, workplace and interact.
domestic entertainment technologies have been
associated with significantly-reduced demands for
Building the Evidence Base: Extending
human energy expenditure, because they all require
Beyond the Cross-Sectional Study
prolonged sitting. Such environmental and social
changes have been identified as the cause of the low Sedentary behavior research is in its early stages,
levels of physical activity that characterise people’s and is probably 20 years behind physical activity
usual ways of life in urban, suburban, and rural research in terms of valid and reliable measurement,
environments. and, understanding the behavioural determinants
and the efficacy and effectiveness of interventions.
Thus, it is important to build a solid base for this new
Adolescents as a Key target Group
area of research through developing a more-extensive
In the 2003-2004 US National Health and body of epidemiological findings on how sedentary
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), older behavior findings may be linked to a range of health
adolescents (16-19 years) were the second most outcomes, within different population groups for
sedentary group on average, after older adults (≥60 whom genetic, cultural, social, and environmental
years).10 As young people begin to approach their exposures will be different in scientifically-important
adult physical stature and move into adult-like daily ways.
occupations (including long school hours) and social However, it is also imperative that this new
roles, they become increasingly susceptible to these field of research moves quickly to go beyond the
pervasive influences to spend their time in sedentary inherent logical limitations of cross-sectional
behaviours: or, too much sitting. studies: to prospective study designs to examine the
The study by Martínez-Gómez et al focuses on long-term effects of sedentary behavior on health;
this important socio-demographic group.1 Their to experimental studies to further understand the
findings raise significant concerns about the early physiological mechanisms that may underpin the
development of behaviour patterns and body habitus findings; and, to intervention studies examining
attributes that may significantly increase the risk of the feasibility of changing sedentary behaviors, and
major chronic diseases (particularly type 2 diabetes, the associated health outcomes of any change.
cardiovascular disease, and breast and colon cancer). Two recent, longitudinal studies have highlighted
While these diseases may not manifest themselves the potential importance of sedentary behaviours
until later in adult life, it seems that not only the on health. In a follow-up of Australian Diabetes,
behavioural basis, but also the biological precursors Obesity and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab) participants
for these chronic diseases may be established during over 6.5 years, high levels of television viewing time
adolescence. were significantly associated with increased all-cause
As Martínez-Gómez and colleagues highlight,1 and cardiovascular disease mortality.11 The adverse
the majority of studies that have examined the consequences of prolonged sitting time have been
relationship of sedentary time with cardiometabolic reinforced by follow-up findings on participants in
health in children and adolescents have been the Canada Fitness Surveys that have been carried
conducted under the framework of the European out since 1980s.12 Those who initially reported that
Youth Heart Study (EYHS): a cross-sectional they spent the majority of their day sitting had
population study investigating the personal, significantly poorer long-term mortality outcomes;
environmental and lifestyle factors that may importantly, the sitting time-mortality relationships
influence cardiovascular disease risk factors in were apparent even among those who were physically
children aged 9 and 15 years. The findings from active, and were stronger among those who were
the current study build on those from the EYHS, overweight or obese.12
and extend them to examining significant health As Martínez-Gómez et al argue, it seems likely
risks among adolescents 13 to 16 years, as well as that there is a unique physiology of sedentary time,
additional biomarkers, such as apolipoprotein. It is within which biological processes that are distinct
important now to broaden these findings beyond the from traditionally-understood exercise physiology
highly-informative cross-sectional findings that are may be operating.1 The groundbreaking laboratory
now reported, by following-up and reassessing these studies of Hamilton et al, provide important insights
young people as they transition through the various into the possible mechanisms that may underlie the
stages of adolescence and beyond. Additionally, it is associations observed.7 In their series of studies,
important to further examine how the relationships lipoprotein lipase (LPL) regulation was identified
may vary by gender, by age, and by race/ethnicity, as a key pathway through which sedentary time
and to examine how the relevant health behaviours (involving prolonged postural unloading of large
262 Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63(3):261-4
Document downloaded from http://http://www.revespcardiol.org, day 24/04/2013. This copy is for personal use. Any transmission of this document by any media or format is strictly prohibited.
Healy GN et al. Sedentary Behaviour and Biomarkers of Cardiometabolic Health Risk in Adolescent
skeletal muscles) may impact on cardiometabolic in adolescents would potentially be an important
health. These studies also found that the cellular contribution with significant implications for public
processes initiated from sedentary time were unique health, educational and urban-transport policies.
and qualitatively different from exercise-related Based on the findings of our studies with Australian
biological responses.7 Mechanistic studies such as adults, we would predict that among adolescents with
these, identifying potential underlying mechanisms, fewer breaks in their sedentary time, significantly
are a crucial element to the sedentary behavior and more-deleterious patterns of cardiovascular risk
health research field. would be observed.
Intervention studies specifically targeting
reductions in sedentary time are primarily limited
Future directions: the Need for Accurate
to children, and often target specific sedentary
and Reliable Measurement
behaviours, such as television viewing time and
computer and electronic game use (for example, Accurate and reliable measurement of time
the “switch-play” intervention by Salmon et al13). spent in sedentary behaviours is another key area
Examining what changes are feasible, what are the for further development. Although accelerometers
correlates of such changes, and the sustainability of provide information about the time, duration, and
these changes, are important next steps in sedentary intensity of ambulatory movements (from which
behaviour research with adolescents, as well as with estimates of sedentary time can be derived) they do
children and adults. not provide detail on postural changes. Thus, sitting
or lying is not differentiated from standing still. The
introduction of free-living research inclinometers
the Importance of Breaking-up Sedentary
(such as the ActivPAL) enables closer examination of
time
specific time spent in sitting and lying behaviours.15
In addition to examining the aggregate or An important next step in sedentary behavior
average sedentary time (either across the day, or in measurement is the integration of multiple
specific domains such as the school or travel, or for information sources, such as accelerometers,
particular behaviours such as television viewing time, inclinometers, GPS technology, and behavior logs:
computer use or study), there is also the potential preferably in a format that has a low participant
to further extend the scientific focus, by examining and analytic burden. Furthermore, the development
how the sedentary time is accrued. In a study of 169 of valid and reliable questionnaires that measure
Australian adults, we demonstrated that breaks in across multiple domains is necessary for population
sedentary time (as distinct from the total volume surveillance of this ubiquitous behavior.
of time spent being sedentary) were shown to have
beneficial associations with metabolic biomarkers.14
Conclusion
Sedentary time may be considered to be
interrupted or broken if accelerometer counts rose We congratulate Martínez-Gómez et al on
up to or above 100 counts per minute. Breaks their well-conducted and important study.1 While
from sedentary time can involve activities such as there have been several studies that have set out
standing from a sitting position, or walking a step. to identify the health consequences of sedentary
A higher number of breaks in sedentary time were behaviour in adolescents, few have reported blood-
beneficially associated with waist circumference, derived biomarker outcomes. The combination
body mass index, triglycerides, and 2-hour plasma of objectively-assessed sedentary time as the main
glucose; these relationships were independent of exposure variable with an extensive set of biomarker
total sedentary time, moderate-to-vigorous intensity outcomes provides findings that are of great scientific
activity time, and the average intensity of physical value.
activity.14 Interestingly, patterns of sedentary These findings ought now to be replicated and
time accumulation (but not total sedentary time) extended, and longitudinal and intervention trial
were shown to differ among 4 groups of adults study designs need to be applied. As the science
with various activity patterns (healthy group with develops, there will be considerably greater potential
active occupation; healthy group with sedentary for informing the public-health and other policy
occupation; group with chronic back pain; group changes that will reduce sedentary time (for example
with chronic fatigue syndrome).15 mandatory breaks from sitting during school
These two findings suggest some interesting hours; stronger public health recommendations on
directions for further studies with adolescents. avoiding prolonged sitting; traffic control in urban
Examining, for example (as we have done with environments to encourage walking and cycling).
adults), the associations of breaks in sedentary In the current human environment of multiple and
time with biomarkers of cardiometabolic health ubiquitous opportunities to sit, there is the crucial
Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63(3):261-4 263
Document downloaded from http://http://www.revespcardiol.org, day 24/04/2013. This copy is for personal use. Any transmission of this document by any media or format is strictly prohibited.
Healy GN et al. Sedentary Behaviour and Biomarkers of Cardiometabolic Health Risk in Adolescent
need to develop a broader range of opportunities type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Diabetes.
2007;56:2655-67.
for children, adolescents and adults to be more
8. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ,
physically active, and to have practical and realistic
Owen N. Television time and continuous metabolic risk
ways to spend less time sitting within the normal in physically active adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:
contexts of their daily lives.16 639-45.
9. Owen N, Leslie E, Salmon J, Fotheringham MJ. Environmental
determinants of physical activity and sedentary behavior. Exerc
Sport Sci Rev. 2000;28:153-8.
REFERENCES 10. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech
BM, Pate RR, et al. Amount of Time Spent in Sedentary
1. Martínez-Gómez D, Eisenmann JC, Gómez-Martínez S, Veses Behaviors in the United States, 2003-2004. Am J Epidemiol.
A, Marcos A, Veiga OL. Sedentarismo, adiposidad y factores 2008;167:875-81.
de riesgo cardiovascular en adolescentes. Estudio AFINOS. 11. Dunstan DW, Barr ELM, Healy GN, Salmon J, Shaw JE,
Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63:277-85. Balkau B, et al. Television viewing time and mortality: The
2. Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Whitt MC, Irwin ML, Swartz AusDiab study. Circulation. Jan 11, 2010 [Epub ahead of
AM, Strath SJ, et al. Compendium of physical activities: an print]. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.894824
update of activity codes and MET intensities. Med Sci Sports 12. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, Bouchard C. Sitting
Exerc. 2000;32 Suppl :S498-504. time and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and
3. Pate RR, O’Neill JR, Lobelo F. The evolving definition of cancer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41:998-1005.
“sedentary”. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2008;36:173-8. 13. Salmon J, Ball K, Crawford D, Booth M, Telford A, Hume
4. Donahoo WT, Levine JA, Melanson EL. Variability in energy C, et al. Reducing sedentary behaviour and increasing physical
expenditure and its components. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab activity among 10-year-old children: overview and process
Care. 2004;7:599-605. evaluation of the ‘Switch-Play’ intervention. Health Promot
5. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Cerin E, Shaw JE, Zimmet Int. 2005;20:7-17.
PZ, et al. Objectively measured light-intensity physical activity 14. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Cerin E, Shaw JE, Zimmet
is independently associated with 2-h plasma glucose. Diabetes PZ, et al. Breaks in Sedentary Time: Beneficial Associations
Care. 2007;30:1384-9. with Metabolic Risk. Diabetes Care. 2008;31:661-6.
6. Healy GN, Wijndaele K, Dunstan DW, Shaw JE, Salmon 15. Chastin SF, Granat MH. Methods for objective measure,
J, Zimmet PZ, et al. Objectively measured sedentary time, quantification and analysis of sedentary behaviour and
physical activity, and metabolic risk: the Australian Diabetes, inactivity. Gait Posture. Oct 23, 2009 [Epub ahead of print].
Obesity and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Diabetes Care. 2008;31: 16. Hamilton MT, Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Zderic TW, Owen N.
369-71. Too little exercise and too much sitting: inactivity physiology
7. Hamilton MT, Hamilton DG, Zderic TW. The role of low and the need for new recommendations on sedentary behaviour.
energy expenditure and sitting on obesity, metabolic syndrome, Curr Cardiov Risk Rep. 2008;2:292-8.
264 Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63(3):261-4
