he first outbreak of coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19)
started during December 2019 in Wuhan, China. Shortly

# T

thereafter, the World Health Organization classified COVID-19
as a pandemic and recommended strict restrictions regarding
most aspects of daily activities including work, social life, leisure time, and healthcare [1].

As soon as the pandemic was identified, hospitals and ambulatory care facilities planned prevention and control strategies
to reduce transmission of COVID-19 to patients and healthcare
workers [1]. Although their goal was to reduce the impact on
emergency departments and hospital bed capacity in addition to
maximizing the efficiency of healthcare personnel with regard
to COVID-19 cases, it also created a challenge for hospitals to
establish non-COVID 19 medical priorities. Evidence is emerging on the dramatic decline of the number of patients with serious medical conditions, such as strokes and myocardial infarction, arriving at hospitals since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic [2-4]. This deferral has already resulted in increased
morbidity and mortality among cardiac, neurologic, and oncologic patients, and may also jeopardize the safety of patients in
the future [5,6].

Limited data are available about how COVID-19 affects the
behavior, prenatal care, and outcomes of pregnant women without the disease. Most obstetrics and gynecology organizations
have issued guidance regarding prenatal care for low- and highrisk women during the COVID-19 outbreak. Some of the suggestions include reducing the number of in-person visits by using telehealth, altering the timing of visits, grouping screening
tests, restricting accompanied visitors, and scheduling maternal
and fetal assessment appointments when relevant [7-10].

Following the restrictions imposed by the Ministry of Health,
we noticed a drop in the number of prenatal visits and admissions to our obstetrics and gynecology department. We therefore
decided to characterize this change and to assess whether this
drop, similar to other disciplines, had any adverse effect on the
maternal and fetal outcomes.


-----

This cross-sectional study was conducted at a large tertiary referral center. The hospital opened a dedicated inpatient ward for
receiving patients, including pregnant women, who had been
diagnosed with the COVID-19. However, no pregnant women
who were diagnosed with COVID-19 were included in our study.
Preparations included the formation of a distinct staff for this
department as well as the establishment of a set of procedures
to ensure safe and comprehensive isolation, in accordance with
the strict requirements defined by the Ministry of Health [11].
Our obstetrics and gynecology department provides care to approximately 15,000 patients annually, and includes nearly 5500
births. The study was approved by the hospital’s research ethics
board (REB-0172-20).

Demographic and clinical data were retrieved from the
combined maternal and fetal medical records, and included
antenatal, intrapartum, and postpartum characteristics. All
registered visits to our obstetrics and gynecology department
during two distinct time periods were eligible for the study:
March–April 2019 was defined as period I and March–April
2020 (throughout the peak COVID-19 outbreak) was defined
as period II.

During the outbreak, all personnel working in the triage
areas were protected from the virus by wearing a face mask,
screen shield, and disposable medical gown. In the triage, every
woman was asked about respiratory symptoms, fever, and any
close contact with COVID-19 cases. Women were told to continue ongoing home care or were sent to a regular labor ward or
to a designated labor ward if COVID-19 was suspected.

The primary objective of this study was to describe changes
in outpatient clinic visits and to compare the rates of cesarean
and instrumental deliveries between study period I (March–
April 2019) and period II (March–April 2020). The secondary
goal was to compare other maternal and neonatal outcomes
during the peak COVID-19 outbreak to the same period of the
preceding year. To reduce personal contact and to protect as
many medical staff members as possible, the only difference in
care during the COVID-19 outbreak was that we switched to
12-hours shifts followed by 24-hours of rest. Perinatal outcomes
were only analyzed in women who ultimately gave birth at our
institution. Maternal outcome data included demographic data,
medical data, and maternal and fetal outcome. Estimated blood
loss of > 500 ml during a vaginal delivery and more than 1000 ml
during a cesarean delivery were used to define postpartum hemorrhage. Clinical criteria for chorioamnionitis were maternal
fever with two or more of the following symptoms: maternal
tachycardia, fetal tachycardia, leukocytosis, uterine tenderness,
and malodorous amniotic fluid. Neonatal outcomes included
shoulder dystocia, Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes, umbilical
artery cord pH, admission to the neonatal intensive care unit,
and intrauterine fetal death.


No power calculations were computed for this cross-sectional
study. Descriptive statistics were reported as mean ± standard
deviation for continuous variables and as numbers (percentages) for categorical variables. Univariate analyses were performed using Chi-square and -test or Mann–Whitney U test to
compare the groups on maternal and neonatal outcomes. The
threshold of statistical significance was
analyses were performed using IBM Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences statistics software, version 25 (SPSS, IBM
Corp, Armonk, NY, USA).

During the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of visits and admissions to our obstetrics and gynecology
department declined significantly [Figure 1]. Visits to obstetric
triage, gynecologic triage, high-risk clinic, and ultrasound unit,
as well as the total number of deliveries decreased by 36.4%,
34.7%, 32.8%,18.1%, and 17.8%, respectively. The total number of admissions to high-risk unit also declined by 22.3%.
Twenty pregnant women were tested for the virus due to high
suspicion and all were ultimately proved negative.


-----

Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the
study groups are presented in Table 1. Pregnant women were
more likely to be nulliparous (33.3% vs. 27.6%, = 0.02), to
present with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (7.5% vs. 4%,

= 0.005) or gestational diabetes (13% vs. 10%, = 0.03), and
to use epidural analgesia (83.1% vs. 77.1%, = 0.006) during
period II compared with period I.

Table 2 shows comparisons of maternal and neonatal outcome variables between the two groups. The rate of cesarean
deliveries, including of emergency cesarean deliveries, was not
different between the two periods: 22.1% (164/742) in period I
vs. 24.1% (147/610) in period II, = 0.39. Rates of operative
vaginal deliveries were overall similar in both groups; however,
there were more operative vaginal deliveries among nulliparous
women during period II than during period I (16.7% vs. 6.8%,

= 0.01). A sub-analysis of the common indications for operative vaginal deliveries (non-reassuring fetal heart rate, prolonged second stage, maternal exhaustion) showed that prolonged second stage was significantly more common in period
II than in period I: 14.3% (2/14) in period I vs. 52.9% (18/34)
in period II, = 0.01. All other maternal and neonatal outcomes
were similar between the two periods.

During the first months of the outbreak of the coronavirus disease, we noticed a dramatic decrease in the number of visits
and admissions into our obstetrics and gynecology department.


Women who attended their visits were more likely to be nulliparous, high-risk patients, who presented with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy or gestational diabetes and used more epidural
analgesia during labor. We also observed a higher rate of operative vaginal deliveries among nulliparous women. No differences were demonstrated in any of the other perinatal outcomes.

As the COVID-19 pandemic continued, many pregnant
women were uncertain about the impact of the outbreak on their
pregnancy outcome. Pregnancy by itself constitutes a state of
relative immunosuppression [12,13], and recent data suggest
that pregnant women have increased susceptibility to contract
the disease as well as to increased morbidity [8].

We did not expect the number of childbirths, which reflect
the number of pregnancies that began several months earlier,
to drop during the pandemic period. In our opinion, by being a
referral center for patients with COVID-19, women preferred to
reduce the risk of acquiring the virus by choosing to give birth in
a non-COVID-19 medical center. We speculate that women who
gave birth elsewhere were more likely to be low-risk patients
and multiparous, which left us with a relative higher number of
high-risk and nulliparous women. Another possible explanation
for the increased number of women with hypertensive disorders
of pregnancy and gestational diabetes may be the stress associated with the COVID-19 lockdown.

The stress that pregnant women experienced during the
COVID-19 lockdown could instigate a cascade of endocrinological and immunological alterations that affect the delicate
equilibrium needed to maintain a normal pregnancy and give


-----

rise to the development of coexisting pregnancy complications.
It was postulated that the high maternal cortisol levels could
be correlated to reduced T-lymphocyte sensitivity to glucocorticoids. This acquired form of steroid resistance could be associated with a higher release of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(TNF- and IL-6) and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis dysregulation, leading to endothelial dysfunction and consequent
preeclampsia development [14]. Similarly, excessive activity of
circulating cortisol is a possible contributor to increased insulin
resistance, a typical feature in the pathogenesis of gestational
diabetes [15,16].

Nulliparity is a known risk factor for operative vaginal delivery [17]. Yet, we noticed an increase in the rate of vacuum assisted births during the initial months of the outbreak
among nulliparous women. The increase in the rate of vacuum
assisted births during the COVID-19 pandemic may be the
consequence of a combination of well-known risk factor for
operative deliveries, high-risk nulliparous women, and prolonged second stage [18,19]. In addition, although the effect
of neuraxial analgesia on the second stage of labor is inconsistent [20,21], we assume that the higher rate of epidural analgesia use during period II also contributed to the higher rate
of operative deliveries during period II. Fortunately, we did
not observe a higher rate of maternal or fetal complications
secondary to the procedure.


This cross-sectional study has limitations. For example, we postulated that, at least in part, COVID-19 was the main reason
for the decline in number of hospital visits and births, but there
might be other explanations for the decline that we were not
able to explore. As the aim of our study was to describe the perinatal care and outcomes during the two periods of time, some
other variables, such as the indications for cesarean delivery
and distinction between the types of gestational diabetes and the
types of hypertensive disorders, were not fully evaluated in the
current study. Evaluating these additional parameters would add
little to this aim. In addition, the small number of vacuum assisted deliveries prevented us from performing multivariate analysis that could have shed some more light regarding the causes
for our observations. Also, no data are available regarding the
women who did not deliver at our institution or their pregnancy
outcome. The major strengths of this study include the relatively
large number of deliveries and our ability to describe maternal
and neonatal outcomes in two consecutive months during the
COVID-19 outbreak compared to the same period in the preceding year.

During the COVID-19 outbreak a decline in all obstetrics and
gynecology visits in general, and specifically in births, was noted. This decline resulted in higher risk women attending labor


-----

and delivery wards. Hospitals and caregivers should be aware
that higher risk women may attend labor and delivery wards
during the time of the pandemic.


-----

