Socioeconomic Status and Stroke Incidence in the 
US Elderly 
The Role of Risk Factors in the EPESE Study 
Mauricio Avendano, MSc; Ichiro Kawachi, MD, PhD; Frank Van Lenthe, PhD; 
Hendriek C. Boshuizen, PhD; Johan P. Mackenbach, PhD; G.A.M. Van den Bos, PhD; 
Martha E. Fay, MPH; Lisa F. Berkman, PhD 


Methods—Data comprised a sample of 2812 men and women aged 65 years and over from the New Haven cohort of the 
Established Populations for the Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly. Individuals provided baseline information on 
demographics, functioning, cardiovascular and psychosocial risk factors in 1982 and were followed for 12 years. 
Proportional hazard models were used to model survival from initial interview to first fatal or nonfatal stroke. 
Results—Two hundred and seventy subjects developed incident stroke. At ages 65 to 74, lower socioeconomic status was 
(cid:1)2.07, 95% CI, 1.04 to 4.13) and income 
associated with higher stroke incidence for both education (HRlowest/highest 
(cid:1)2.08, 95% CI, 1.01 to 4.27). Adjustment for race, diabetes, depression, social networks and functioning 
(HRlowest/highest 
attenuated hazard ratios to a nonsignificant level, whereas other risk factors did not change associations significantly. 
(cid:1)0.42, 95% CI, 
Beyond age 75, however, stroke rates were higher among those with the highest education (HRlowest/highest 
(cid:1)0.43, 95% CI, 0.22 to 0.86), which remained largely unchanged after adjustment 
0.22 to 0.79) and income (HRlowest/highest 
for risk factors. 
Conclusions—We observed substantial socioeconomic disparities in stroke at ages 65 to 74, whereas a crossover of 
the association occurred beyond age 75. Policies to improve social and economic resources at early old age, and 
interventions to improve diabetes management, depression, social networks and functioning in the disadvantaged elderly 
can contribute to reduce stroke disparities. (Stroke. 2006;37:1368-1373.) 


health problem. Eliminating these disparities is one of 
the major goals of the Healthy people 2010 public agenda, 
which calls for further research to understand the causes of 
these disparities.1 Lower socioeconomic status is associated 
with higher stroke incidence in European countries.2– 6 How- 
ever, little research has examined this association in the US 
and how it varies across age-groups. It is also not well 
established which risk factors mediate this association. Pre- 
vious research in the UK suggests that conventional risk 
factors such as hypertension and smoking explain about half 
of these disparities.3 However, these studies were focused on 
those aged (cid:2)65.3 Around 89% of strokes occur after age 65,7 
whereby factors such as depression and functioning are also 
major risk factors for stroke.8,9 
We assessed the effect of socioeconomic status on stroke 
incidence in the US elderly, and the role of risk factors in 
explaining stroke disparities. Furthermore, we examined the 
role of race. We used data from a representative sample of the 
elderly in New Haven followed for 12 years. As relative 
disparities decrease or disappear at old age,10,11 we assessed 
whether this age-pattern applies to stroke. To our knowledge, 
this is the first study to assess the contribution of biomedical, 
psychosocial and functioning risk factors to stroke disparities 
in the elderly, and how this pattern varies for the old and 
oldest old. 

Study Population 
Data came from the New Haven (Connecticut) sample of the EPESE 
(Established Populations for the Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly) 
Received October 21, 2005; final revision received January 25, 2006; accepted March 2, 2006. 
From the Department of Public Health (M.A., F.V.L., J.P.M.), Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; the Department of Society (I.K., 
M.E.F., L.F.B.), Human Development, and Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Mass, USA; the National Institute of Public Health and the 
Environment (M.A., H.B.), Bilthoven, The Netherlands; and the Department of Social Medicine (G.A.M.V.d.B.), Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 













study, a prospective investigation aimed at identifying predictors of 
mortality and disability in the elderly. Details of this study have been 
described elsewhere.12 The sample was stratified by type of resi- 
dence: (1) public elderly housing, (2) private elderly housing and (3) 
general community housing. Because of the preponderance of 
women, men were oversampled in community and private housing.12 
The response rate was 82%, yielding a baseline sample of 2812 
participants. Respondents with a history of stroke at baseline 
(n(cid:1)208) or missing basic demographics were excluded. Education 
data were missing for 73 individuals (2.8%) and income data for 347 
participants (13.4%). The final sample comprised 2524 individuals 
for education and 2250 individuals for income. 
Data Collection and Measurements 
Interviews were conducted in 1982 by trained interviewers and in- 
cluded information on: 
Socioeconomic Status and Demographics 
Education and income were used as indicators of socioeconomic 
status. Education was measured as years of schooling completed (0 
to 7, 8 to 9, 10 to 12, or(cid:1)13), and income as household income in 
the year before baseline (0 to 4999, 5000 to 9999, 10 000 to 14 999, 
or (cid:1)15 000 US dollars). Race was classified into white non- 
Hispanic, black non-Hispanic and other. Age was based on self- 
report and used as a continuous variable. 
Conventional Risk Factors 
(1) Blood pressure was measured according to the Hypertension 
Detection and Follow-up Program protocol.13 A hypertension diag- 
nosis was based on blood pressure measurements or use of hyper- 
tension medication. Categories comprised normotensive, controlled, 
isolated systolic, and diastolic (with or without systolic) hyperten- 
sion. (2) Smoking was classified into never smoked, exsmoker, and 
currently smoking daily (cid:2)14, 15 to 24, and (cid:1)25 cigarettes. (3) 
Diabetes mellitus was ascertained through self-report at baseline. (4) 
Body mass index was based on self-reported weight and height 
(weight [kg]/height [m2]). (5) Physical activity was measured by 
self-reported walks, garden work and active sports (scale: often, 
sometimes and never), and defined as number of items with response 
category ‘often’.14 (6) Alcohol consumption was based on self- 
reported use in the preceding month and categorized into: nondrink- 
ers, moderate (0.1 to 20 ounces/month) or heavy ((cid:1)21 ounces/ 
month) drinkers. 
Physical/Cognitive Functioning 
Three complementary measures of physical functioning were used: 
(1) A modified version of the Katz Activities of Daily Living Scale15 
assessed the ability to perform basic activities without assistance 
(none versus (cid:1)1 limitations). (2) The Rosow-Breslau Functional 
Health Scale16 assessed the number of limitations in activities of 
gross mobility. (3) The Nagi Scale measured the number of limita- 
tions in physical performance activities (eg, difficulty in stooping, 
crouching and kneeling).17 
Cognitive function was measured using a 10-item version of the 
SPMSQ (Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire)18 and scored 
by the number of errors ((cid:2)1, 2 to 3, and(cid:1)4). 19 
Psychosocial Risk Factors 
(1) Depressive symptoms were measured using the Center for 
Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale.20 A score of 21 or more 
indicates depressive symptomatology in the elderly.21 (2) The Social 
Networks Index measured social ties with children, relatives, friends 
and a confidant, and social participation.22 (3) Stressful life events 
were the summed score of 8 items on stressful events (eg, death of 
a close relative) during the past year (none, 1, 2, or (cid:1)3).23 
Stroke Outcomes 
An incident event was defined as first nonfatal or fatal stroke. 
Nonfatal strokes were ascertained through yearly interviews from 
1983 through 1990/1991, and in 1994. Education/income informa- 
tion was ascertained at baseline only. Independently, participants 
were asked in subsequent waves whether they had been diagnosed 
with stroke since last interviewed. Only 99 survivors (3.9%) did not 
have complete interviews until 1994, and were censored at last 
interview date. 
Fatal strokes were ascertained through daily review of obituaries, 
hospital admission records and annual interviews with participant or 
next of kin. Records were matched to the National Death Index and 
death certificates obtained. Data on mortality and cause of death 
were successfully obtained for almost all participants ((cid:1)99%). 
Methods of Analysis 
As results did not differ by sex, men and women were combined to 
obtain more precise estimates. Firstly, standardized stroke rates were 
calculated by education and income, using the entire population as 
the standard. Cox proportional hazard models were then used to 
quantify the impact of socioeconomic indicators on stroke. Survival 
was defined as time from baseline to date of first fatal or nonfatal 
stroke, death from other causes, or last interview. Initial models were 
adjusted for age, sex and race. Subsequently, conventional, function- 
ing and psychosocial factors were added. Psychosocial factors and 
functioning measures were correlated. However, correlations were 
generally modest, so that there was no collinearity in the models. 
Final models were adjusted for all factors. HRs (hazard ratios) for the 
reference model (adjusted for age, sex and race) were compared with 
HRs additionally adjusted for risk factors, using the following 
formula: (100(cid:3)[HRreference 
(cid:4)1]). Analyses were 
weighted using SUDAAN (version 9.01). Weights permitted the 
sample characteristics to be inflated to the total New Haven older 
population, thus assuring the validity of generalizations. We applied 
housing unit weights, weights to account for male oversampling, and 
poststratification weights.12 

Results 
During 20 315 person-years, 270 subjects developed incident 
lower 
stroke. Among individuals aged 65 to 74 years, 
socioeconomic status was associated with a higher stroke 
incidence (Table 1). The standardized stroke incidence rates 
in those with low education or income were twice as high 
than in those with high education (HR(cid:1)2.07, 95% CI, 1.04 to 
4.13) or income (HR(cid:1)2.08, 95% CI, 1.01 to 4.27). A reverse 
pattern occurred at ages 75 and over, so that stroke incidence 
rates were higher in the highest education (HR(cid:1)0.42, 95% 
CI, 0.22 to 0.79) and income (HR(cid:1)0.43, 95% CI, 0.22 to 
0.86) groups (Table 1). 
Adjustment for race attenuated hazard ratios between the 
highest and lowest socioeconomic groups by about one third 
(Tables 2 and 3), and confidence intervals became wide and 
overlapped with the null value. HRs remained largely un- 
changed after adjustment for hypertension, smoking and 
alcohol consumption, and adjustment for physical activity 
and BMI slightly decreased HRs for education but not for 
income. HRs for both education and income were attenuated 
after adjustment for diabetes. Accordingly, although most 
risk factors predicted stroke incidence, only diabetes was 
clearly associated with socioeconomic status (supplemental 
Table I, available online at http://stroke.ahajournals.org). 
Adjustment for all conventional risk factors attenuated the 
effect of education by 22% and income by 43%, which was 
almost entirely attributable to diabetes. 
Adjustment for depressive symptoms and social networks 
attenuated HRs considerably for both education and income, 
whereas life events did not change HRs. Altogether, psycho- 






TABLE 1. Stroke Incidence (per 100 000 Person-Years) by Socioeconomic Status Among Men and Women 
Aged >65 



Socioeconomic 
Status 





Income (dollars) 
(cid:1)15 000 








Income (dollars) 
(cid:1)15 000 






























































































social factors reduced HRs by about 50%. This reflected the 
consistent association of depression and social networks with 
education, income and stroke (supplemental Table I). Adjust- 
ment for physical and cognitive functioning reduced HRs by 
about one quarter (Tables 2 and 3). After adjusting for all 
factors, HRs were no longer significant and decreased by 
about 60% for education and almost 90% for income. 
At ages 75 and over, major risk factors such as hyperten- 
sion and BMI did not consistently predict stroke (supplemen- 
tal Table I). Thus, entering risk factors did not change HRs 
for education or income, which remained well below 1 after 
adjustment (Table 4). 
Discussion 
At ages 65 to 74 years, lower education and income were 
associated with higher stroke incidence. Adjustment for race, 
diabetes, depressive symptomatology, social networks, and 
cognitive/physical functioning reduced these associations 
considerably, whereas other conventional risk factors did not 
alter associations. Beyond age 75, higher socioeconomic 
status was associated with higher stroke rates, even after 
adjustment for risk factors. This suggests a crossover of the 
association beyond age 75. 
follow-up. However, nonfatal strokes were ascertained 
through yearly interviews, which may have resulted in 
underestimation of stroke incidence. Nevertheless, we 
found no evidence that underestimation occurred differen- 
tially by socioeconomic status. Furthermore, a data audit in 
the period 1982 to 1988 showed high correspondence 
between cases detected through interview and hospital 
records inspection.24 Thus, any bias caused by this prob- 
lem is likely to be small. 
A majority of the EPESE cohort was retired, with some 
participants living in elderly housing. Thus, although we 
asked participants to report 
income from all household 
sources, income may not fully reflect all resources available 
to participants. Thus, we do not know whether a different 
pattern might be observed for factors such as wealth, which 
reflect assets accumulation through life.25 
Data on stroke subtypes were not available in our study. 
However, previous research indicates that the effect of socio- 
economic status is similar for both ischemic and hemorrhagic 
stroke.5,6 Nevertheless, future studies should assess whether 
the role of risk factors in explaining stroke disparities may 
vary by stroke subtype. 
Study Limitations 
A strength of our study was the long and virtually complete 
follow-up. However, some limitations should be consid- 
ered. Mortality was accurately ascertained throughout 
Comparison With Previous Studies 
Previous research suggests that conventional risk factors such 
as smoking explain about half of stroke disparities before age 
these factors play a less 
65.3 However, we found that 





































































































important role, with only diabetes and less conventional 
factors contributing to stroke disparities. Accordingly, a 
previous study indicated that conventional risk factors do not 
fully explain stroke disparities among elderly women.4 
Previous research indicates that stroke is associated with 
depression9 and low social networks,9 which highlights their 
potential role in explaining stroke disparities. Previous stud- 
ies have also shown that physical functioning limitations 






































































































































































0.50 (0.24–1.08) 
*Basic model(cid:1)age(cid:5)sex; †adjusted for age, sex, race and indicated risk factor group: conventional (hypertension, 
smoking, diabetes, alcohol consumption, BMI and physical activity); psychosocial (depressive symptoms, social 
networks and difficult life events); and functioning (physical and cognitive). 



predict stroke.8 These factors contributed to stroke disparities 
in our study. Alternatively, their contribution may also reflect 
a reverse effect of these factors (eg, physical functioning) on 
income. However, reverse causality cannot explain results 
for educational level, which is largely determined early in 
life.2 
Socioeconomic disparities in stroke at ages 65 to 74 partly 
reflect the higher stroke rates among blacks than whites.26 
Blacks have on average less education and income, and are 
more likely to develop stroke than their white counterparts26 
(supplemental Table I). This is partly explained by a higher 
burden of risk factors among blacks, and may also reflect 
genetic susceptibility.26 However, despite wide confidence 
intervals, an elevated risk remained after adjustment or 
stratification by race. Thus, despite large racial stroke dispar- 
ities, the effect of socioeconomic status on stroke appears to 
be independent from race. 
Prior research reported that stroke disparities diminish but 
remain beyond age 75.2 However, our study comprised a 
longer follow-up and included both first fatal and nonfatal 
strokes. Studies indicate that the effect of socioeconomic 
status on all-cause mortality disappear or even reverses at 
approximately age 75.11 Our findings suggest that this cross- 
over10 might be even stronger for stroke. 
Interpretation of Findings 
Conventional risk factors such as smoking were strong 
predictors of stroke at ages 65 to 74, but did not explain 
stroke disparities. This may be attributable to their weak 
association with socioeconomic status. Accordingly, in ear- 
lier birth cohorts, the prevalence of risk factors did not vary 
as much by socioeconomic status, and only in more recent 
cohorts do disparities in risk factors such as smoking begin to 
emerge.27 Their role in explaining stroke disparities may thus 
be limited at ages 65 to 74, whereas they may play a more 
important role in more recent birth cohorts.3 
On the other hand, socioeconomic disparities in other risk 
factors played a more important role. Diabetes disparities 
may originate from differentials in obesity throughout life.28 
Depression is associated with an increased risk of atheroscle- 
rosis,29 through which it may contribute to stroke disparities. 
Lower social networks are associated with higher functional 
limitations,19 which might lead to less physical activity and 
thus higher stroke rates. However, physical limitations may 
also be a marker for other health problems, which might 
mediate the association of socioeconomic status on stroke. 
Beyond age 75, higher socioeconomic status was associ- 
ated with higher stroke rates. Because of their weak associ- 
ation with stroke and socioeconomic status, adjustment for 
risk factors did not explain this crossover. Failure of educa- 
tion and income to represent the true socioeconomic re- 
sources of the oldest old may explain this pattern. Neverthe- 
less, a similar race crossover has also been previously 
reported, whereby black mortality rates can become lower 
than white rates after approximately age 75.10 Selective 
survival and competing causes of death may explain this 
pattern. Individuals with lower socioeconomic status may die 
earlier from other causes, so that only the healthiest survive 
into old age. Simultaneously, better survival might lead to 
postponement of death toward older ages among higher 
socioeconomic groups.10,11 Thus, higher socioeconomic 
groups might be more likely to live ‘long enough’ to develop 
stroke at very old ages. Nevertheless, previous research 
indicates that selective survival cannot fully account for age 
variations in mortality differentials.11 Further studies should 
to replicate these findings and explore possible 
attempt 
explanations. 
Implications 
Social and economic circumstances of the elderly shape a 
wide array of conditions such as stroke. Men and women 
with a low socioeconomic status face a disproportionate share 






of social and health disadvantage. Thus, policies aimed at 
providing both economic and social resources may improve 
their profile. This can be supplemented with interventions to 
improve diabetes and depression management, and to main- 
tain social networks and functioning in the lower socioeco- 
nomic groups.19,24 As world populations age, the toll of social 
and economic disadvantage is likely to increase, along with 
the societal impact of stroke. Thus, it is incumbent on us to 
develop effective interventions at middle and early old age, 
and thus diminish the higher burden of stroke among disad- 
vantaged populations. 
Acknowledgments 
The Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (Nederlandse 
Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek -NWO) and the 
Trustfonds Foundation from the Erasmus University supported this 
study. Collaboration between the Erasmus MC and the Harvard 
School of Public Health made possible the conduction of this study. 
Authors would like to acknowledge the support of the National 
Institute of Aging (grant #AGO18369) for supporting this work. 
References 
1. Mensah GA. Eliminating disparities in cardiovascular health: six strategic 
imperatives and a framework for action. Circulation. 2005;111:1332–1336. 
2. Avendano M, Kunst AE, Huisman M, van Lenthe F, Bopp M, Borrell C, 
Valkonen T, Regidor E, Costa G, Donkin A, Borgan JK, Deboosere P, 
Gadeyne S, Spadea T, Andersen O, Mackenbach JP. Educational level 
and stroke mortality: a comparison of 10 European populations during the 
1990s. Stroke. 2004;35:432– 437. 
3. Hart CL, Hole DJ, Smith GD. The contribution of risk factors to stroke 
the Renfrew/ 
differentials, by socioeconomic position in adulthood: 
Paisley Study. Am Journal of Public Health. 2000;90:1788 –1791. 
4. van Rossum CT, van de Mheen H, Breteler MM, Grobbee DE, Mackenbach 
JP. Socioeconomic differences in stroke among Dutch elderly women: the 
Rotterdam Study. Stroke. 1999;30:357–362. 
5. Jakovljevic D, Sarti C, Sivenius J, Torppa J, Mahonen M, Immonen- 
Raiha P, Kaarsalo E, Alhainen K, Tuomilehto J, Puska P, Salomaa V. 
Socioeconomic differences in the incidence, mortality and prognosis of 
intracerebral hemorrhage in Finnish Adult Population. The FINMONICA 
Stroke Register. Neuroepidemiology. 2001;20:85–90. 
6. Jakovljevic D, Sarti C, Sivenius J, Torppa J, Mahonen M, Immonen-Raiha P, 
Kaarsalo E, Alhainen K, Kuulasmaa K, Tuomilehto J, Puska P, Salomaa V. 
Socioeconomic status and ischemic stroke: The FINMONICA Stroke 
Register. Stroke. 2001;32:1492–1498. 
7. Center for Disease Control. State-specific mortality from stroke and 
distribution of place of death–United States, 1999. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2002;51:429 – 433. 


9. Colantonio A, Kasi SV, Ostfeld AM. Depressive symptoms and other 
psychosocial factors as predictors of stroke in the elderly. Am J Epi- 
demiol. 1992;136:884 – 894. 




12. Cornoni-Huntley J, Ostfeld AM, Taylor JO, Wallace RB, Blazer D, 
Berkman LF, Evans DA, Kohout FJ, Lemke JH, Scherr PA, Korper SP. 
Established populations for epidemiologic studies of the elderly: study 
design and methodology. Aging (Milano). 1993;5:27–37. 
13. Hypertension detection and follow-up program Cooperative group. Blood 
pressure studies in 14 communities. A two-stage screen for hypertension. 
JAMA. 1977;237:2385–2391. 
14. Bassuk SS, Berkman LF, Amick BC 3rd. Socioeconomic status and 
mortality among the elderly: findings from four US communities. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2002;155:520 –533. 






18. Pfeiffer E. A short portable mental status questionnaire for the assessment 
of organic brain deficit in elderly patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1975;23: 
433– 441. 
19. Colantonio A, Kasl SV, Ostfeld AM, Berkman LF. Psychosocial pre- 
dictors of stroke outcomes in an elderly population. J Gerontol. 1993;48: 
S261–S268. 
20. Radloff L. The CES-D Scale: a self-report depression scale for research 
in the general population. Appl Psychol Measure. 1977;1:1385–1401. 
21. Lyness JM, Noel TK, Cox C, King DA, Conwell Y, Caine ED. Screening 
for depression in elderly primary care patients. A comparison of the 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale and the Geriatric 
Depression Scale. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:449 – 454. 
22. Seeman TE, Berkman LF. Structural characteristics of social networks 
and their relationship with social support in the elderly: who provides 
support. Soc Sci Med. 1988;26:737–749. 
23. Glass TA, Kasl SV, Berkman LF. Stressful life events and depressive 
symptoms among the elderly. Evidence from a prospective community 
study. J Aging Health. 1997;9:70 – 89. 
24. Colantonio A, Kasl SV, Ostfeld AM, Berkman LF. Prestroke physical 
function predicts stroke outcomes in the elderly. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
1996;77:562–566. 


26. White H, Boden-Albala B, Wang C, Elkind MS, Rundek T, Wright CB, 
Sacco RL. Ischemic stroke subtype incidence among whites, blacks, 
and Hispanics: the Northern Manhattan Study. Circulation. 2005;111: 
1327–1331. 
27. Lopez AD, Collishaw NE, Piha T. A descriptive model of the cigarette 
epidemic in developed countries. Tobacco Control. 1994;3:242–247. 
28. Agardh EE, Ahlbom A, Andersson T, Efendic S, Grill V, Hallqvist J, 
Ostenson CG. Explanations of socioeconomic differences in excess risk 
of type 2 diabetes in Swedish men and women. Diabetes Care. 2004;27: 
716 –721. 
29. Ford DE, Mead LA, Chang PP, Cooper-Patrick L, Wang NY, Klag MJ. 
Depression is a risk factor for coronary artery disease in men: the precursors 
study. Arch Intern Med. 1998;158:1422–1426. 



Socioeconomic Status and Stroke Incidence in the US Elderly: The Role of Risk Factors in 
the EPESE Study 
Mauricio Avendano, Ichiro Kawachi, Frank Van Lenthe, Hendriek C. Boshuizen, Johan P. 
Mackenbach, G.A.M. Van den Bos, Martha E. Fay and Lisa F. Berkman 





Copyright © 2006 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the 
World Wide Web at: 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/37/6/1368 



 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. 
Permissions: 
Stroke 
in 
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click 
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this 
process is available in the 


Reprints: 
http://www.lww.com/reprints 

Subscriptions: 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/ 



 
 
 
 
 
 
