Depressive Disorder, Dysthymia, and Risk of Stroke 
Thirteen-Year Follow-Up From the 
Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study 



Methods—The Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study is a prospective 13-year follow-up of a probability sample 
of household residents from Baltimore, Md. Depressive disorder was measured with the diagnostic interview schedule, 
and stroke was assessed by questions from the health interview survey or by documentation on a death certificate. 
Results—During the 13-year follow-up of 1703 individuals, 66 strokes were reported and 29 strokes were identified by 
death certificate search. Individuals with a history of depressive disorder were 2.6 times more likely to report stroke than 
those without this disorder after controlling for heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, and current and previous use of 
tobacco. Medications used in the treatment of depressive disorder at baseline did not alter this finding. A history of 
dysthymia demonstrated a similar relationship to stroke, although the estimate was not statistically significant. 
Conclusions—Depressive disorder is a risk factor for stroke that appears to be independent of traditional cardiovascular 
risk factors. Further research on mechanisms for the association and the impact of treatment for depressive disorder on 
subsequent stroke is needed. (Stroke. 2001;32:1979-1983.) 
Key Words: affective disorders n cerebrovascular disorders n depression n depressive disorder 
n dysthymic disorder n stroke 

in the relationship between affective 
disorder and long-term health consequences has generated 
recent examinations of depressive symptoms and stroke. 
Recently, Ohira et al1 reported that depressive symptoms 
were associated with an increased incidence of ischemic, but 
not hemorrhagic, strokes in an older Japanese sample. Similar 
results have been found in an Australian sample.2,3 Likewise, 
Jonas and Mussolino4 found that depressive symptoms were 
associated with incident stroke in a longitudinal study span- 
ning 22 years. In an earlier study, researchers found that 
individuals reporting 5 or more symptoms of depression at 
baseline were 50% more likely to die of a stroke-related cause 
during a 29-year follow-up.5 
There are plausible explanations for a prospective relation- 
ship between depressive disorder (or depression symptoms) 
and stroke. A growing body of research is targeting the 
effects of depression on platelet function. Platelet activation, 
measured by plasma levels of platelet 
factor 4 and 
b-thromboglobulin, are higher in individuals with major 
depression.6 Musselman et al7 found that depressed individ- 
uals experience a heightened susceptibility to platelet activa- 
tion that is associated with cardiovascular disease. Interest- 
the results of a small study indicate that platelet 
ingly, 
function normalized after 6 weeks of treatment with parox- 
etine.8 Similarly, cardiovascular disease and depression have 
been linked. In one study, respondents with a history of major 
depression were 4 times more likely to report a myocardial 
infarction than were individuals without a history of depres- 
sion.9 Ford et al10 also found that men with clinical depres- 
sion were at an increased risk for coronary artery disease. 
Because individuals who have had a myocardial infarction 
are at an increased risk for stroke, these findings suggest yet 
another pathway by which depression may be linked to 
stroke.11 Further evidence that there may be a relationship 
between depression and vascular disease is found in studies 
reporting that individuals with major depression appear to 
have higher adrenocortical activity, a risk factor for athero- 
sclerosis and in turn a risk factor for stroke.12–14 
Although researchers have examined the association be- 
tween depressive symptoms and stroke by using measures of 
current symptoms, no research was identified that examined 
the relationship between lifetime reports of depressive disor- 
der assessed by rigorous diagnostic standards. Thus, 
the 
objective of our prospective study was to examine the 
relationship between the lifetime occurrence of depressive 
disorder measured by an instrument consistent with the 
Received January 17, 2001; final revision received May 25, 2001; accepted June 1, 2001. 
From Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health (S.L.L., P.L.O., W.E.) and School of Medicine (D.F.), Baltimore, Md. 
This study was funded in part by National Institute of Mental Health grant MH 47447 from the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. 
Correspondence to Sharon L. Larson, PhD, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 2101 E Jefferson #500, Rockville, MD 20852. 











Dysthymia Only 
(N527) 
n (%) 
Depressive Disorder 
(N5101) 
n (%) 
No Depressive Disorder 
(N51575) 
n (%) 








55–64 
$65 





Low socioeconomic status 
(Nam-Powers index #35) 







































































standards presented in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 
3rd edition (DSM-III) and stroke.15 

Research Design 
The Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) project is a national 
study that was initially funded by the National Institute of Mental 
Health (NIMH) between 1980 and 1983 (wave 1). The purpose of 
this study was to measure the prevalence and incidence of psychiatric 
disorders in the general population. More than 20 000 adults .18 
years old were interviewed in 5 US metropolitan areas. In the 
Baltimore site, 3481 persons were interviewed. These respondents 
were selected through probability sampling within the east Baltimore 
area, with oversampling of those .65 years of age. This site reported 
an interview completion rate of 82%. Participants gave informed 
consent before their interview, per the study protocol approved by 
the Committee on Human Research of the Johns Hopkins University 
School of Hygiene and Public Health. Further details of the ECA 
study and methods are described elsewhere.16 
Study Sample 
Between 1993 and 1996, a follow-up study of the original Baltimore 
ECA cohort was conducted.17 Of the 3481 participants interviewed 
at baseline, 1920 were located and reinterviewed. Eight hundred 
forty-eight of the original respondents died during follow-up, with 
death certificates including cause of death obtained for 663 partici- 
pants. Of the remaining 713 individuals, 298 refused to participate 
and 415 were lost to follow-up.18 Our sample was restricted to those 
individuals who indicated that they had not had a stroke at baseline 
and either responded to the question “Have you ever had a stroke?” 
at follow-up or had a death certificate on record. 
In the follow-up study, 1731 of those surveyed in 1981 responded 
to the question, “Have you ever had a stroke?” Twenty-six of these 
individuals indicated either that they had had a stroke before wave 1 
or that they did not know whether they had had a stroke before wave 
1; these subjects were excluded from this analysis. There were 1705 
cases at risk for incident stroke during the follow-up period. The 
final sample for analysis excluded mania (n52) to examine only 
those mood disorders related to depression. The sample for analysis 
had 1703 cases. 
Variables 
The incident stroke measure represents those who reported a first 
stroke during the 13-year follow-up period or for whom stroke was 
a cause of death reported on the death certificate. Within this sample 
of those at risk for a first-ever stroke, there were 66 self-reports of 
stroke during the follow-up period and 29 stroke-related deaths 
reported on death certificates. Forty-six (70%) respondents who 
self-reported stroke also reported an inability to perform at least 1 
activity of daily living. 
The diagnostic interview schedule (DIS) used in the ECA study is 
a structured survey instrument developed by the NIMH for this 
study. The interview is intended to produce diagnoses of specific 
mental disorders according to standards established by the American 
Psychiatric Association and presented in the DSM-III.15 The DIS 
consists of dichotomously coded questions about the presence of 
signs and symptoms of psychiatric illness. The psychiatric diagnoses 
of interest 
to this study were depressive disorders. Based on 
responses to the DIS, individuals were categorized into 3 groups. The 






first group included those with dysthymia only (n527). The second 
group consisted of those with major depression (n561), as well as 
those reporting dysphoria and meeting the criteria in 2 or more other 
depression symptom groups but without reporting distress and/or 
impairment in important areas of functioning (n540). Elsewhere this 
latter subgroup has been labeled “depression syndrome,”19 and we 
refer to the combined group (of 101 cases) as “depressive disorder.” 
Respondents with dysthymia were included in this group if they also 
met the criteria for depression syndrome (n56). The third group 
included all individuals who did not meet criteria for either depres- 
sive disorder or dysthymia (n51575). 
Demographic characteristics from wave 1 were controlled for in 
this analysis, including age, race/ethnicity, education, and sex. Age 
was treated as a categorical variable (18 to 29, 30 to 44, 45 to 54, 55 
to 64, and 65 years or older). The youngest group, 18 to 29 years old, 
served as the reference group. Indicator variables were created to 
control for differential effects of race/ethnicity on stroke. Blacks and 
other minorities were compared with whites. Educational attainment 
was dichotomously coded, and those with no high school diploma 
served as the reference group. Female sex is the indicator variable for 
gender. The Nam-Powers socioeconomic index was calculated by 
using income, occupation, and prestige ratings, and this index ranges 
between 0 and 100.20 This variable was coded as an indicator, and 
those with a score .35 (middle and upper socioeconomic status) 
served as the reference group. At baseline, respondents were also 
asked to indicate whether they had ever had diabetes, heart problems, 
high blood pressure, or currently or ever used tobacco products 
including cigarettes, cigars, or pipes. Current smoking indicated 
smoking any time during the last 7 days. 
In addition, respondents were queried regarding their use of 
medications prescribed for the treatment of depression and depres- 
sive disorder at baseline. These included tricyclic/heterocyclic drugs, 
mood stabilizers such as lithium, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs). Analysis of the use of these medications provides infor- 
mation about the effect of pharmacological treatment for depression 
disorder at baseline on the risk for stroke. 
Analytic Strategy 
The 3 exposure groups, those with dysthymia only, those with 
depressive disorder, and those with no depressive disorder or 
dysthymia, were compared with respect to baseline characteristics 
(Table 1). Stroke incidence and relative risk (RR) were calculated 
according to risk factors assessed at baseline (Table 2). RR for stroke 
was calculated for dysthymia only and depressive disorder (Table 3, 
models 1 and 2) by using logistic regression and adjusting for age, 
sex, race, and educational attainment. Model 3 (Table 3) controlled 
for the presence of medical risk factors, including a history of 
diabetes, heart problems, high blood pressure, and current use of 
tobacco. We also estimated the population-attributable risk to gen- 
erate some notion of how important depression might be as a risk 
factor for incident stroke. 
Results 
Over the 13-year follow-up, few individuals with dysthymia 
alone or depressive disorder reported a first stroke during this 
period (3.7% and 6.9%, respectively; Table 1). In the group of 
respondents with neither dysthymia nor depressive disorder, 
there were 87 cases of incident stroke (5.5%). Those with 
dysthymia only and those with depressive disorder were 
younger and more likely to be female, consistent with 
research on the epidemiology of depressive disorder.16 They 
were also more likely to have used psychotropic medications. 
The group of respondents with depressive disorder was 
slightly more likely than those with no disorder to report an 
incident stroke (RR51.2) in unadjusted analyses (Table 2). 
Age is a significant risk factor for stroke. After age 44, there 
is a steady increase in the incidence of stroke. About one 
TABLE 2. Stroke Incidence by Risk Factor, Baltimore ECA 
Follow-Up 1981–1993, 1996 




History of other depressive 
disorder 




55–64 
$65 





Low socioeconomic status 
(Nam-Powers index #35) 






History of 2 or more medical risk 
factors 
Frequency 
of Stroke 
Incidence of 
Stroke per 100 






























































fourth (23.4 per 100) of respondents aged 65 years and older 
had a first stroke during the follow-up period. Educational 
attainment 
those who did not 
complete high school had a cumulative incidence of 9.9 
strokes per 100 while those with a high school education had 
a cumulative incidence of only 2.3 per 100. Lower socioeco- 
nomic status was associated with a stroke incidence of 6.9 per 
100 while those with a higher socioeconomic status reported 
4.8 strokes per 100. A history of heart problems, hyperten- 
sion, and diabetes appeared to be associated with an increased 
incidence of stroke. Medications used as treatment for de- 
pressive disorder were not associated with a change in the 
incidence of stroke. 
We created a multivariate logistic model with incident 
stroke as the dependent variable (Table 3). After controlling 
for baseline characteristics of age, sex, and educational 
attainment, dysthymia demonstrated a tendency to be a risk 
factor for stroke, but confidence intervals were wide. (RR 
2.65; 95% CI, 0.69 to 10.11). However, depressive disorder 
was significantly related to stroke after adjusting for these 
baseline characteristics. Those with depressive disorder were 
3.08 (95% CI, 1.26 to 7.52) times more likely to report a first 
stroke during the 13-year follow-up than were those who did 
not have a depressive disorder. 













55–64 
$65 

Dysthymia 
Only 


Depressive 
Disorder 
Depression and 
Medical Risk Factors 





















Other ethnic/racial groups‡ 
Socioeconomic status (Nam-Powers index #35) 




Currently smoke tobacco 
Model x2 

*Reference age is 18 –29 years. 
†Reference group is white. 
‡Reference group is white. 



















A history of heart problems and hypertension was also signifi- 
cantly related to stroke in the adjusted analyses. Those with a history 
of heart problems were 2.07 (95% CI, 1.19 to 3.60) times more 
likely to report stroke, and those with a history of hypertension were 
2.14 (95% CI, 1.32 to 3.48) times more likely to report a first stroke 
during the follow-up period. A history of diabetes was associated 
with an increased risk for stroke (RR 1.35; 95% CI, 0.62 to 2) but 
was not statistically significant. Current tobacco use was associated 
with an increased risk for stroke (RR 2.03; 95% CI, 1.23 to 3.33). 
The final logistic regression model included history of 
diabetes, heart problems, high blood pressure, and current 
tobacco use. Depressive disorder persisted as a significant 
predictor of incident stroke during the 13-year follow-up (RR 
2.67; 95% CI, 1.08 to 6.63). In an additional logistic regres- 
sion analysis (not shown) controlling for pharmacological 
depression treatment at baseline, including tricyclics/hetero- 
cyclics, MAOIs, and lithium, depressive disorder continued 
to significantly predict stroke, and the use of these medica- 
tions was not associated with a change in the risk for stroke. 
The prevalence of these 2 forms of depression was 0.0752 
(128 cases of depressive disorder and dysthymia in this sample 
of 1703; 7.52 per 100). By using the adjusted RR of 2.67, the 
attributable risk for depression was found to be 0.108, or 10.8%. 
Therefore, if these 2 forms of depression were causing the 
stroke, 
then the maximum impact of removing depression 
exposure is a decrease in stroke of ’11%. 
Discussion 
A lifetime history of depressive disorder is associated with a 2- 
to 3-times greater risk for incident stroke. This increased risk 
was independent of a history of diabetes, hypertension, heart 
problems, or current tobacco use; the use of psychotropic drugs 
did not alter the association of depressive disorder and stroke. 
The relationship became stronger after controlling for the effect 
of age on stroke incidence. Dysthymia was similar to depressive 
disorder in its relationship to stroke. Our findings, based on an 
instrument designed to generate information of the type obtained 
in psychiatric interviews, add support to those reported by Jonas 
and Mussolino4 and Ohira et al,1 as well as others who have 
reported a positive relationship between stroke and recent 
symptoms of psychological distress.2,3,5 
A significant body of literature has found linkages that may 
help to explain the relationship between stroke and depres- 
sion. Symptom scales of depression such as the Centers for 
Epidemiologic Studies-Depression instrument are associated 
with brain changes similar to those experienced by stroke 
patients.21,22 Cardiovascular disease is concomitantly associ- 
ated with depression, providing another vehicle for a rela- 
tionship between stroke and depression.9,10,23 
Multiple studies are documenting that depression acts as a 
risk factor for many physical diseases. The strongest evidence 
is for an association between depression and cardiovascular 
disease.7,9,10,23 This observational study, though based only 
on self-reported data, provides evidence that stroke should be 
included as a potential consequence of depressive disorder. 
Other research will be necessary to determine whether de- 
pression causes, results from, or is concurrent with vascular 
changes that lead to stroke. Additional studies that identify 
the mechanisms underlying the association are needed to 
guide possible prevention efforts. 






The predictive strength of depressive disorder is not trivial. 
The estimated population-attributable risk, which is the max- 
imum proportion of the disease that would be eliminated in 
the population if the risk factor were a necessary cause, is 
’11%. In a similar analysis, Klungel et al24 estimated that 
22.8% to 25.4% of strokes in the Netherlands were attribut- 
able to untreated hypertension. 
Several limitations of the study should be considered when 
drawing conclusions. First, these data are self-reported. Indi- 
viduals were asked whether they had ever had a stroke in each 
of the survey periods. The individual reporting the stroke may 
have been unclear about whether a stroke or another medical 
phenomenon had occurred. However, the general population 
has been found to be reasonably accurate in identifying 
strokes.25 A recent study found that individuals with depres- 
sion self-report stroke as accurately as individuals without a 
history of depression, with a positive predictive value equal to 
0.79.26 Misclassification concerning transient ischemic at- 
tacks is possible. No information was available to assess the 
type of stroke that may have occurred, nor were confirming 
brain imaging studies available. However, a high percentage 
(70%) of those individuals reporting a stroke did report at 
least 1 limitation of activities of daily living in the follow-up 
study. 
Another possible limitation may be found in the potential 
misclassification of the exposure variables, depressive disor- 
der and dysthymia. The DIS has been shown to have good 
reliability and is generally valid. One study that examined the 
concordance between clinical diagnoses and the DIS found 
that the DIS errs in the direction of underidentification of 
those with depression.27 
Of all established cardiovascular risk factors, depression is 
most highly associated with tobacco smoking. We considered 
both current and past tobacco smoking in this analysis, and 
found current tobacco use to be associated with future stroke. 
It is possible that depressive disorder could have led to the 
development of hypertension between baseline and stroke 
occurrence. Similar to most of the investigators in this field, 
we also could not have accounted for this possibility. Future 
studies should carefully measure both blood pressure and 
tobacco smoking over time to refine our understanding of the 
relationship between depressive disorder and stroke. 
Finally, although the sample is relatively large, the number 
of individuals with depressive disorder at baseline was more 
limited, and among these, only a handful had new strokes. 
The problem here is not one of sample size, strictly speaking, 
because the findings are statistically significant. The potential 
problem is that errors of measurement in only a few cases 
could markedly change the results. The potential importance 
of these results, even though they are consistent with prior 
research, albeit with weaker measures,1–5 argues for the need 
to replicate them further in other samples. With these caveats, 
this prospective, population-based study has found that de- 
pressive disorder is a risk factor for stroke. 
References 
1. Ohira T, Iso H, Satoh S, Sankai T, Tanigawa R, Ogawa Y, Imano H, Sato 
S, Kitamura A, Shimamoto T. Prospective study of depressive symptoms 
and risk of stroke among Japanese. Stroke. 2001;32:903–908. 
2. Simons LA, McCallum J, Friendlander Y, Simons J. Risk factors for 
ischemic stroke: Dubbo Study of the Elderly. Stroke. 1998;29:1341–1346. 
3. Simons LA. Is depression a risk factor for ischemic stroke? Stroke. 



5. Everson S, Robert R, Goldberg D, Kaplan G. Depressive symptoms and 
increased risk of stroke mortality over a 29-year period. Arch Intern Med. 
1998;158:1133–1138. 
6. Laghrissi-Thode F, Wagner WR, Pollock BG, Johnson PC, Finkel MS. 
Elevated platelet factor-4 and b-thromboglobulin plasma levels in depressed 
patients with ischemic heart disease. Biol Psychiatry. 1997;42:290–295. 
7. Musselman D, Tomer A, Manatunga A, Knight B, Porter M, Kasey S, 
Marzec U, Harker L, Nemeroff C. Exaggerated platelet reactivity in major 
depression. Am J Psychiatry. 1996;153:1313–1317. 
8. Musselman DL, Marzec UM, Manatunga A, Penna S, Reemsnyder A, 
Knight BT, Baron A, Hanson SR, Nemeroff CB. Platelet reactivity in 
depressed patients treated with paroxetine: preliminary findings. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 2000;57:875– 882. 
9. Pratt L, Ford D, Crum R, Amerenian H, Gallo J, Eaton W. Depression, 
psychotropic medication and risk of myocardial infarction: prospective 
data from the Baltimore ECA follow-up. Circulation. 1996;94: 
3123–3129. 
10. Ford DE, Mead LA, Chang PP, Cooper-Patrick L, Wang NY, Klag MJ. 
Depression is a risk factor for coronary artery disease in men: the 
precursors study. Arch Intern Med. 1998;158:1422–1426. 


12. Nemeroff C, Widerlov E, Bissette G, Wallwus H, Karlsson I, Eklund K, 
Kilts C, Loosen P, Vale W. Elevated concentrations of CSF corticotropin- 
releasing factor-like immunoreactivity in depressed patients. Science. 
1984;226:1342–1344. 


14. Troxler R, Sprague E, Albanese R, Fuchs R, Thompson A. The asso- 
ciation of elevated plasma cortisol and early atherosclerosis as demon- 
strated by coronary angiography. Atherosclerosis. 1977;26:151–162. 
15. American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual. 3rd 

16. Eaton WW, Kessler L. Epidemiologic Field Methods in Psychiatry: The NIMH 
Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program. Orlando, Fla: Academic Press; 1985. 
17. Eaton WW, Anthony JC, Gallo J, Cai G, Tien A, Romanoski A, Lyketsos 
C, Chen L. Natural history of DIS/DSM major depression: the Baltimore 
ECA follow-up. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54:993–999. 
18. Badawi MA, Eaton WW, Myllylouoma J, Weimer L, Gallo J. Psychopa- 
thology and attrition in the Baltimore ECA follow-up 1981–1996. Soc 
Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 1999;34:91–98. 
19. Chen LS, Eaton WW, Gallo JJ, Nestadt G, Crum RM. Empirical exam- 
ination of current depression categories in a population based study: 
symptoms, course and risk factors. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157:573–580. 
20. Terrie EW, Nam CB. 1990 and 1980 Nam-Power-Terrie Occupational 
Status Scores. Tallahassee, Fla: Center for Study of Population, Florida 
State University; 1994. 


22. Steffens D, Helms M, Krishnan K, Burke G. Cerebrovascular disease and 
depression symptoms in the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 1999; 
30:2159 –2166. 


24. Klungel OH, Stricker B, Paes A, Seidell JC, Bakker A, Voko Z, Breteler MM, 
deBoer A. Excess stroke among hypertensive men and women attributable to 
undertreatment of hypertension. Stroke. 1999;30:1312–1318. 
25. Bergmann MM, Byers T, Freedman D, Mokdad A. Validity of self- 
reported diagnoses leading to hospitalization: a comparison of self-reports 
with hospital records in a prospective study of American adults. Am J 
Epidemiol. 1998;147:969 –977. 


27. Eaton WW, Neufeld K, Chen L, Cai G. A comparison of self-report and 
clinical diagnostic interviews for depression: diagnostic interview 
schedule and schedules for clinical assessment in neuropsychiatry in the 
Baltimore epidemiologic catchment area follow-up. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2000;57:217–222. 



Depressive Disorder, Dysthymia, and Risk of Stroke: Thirteen-Year Follow-Up From the 
Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study 
Sharon L. Larson, Pamela L. Owens, Daniel Ford and William Eaton 

Stroke. 
2001;32:1979-1983 
doi: 10.1161/hs0901.094623 

Copyright © 2001 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the 
World Wide Web at: 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/32/9/1979 


 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. 
Permissions: 
Stroke 
in 
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click 
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this 
process is available in the 


Reprints: 
http://www.lww.com/reprints 

Subscriptions: 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/ 



 
 
 
 
 
 

