

Personality, lifestyle, and risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer: 
follow-up of population based cohort 
Til Stürmer, Petra Hasselbach, Manfred Amelang 

Objective To study the relation between measures of 
personality and risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer in a 
large cohort. 
Design Follow-up of population based cohort. 
Setting Heidelberg, Germany. 
Participants 5114 women and men aged 40-65 in 1992-5. 
Main outcome measures Psychological traits assessed by 
several standardised personality questionnaires in 1992-5, 
related to cause of death (to 2002-3) or reported incidence of 
cardiovascular diseases and cancer (validated by treating 
doctors). Relative risks (and 95% confidence intervals) for 
combined morbidity and mortality according to five important 
personality traits were estimated using multivariable Cox 
proportional hazards models. 
Results During median follow-up of 8.5 years, 257 participants 
died and 72 were diagnosed with a heart attack, 62 with stroke, 
and 240 with cancer (morbidity and mortality combined). A 
high internal locus of control over disease was associated with a 
decreased risk of myocardial infarction (adjusted relative risk 
for an increase of 1 SD = 0.75; 95% confidence interval 0.58 to 
0.96). An increase of 1 SD in time urgency was associated with a 
decreased risk of cancer (adjusted relative risk 0.83; 0.73 to 
0.95). Other major personality traits—anger control, 
psychoticism, and symptoms of depression—were not 
consistently associated with myocardial infarction, stroke, or 
cancer. 
Conclusion Internal locus of control over disease and time 
urgency seem to be associated with reduced risk for common 
chronic diseases, probably by affecting unmeasured health 
related behaviour. The other personality traits assessed had no 
major impact on cardiovascular disease and cancer. 

Medicine and psychology have long been separate disciplines. 
Despite the lack of interdisciplinary studies and cooperation, 
doctors are aware that psychological 
influence the 
incidence and the course of chronic diseases. 


large multinational case-control study linked 
permanent stress at work or home during the past year to 
increased incidence of myocardial infarction.1 The size of the 
effect of psychosocial 
factors was similar to that seen for 
abdominal obesity, diabetes, and hypertension.2 The proposed 
pathophysiological 
stress and 
cardiovascular disease include clustering of “traditional” risk fac- 
tors, endothelial dysfunction, myocardial ischaemia, plaque rup- 
ture, thrombosis, and malignant arrhythmias.3 4 

Evidence for a link between psychological factors and cancer 
is weak. A recent review concluded that “there is not any psycho- 
logical factor for which an influence on cancer development has 
been convincingly demonstrated in a series of studies.”5 A meta- 
analysis of stressful life events and risk of breast cancer did not 
support an overall association between such events and breast 
cancer, except for a modestly increased risk with the death of a 
spouse.6 
In a large population based cohort study from 
Denmark, the incidence of cancer was 18% higher in mothers 
7-18 years after the death of a child.7 
We hypothesised that personality differences influence the 
incidence of and mortality from cardiovascular disease and can- 
cer, independent of “traditional” risk factors. We empirically 
derived five personality scales that measure different independ- 
ent personality traits8 and present results on all five scales 
without selection according to the strength of association with 
the disease outcomes. 

Recruitment and follow-up of the cohort have been described.8 
Briefly, we identified a representative sample of women and men 
aged 40-65 from the population registry of Heidelberg, 
Germany. Between 1992 and 1995, 5114 of 
these people 
completed an extensive baseline questionnaire on psychological 
traits, lifestyle factors, and comorbidity. All participants provided 
written informed consent to assess their health status 10 years 
later, including assessment of causes of death. 
In 2002, we mailed a follow-up questionnaire to all 
participants and asked for information about chronic diseases 
that had been diagnosed since baseline. All participants who did 
not reply and could not be reached by telephone were followed 
up through population registries. 
Personality variables 
The personality scales used at baseline were selected for several 
reasons.8 Some scales were markers of broad aspects of person- 
ality (extraversion, neuroticism, psychoticism). Other scales had 
been used in research on health outcomes (scales to measure 
depression, time urgency, hostility, anger out, low sense of coher- 
ence, and irritability), some were hypothesised to be relevant 
(scales to measure optimism, anger in, anger control, social sup- 
port, exaggerated social control, internal and external locus of 
control over disease, jealousy), and others were important with 
respect to response style (scales to measure social desirability). 




Since many of these personality scales overlap and are highly 
correlated, we aggregated the information contained in these 
scales (by using factor analysis) to obtain five broad independent 
dimensions of personality.8 These dimensions are unique to the 
population from which they were derived. To make it possible to 
compare our results with reports in the literature, we used the 
personality scales that were most strongly correlated with these 
five broad dimensions, rather than the dimensions themselves. 
Both the derivation of the dimensions and the selection of scales 
relied solely on cross sectional baseline data (that is, were 
independent of the disease outcomes), and results are presented 
for all scales assessed. 
Morbidity and mortality 
We validated all diagnoses of myocardial infarction, stroke, and 
cancer that had occurred since baseline by contacting the treat- 
ing doctors (with the written informed consent of participants). 
Mortality follow-up was 99.6% (22 participants moved to an 
unknown address or left the country); we assessed the cause of 
death from death certificates for 98.8% of participants who had 
died. Two doctors coded the cause of death according to ICD-10 
(international classification of diseases, 10th revision), and 
inconsistencies were resolved by discussion. 
Covariates 
We assessed the risk factors for chronic diseases that might be 
associated with personality variables at baseline. Besides age and 
sex, 
these were body mass index; smoking status; alcohol 
consumption (amount of beer, wine, and spirits drunk each 
week); exercise (hours each week); comorbidity (history of myo- 
cardial infarction, stroke, cancer, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, 
and diabetes); family history of myocardial infarction, stroke, and 
cancer; and education (years of schooling). 
Statistical analyses 
For each participant, we calculated the time to death, diagnosis of 
disease, or end of follow-up, whichever came first. We used Cox 
proportional hazards models to assess the association between 
each personality scale (in thirds or as a continuous variable) and 
the incidence of myocardial infarction, stroke, or cancer. We 
excluded participants with the disease at baseline or in whom the 
incidence of disease could not be assessed because of missing 
information (247 for myocardial infarction, 274 for stroke, and 
256 for cancer). 


the 4267 
Table 1 shows 
participants who replied to the follow-up questionnaire or died 
during follow-up (83.4% of the original cohort). Mean age was 
53.4 years; 51.5% were women. Risk factors for chronic diseases, 
such as overweight or obesity, smoking, no regular physical exer- 
cise, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and a family history of myo- 
cardial infarction, stroke, or cancer were common. 
Table 2 shows the distribution of the five personality scales 
according to baseline characteristics (actual patient numbers are 
shown in table A on bmj.com). All scales were divided into low, 
medium, or high according to the observed distribution (with 
one third of participants 
for 
psychoticism, which was split into 22%, 53%, and 26%). Older 
age was strongly associated with more symptoms of depression 
and higher anger control. Women were more likely than men to 
have more symptoms of depression, and men were more likely to 
have higher anger control, higher time urgency, and higher 
internal locus of control over disease (the patient’s belief that the 

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of 4267 participants from the Heidelberg 
cohort. Values are number (percentage) unless otherwise indicated 




50 to <60 
≥60 
Women 



25 to <30 
≥30 







15 to <30 
≥30 

















≥9 
10-11 
12 
≥13 


































*Information missing for 62 participants. 
†Calculated from glasses of beer (0.5 litre, z1 pint), wine (0.25 litre, 1 glass), and spirits 
(0.02 litre, 1 shot) regularly drunk each week assuming an alcohol content (% volume) of 5 
(beer), 11 wine, and 40 (shots), and a relative weight of alcohol of 0.8; information missing 
for 62 participants. 
‡Information was missing for 31 participants. 
§Self reported at baseline; information was missing for 249 participants with myocardial 
infarction, 231 with stroke, 199 with cancer, 227 with hypertension, 148 with hyperlipidaemia, 
and 246 with diabetes. 
¶Information missing for 61 participants with myocardial infarction, 60 with stroke, and 50 
with cancer. 
**Information missing for 44 participants. 
onset and process of an illness is the result of their behaviour). 
Higher frequency of exercise was strongly associated with fewer 
symptoms of depression and higher locus of control. Patients 
with any comorbidity—especially those with a history of myocar- 
dial infarction, stroke, diabetes, or cancer—had more symptoms 
of depression. 
During a median follow-up of 8.5 years, 257 participants 
died, 72 participants had a heart attack, 62 participants had a 
stroke, and 240 participants were diagnosed with cancer 
(morbidity and mortality combined). 
Tables 3-5 show the five personality scales (representing the 
five broad personality dimensions) at baseline as predictors of 



Table 2 Distribution of observed personality scales in 4267 participants from the Heidelberg cohort according to baseline characteristics. Values are 
percentages (table A on bmj.com gives the actual numbers)* 



50 to <60 
≥60 





25 to <30 
≥30 







15 to <30 
≥30 
Exercise: 
















≤9 
10-11 
12 
≥13 



Internal locus of control 
over disease 















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































*Percentage of participants classified as low, medium, or high in each personality scale according to the observed distribution (one third each for all traits except psychoticism, where the 
distribution of values was 22%, 53%, and 26%); 10 values missing for anger control, nine for psychoticism, and nine for symptoms of depression; see table 1 for information on the missing 
data for the covariates. 
†Calculated from glasses of beer (0.5 litre, z1 pint), wine (0.25 litre, 1 glass), and spirits (0.02 litre, 1 shot) regularly drunk each week assuming an alcohol content (% volume) of 5 (beer), 11 
wine, and 40 (shots), and a relative weight of alcohol of 0.8. 
‡Self reported at baseline. 
incident myocardial infarction, stroke, and cancer during follow- 
up. For each personality scale, we performed two separate analy- 
ses; one compared the low and the high category to the medium 
category and one used the z transformed scores from the origi- 
nal personality scale as a continuous variable, so that the relative 
risk corresponds to an increase of 1 SD (standard deviation) in 
the personality scale. The first 
set of analyses assesses 
non-monotonic trends and the second assumes a monotonic 
log-linear trend. 
Anger control, time urgency, and symptoms of depression 
were not associated with the incidence of myocardial infarction 
(table 3). Participants with a low internal locus of control over 
disease had an adjusted relative risk of 1.84 (95% confidence 
interval 1.01 to 3.32) compared with those with a medium inter- 
nal locus of control, and participants with a high internal locus of 
control over disease had a relative risk of 0.77 (0.41 to 1.46). An 
increase of 1 SD in internal locus of control over disease was 
associated with a relative risk of 0.75 (0.58 to 0.96). The relative 
risks of myocardial infarction were 1.59 (0.88 to 2.87) and 1.28 
(0.71 to 2.30) for participants with low and high psychoticism 
compared with those with a medium degree of psychoticism. 
Although this indicates a U-shaped association, an increase of 1 
SD was associated with a relative risk of 1.21 (1.01 to 1.45). 
None of the personality scales was strongly associated with 
the incidence of stroke (table 4). Higher values of symptoms of 
depression, anger control, and time urgency showed a 
monotonic association with increased risk of incident stroke. In 
the fully adjusted models, these trends were less pronounced. 
Higher degrees of psychoticism were associated with a decreased 





Person years (n=32 
875) 
No of events 
(n=72) 
Incidence/100 000 person years 
(219 overall) 





















































































































































*128 participants had myocardial infarction at baseline; 247 participants lacked information on incident myocardial infarction during follow-up; 72 incident cases of myocardial infarction 
(including 31 deaths) occurred. 
†Incidence rate ratios and their 95% confidence intervals from Cox proportional hazards model controlling for all variables in table 1: age (continuous), sex, body mass index (3 categories), 
smoking (never, former, current), alcohol consumption (4 categories), exercise (4 categories), comorbidity (history of stroke, cancer, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and diabetes), family history 
of myocardial infarction, and education (4 categories). Fully adjusted models based on 3700 participants for anger control, 3705 for time urgency, 3705 for internal locus of control over disease, 
3698 for psychoticism, and 3697 for symptoms of depression, and 66 events owing to missing information on covariates. 
risk of stroke, and this trend was more pronounced after we con- 
trolled for confounding. 
Table 5 shows that anger control, internal locus of control 
over disease, psychoticism, and symptoms of depression were not 
associated with cancer. Time urgency was inversely associated 
with the risk of cancer; participants with high time urgency had 
a relative risk for cancer of 0.68 (0.49 to 0.95) compared with 
those with medium time urgency, and an increase in time 
urgency of 1 SD was associated with an adjusted relative risk for 
cancer of 0.83 (0.73 to 0.95). 

In a large, population based cohort study with a median 
follow-up of 8.5 years (during which 257 participants died, 72 
had a heart attack, 62 had a stroke, and 240 developed cancer) 
some personality traits were risk factors for morbidity and mor- 
tality, independent of lifestyle factors. A low internal locus of 
control over disease and high and low psychoticism were risk 
factors for myocardial infarction. A high time urgency was asso- 
ciated with reduced risk of developing cancer. Overall, however, 
the personality traits had no major impact on the incidence of 
and mortality from cardiovascular disease and cancer. 
Comparison with other studies 
Research on personality variables as risk factors for cardiovascu- 
lar disease has focused on stress, social support, low sense of 
coherence, and hardiness.9 Findings from the Western Collabo- 
rative Group study and the Framingham heart study seemed to 
establish type A behaviour (the triad of competitive ambition, 
time urgency, and hostility) as a risk factor for cardiovascular dis- 
ease.10 11 But at least one large study (MRFIT; multiple risk factor 
intervention trial) found no association, and a later analysis of 
the Western Collaborative Group study found that 
the 
association between type A behaviour and all cause mortality is 
more complex.12 13 Because type A behaviour has now been 
deconstructed, we analysed anger control (inversely associated 
with hostility) and time urgency separately.9 Neither personality 
trait was associated with cardiovascular disease, so we cannot 
confirm the finding of an increased risk of non-fatal myocardial 
infarction with increasing time urgency seen in a recent 
case-control study.14 
A high internal locus of control over disease has consistently 
been linked with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease.9 Our 
results on myocardial infarction agree with those on control over 
life circumstances (not disease) seen in a large case-control 
study.1 Residual confounding by healthy behaviours apart from 
those that we (and others) could control 
for is a likely 
explanation for at least part of the reduced risk. 
Our finding of increased risk for myocardial infarction with 
increasing psychoticism needs to be interpreted with caution 
because of the inconsistency of the results. The analysis based on 
dividing participants into thirds does not indicate a monotonic 
association, so that the analysis assuming a monotonic (log 
linear) trend is probably driven by influential observations at the 
high end of the highly skewed scale. High values of psychoticism 
have been associated with less health conscious behaviour in at 
least one study, but not with myocardial infarction.15 
Our finding of no association between personality traits and 
stroke is especially interesting in the light of emerging research 
on the individual components of composite end points and the 
greater contribution of stroke than myocardial 
infarction to 
overall risk of cardiovascular disease in women.16 





Person years (n=33 
247) 
No of events 
(n=62) 
Incidence/100 000 person 
years (186 overall) 





















































































































































*64 participants had stroke at baseline; 274 participants lacked information on incident stroke during follow-up; 62 incident cases of stroke (no deaths) occurred. 
†Incidence rate ratios and their 95% confidence intervals from Cox proportional hazards model controlling for all variables in table 1: age (continuous), sex, body mass index (3 categories), 
smoking status (never, former, current), alcohol consumption (4 categories), exercise (4 categories), comorbidity (history of stroke, cancer, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and diabetes), family 
history of stroke, and education (4 categories). Fully adjusted models based on 3741 participants for anger control, 3746 for time urgency, 3746 for internal locus of control over disease, 3739 
for psychoticism, and 3738 for symptoms of depression, and 59 events owing to missing information on covariates. 
A recent review of the association between psychological fac- 
tors and cancer concluded that life events (other than loss of a 
spouse or child), negative emotional states, fighting spirit, stoic 
acceptance or fatalism, active coping, personality factors, and 
locus of control have little influence on whether people develop 
cancer or not.5 We found that a high time urgency was associated 
with a lower risk of cancer, but the strength of the association was 
moderate, and risk was not increased in the category of low time 
urgency. High time urgency has been associated with a decreased 
risk for all cause mortality in women after myocardial infarction 
but not with a decreased risk for any type of cancer.17 High time 
urgency might be associated with delayed diagnosis and thus 
lower incidence of cancer. Secondary analyses restricted to 83 
deaths caused by cancer showed similar results, but with an 
adjusted hazards ratio of 0.58 (0.32 to 1.05) for high versus 
medium time urgency and of 0.80 (0.64 to 1.00) for an increase 
of 1 SD. By looking at cancer overall, we may have missed asso- 
ciations with individual types of cancer. A meta-analysis found a 
modest increase in risk of breast cancer after the death of a 
spouse but did not support an overall association between stress- 
life events and risk of breast cancer.6 A previous review 
ful 
reached similar conclusions.18 
Limitations 
We lack information on important risk factors for cardiovascular 
disease and cancer, including blood lipids, markers of subclinical 
systemic inflammation, diet, and use of drugs (for example, low 
dose aspirin, statins) during follow-up. Whereas an association 
between personality variables and biological markers is unlikely, 
personality variables could be associated with long term use of 
screening practices, and reporting of 
preventive drugs, 
symptoms.19 It might be better not to control for such covariates 
that are consequences rather than confounders. 
Despite the population based recruitment, participants prob- 
ably do not represent the whole range of personalities in the 
population. We might have missed associations between extreme 
patterns of these traits and disease. 
Implications 
Psychological traits such as the personality variables considered 
in our analysis are probably stable over time and are likely to 
have a genetic component.20 21 The more these traits are 
predetermined, the more they should be seen as part of a risk 
prediction rather than be used for “victim blaming”. Life events 
seem to influence the stability of these traits, and some events 
(such as becoming unemployed) might be avoidable at the level 
of the individual or society.20 22 We assessed personality variables 
at baseline with an extensive list of validated scales under stand- 
ardised conditions, and we used factor analysis to find five 
personality scales as indicators for five independent personality 
dimensions without information on outcomes.8 An analysis that 
adjusted for multiple comparisons 
found no statistically 
significant association. We did not adjust the results for multiple 
comparisons because it is unlikely that all associations between 
personality traits and disease are random, because we chose all 
scales without knowledge of the outcomes, and because we 
present all the associations that we evaluated.23 
Mortality and morbidity follow-up were almost complete and 
the incidence of the chronic diseases was validated, so the 
estimates of relative risks should be valid, even if we missed some 
events. 
We adjusted our analyses for various lifestyle factors at base- 
line (smoking, alcohol consumption, body mass index, physical 
exercise, and education). Since the personality variables and 
these lifestyle factors were assessed at the same time, we cannot 
tell how personality variables influenced these lifestyle factors. 





Person years (n=31 
257) 
No of events 
(n=240) 
Incidence/100 000 person 
years (768 overall) 





















































































































































*242 participants had cancer at baseline; 256 participants lacked information on incident cancer during follow-up; 240 incident cases of myocardial infarction (including 83 deaths) occurred. 
†Incidence rate ratios and their 95% confidence intervals from Cox proportional hazards model controlling for all variables in table 1: age (continuous), sex, body mass index (3 categories), 
smoking status (never, former, current), alcohol consumption (4 categories), exercise (4 categories), comorbidity (history of stroke, cancer, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and diabetes), family 
history of cancer, and education (4 categories). Fully adjusted models based on 3587 participants for anger control, 3591 for time urgency, 3591 for internal locus of control over disease, 3584 
for psychoticism, and 3583 for symptoms of depression, and 230 events owing to missing information on covariates. 
Psychological traits probably influence the risk of disease only 
after long latency periods, but they might have more immediate 
effects through variables such as lifestyle factors (smoking, alco- 
hol consumption, and weight).24 We therefore adjusted for age 
and sex only as well as for these two factors plus lifestyle factors. 
Repeated measures and more sophisticated models are needed 
to determine the causal effect of personality differences on the 
risk of disease. 
Contributors: MA and TS designed the study and obtained funding; PH 
collected the data; TS and PH analysed the data; TS drafted the paper; TS, 
PH, and MA helped to write the paper. MA is guarantor. 
Funding: German Research Foundation (research grant AM 37/19-1). 
Competing interests: None declared. 
Ethical approval: Ethics committee-I of the medical faculty of Heidelberg, 
Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
1 Rosengren A, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, Sliwa K, Zubaid M, Almahmeed WA, et al. Asso- 
ciation of psychosocial risk factors with risk of acute myocardial infarction in 11 119 
cases and 13 648 controls from 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): case-control 
study. Lancet 2004;364:953-62. 
2 Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, Dans T, Avezum A, Lanas F, et al. Effect of potentially 
modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the 
INTERHEART study): case-control study. Lancet 2004;364:937-52. 
3 Merz CNB, Dwyer J, Nordstrom CK, Walton KG, Salerno JW, Schneider RH. 
Psychological stress and cardiovascular disease: pathophysiological links. Behav Med 
2002;27:141-7. 














11 Haynes SG, Feinleib M, Kannel WB. The relationship of psychosocial factors to coro- 
nary heart disease in the Framingham study. III. Eight-year incidence of coronary heart 
disease. Am J Epidemiol 1980;111:37-58. 
12 Shekelle RB, Hulley SB, Neaton JD, Billings JH, Borhani NO, Gerace TA, et al. The 
MRFIT behaviour pattern study. II. Type A behaviour and incidence of coronary heart 
disease. Am J Epidemiol 1985;122:559-70. 
13 Carmelli D, Swan GE. The relationship of type A behaviour and its components to all- 
cause mortality in an elderly subgroup of men from the western collaborative group 
study. J Psychosom Res 1996;40:475-83. 
14 Cole SR, Kawachi I, Liu S, Gaziano JM, Manson JE, Buring JE, Hennekens CH. Time 
urgency and risk of non-fatal myocardial infarction. Int J Epidemiol 2001;30:363-9. 
15 Brayne C, Do KA, Green L, Green AC. Is health protective behaviour in adolescents 
related to personality? A study of sun protective behaviour and the Eysenck personal- 
ity questionnaire (junior version) in Queensland. Pers Individ Dif 1998;25:889-95. 
16 Glynn RJ, Rosner B. Methods to evaluate risks for composite end points and their indi- 



Evidence of an effect of personality on disease is best for 
stress and cardiovascular disease, but little evidence exists 
for cancer 
Overall, the personality traits assessed had no major impact 
on incidence of and mortality from cardiovascular disease 
and cancer 
Higher internal locus of control over disease (a patient’s 
belief that the onset and progress of disease is a result of 
their behaviour) may be associated with a reduced risk of 
myocardial infarction but not of stroke or cancer 
Higher time urgency may be associated with a reduced risk 
of cancer but not of cardiovascular disease (myocardial 
infarction and stroke) 



17 Powell LH, Shaker LA, Jones BA, Vaccarino LV, Thoresen CE, Pattillio JR. Psychosocial 
predictors of mortality in 83 women with premature acute myocardial infarction. Psy- 
chosom Med 1993;55:426-33. 
18 Butow PN, Hiller JE, Price MA, Thackway SV, Kricker A, Tennant CC. Epidemiological 
evidence for a relationship between life events, coping style, and personality factors in 
the development of breast cancer. J Psychosom Res 2000;49:169-81. 
19 Macleod J, Smith GD, Heslop P, Metcalfe C, Carroll D, Hart C. Psychological stress and 
cardiovascular disease: empirical demonstration of bias in a prospective observational 
study of Scottish men. BMJ 2002;324:1247-51. 
20 Vaidya JG, Gray EK, Haig J, Watson D. On the temporal stability of personality: 
evidence for differential stability and the role of life experiences. J Pers Soc Psychol 
2002;83:1469-84. 
21 Borkenau P, Riemann R, Angleitner A, Spinath FM. Genetic and environmental influ- 
ences on observed personality: evidence from the German observational study of adult 
twins. J Pers Soc Psychol 2001;80:655-68. 
22 Vahtera J, Kivimaki M, Pentti J, Linna A, Virtanen M, Virtanen P, et al. Organisational 
downsizing, sickness absence, and mortality: 10-town prospective cohort study. BMJ 
2004;328:555. 



created equal? J Clin Epidemiol 2002;55:436-44. 
(Accepted 13 April 2006) 

Divisions of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, and Preventive 
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02120, USA 
Til Stürmer visiting associate professor of medicine 
Department of Psychology, University of Heidelberg, Germany 
Petra Hasselbach research fellow 
Manfred Amelang professor of psychology 
Correspondence to: T Stürmer til.sturmer@post.harvard.edu 


