

Citation: Goga, N.; Boiangiu, C.-A.;
Vasilateanu, A.; Popovici, A.-F.;
Dr˘agoi, M.-V.; Popovici, R.;
Gancea, I.O.; Pîrlog, M.C.; Popa, R.C.;
Had˘ar, A. An Efﬁcient System for Eye
Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy: A
Pilot Study. Healthcare 2022, 10, 133.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare10010133
Academic Editor: Daniele Giansanti
Received: 16 December 2021
Accepted: 7 January 2022
Published: 10 January 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
healthcare
Article
An Efﬁcient System for Eye Movement Desensitization
and Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy: A Pilot Study
Nicolae Goga 1, Costin-Anton Boiangiu 2
, Andrei Vasilateanu 1
, Alexandru-Filip Popovici 1,3,*
,
Marius-Valentin Drăgoi 1, Ramona Popovici 1,3, Ionatan Octavian Gancea 2, Mihail Cristian Pîrlog 4
,
Ramona Cristina Popa 1 and Anton Hadăr 5
1
Faculty of Engineering in Foreign Languages, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Splaiul Independentei 313,
060032 Bucharest, Romania; n.goga@rug.nl (N.G.); andrei.vasilateanu@upb.ro (A.V.);
marius.valentin.dragoi@gmail.com (M.-V.D.); ramona.popovici@drd.unibuc.ro (R.P.);
popa.ramona91@yahoo.com (R.C.P.)
2
Faculty of Automatics and Computer Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Splaiul Independentei 313,
060032 Bucharest, Romania; costin.boiangiu@cs.pub.ro (C.-A.B.); ganceatoni@gmail.com (I.O.G.)
3
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Bucharest, 90 Panduri Street,
050657 Bucharest, Romania
4
Department of Sociology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Petru Rares 2,
200349 Craiova, Romania; mihai.pirlog@gmail.com
5
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Robotics, University Politehnica of Bucharest,
Splaiul Independentei 313, 060032 Bucharest, Romania; anton.hadar@upb.ro
*
Correspondence: ﬁlip.popovici@unibuc.ro
Abstract: In this paper, we describe an actuator-based EMDR (eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing) virtual assistant system that can be used for the treatment of participants with traumatic
memories. EMDR is a psychological therapy designed to treat emotional distress caused by a
traumatic event from the past, most frequently in post-traumatic stress disorder treatment. We
implemented a system based on video, tactile, and audio actuators which includes an artiﬁcial
intelligence chatbot, making the system capable of acting autonomously. We tested the system on a
sample of 31 participants. Our results showed the efﬁciency of the EMDR virtual assistant system
in reducing anxiety, distress, and negative cognitions and emotions associated with the traumatic
memory. There are no such systems reported in the existing literature. Through the present research,
we ﬁll this gap by describing a system that can be used by patients with traumatic memories.
Keywords: EMDR; virtual assistant; cyber-physical system
1. Introduction
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is an eight-phase psycholog-
ical therapy designed to treat emotional distress caused by traumatic events from the past,
most frequently in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD is a serious disorder that
can be developed by people after exposure to severe stressors that generate a series of symp-
toms such as avoidance of reminders of the event, hyperarousal, or vivid ﬂashbacks [1].
During the therapy, the clinician uses diverse bilateral stimuli such as a light that changes
positions, the alternation of sounds between speakers, or the vibration of devices held by
the patient in their hands, in order to help the client process a distressing experience.
Although studies have shown that EMDR is an efﬁcient method of intervention for
different mental conditions, there are still controversies regarding the working mechanism.
The studies so far on EMDR efﬁciency and the role of eye movement have captured variable
results [2], which makes the emergence of more rigorous research an imperative [3]. In this
context, the tools for self-administration of EMDR therapy can facilitate the understanding
of the role of eye movement in EMDR therapy.
Healthcare 2022, 10, 133. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10010133
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
2 of 18
A study from 2012 [4] found that intervention through EMDR helped the participants
in coping with a psychotic disorder and PTSD. Also, another study showed that EMDR had
better results in treating speciﬁc symptoms than other types of therapies [5]. A more recent
meta-analysis showed that EMDR treatment is efﬁcient in reducing PTSD symptoms [6]
and other mental health problems such as anxiety and depression [7,8]. Therefore, EMDR
therapy has proven to be effective in treating trauma and PTSD. Moreover, EMDR may
be effective for any psychological disorder that can be linked with trauma or adverse life
events [9].
In the light of this information, an actuator-based virtual assistant trained to perform
EMDR therapy could be a useful tool for psychologists in the process of treating their
patients. It can also become a tool used by the general population for the treatment of
minor psychological disorders linked with trauma. The artiﬁcial intelligence engine chatbot
developed for the presented system was based on the eight essential phases of EMDR
described by Francine Shapiro [10]:
1. The ﬁrst phase involves the investigation of the client’s past in order to design the
treatment plan. This includes the evaluation of all clinical aspects (symptoms, unhealthy
behaviors, and characteristics) and the selection made by the therapist of the issues that
need to be addressed (events that affect the emotional life, dysfunction triggers, and new
positive behaviors/attitudes).
2. In the preparation phase, the therapist explains the basic theory of EMDR and the
intervention procedures with the aim of setting the expectation of the outcome, which also
includes the presentation of the possible disturbances that could appear. The client is also
empowered with some affect regulation strategies.
3. The evaluation phase consists of the application of two evaluation instruments, the
Subjective Units of Distress (SUD) and Validity of Cognition (VOC) scales, for assessing the
negative cognition and the emotional response of the client to the investigated event.
4. The desensitization phase concerns the client’s emotional response, the evoked
insights, and appropriate associations. In this phase, the client is bilaterally stimulated
until the SUD level signiﬁcantly decreases.
5. The installation phase aims at cognitive integration and restructuration. One
essential aspect of this phase is the installation and strengthening of a more functional,
positive cognition.
6. The sixth phase involves an analysis of the persisting body sensations which implies
a mental body scan in order to identify any residual disturbance. Thus, the client will be
able to process any unprocessed information.
7. The seventh phase includes discussions and prepares the client for the closure of
the session. Its purpose is to bring the client to a state of equilibrium between the sessions.
8. The last phase is the re-evaluation of the progress at the beginning of each session.
Interaction with the user includes both audio and writing communication. Thus, the
present research describes an EMDR virtual assistant system based on video, tactile, and
audio actuators which includes an artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot that can be used in the
autonomous treatment of traumatic memories.
With this background, the aim of our paper is to deliver an EMDR tool fully capable
of assisting a user in performing efﬁcient therapy and doing so without the intervention
of a trained clinician. We developed a pilot study for testing our system, in which 31
participants were included. We found that our EMDR virtual system is efﬁcient and can be
used for the reduction of symptoms associated with PTSD and anxiety.
2. Related Work
Since EMDR therapy has proven to be efﬁcient in the treatment of PTSD, recommended
by the World Health Organization in 2013, it has also begun to be used in the treatment of
resistant disorders, such as PTSD with comorbid psychosis [11], in which case it obtained a
reduction of paranoid thoughts and allowed patients to reach remission in the psychotic
disorder in a shorter period of time. For the treatment of borderline personality disor-

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
3 of 18
der [12], there had to be several adaptations made from the standard procedure. The same
was done for people suffering from a narcissistic personality disorder [13] or comorbid
bipolar I and II disorders [14].
EMDR therapy has been associated with technology since its earliest description.
There was always an interest in the development of new devices to assist with the bilateral
stimuli involved in the therapy process, whether these were devices designed to help in
the visual phase of treatment, such as headsets and glasses, or devices designed to assist
in the tactile therapy. Lately, with the advance in technology and the major development
of mobile devices, there is interest in developing mobile applications that can provide the
required treatment with as little involvement from a trained psychotherapist as possible.
The literature on this topic is, however, scarce. We present below a brief summary of the
existing studies and their major results.
In [15], Alulema Flores et al. present a prototype that can be used in EMDR therapy. It
is a modular design containing three modules, each providing visual, auditory, and tactile
sequences, integrated with an Android interface that controls the speed of the sequences,
the type of sound, and the intensity of vibration of the tactile module. The software is
intended for the use of the psychotherapist, who can either use a predeﬁned routine or
create a personalized program for the patient by controlling all three modules. The structure
of the project consists of an Android device that controls the sound module and the IOIO for
Android DEV-10748 motherboard [16] that controls both the visual and the tactile module.
For each person, the application requires selecting a therapy type: the visual therapy lights
the red LEDs on the glasses in different sequences, the touch therapy sends pulses to each
hand at a time, and the sound therapy option plays from 10 different sounds in the left
or right ear. Each type of therapy has an automatic and manual mode of functioning. In
the manual mode, the psychotherapist can choose the frequency of the sequence (from
0 to 6 s) and also the side (left or right) that the sequence is displayed. In its conclusion, the
paper [15] stated that the usage of the described system helped to reduce the processing
time of patient cases and the duration of a therapy session, which decreased to 20–30 min
per session. Also, when the system was used, it was observed that the level of physical
exhaustion was reduced by 90 percent and mental exhaustion by 75 percent. However, no
artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot was included in this system that could allow it to function
fully autonomously—the intervention of the psychotherapist was still needed.
The system described by Jeffery D. Eastman in [17] is designed to help people that are
suffering from trauma. It is based on the display of a series of light sequences that allows
the user to self-direct an EMDR session. The implementation of the proposed method of
treatment is based on the exchange of data between the patient’s computer, where the
user completes a survey form after each therapy session, and the server application that
responds with another adapted sequence of lights or in some cases even with an audio
sequence. The self-directed session starts with the user logging in to the client application,
which requests authentication and an initial light sequence from the server. The server
returns a response based on the user’s history and personal data. Each treatment sequence
is followed by a survey form containing a 1 to 10 scale evaluation of the discomfort level,
which is taken into consideration for the next self-directed light session, and the light
patterns are changed accordingly. As compared to the previous system, there are no
tactile-based actuators in this system that can make the EMDR more efﬁcient.
The invention presented in [18] by Gazit et al. refers to a system and a series of methods
designed for remote EMDR therapy. The described system includes a therapist platform,
a client platform, and an EMDR server which includes multiple processors, memory, a
storage solution, and an operating system. The therapist platform presents a dashboard
that allows the user to add client information such as personal data, preferences for bilateral
stimulation, and notes regarding past therapy sessions, and controls different bilateral
stimulation parameters. These parameters may refer to color, opacity, size, or background
color in the case of video therapy; volume, sound effects, or the type of music for audio
therapy; and for the tactile part, vibration intensity. For a better interpretation of the

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
4 of 18
sessions’s the results of the session, the therapist’s computer has the function of displaying
the level of correspondence between the client’s eye movement and the movement of the
visual element on the screen. In this respect, an image processing algorithm running on the
client’s platform can be used to correlate the movement of the visual bilateral stimulation
and the client’s eye movement. Moreover, based on this implementation, the server may be
conﬁgured to automatically modify the bilateral stimulation depending on the patient’s
level of correspondence; for example, if the correspondence is better than 95%, the speed
of the light display may be increased, while if it is less than 90%, the speed may decrease.
This system does not include an intelligent chatbot.
In [19], Burgio et al. present a system and a method that can be used in EMDR therapy.
The system is based on a headset, e.g., a pair of glasses, with dark lenses to block out the
external light, a receiver that receives signals from an external device, a microprocessor,
and data storage. EMDR therapy also implies auditory stimulation that can be provided
by a device integrated with the headset and tactile stimulation which can be produced by
a clothing article having incorporated a series of vibrating units over the torso. Also, in
some embodiments, the stimulator may have a transceiver that can coordinate with the
headset. Before every treatment, a diagnosis is performed by measuring the reactivity of
each patient using a transducer assembly, with the role of determining the appropriate
treatment schedule. An example of a treatment procedure may observe the following
ﬂow: ﬁrst, the patient’s neuromuscular strength is measured with the transducer, then a
speciﬁc treatment schedule is applied which may involve tactile stimulation, applying a
gentle massage over the neural lymphatic points; visual stimulation, provided through
the headset by changing the eye’s focus direction by displaying different light patterns; or
auditory stimulation. During the treatment, the neuromuscular strength is remeasured.
Then, depending on the weak signals that were determined, the patient may follow either a
physical treatment, a mental treatment, or a chemical one. Next, the vibrating units and the
headset are activated by the stimulator through an infrared signal and the treatment plan
is applied. The process of the neuromuscular strength check is repeated, and an adapted
treatment is followed again. This form of treatment that involves an automatic system is
slightly different than the standard EMDR, but has proven to be cost-effective, enabling
therapists to treat multiple patients at once. Also, the system can treat physical injuries,
life accumulation stress disorder (LASD), and improve the patient’s overall mental and
physical state.
As compared to all these studies, the system we propose has several improvements,
such as the presence of an intelligent chatbot that can accompany the user during the EMDR
intervention, which is developed in relation to the standardized procedures. Moreover,
the presence of audio, video, and tactile-based actuators makes the EMDR system more
efﬁcient [20,21]. Table 1 describes these differences in relation to similar systems.
From a theoretical and practical point of view, this paper responds to some gaps
reported in previous literature, having an important contribution [3]. Firstly, the proposed
system is accompanied by an intelligent chatbot based on the protocol developed by
F. Shapiro. In contrast, the other systems are based on a partial protocol or do not follow it
at all and can only be used in the presence of a therapist. Other systems work remotely
via an EMDR platform but still with the help of a person. As far as we know, there is no
system similar to the one presented in this paper reported in the literature.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
5 of 18
Table 1. Comparison with similar systems in the literature.
Paper
Advantages
Disadvantages
Differences between Our System
and Related Work
Aleluma Flores
et al. [15]
Uses visual, tactile, and
auditory therapy.
Can be customized.
Implements only the
desensitization phase in the
EMDR protocol.
Used only by
psychotherapists/clinicians.
The presence of a trained clinician
is mandatory, cannot be used
independently.
Presence of intelligent chatbot
which implements the preparation,
evaluation, and ending phases in
the EMDR protocol.
The system has the potential to be
autonomous, the presence of a
trained clinician not being
mandatory.
Jeffrey D.
Eastman [17]
Visual stimulation can be
dynamically adjusted based on
feedback from the user.
Only visual and auditory stimuli.
Audio is mostly used for playing
relaxation sounds, very little
information is given about
bilateral audio stimulation.
Only patent, not validated.
Presence of intelligent chatbot
which implements the preparation,
evaluation, and ending phases in
the EMDR protocol.
Audio, video, and tactile-based
actuators that make the EMDR
system more efﬁcient.
Gazit et al. [18]
Selection of the intensity
of stimuli.
No intelligent chatbot.
The system is designed to
intermediate the relation between
client and clinician and can be
used remotely but requires the
intervention of a therapist for
setting the parameters.
The proposed system has the
potential to be autonomous.
Burgio et al. [19]
Opaque glasses that block light
from reaching the eyes and thus
prevent simultaneous exposure to
other visual stimuli.
Uses chemical stimulation.
The system is dependent on the
presence of the therapist
Different from the standardized
EMDR procedure
Only patent, not validated.
The proposed system includes an
intelligent chatbot offering
autonomy.
Designed in relation to
standardized EMDR procedures.
Secondly, because there is a constant need to test the potential effectiveness of self-
administered EMDR therapy [3], this study aimed to address this need in testing the
feasibility and efﬁciency of a virtual assistant for EMDR in reducing negative symptoms
associated with traumatic memories.
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Materials
The system offers a multi-actuator implementation of the EMDR protocol:
•
Video stimulus using a rendered ball on a graphical display;
•
Audio stimulus simulating a moving sound source;
•
Tactile stimulation using vibration motors placed on the user using bracelets—stimuli
are synchronized to maximize the effectiveness;
•
A chatbot for communicating with the user according to the EMDR protocol, allowing
the system to function autonomously, i.e., in the absence of a therapist.
In Figure 1 we have a view of the general architecture of the system. We have chosen
a component-based, highly modular approach so the system can be deployed in different
conﬁgurations. The proposed system is composed of the following modules: video, audio,
tactile, and chatbot, which can work independently or together, depending on the user
preferences and deployment options.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
6 of 18
 
Figure 1. The EMDR system.
The chatbot module is the central command module of the system, which coordinates
and synchronizes all other modules, and allows users to interact with the system by text
and audio (through the audio module). The chatbot is the kernel of the system because
all processing decisions are made inside of it. Regarding user interaction, the module is
programmed to describe each step of the treatment and asks a series of questions, according
to the EMDR protocol, to evaluate the negative cognition and the emotional response of
the user to a traumatic event. In the Figure A1 (see Appendix A), we present the interface
of the EMDR system with the users and an example scenario. This chat window pairs the
discussion between the artiﬁcial intelligence chatbot and users.
From the implementation point of view, we have developed the chatbot kernel in
Python using different natural language processing algorithms, such as preprocessing,
lemmatization and vectorization, and intelligent pattern matching based on cosine simi-
larity. Chatbot intents are organized based on the stage of the protocol, with the purpose
of giving contextual feedback to the user but also guiding her/him from stage to stage.
The textual input from the user is preprocessed by removing stop words and lemmati-
zation. Lemmatization is the process of ﬁnding out the dictionary form, or lemma, of a
word, depending on the context. The WordNet lemmatizer was used for this task. Since
most machine learning algorithms work on numeric input, the preprocessed text is then
vectorized, by using a term frequency inverse document frequency vectorizer from Python.
The vectorized form is compared using an intelligent pattern match based on cosine
similarity with the available patterns for a given intent. The highest match maps to a
response outputted to the user.
The video module is used in the desensitization phase to simulate the therapist’s hand
movement by creating an output window that displays a red ball moving horizontally from
one side of the screen to the other. The following parameters can be modiﬁed: window
width and height and ball speed. Figure 2 presents the parameters of the motion, and
Figure A2 (see Appendix A) displays the movement of the ball during the EMDR session.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
7 of 18
 
Figure 2. EMDR treatment user interface.
The audio module has two responsibilities: ﬁrstly, to render audio for the chatbot
interaction, the procedure descriptions, and the questions, and secondly, for the bilateral
audio stimulation in the desensitization phase. This module can be deactivated for users
with hearing impairments.
For the user interaction, the module can use pre-recorded audio clips by therapists but
can also use a text-to-speech function to transform text input to audio output. This allows
developers to easily add more interaction scenarios and provides more personalized and
dynamic behavior, with text generated at runtime by the chatbot.
The audio bilateral stimulation is achieved by changing the sound balance from left to
right and then back.
The tactile module is used in the desensitization phase to provide bilateral tactile
stimulation, using vibration motors attached to the wrists of the patient, to complete the
EMDR treatment experience, enhance the video and audio stimulations, and make the
system usable by users with hearing and visual impairments.
The overall ﬂow of the entire system is presented in Figure 3 and is based on the
EMDR protocol described in the Introduction section. The protocol is adapted so that the
questions and evaluations typically carried out by the therapist are now implemented by
the chatbot module (integrated with the audio module), while the desensitization phase is
implemented in the audio, video, and tactile modules. We used a UML activity diagram to
represent the actions conducted by each module in response to the patient input.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
8 of 18
 
Figure 3. The overall ﬂow of the system.
All modules were implemented in Python, with the chatbot module acting as a
coordinator and also being the entry point of the application. Different libraries were
used for the speciﬁc modules, such as PySimpleGui, time, sys, os for video module, gTTS
text-to-audio library, playsound library for the audio module, NLTK, sklearn, and WordNet
for the chatbot kernel.
In Figure 4, the tactile module implements tactile stimulation by using two vibration
motors pressed to the user’s wrists using bracelets. The motor used is the same as the
one in [22], a small, lightweight ﬂat vibration motor controlled by a Raspberry Pi board
(or similar).
The system can be entirely deployed on a Raspberry Pi (or similar) board, with an
attached video and audio output, and the vibration motors attached to the RPI general-
purpose I/O pins. If the selected conﬁguration does not include the tactile module, then
the system can also be deployed on a desktop/laptop computer. It is preferable to use
headphones instead of speakers for bilateral audio stimulation. Figure 5 shows how
somebody may use the EMDR system.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
9 of 18
Figure 4. Raspberry Pi 4 with tactile module integrated and the vibration motor 1027 [22].
Figure 5. The participant is prepared for intervention. On the left side of the ﬁgure, we see how the
user is ﬁxing the actuators, while on the right side of the ﬁgure we see how the user is participating
in an EMDR session.
In the current pilot study, we tested the feasibility of an actuator-based EMDR virtual
assistant system in replacing a trained clinician in the EMDR procedure and making the
system capable of acting autonomously. Thus, we wanted to see if there were improvements
regarding the cognitive and emotional response in relation to traumatic memories after the
participants used the virtual assistant.
3.2. Recruitment
A total of 31 participants were included in the pilot study, 14 males and 17 females,
with ages between 19 and 33 (Mage = 26.2, SD = 4.21). Given the nature of the study and
given the fact that this pilot study is an initial step in exploring an innovative application,
we followed the recommendation of Leon et al. [23] in recruiting and selecting participants,
who emphasize that a pilot sample size is based on the pragmatics of recruitment and
the necessity for examining the feasibility of the application. Participants were volunteers
that responded to an online announcement and agreed to participate in a single session of
intervention for reducing stress and anxiety associated with a potentially traumatic event
from the past. In order to assess whether the participants were eligible in accordance with
Shapiro’s recommendations, they were interviewed by two psychologists [10]. For inclusion
in the study, participants needed to be 18–40 years of age, and to have at least medium scores
on the Impact of Events Scale-Revised (IES-R) and the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI).
Participants were excluded from the study if they scored very high on both measures, if
they were suicidal, taking psychotropic medication, or had a diagnosed psychological
condition. After the initial assessment, four participants were excluded (Table 2). All
participants were informed about the study and signed a consent statement. The study was
approved by the Committee of Ethics and Academic and Scientiﬁc Deontology, University
of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
10 of 18
Table 2. Sample characteristics.
Characteristics
Category
n
%
Age (years)
Mean ± standard deviation
26.2 ± 4.21
Gender
Male
14
45.2
Female
17
54.8
Education
High school diploma
4
12.9
College degree
10
32.3
Master’s degree
15
28.4
Doctorate (Ph.D)
2
6.5
Health condition
No treatment in the last 6 months
23
74.2
Under treatment in the last 6 months
8
25.8
Months since the
traumatic event
Less than 6 months
1
3.2
Between 6 and 12 months
13
41.9
Between 12 and 24 months
6
19.4
Between 24 and 36 months
7
22.6
More than 36 months
4
12.9
Criteria for inclusion
(18–40 years of age; at least medium
scores on IES-R and STAI)
31
88.5
Criteria for exclusion
(Scored very high on both measures;
suicidal; taking psychotropic medication;
diagnosed psychological condition)
4
11.6
3.3. Procedure
The designed intervention consisted of four phases of bilateral stimulation (visual,
auditive, and actuator-based). The ﬁrst three phases were designed with the aim of reducing
the intensity of emotions and beliefs associated with the traumatic event. The fourth
phase was introduced to install a positive belief about that event. In addition to visual
stimulation, audio and tactile stimulation were used simultaneously, as auditory, and tactile
stimuli have been shown to enhance the effect and increase the effectiveness of EMDR
intervention [20,21].
The procedure was applied as follows. The participants were informed about the
EMDR therapy and instructed on how to use the application. Participants were invited to
think about a traumatic event from the past that caused them discomfort, where they failed
to overcome it. After accessing the traumatic memory, the IES-R and STAI instruments
were applied in the pre-test condition. After the discussion with a specialist, and after
the completion of the instruments on the pre-test assessment phase, the participants self-
administered the intervention through the application. After the initial assessment, we
eliminated four participants because their scores on the IES-R and STAI were very high,
and they needed specialized professional treatment. In Table 3 we can see the description
of the applied protocol in detail.
The detailed steps of the application protocol and their interaction on multiple levels
are visually represented in Figure 6.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
11 of 18
Table 3. Application protocol description.
The Phase of the Intervention
Description
1. Introduction
Participants were informed about EMDR therapy and how bilateral
sensory stimulation helps process traumatic memories. It was mentioned
that they could withdraw at any time if they were not comfortable with
the procedure. At the same time, the participants went through an
adjustment session with bilateral stimulations.
2. Demographic info
The application requested demographic information (gender and age)
and the agreement for participation.
3. Preparation for accessing the traumatic event
Through intelligent chatbot guiding, the participant was led to access
overwhelming emotions that sometimes interfere with their usual activity
and primary events recorded in memory associated with overwhelming
emotions. The participant was also guided to visualize that event
mentally as a movie scene. Once the oldest memory associated with those
emotions was identiﬁed, the participant was asked to describe it brieﬂy.
4. Body scanning
The participant was intelligently guided to identify the bodily sensations
associated with that event (tension, tremor, cold, heat, pressure, or
sounds). The information obtained was noted and recorded by the
application.
5. Identiﬁcation of negative beliefs
Identiﬁcation of negative beliefs (about oneself, others, the world, or life
in general) caused by the traumatic event.
6. Emotions and cognitions intensity assessment
Assessment of the intensity of negative cognitions/beliefs and emotions
associated with that event (VOC and SUD scale)
7. Treatment phase
Application of bilateral stimulation (audio, video, and sensory) in several
sessions of four minutes each and assessment of the intensity of
cognitions and emotions after each session of bilateral stimulation done
through the guidance of the chatbot.
8. Positive cognition identiﬁcation and installing
Identifying and installing positive cognition through a new session of
bilateral stimulation.
9. Closure
The intelligent chatbot reminds the participant that they can beneﬁt from
psychological support.
10. Feedback
The participant can share their impressions related to the experience of
using the application.
3.4. Instruments
3.4.1. Primary Outcome Measures
Impact of Event Scale-Revised (IES-R). The IES-R is a 22-item self-report questionnaire
used to assess subjective distress caused by a recent traumatic event or a speciﬁc one. The
IES-R items are rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“extremely”)
and related to symptoms associated with PTSD. The IES-R scale can have a total raw
score ranging from 0 to 88 and a raw score for three subscales: Intrusion, Avoidance,
and Hyperarousal subscales. For our study, we calculated the total score in order to
assess the severity of the symptoms [24,25]. The scale has good psychometric properties
being validated for the Romanian population and is one of the most used instruments for
assessing traumatic events [26–28]. In this study, Cronbach’s alpha varied from 0.87 in the
pre-intervention phase to 0.72 for the post-intervention condition.
The State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) is a 40-item self-reported instrument used
to measure trait and state anxiety and was designed by Spielberger et al. [29]. The scale
consists of two separate subscales each of 20 items that measure the state factor and the trait
one. In our study, we used the ﬁrst subscale which measures the state factor because this
scale can be used to measure the level of anxiety regarding a situation, event, or traumatic
memory from the past. All items are rated on a 4-point scale ranging from “Almost Never”
to “Almost Always”, with higher scores indicating higher levels of anxiety. The scale was

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
12 of 18
validated for the Romanian population [30]. In our study, Cronbach’s alpha was 0.88 in the
pre-intervention condition, and 0.71 for the post-intervention condition.
 
Figure 6. The representation of the applied application protocol.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
13 of 18
3.4.2. Secondary Outcome Measures
Apart from these primary outcome measures, we used other scales that are part of the
standardized intervention procedures in EMDR [10].
Subjective Units of Disturbance (SUD) scale is a single-item measure and self-reporting
scale used for measuring the level of subjective distress and intensity of the traumatic
memory with answers ranging from 0 to 10, where 0 refers to a lack of disturbances and 10
to the worst possible.
The Validity of Cognition (VOC) scale is a single-item measure and self-report scale
and shows the level of belief in a positive or a negative cognition on a scale ranging from
1 to 7, where a score of 1 means a lack of belief in a particular cognition, and a score of
7 means a full belief in it.
4. Results
4.1. Primary Outcome Measures
The results provided in Tables 4 and 5 show that there was a signiﬁcant difference in
scores for the pre-test condition (M = 39.8, SD = 14.07) and post-test (M = 13.7, SD = 5.7)
measured with the IES-R scale: t (30) = 10.5, p < 0.001, and a large effect size (d = 1.89).
Table 4. Paired sample t-test—primary outcome measures.
95% CI For Cohen’s D
t
df
p
Cohen’s d
Lower
Upper
IES-R Pre-, IES-R Post-
10.521
30
<0.001
1.890
1.292
2.476
STAI Pre-, STAI Post-
11.759
30
<0.001
2.112
1.469
2.744
Table 5. Descriptive statistics of scores (pre- and post-intervention).
N
Mean
SD
SE
IES-R Pre-
31
39.806
14.077
2.528
IES-R Post-
31
13.742
5.785
1.039
STAI Pre-
31
56.774
8.330
1.496
STAI Post-
31
33.839
4.620
0.830
Also, there was a signiﬁcant difference in scores for the pre-test condition (M = 56.7,
SD = 8.3) and post-test (M = 33.8, SD = 4.6) regarding anxiety scores: t (30) = 11.7, p < 0.001,
and a large effect size (d = 2.11) of intervention in reducing anxiety associated with the
traumatic event. In other words, the intervention through the virtual assistant system for
EMDR had a signiﬁcant effect and contributed to reducing the distress associated with the
traumatic event, and reduced the anxiety associated with it.
4.2. Secondary Outcome Measures
We used the VOC and SUD scales in order to assess whether there were improvements
in the EMDR procedure on the negative cognitions and emotions associated with the
traumatic event. The results indicate a signiﬁcant increase in VOC scores: t (30) = 14.4,
p < 0.001, which reﬂects a positive increase of positive cognition regarding the traumatic
event (Table 6). Also, we notice that there was a signiﬁcant pre- to post-intervention
reduction in scores for SUD: t (30) = 75.9, p < 0.001 (Table 5). Table 7 also shows that
the higher scores decreased signiﬁcantly at the end of the intervention. These results
indicate that the self-administered protocol has good potential and is efﬁcient for reducing
the negative cognitions and emotions associated with the traumatic memory even in the
absence of the human factor.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
14 of 18
Table 6. Paired samples t-test—secondary outcome measures (pre- and post- assessment).
t
df
p
VOC Pre-, VOC Post -
14.471
30
<0.001
SUD Pre-, SUD Post -
75.904
30
<0.001
Table 7. Pre- and post-intervention comparison of secondary outcome measure.
N
Mean
SD
SE
VOC Pre-
31
2.968
0.657
0.118
VOC Post-
31
6.097
0.887
0.156
SUD Pre-
31
9.161
0.735
0.132
SUD Post-
31
0.774
0.717
0.129
5. Discussion
The goal of this study was to develop an EMDR virtual assistant capable of guiding a
user in performing an efﬁcient therapy with minimal intervention from a trained clinician.
Given the fact that the study is a pilot one, the process was supervised by trained clinicians
who did not intervene in the process but were prepared to do so if needed.
The results suggest the efﬁciency of self-administered EMDR through the developed
system pre- and post-intervention. Our study showed a statistically signiﬁcant reduction
of symptoms associated with PTSD and anxiety. Also, the self-administration of treatment
using bilateral actuator, visual, and tactile stimulation appears to produce a signiﬁcant
decrease in symptoms associated with traumatic memories. The intervention contributes
both to the reduction of negative affections associated with traumatic events and helps in
changing these cognitions with more functional ones.
Compared to other systems that offer the possibility of EMDR interventions, such as
the one proposed by Aleluma Flores et al. [15], our virtual system is more autonomous,
being developed following the EMDR protocol, and the presence of a clinician is not
mandatory. In addition, the main difference from other systems [17–19] lies in the usefulness
of the intelligent chatbot together with the multi-actuator implementation that can have an
impact on the efﬁciency of the intervention.
Our results are in line with interventions that used traditional EMDR [8,31]. Even if
the intervention involved only one session, our ﬁndings are similar to those of previous
research, which showed that even after a single session of EMDR, symptoms decreased
signiﬁcantly, effects of the intervention being constant after follow-up [32–37]. Moreover,
this decrease in terms of symptoms was also found in other research where participants
were treated remotely and the intervention was self-administered [3,38].
In explaining our results, as noted by Kutz et al. [37], we must take into consideration
two main variables: the former exposure of participants to trauma and the presence of
some risk factors that can inﬂuence the effect of the intervention [35]. In this respect,
those who are exposed to a single traumatic event and who have experienced moderate
symptoms associated with PTSD or anxiety are more prone to have a rapid response in
terms of recovery, compared to those who have a history of risk factors or pre-existing
vulnerabilities such as multiple exposures to signiﬁcant trauma [37].
Also, it is important to note that in relation to the virtual assisted treatment, the
participants were curious about how the intervention would proceed, while some were
interested in the possibility of working through their traumatic memories without exposing
themselves to another person. Therefore, our system could be very useful in the context
generated by COVID-19, given that most of the activities are developed in the online
environment, and the incidence of depression, anxiety, insomnia, and PTSD has increased
substantially [39]. Because of the impact that COVID-19 has on individuals and in the
context of increasing demands for remote intervention [40], the possibility of using such a
system complements the lack of human resources and at the same time makes psychological
intervention possible where, because of the restriction measures, face-to-face interaction

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
15 of 18
with a specialist is not possible. Moreover, our system is suitable for cases confronting mild
psychological distress, which do not require the presence of a specialist. Thus, existing
human resources can concentrate on those cases that require special attention.
Based on the results from this study, we can state that having a system which offers
an autonomous EMDR intervention is a clear possibility. The advantages include reduced
costs and increased accessibility. However, it raises several questions about whether the
technology can replace the human presence entirely. We are aware of the fact that there are
some risks associated with this intervention, such as increased short-term distress for some
participants. Still, studies have shown that such risks are minor and are based on anecdotal
evidence [3]. We have improved our system by taking into account the recommendation
for designing safe, affordable, and easy-to-use interventions for self-help that have the
potential to be used by many people [41]. However, we consider that any intervention,
whether autonomous or not, must be carried out in the ﬁrst phase under the supervision of
a trained clinician and in compliance with the established protocol until large-scale testing.
Participants did not report any problems in their interactions with the system. The
usability of the system was considered good and whenever needed, explanations were
given to the participants on how to use the system. Overall, the experience of the users in
this respect—usability—was ranked as good.
However, the results of our present research must be interpreted in the context of the
pilot study that we have carried out, which is based on a limited number of participants
and consequently has limitations in terms of generalizability. Even so, this is a ﬁrst step in
addressing the need that has been reported in previous studies regarding the development
of self-administered EMDR therapy that is developed in accordance with established
protocols and underscores the need for more extensive research. We consider it as another
step in studying the effectiveness of remotely administered interventions and a starting
point for developing some clinical trials using the proposed system.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we described an EMDR virtual system based on video, tactile, and
audio actuators used to treat anxiety, distress, and negative emotions associated with
traumatic memories. Based on the results obtained, an autonomous EMDR intervention is
a clear possibility.
Our study evidences the efﬁcacy of an EMDR intervention for those who cannot
have access to immediate psychological support, thus enabling their autonomy. Moreover,
the established protocol was tested and positively conﬁrmed in providing the necessary
guidance for an efﬁcient administration. As a result, it could be considered as a tool of
self-support for people experiencing mild symptoms of PTSD.
Moreover, one of the key ﬁndings of this study refers to the efﬁciency of such a system
that offers the possibility of self-administration of an EMDR intervention, thus contributing
to a limited body of research in this ﬁeld [3]. Even if there are some developments and
applications for EMDR therapy, the majority of the systems are not autonomous and require
the permanent intervention of a clinician or are used only as a tool in treatment [38,42].
Compared to other systems, the unique advantages of the present system are as follows:
•
The presence of an AI-driven chatbot, following the eight essential phases of EMDR [10],
which can be further enhanced with new dialogue options and evaluation strategies;
•
The ability to customize the interaction based on the patient’s characteristics. For
example, using different stimulation methods (visual, audio, tactile) makes the EMDR
procedure accessible for people with disabilities (severe visual impairment or even
blindness, hearing loss);
•
The possibility of applying EMDR treatments in a fully unsupervised manner, using
the aforementioned chatbot, i.e., the assistance of a trained clinician is not required;
Future work will include adding web-based functionality to the system to make it
possible to be used by the public. Adding intelligent dialog robots, such as Siri, can
realize autonomous communication and at the same time can accompany the user in

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
16 of 18
accommodating the intervention. Moreover, the use of an automated system has the
potential to enable future studies comparing EMDR with alternative treatments using sham
stimulation, which could be valuable in helping to elucidate the efﬁcacy of the bilateral
stimulation component of EMDR at a more general level.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P., M.-V.D., R.P., I.O.G., M.C.P.,
R.C.P. and A.H.; methodology, N.G., A.V., A.-F.P. and R.P.; software, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., M.-V.D., I.O.G.
and R.C.P.; validation, N.G., A.-F.P. and R.P.; formal analysis, N.G., A.-F.P., and R.P.; investigation
A.-F.P., M.-V.D., R.P. and I.O.G.; writing—original draft preparation, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P.,
M.-V.D., I.O.G., R.P., M.C.P. and A.H.; writing—review and editing, N.G., C.-A.B., A.V., A.-F.P. and
R.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Ethics Committee of The University of Medicine and
Pharmacy of Craiova (149/07.12.2020).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available upon request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Oana S, tefănescu for her great support and
assistance with this paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
 
Figure A1. Chat window used for communication between the chatbot module and users.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
17 of 18
Figure A2. Movement of the ball during the EMDR session.
References
1.
Shapiro, F. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing:
Basic Principles, Protocols and Procedures, 2nd ed.; Guilford:
New York, NY, USA, 2001; ISBN 978-1572306721.
2.
Sikes, C.; Sikes, V. EMDR: Why the controversy? Traumatology 2003, 9, 169–182. [CrossRef]
3.
Waterman, L.Z.; Cooper, M. Self-administered EMDR therapy: Potential solution for expanding the availability of psychotherapy
for PTSD or unregulated recipe for disaster? BJPsych Open 2020, 6, e115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Berg, D.P.V.D.; van der Gaag, M. Treating trauma in psychosis with EMDR: A pilot study. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 2012, 43,
664–671. [CrossRef]
5.
Ironson, G.; Freund, B.; Strauss, J.; Williams, J. Comparison of two treatments for traumatic stress: A community-based study of
EMDR and prolonged exposure. J. Clin. Psychol. 2001, 58, 113–128. [CrossRef]
6.
Cuijpers, P.; Van Veen, S.C.; Sijbrandij, M.; Yoder, W.; Cristea, I.A. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing for mental
health problems: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2020, 49, 165–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Horst, F.; Den Oudsten, B.; Zijlstra, W.; de Jongh, A.; Lobbestael, J.; De Vries, J. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy vs. Eye Movement
Desensitization and Reprocessing for Treating Panic Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Front. Psychol. 2017, 8, 1409.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Gauhar, Y.W.M. The Efﬁcacy of EMDR in the Treatment of Depression. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2016, 10, 59–69. [CrossRef]
9.
Logie, R. EMDR-more than just a therapy for PTSD? Psychologist 2014, 27, 512–517.
10.
Shapiro, F. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) Therapy, Third Edition: Basic Principles, Protocols, and Procedures;
The Guilford Press: New York, NY, USA, 2018; ISBN 9781462532766.
11.
De Bont, P.A.J.M.; Berg, D.V.D.; Van Der Vleugel, B.M.; De Roos, C.; De Jongh, A.; van der Gaag, M.; Van Minnen, A.M. Prolonged
exposure and EMDR for PTSDv. a PTSD waiting-list condition: Effects on symptoms of psychosis, depression and social
functioning in patients with chronic psychotic disorders. Psychol. Med. 2016, 46, 2411–2421. [CrossRef]
12.
Mosquera, D.; Leeds, A.M.; Gonzalez, A. Application of EMDR Therapy for Borderline Personality Disorder. J. EMDR Pr. Res.
2014, 8, 74–89. [CrossRef]
13.
Mosquera, D.; Knipe, J. Understanding and Treating Narcissism with EMDR Therapy. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2015, 9, 46–63. [CrossRef]
14.
Novo, P.; Landin-Romero, R.; Radua, J.; Vicens, V.; Fernandez, I.; Garcia, F.; Pomarol-Clotet, E.; McKenna, P.J.; Shapiro, F.;
Amann, B.L. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy in subsyndromal bipolar patients with a history of
traumatic events: A randomized, controlled pilot-study. Psychiatry Res. 2014, 219, 122–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Flores, D.O.A.; Pineda-Lopez, F.; Aucatoma, E.L.G.; Cordova, F.E.I. Automated system on android platform for use in the
implementation psychotherapeutic technical EMDR. In Proceedings of the 2014 XIX Symposium on Image, Signal Processing and
Artiﬁcial Vision, Armenia, Colombia, 17–19 September 2014; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
16.
Ben-Tsvi, Y. IOIO Documentation on GitHub.
Available online:
https://github.com/ytai/ioio/wiki. (accessed on
15 November 2021).
17.
Eastman, J.D. Systems and Methods for Self Directed Stress Assistance. U.S. Patent 201201513119A1, 14 June 2012.
18.
Gazit, N.; Gazit, L.; Bar, T. Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy. U.S. Patent 20200086077A1, 19 March 2020.
19.
Burgio, P.A.; Spurrill, A.T.; Burgio, D.J. Method and Apparatus for Providing Automatic Eye Focused Therapy. U.S. Patent
20090156886A1, 18 June 2009.
20.
Amano, T.; Toichi, M. The Role of Alternating Bilateral Stimulation in Establishing Positive Cognition in EMDR Therapy: A
Multi-Channel Near-Infrared Spectroscopy Study. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0162735. [CrossRef]
21.
Rousseau, P.-F.; Boukezzi, S.; Garcia, R.; Chaminade, T.; Khalfa, S. Cracking the EMDR code: Recruitment of sensory, memory and
emotional networks during bilateral alternating auditory stimulation. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 2020, 54, 818–831. [CrossRef]
22.
Vibration Motor 1027. Available online: www.vibrationmotors.com/product-catalogue/coin-vibration-motors/coin-vibration-
motor-bvm1027-x10-1b02u-b (accessed on 5 October 2021).
23.
Leon, A.C.; Davis, L.L.; Kraemer, H.C. The role and interpretation of pilot studies in clinical research. J. Psychiatr. Res. 2011, 45,
626–629. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Weiss, D.S.; Marmar, C.R. The Impact of Event Scale-Revised. In Assessing Psychological Trauma and PTSD: A Practitioner’s Handbook;
Wilson, J.P., Keane, T.M., Eds.; Guilford Press: New York, NY, USA, 1997; pp. 399–411.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 133
18 of 18
25.
Weiss, D.S. The Impact of Event Scale: Revised. In Cross-Cultural Assessment of Psychological Trauma and PTSD; Wilson, J.P.,
Tang, C.S., Eds.; Springer International and Cultural Psychology Series; Springer Science & Business Media: Boston, MA, USA,
2007; pp. 219–238.
26.
Beck, J.G.; Grant, D.; Read, J.P.; Clapp, J.; Coffey, S.F.; Miller, L.M.; Palyo, S.A. The Impact of Event Scale-Revised: Psychometric
properties in a sample of motor vehicle accident survivors. J. Anxiety Disord. 2008, 22, 187–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Creamer, M.; Bell, R.; Failla, S. Psychometric properties of the Impact of Event Scale—Revised. Behav. Res. Ther. 2003, 41,
1489–1496. [CrossRef]
28.
Doroga, C.; Băban, A. Traumatic exposure and posttraumatic symptoms for train drivers involved in railway incidents. Clujul
Med. 2013, 86, 144–149.
29.
Spielberger, C.D.; Gorsuch, R.L.; Lushene, R.; Vagg, P.R.; Jacobs, G.A. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory; Consulting
Psychologists Press: Palo Alto, CA, USA, 1983.
30.
Pitariu, H.; Peleasa, C. Manual for the Romanian Version of State-Trait Anxiety Inventory form Y; Sinapsis: Cluj-Napoca, Romania,
2007.
31.
Balbo, M.; Cavallo, F.; Fernandez, I. Integrating EMDR in psychotherapy. J. Psychother. Integr. 2019, 29, 23–31. [CrossRef]
32.
Shapiro, F. Efﬁcacy of the eye movement desensitization procedure in the treatment of traumatic memories. J. Trauma. Stress 1989,
2, 199–223. [CrossRef]
33.
Puffer, M.K.; Greenwald, R.; Elrod, D.E. A single session EMDR study with twenty traumatized children and adolescents.
Traumatology 1998, 3, 6. [CrossRef]
34.
Rogers, S.; Silver, S.M.; Goss, J.; Obenchain, J.; Willis, A.; Whitney, R.L. A Single Session, Group Study of Exposure and
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing in Treating Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among Vietnam War Veterans:
Preliminary Data. J. Anxiety Disord. 1999, 13, 119–130. [CrossRef]
35.
Maxﬁeld, L.; Melnyk, W.T. Single Session Treatment of Test Anxiety with Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing
(EMDR). Int. J. Stress Manag. 2000, 7, 87–101. [CrossRef]
36.
Servan-Schreiber, D. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Is psychiatry missing the point? Psychiatr. Times 2000, 17,
36–40.
37.
Kutz, I.; Resnik, V.; Dekel, R. The Effect of Single-Session Modiﬁed EMDR on Acute Stress Syndromes. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2008, 2,
190–200. [CrossRef]
38.
Tarquinio, C.; Brennstuhl, M.-J.; Rydberg, J.A.; Bassan, F.; Peter, L.; Tarquinio, C.L.; Auxéméry, Y.; Rotonda, C.; Tarquinio, P.
EMDR in Telemental Health Counseling for Healthcare Workers Caring for COVID-19 Patients: A Pilot Study. Issues Ment. Health
Nurs. 2021, 42, 3–14. [CrossRef]
39.
Pappa, S.; Ntella, V.; Giannakas, T.; Giannakoulis, V.G.; Papoutsi, E.; Katsaounou, P. Prevalence of depression, anxiety, and
insomnia among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Brain Behav.
Immun. 2020, 88, 901–907. [CrossRef]
40.
McGrowder, D.A.; Miller, F.G.; Vaz, K.; Cross, M.A.; Anderson-Jackson, L.; Bryan, S.; Latore, L.; Thompson, R.; Lowe, D.;
McFarlane, S.R.; et al. The Utilization and Beneﬁts of Telehealth Services by Health Care Professionals Managing Breast Cancer
Patients during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Health 2021, 9, 1401. [CrossRef]
41.
Maxﬁeld, L. Low-Intensity Interventions and EMDR Therapy. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2021, 15, 86–98. [CrossRef]
42.
Marotta-Walters, S.A.; Jain, K.; Dinardo, J.; Kaur, P.; Kaligounder, S. A Review of Mobile Applications for Facilitating EMDR
Treatment of Complex Trauma and Its Comorbidities. J. EMDR Pr. Res. 2018, 12, 2–15. [CrossRef]

