Citation: Trappey, A.J.C.; Lin, A.P.C.;
Hsu, K.Y.K.; Trappey, C.V.; Tu, K.L.K.
Development of an Empathy-Centric
Counseling Chatbot System Capable
of Sentimental Dialogue Analysis.
Processes 2022, 10, 930. https://
doi.org/10.3390/pr10050930
Academic Editor: Raul
D.S.G. Campilho
Received: 22 April 2022
Accepted: 2 May 2022
Published: 8 May 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
processes
Article
Development of an Empathy-Centric Counseling Chatbot
System Capable of Sentimental Dialogue Analysis
Amy J. C. Trappey 1,*
, Aislyn P. C. Lin 1, Kevin Y. K. Hsu 2, Charles V. Trappey 3 and Kevin L. K. Tu 1
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; s109034608@m109.nthu.edu.tw (A.P.C.L.); s106034002@m106.nthu.edu.tw (K.L.K.T.)
2
Department of Educational Psychology and Counseling, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; ykhsu@mx.nthu.edu.tw
3
Department of Management Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30093, Taiwan;
trappey@nycu.edu.tw
*
Correspondence: trappey@ie.nthu.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-3-5742651
Abstract: College students encounter various types of stresses in school due to schoolwork, personal
relationships, health issues, and future career concerns. Some students are susceptible to the strikes
of failures and are inexperienced with or fearful of dealing with setbacks. When these negative
emotions gradually accumulate without resolution, they can cause long-term negative effects on stu-
dents’ physical and mental health. Some potential health problems include depression, anxiety, and
disorders such as eating disorders. Universities commonly offer counseling services; however, the
demand often exceeds the counseling capacities due to limited numbers of counsellors/psychologists.
Thus, students may not receive immediate counseling or treatments. If students are not treated, some
repercussions may lead to severe abnormal behavior and even suicide. In this study, combining
immersive virtual reality (VR) technique with psychological knowledge base, we developed a VR
empathy-centric counseling chatbot (VRECC) that can complementarily support troubled students
when counsellors cannot provide immediate support. Through multi-turn (verbal or text) conver-
sations with the chatbot, the system can demonstrate empathy and give therapist-like responses to
the users. During the study, more than 120 students were required to complete a questionnaire and
34 subjects with an above-median stress level were randomly drawn for the VRECC experiment. We
observed decreasing average stress level and psychological sensitivity scores among subjects after the
experiment. Although the system did not yield improvement in life-impact scores (e.g., behavioral
and physical impacts), the signiﬁcant outcomes of lowering stress level and psychological sensitivity
have given us a very positive outlook for continuing to integrate VR, AI sentimental natural language
process, and counseling chatbot for advanced VRECC research in helping students improve their
psychological well-being and life quality at schools.
Keywords: counseling; chatbot; school stress; sentiment understanding; virtual therapy
1. Introduction
According to Taiwan Suicide Prevention Center statistics, approximately 4000 people
aged 15 to 24 in Taiwan attempted suicide per year during the years of 2012 to 2016 [1].
The numbers have continued to grow in the past ﬁve years, and reached an all-time high
(10,659) in 2020, among which 2371 were students [1]. Some studies depicted that the
psychological disturbances of college students come from academic pressure, interpersonal
relationships, personality traits, career plans, family issues, etc. Academic pressure is the
most reported factor that leads to mental distress, followed by interpersonal relationships
and personality traits [1].
Starting in 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 has drastically changed the lifestyle of
society. According to the survey conducted by the John Tung Foundation, more than
1/5 of participants were dissatisﬁed with the changes caused by the pandemic. The
Processes 2022, 10, 930. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr10050930
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/processes

Processes 2022, 10, 930
2 of 19
top four negative emotions participants experienced were worry (38%), anxiety (23%),
nervousness (22%), and panic (9%), which can lead to long-term psychological illnesses,
e.g., hopelessness, depression, and anxiety, if not treated in time. These mental health issues
may increase suicidal tendencies. Thus, it is crucial that schools, especially universities,
provide sufﬁcient counseling services to those in need [2]. However, most universities’
therapist–student ratios are low. The students must wait in line for an appointment, and
some of them are not aware of how to consult other health centers to prevent the syndrome
from worsening. In order to cope with the shortages of counsellors/therapists, several
companies have launched online solutions to provide in-time consultation aiming to assist
in complementary counseling supports to students. Companies such as Woebot, Wysa, X2,
and Youper are startups currently in the market to provide such services. Their systems
adopt artiﬁcial intelligence integrated with background (psychotherapy) knowledge related
to mental health issues. Despite providing the abovementioned one-on-one counseling
solutions, these systems currently lack the functions of interacting and sharing distress with
others in a group counseling setting. Even in a one-on-one counseling setting, although they
have the ability to understand users’ basic concerns and questions, these systems’ ability to
understand natural language in sentimental dialogs and to answer users’ questions with
empathy-centric responses are very limited. Thus, this research focuses on closing the
research gap by developing an empathy-centric counseling chatbot system that is capable
of sentimental dialogue analysis.
In short, this research aims to alleviate students’ distresses and psychological symp-
toms by providing empathy-centric counseling using the chatbot system and making
students feel relieved through the virtual interactive conversations. In this research, we
adopted a VR group-counseling chatbot (VRGCC) framework, preliminarily presented
in our recent publication [3]. We further improved the original VRGCC system by incor-
porating the empathy-centric counseling knowledge for the chatbot development. The
newly developed system, namely the VR empathy-centric counseling chatbot (VRECC),
recognizes sentiments of questions and is capable of empathy-centric dialogues. BERT
models for sentiment- and issue-related classiﬁcations of question sentences and the di-
alog management module were trained and developed to accomplish empathy-centric
counseling tasks. VRECC was tested and veriﬁed through pre-and post-experiment psycho-
logical questionnaires. The experiment results showed that stress levels and psychological
sensitivity were signiﬁcantly reduced after the subjects received VRECC treatments.
2. Literature Review
This chapter reviews past literature on related topics. Section 2.1 explores common
psychotherapy approaches applied to student stress. Section 2.2 reviews the applications of
immersive technology (AR/VR) in health-related sectors. In Section 2.3, chatbot applica-
tions in counseling and related VR-enabled chatbots are brieﬂy introduced and reviewed.
2.1. Psychotherapy
This section reviews common psychotherapy approaches and how they can be applied
to alleviate student stress. The American Psychological Association classiﬁes psychotherapy
approaches into ﬁve categories, including psychoanalysis and psychodynamic therapies,
behavior therapy, cognitive therapy, humanistic therapy, and integrative or holistic ther-
apy [4]. Psychodynamic therapy was originally conceptualized by Austrian psychologist
Sigmund Freud. It emphasizes the subconscious mind and explores how past experiences
and personalities inﬂuence present thoughts, feelings, relationships, and behaviors [5].
Behavior therapy, also known as “behavior modiﬁcation”, uses ﬁndings and methods from
experimental psychology’s study of learning processes to change maladaptive behaviors.
The abnormal behaviors manifested in psychological disorders can be acquired as normal
behaviors, and the disorders can be corrected through the basic principles of conditioning,
learning, and observational learning [6]. Cognitive therapy is based on theoretical assump-
tions about human cognitive processes that inﬂuence emotions and behaviors, and uses

Processes 2022, 10, 930
3 of 19
cognitive and behavioral techniques to change maladaptive cognitions. It utilizes cognitive
reconstruction, psychological coping, and problem-solving techniques for counseling and
treatment [7]. Humanistic therapy is an extension of person-centered therapy, which fo-
cuses on exploring the nature of human beings. It is a way to explore the mind, body, and
spirit, including thoughts, emotions, and behaviors, and to integrate healthy relationships
with others and society to make life more fulﬁlling. The emphasis is on positive growth and
development and the therapist’s own attitudes such as congruence, genuineness, uncondi-
tional positive regard, and empathic understanding rather than therapeutic techniques. [8].
Integrative or holistic therapy means that the therapist integrates elements of multiple
approaches to tailor the treatment plan to the needs of each client. Therapists instruct
patients on how to solve problems by correcting their thinking and behavioral reactions [9].
College students face (and bear) many sources of pressure from teachers, peers (class-
mates), and other personal relations (e.g., families, signiﬁcant others, etc.). DeAnnah’s
research divides the factors affecting students’ mental health into three levels, i.e., individ-
ual, interpersonal, and institutional. The individual level is similar to the coping abilities of
students, and the interpersonal, including intergroup awareness, and institutional levels
are related to the school organization, i.e., the tension of the entire campus. The data come
from 2203 students enrolled in the university. The results show that the comprehensive
impacts of the individual and institutional levels are related to the mental health of students.
Therefore, the students’ limited coping abilities and the tense campus atmosphere have
led to psychological distress for college students [10]. In order to explore whether general
life satisfaction is negatively related to college students’ stress, Weinstein conducted three
surveys on a sample of college students, including a simple demographic survey, a life
satisfaction scale [11], and a college student stress scale [12]. The life satisfaction and college
student stress scores were signiﬁcantly negatively correlated within the sample, which
indicates that college students’ life satisfaction is adversely affected by college pressure [13].
Another study attempted to explore the association between student stress and mental
disorders. A total of 20,842 respondents from the World Health Organization World Mental
Health International College Student Initiative were collected, including students from
24 universities in 9 countries. The study put forward six issues that may cause stress in
students, including ﬁnancial status, health, love life, family relations, work/school relations,
and family experience. At the same time, mental disorders were divided into six categories:
major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder,
alcohol use disorder, and drug use disorder. The relationship between stress issues and
mental disorders was evaluated based on the stress perception of students’ responses.
The results showed that 93.7% of students said they felt stress in at least one area, and a
signiﬁcant correlation was found between the degree of stress and the increased chance
of mental illness [14]. For stress-level determination, Tonacci’s study showed that using
machine learning to analyze physiological signals related to autonomic nervous system
(ANS) activity, such as electrocardiograms (ECG) and galvanic skin response (GSR), can
yield the same results as self-reporting [15].
In order to reduce student stress and improve the effectiveness of counseling, many
studies have proposed various counseling services. Several studies have investigated
the effects of biofeedback on the treatment of stress and anxiety. Results showed that
participants who received biofeedback and counseling had more reductions in anxiety
symptoms than those who only received counseling [16,17]. Another study on complemen-
tary alternative therapy resources suggests that yoga can be effective in helping with stress
management [18]. In addition, several studies have examined the impact of counseling
on students’ schooling. Studies have shown a signiﬁcant correlation between counseling
experiences and student retention [19,20], demonstrating the importance of counseling
services for students.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
4 of 19
2.2. Immersive Technology: AR/VR
This section reviews the advantages of immersive technology in health care appli-
cations and some implementations of augmented reality and/or virtual reality (AR/VR)
for psychotherapy systems. The beneﬁts of immersive virtual environments in the ﬁeld
of psychotherapy have been demonstrated in a number of studies. For example, Persky’s
study used the Scopus database for literature retrieval and analysis and showed that immer-
sive technologies have more advantages than traditional processing methods, including a
higher degree of user realism and easier experimental control [21].
Another study was done in an AR environment setting [22], where a Kinect sensor
was connected with an iPad to establish a clinical consulting system. Patients can take
advantage of this AR system as long as they want to seek medical consultation at home.
Because of its low cost and portability, the AR system can greatly beneﬁt patients and allow
physicians to visually explain complex medical conditions to the patients [22].
Prior research conducted exposure therapy in a VR environment setting and designed
seven VR driving condition scenarios such as day and night, mountain road, highway, etc.
The experiments would simultaneously collect physiological signals of subjects through
biosensors. By meticulously designing multiple experiments, VR can simulate many
different driving-related anxiety scenarios for better treatment. The subjects provided a
decent evaluation of the immersive experiences The results showed that the VR system
was an effective driving phobia treatment [23]. In addition, other research performed meta-
analyses and found that VR can be used as an effective intervention to distract patients
with needle-related surgery and relieve pain in children [24]. While aging problems have
occurred in many countries across the globe, emphasis on the healthcare of the elderly using
immersive technologies has become a new research area. Elderly people are susceptive
to falling, which damages their bodies and mind. In one study, the results showed that
VR can be served as auxiliary means of physical therapy for fall prevention and remote
rehabilitation for the elderly population [25].
2.3. Related Chatbot Applications
This section reviews existing counseling chatbots and some related VR-enabled chatbot
applications. Woebot is a chatbot that caters to the users’ mental health. Its foundation is
rooted in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT), and
Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT). The company claimed that users can establish close
bonds with Woebot within three to ﬁve days, and the bond did not appear to diminish
over time [26]. Of the experimental subjects, 85% were willing to interact with Woebot
daily, and 76% felt better after taking measures suggested by Woebot. There was also a 22%
average reduction in depression symptoms in two weeks [27]. Consequently, chatbots have
demonstrated themselves as effective tools for combating certain types of psychological
diseases. Minjeong Kang’s research customizes the chatbot to process personalities such
as steadiness and conscientiousness [28]. Other studies built an online chatbot that can
distinguish emotions from conversations. It can extract useful words and analyze any
depression or anxiety indication to prevent future mental illness [29].
A major trend is to combine chatbots with VR human–computer interface (HCI) for dif-
ferent applications. For instance, Tsaramirsis et al. developed a VR asynchronous distance
learning software and found that students using the software for learning outperformed
those using traditional videos used for learning [30]. VR chatbots can also be used for job
interview simulations. The chatbot is trained in advance using questions and answers and
associated word pairs, and then generates conversations based on the user’s responses to
provide a human-like experience [31].
3. Methodology
The goal of this study is to develop a platform that combines VR and empathy-centric
psychological counseling. Students can use VR devices to connect to the system, register
for an account, and then start using the counseling services. Our system consists of

Processes 2022, 10, 930
5 of 19
three components, including a questionnaire to measure users’ stress status, a chatbot to
talk with users, and a chat room where users can interact with each other and talk freely
with counselors. An additional ofﬂine questionnaire was added to the study to collect the
stress levels and areas in need of assistance from university students beforehand, which
was used as a reference for the system construction. We ﬁrst designed the questionnaire
and built the platform, and then invited the higher scorers of the ofﬂine questionnaire
to participate in the VR platform test to verify the effectiveness of the platform. In order
to protect the rights of the users, a professional psychological counselor was involved
throughout the entire process, and the users could stop the experiment voluntarily if they
were uncomfortable. The counselor could also stop the experiment depending on the
user’s condition.
3.1. Module 1: Questionnaire Design
The structure of the questionnaire design is shown in Figure 1. Stress is a normal
physical and psychological response to the various demands we place on ourselves. Stress
is a subjective feeling, and different people react differently to the same event. Some
studies mention that stress has an effect on people’s psychology, behavior, physicality, and
cognition [32–35], and some studies have used these factors as aspects of stress scales [36].
American addiction centers suggests that stress can also have an impact on a person’s
social level [37]. In this study, these factors [32–37] were combined and categorized to
comprehensively consider the stress situation of students. One can also refer to the Ques-
tionPro Survey Software website [38] for more details on questionnaire design. In this
research, the questionnaire “Survey for school stress—Virtual Reality Counseling Chatbot
System” consisted of three aspects, i.e., the Stress Level, Psychological Sensitivity, and
Life Impact of subjects. The Stress Level part had scaled questions using a 10-point Likert
scale to measure each subject’s stress levels and stress coping abilities. The Psychological
Sensitivity (the diversity of emotional effects) and Life Impact parts, which contained a
series of questions utilizing a 5-point Likert scale, were developed to measure the impact of
stress on mindset and various crucial effects on life (e.g., the behavioral, physical, cognitive,
and social effects).
Figure 1. Structure of the questionnaire design.
3.2. Module 2: Empathy-Centric Counseling Chatbot
This section will introduce the essential parts of the counseling chatbot methodol-
ogy, including Section 3.2.1 the description of empathy-centric psychological knowledge,
Section 3.2.2 the chatbot technology and module implementation, and Section 3.2.3 the issue
and sentiment classiﬁcation (of question sentences) using an NLP machine learning model.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
6 of 19
3.2.1. Empathy-Centric Psychological Knowledge
Person-centered therapy was developed by Carl Rogers [39]. It is a non-directive
orientation that emphasizes the client’s nature toward self-actualization, their own creation
of self-growth, and their ability to actively heal themselves. Rogers believed that the attitude
of the therapist, the personality traits, and the relationship between the therapist and the
client are the main factors in the effectiveness of therapy. The counseling process is client-
centered, focusing on the client’s tendency to self-actualize, which is believed to be the
spontaneous force that leads to change. The counselor’s skills are not the main focus; rather,
the human attitude and stance are more important. In counseling, empathy expresses the
advisor’s respect and regard for the client, whose experience may be completely different
from that of the advisor. Clients need to feel supported, understood, and respected.
Roger divided empathy into four levels, as in Figure 2. The primary level of empathy is
deﬁned as responding to the client’s explicitly expressed meaning and feelings with a simple
repetition of basic understanding. The second level of empathy is to respond to the implicit,
half-expressed, or implied feelings of the person with corresponding emotional words to
acknowledge them and bring their true feelings to the surface. The third level of empathy
is for recognizing the client’s confusing and contradictory feelings that subconsciously
obscure what the client really cares about, and then capturing the core of the emotion and
responding to the client’s desire with afﬁrmations. The highest level of empathy is for
when the person is suppressing their feelings or not feeling them in the conversation, and
guessing their intentions from what they are describing, capturing the core of the emotion,
and responding to it directly or indirectly in a way that is acceptable to the person [40].
 
Figure 2. Four levels of Empathy.
This study refers to Roger’s concept of empathy as the basis for the counseling re-
sponses. The system uses a classiﬁer to classify the user’s utterances for intention and
sentiment in order to achieve the purpose of issue detection and sentiment response.
3.2.2. Chatbot Technology and Implementation
The architecture of the chatbot in this study is shown in Figure 3. After the user speaks,
the Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) module converts speech into text as input to the
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) module. The NLU module converts the text into
useful information and sends it to the Dialog Management (DM) module. The DM module
functions include Dialog State Tracking and generating dialog Policy. The Dialog State
will be saved and updated in Tracker, and the Policy module can determine the Action
based on the Dialog State saved in Tracker. The Action can generate a message (Natural
Language Generation, NLG) to be exported to the user. Finally, the Text-To-Speech (TTS)
module reads the text message (in voice) to the user, completing one iteration of chatbot.
The details of individual module operations are described in the following paragraph. For
detailed implementations of the chatbot modules described above, please refer to web
resources describing Google Cloud Platform (GCP) [41], Cloud Speech (-to-text) API [42],

Processes 2022, 10, 930
7 of 19
Cloud Text-to-Speech API [43], open python library Rasa Core and NLU [44], and SpaCy
open-source NLP library [45].
Figure 3. Architecture and process of the chatbot modules.
3.2.3. Issues and Sentiments of Questions’ Classiﬁcation
In order to explore users’ emotion and understand users’ concern, machine learning is
applied to the classiﬁcation of sentiment and issue. There are ﬁve steps of machine learning,
as shown in Figure 4: Deﬁne Problem, Build Dataset, Train Model, Evaluate Model, and
Use Model.
Define 
Problem
Build 
Dataset
Train 
Model
Evaluate 
Model
Use 
Model
Figure 4. Five steps of machine learning.
•
Deﬁne problem
In this stage, we clearly deﬁne the speciﬁc problem, identify what task the problem
belongs to in machine learning, and select the corresponding machine learning model. In
this study, we wanted to investigate the user’s sentiment and issue during the conversation,
and the sentiment and issue can be deﬁned in advance; therefore, we chose Supervised
Learning and pre-deﬁned the label of the data.
•
Build dataset
The dataset used in this study was obtained from the CounselChat website [46].
The CounselChat website is a website that matches users with counselors. Users can
anonymously post their concerns or questions for help on the site, and counselors can
respond publicly (with their clinic and contact numbers), allowing users to choose a
counselor who is suitable for them based on the responses. A study obtained all the
data from the founder of the CounselChat website [47], which was used as the dataset
for training the model in this study. The data were cleaned and labeled. The cleaned
data consisted of four columns, namely user questions and counselor responses from the
CounselChat website, and manually added sentiment and issue labels. User questions
were categorized into six issues, namely Studies, Family, Relationship, Finance, Work, and
Health. Sentiment labels were compiled from three previous studies, as described and listed
in Table 1, namely NRC [48], PANAS [49], and AEQ [50]. In order to classify sentiments
comprehensively, this study organizes and integrates the sentiments in descriptive terms
from these studies as the sentiment categories. Nonetheless, the sentiment categories and
analysis for counseling dialogs can be further investigated in future research.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
8 of 19
Table 1. Sentiment categories in descriptive terms.
Referred Studies
Types of Sentiments in Descriptive Terms
NRC [48]
Anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise, trust.
PANAS [49]
Distress, upset, hostile, irritable, scared, jittery, afraid, ashamed,
guilty, nervous.
AEQ [50]
Anger, anxiety, hopelessness, shame, and boredom
Our research
Anger, anxiety (fear, scared, jittery, nervous), hopelessness,
shame, upset (sadness), distress, guilty, boredom, indifference
The negative sentiments in this study were categorized as Anger, Anxiety (fear, scared,
jittery, nervous), Hopelessness, Shame, Upset (sadness), Distress, Guilty, Boredom, and
Indifference. For further simplifying the sentiments, circular space of the circumplex
model [51] and the distribution of 197 emotions proposed by Liu [52] were used. Circular
space of the circumplex model is shown in Figure 5. The space is divided into four
quadrants, with the y-axis representing the arousal level and the x-axis representing the
valence positive or negative. Nine negative sentiments correspond to ﬁve categories on
the left side of the circular space of the circumplex model. In summary, the predeﬁned
categories of issues and sentiments in this study are shown in Figure 6.
Valence
Arousal
High
Low
Negative
Positive
Neutral
Tense
Angry
Frustrated
Depressed
Bored
Tired
Excited
Delighted
Happy
Content
Relaxed
Calm
Anxiety
Anger
Hopelessness
Distress
Upset
Boredom
Indifference
Guilty
Shame
Figure 5. Circular space of the circumplex model.
Figure 6. Classes of issues and sentiments.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
9 of 19
•
Train model
Pre-trained BERT
In this study, we used pre-trained BERT as the basis for two-stage migration learning,
using the model for ﬁne-tuning the following supervised tasks. The full name of BERT
is Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, which is a language repre-
sentation model trained by Google in an unsupervised manner using a large amount of
unmarked text; its architecture is the Encoder in Transformer. Google pre-trained BERT
to perform two tasks: the Masked Language Model (MLM) and Next Sentence Prediction
(NSP). The MLM is trained in such a way that it can predict the missing parts of a sen-
tence. Compared to the traditional Language Model (LM), the MLM implements two-way
contextual word representation.
The traditional LM aims to estimate the probability distribution of the next word given
previous words. The objective function is as follow:
P(wiw1, . . . , wi−1)
(1)
Given the 1st to (i −1)th words, the LM will estimate the probability distribution P of
the (i)th words.
BERT uses the concept of the MLM and the framework of the Transformer Encoder to
get rid of the dilemma that previous language models can only estimate the probability of
the next word from a single direction (left-to-right or right-to-left) and train a bidirectional
language representation model with the following equation as the objective function:
P(wiw1, . . . , wi−1, wi+1, . . . , wn)
(2)
Given the 1st to (i −1)th and (i + 1)th to (n)th words, the MLM will estimate the
probability distribution P of the (i)th words.
BERT uses the transformer encoder to construct a deep bidirectional model so that the
representation of each token output from BERT contains both pre- and post-training.
The second task of pre-training BERT, NSP, is to determine whether the second sentence
is connected to the ﬁrst sentence in the original text. In summary, in the MLM task, learning
to ﬁll in the missing words allows BERT to better model the representation of each word
in different contexts, while the NSP task helps BERT model the relationship between
two sentences.
BertForSequenceClassiﬁcation
For ﬁne-tuning the model, bert-base-uncased tokenizer, which consists of about
30,000 tokens, and BertForSequenceClassiﬁcation is applied. The dropout and linear clas-
siﬁer are added to BERT, with the logits for predicting categories as output. Then, the
objective function of the downstream task is used to train the classiﬁer from scratch and
ﬁne-tune the parameters of BERT. The Adam optimizer was chosen for training, and the
hyperparameters were as suggested by the authors of BERT: Batch size = 16, Learning rate
= 2 × 10−5, Epochs = 4, and epsilon = 1 × 10−8.
•
Evaluate model
Since the distribution of data set categories in this study is heterogeneous, the Mathews
Correlation Coefﬁcient (MCC) was used to evaluate the test set performance. In the
multiclass case, the Matthews correlation coefﬁcient can be deﬁned based on the confusion
matrix of K classes. To simplify the deﬁnition, consider the following intermediate variables:
tk = ∑K
i Cik, the number of times k classes actually occurred,
pk = ∑K
i Cki, the number of times class k was predicted,
c = ∑K
k Ckk, the total number of correctly predicted samples,
s = ∑K
i ∑K
j Cij, the total number of samples.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
10 of 19
Multiclass MCC is deﬁned as:
MCC =
c × s −∑K
k pk × tk
r
s2 −∑K
k p2
k

×

s2 −∑K
k t2
k

(3)
After ﬁne-tuning, the MCC of this study reached 0.8570.
3.3. Module 3: Avatar-Based Chatroom Joined by a Counselor and Student(s)
We designed a module to satisfy the need for various communication tasks with real
therapists in our system. Therapists can join this chatroom to counsel the user one-on-one
or lead all the users to participate in group therapy. The communication capabilities were
implemented using the Photon engine, which is an online server provider that can be inte-
grated with Unity. Real-time verbal or text interactions with each user are supported and
realized with the help of a Photon engine. Each user, including the therapist, is represented
as an individual-chosen avatar in the virtual classroom. By choosing an avatar, people can
express their thoughts much more freely without worrying about being recognized.
3.4. System Veriﬁcation
To verify the effectiveness of the system, participants were invited to use the VR
chatbot system, and their scores on pre- and post-test questionnaires were compared to
measure whether the system could help them reduce their stress. Each participant ﬁlled
out a questionnaire in advance, and if they were screened to participate in the VR chatbot
experiment, the participant underwent two sessions of the VR chatbot experiment at least
one week apart. During the experiments, participants were able to log in to the platform
as a virtual avatar and interact with the chatbot. After two sessions of using the chatbot,
the participants ﬁlled out the questionnaire again to assess the difference in questionnaire
score before and after using the chatbot as an evaluation of the effectiveness of the VR
chatbot counseling.
The participant selection process included two ﬁlters. First, subjects with incom-
plete questionnaires were excluded. The subjects were then split according to their stress
levels in the ﬁrst part of the questionnaire using a median split, and the group with the
higher scores was randomly invited to participate in the virtual reality counseling chatbot
(VRECC) experiment.
4. System Architecture and Case Demonstration
The system framework is illustrated in Figure 7. The core module consists of three
components: a stress questionnaire to measure the user’s stress, mental state, and life prob-
lems, a counseling chatbot to talk to the user, and a chatroom for the user to communicate
with a real counselor. These three modules are implemented in an interface created by unity
and connected to a server. During the use of the modules, the system collects, analyzes,
and stores the user input in a database.
The participants’ selection ﬂow in this experiment is shown in Figure 8, with a total
of 176 valid questionnaires collected (i.e., 178 questionnaires surveyed and 2 incomplete
questionnaires excluded). The median split was applied to screen subjects with above-
median stress levels (n = 101) [53]. Subjects with above-median stress level scores were
randomly drawn and invited to participate in the two-time/session VRECC experiments.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
11 of 19
 
Figure 7. The system framework integrating the online questionnaire, counseling chatbot, and group
counseling chatroom.
Figure 8. VRECC subject selection process ﬂow.
This section introduces the experiment procedure shown in Figure 9. First, we con-
ducted a pre-test questionnaire survey to different backgrounds of students in university to
evaluate their scores in terms of stress level, psychological sensitivity, and life impact. This
research evaluated the students whose stress levels were higher than the median score of all
the questionnaire takers. Next, the randomly selected subjects/participants went through
the introduction and disclaimer of this VRECC experiment. Afterwards, they started using
the VRECC chatbot system. The participants underwent several rounds of asking and an-
swering questions. They could either interact with the chatbot through speaking or typing.
The chatbot would direct the participants to talk about their recent psychological distress,
and they could work on how to relieve the symptoms together. During the interaction
process, the user can feel consolation because of the sympathy and encouragement dialogue
provided by the chatbot. We then asked the user to re-test the chatbot system again after
one week. The one-week interval was designed to ensure better therapy reﬂection and
experience of the chatbot system. When the participants had accomplished operating the
chatbot system twice, they completed the post-test questionnaire. This research analyzed
the performance of using the system in the following sections.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
12 of 19
 
Figure 9. The VRECC experiment pre- and post-experiment survey ﬂow.
5. Data Analysis and Discussion
In this study, a total of 176 valid initial questionnaires were collected. The subjects were
split using the median stress level in the questionnaire and the group with above-median
scores (101 subjects) was identiﬁed. From the above-median (stress level score ≥6) group,
17 male participants and 17 female participants were randomly drawn and recruited for
the VRECC experiments. They also completed the post-experiment questionnaires after
the two-time VRECC experiment. This section reports the analytical results of the subjects’
questionnaire scores in various aspects (e.g., stress level, psychological sensitivity, and life
impact) to evaluate the effectiveness of the VRECC system.
5.1. Questionnaire Result
Total of 178 randomly selected subjects completed the Student Stress Survey, and
two incomplete questionnaires were excluded (i.e., 176 valid questionnaires were collected).
Using the stress level as a criterion, these subjects were divided into two groups: 101 subjects
were in the above-median stress score group, and 75 were in the below-median score group.
Of the 101 subjects in the above-median stress score group, 34 were randomly selected and
recruited as the treatment group (TG) to participate in VRECC experiments. The 75 subjects
with below-median stress scores were treated as the control group (CG).
The demographic information of participants in the TG (Table 2) shows that the
average age of the participants was 22.77 years old, with the youngest being 20 years
old and the oldest being 26 years old. Among the VRECC participants, half were male
and half were female. The majority of the participants were in their ﬁrst year of their
master’s degree (41.18%), followed by the second year of their master’s degree (20.59%),
indicating that more than 60% of the respondents were in graduate school. In terms of the
departments, Industrial Engineering accounted for the most participants (73.53%), followed
by the Science and Management Department (5.88%). As for stress level, 17 participants
(50.00%) rated their stress level as 6, 16 participants (47.06%) rated their stress level as 7, and
the remaining 2 participants (5.88%) rated their stress level as 8. For stress coping ability,
the highest number of subjects (32.35%) rated themselves as 7, followed by 5 (23.53%).
The 95% conﬁdence intervals for the mean values of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG are
shown in the interval plots for each aspect of the questionnaire. The results showed that
in the interval plots of Stress level and Psychological sensitivity, TG_PRE, TG_POST, and
CG showed a decreasing trend as shown in Figures 10 and 11. However, there was no
decreasing trend in Life impact in Figure 12.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
13 of 19
Table 2. Demographic information of participants.
Attributes
Variables
# of
Participants
Percentage
Mean
S.D.
Min
Max
Age
-
34
100.00
22.76
1.5775
20
26
Sex
Male
17
50.00
Female
17
50.00
Year
Undergraduate (2nd)
2
5.88
Undergraduate (3rd)
2
5.88
Undergraduate (4th)
6
17.65
Graduate (1st)
14
41.18
Graduate (2nd)
7
20.59
Doctorate
3
8.82
Major/De-
partment
Industrial engineering
25
73.53
Technology management
2
5.88
Chemical engineering
1
2.94
Electronics
1
2.94
Economics
1
2.94
Engineering sys science
1
2.94
Early childhood education
1
2.94
Computer science
1
2.94
Others
1
2.94
Stress level
6
17
50.00
7
16
47.06
8
2
5.88
 
Figure 10. Interval plot for Stress level of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG.
 
Figure 11. Interval plot for Psychological sensitivity of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
14 of 19
 
Figure 12. Interval plot for Life impact of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG.
According to the questionnaire design, Life impact can be further divided into Behav-
ioral impact, Physical impact, Cognitive change, and “Social mode change”. The respective
interval plots are shown in Figure 13.
 
(a) Behavioral impact 
(b) Physical impact 
(c) Cognitive change 
(d) Social mode change 
Figure 13. (a) Interval plot for Behavioral impact of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG; (b) Interval plot for
Physical impact of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG; (c) Interval plot for Cognitive change of TG_PRE,
TG_POST, and CG; (d) Interval plot for “Social mode change” of TG_PRE, TG_POST, and CG.

Processes 2022, 10, 930
15 of 19
To examine the effectiveness of the experiment on both Stress level and Psychological
sensitivity, further analysis was conducted. The paired sample t-test was used to examine
the difference in mean questionnaire scores between the TG before and after the experiment.
That is, TG_PRE and TG_POST. The independent sample t-test was used to examine the
difference in mean questionnaire scores between TG_PRE and CG, and TG_POST and CG.
The results show that there is a signiﬁcant difference in Stress level between TG_PRE and
CG, TG_PRE and TG_POST, and TG_POST and CG (p-value = 0.000). As for Psychological
sensitivity, there was no signiﬁcant difference between TG_PRE and CG, TG_PRE and
TG_POST, or TG_POST and CG.
5.2. Discussion of Experiment Outcome
The interval graphs (Figures 10 and 11) of stress level and psychological sensitivity il-
lustrate that the counseling chatbot system helped reduce the stress level and psychological
sensitivity of the participants, which demonstrated the effectiveness of VRECC adoption in
the experiment. The t-test results also showed that there was a signiﬁcant reduction in the
Stress level of participants after VRECC sessions (i.e., after the psychotherapy counseling
interventions), although the average stress score of the TG remained higher than the aver-
age score of the CG. Chen’s study showed that the more counseling sessions participants
received, the higher their level of self-involvement (and improvement may follow) [54].
In Orlinsky’s study, it was further found that participants’ self-involvement was directly
proportional to the effectiveness of the counseling interventions [55]. That is, although
there was a decrease in participants’ stress, participating in only a few counseling sessions
(in our experiments, only two sessions per subject) will not lower stress to the level of the
CG’s, which was proven in our survey analytical results.
However, according to the interval plot of Life impact, the intervention has not been
effective on the subjects’ overall Life impact aspects (e.g., behavioral, physical, and cognitive
measures). Judging from these aspects (behavioral, physical, and cognitive questions) of
Life impact, the test results of people that had a higher pressure score before the experiment
were not improving and even somewhat deteriorating after receiving VRECC treatment.
Part of the reason might be the side effects of receiving psychotherapy. Treatment of anxiety
and trauma is well-known for having the risk of temporarily worsening symptoms [56].
As a result, some of the subjects might experience unpleasant side effects. Lorenz has
performed experiments that further investigated the speciﬁc side effects after receiving
counseling. In the study, 14% of participants reported feeling ashamed of using therapy,
and 6% of participants reported new symptoms emerging [57]. In addition, disclosing
thoughts and feelings to instant messengers was demonstrated to be not as effective as face-
to-face disclosure [58]. It can be inferred that VRECC might not be as helpful as receiving
face-to-face therapy for these people; therefore, they did not improve their rating in the
questionnaire. In addition, according to Kim’s research, the agent’s voice in psychological
counseling affects the effectiveness of counseling. The results of the study showed that
the responses with older voices convinced users that the counselor was more professional
than those with younger voices [59]. The use of young female voices in this study may
be one of the reasons why the system was not effective, and future studies may try using
older voice responses. However, there is no research that clearly indicates the effectiveness
of counseling for different orientations, so the ineffectiveness of the three aspects of Life
impact (behavioral, physical, and cognitive questions) in this study cannot be explained,
and follow-up studies can be conducted in this direction.
Concerning the chatbot implementation, applying the emotional understanding of
words as part of the empathic responses into the chatbot dialog dataset presents an imi-
tation pattern closer to the in-person counseling sessions. The participants’ stress levels
decreased in the experiment, reﬂecting that the empathic conversations effectively created a
supportive environment. Another interesting outcome is that their psychological sensitivity
dropped slightly (but not signiﬁcantly), which indicates a possible need for more counsel-
ing sessions involving a real counselor in-person or online (such as our study in VR group

Processes 2022, 10, 930
16 of 19
counseling [3]) when subjects are not totally at ease in an imitating session with a virtual
counselor (chatbot). Further, there may be more elements in the counseling language, such
as the variables and effectiveness of certain emotional and empathic vocabulary usages, to
be considered in further study.
Lastly, the participants of VRECC who lacked improvements were largely male (more
than twice the number of female subjects). This ﬁnding also coincides with some research
showing that female patients generally experience more effective improvement than male
patients during internet-based cognitive behavior therapies [60]. This could imply that
women may be more willing to express their feelings and receive feedback than men.
Again, future research should be carried out to investigate the clinical adoptions of effective
VRECC to patients with diversiﬁed demographic backgrounds.
6. Conclusions
Sentiment analysis and response provides a new way for counseling chatbots to help
students reduce stress. Virtual reality allows the user to be distant or to not show up in
person, reducing the difﬁculty of counseling. The study allowed users to chat with the
counseling chatbot and feel empathized with and healed by the process, thus achieving
the goal of counseling. The strength of the VRECC system is that it allows users to receive
counseling at any time and in any place, making it a ﬂexible aid for counselors.
We completed the initial development of the VRECC system, including the question-
naire module, the counseling chatbot module, and the chatroom module, and conducted
an experiment to verify the effectiveness of the system. The experiment examined whether
TG participants experienced a reduction in stress burden after VRECC. Two groups were
created from the questionnaire results of 176 subjects using median stress levels: one group
with higher stress levels and the other with lower stress levels. From the 101 people on the
waiting list with higher stress levels, 34 were randomly selected to participate in the VRECC
experiment as TG. At the end of the experiment, the participants in the TG were asked
to ﬁll out the same stress questionnaire. According to the results, there was a signiﬁcant
improvement in stress level after VRECC, but it still could not be reduced to the same
level as that of the CG. For Psychological sensitivity and Social impact, although there
was no signiﬁcant difference, there was a decreasing trend. However, there was no effect
in other aspects of Life impact such as Behavioral, Physical, and Cognitive measures. In
conclusion, the results of this study demonstrate the effectiveness of VRECC in reducing
students’ stress levels. Despite the signiﬁcant progress made in this study on student
stress reduction, VRECC is still far from satisfactory in terms of Life impact. For future
research, it is a challenge to explore the effectiveness of counseling on different aspects and
to introduce more counseling materials and techniques into the VRECC system. Although
VRECC shows promising effectiveness in counseling treatments, this study still has its
limitations and requires further research. For some people, there is still a gap between
counseling performed by a VR chatbot and having real conversations with a counselor. It is
always a challenge to overcome the authenticity issue of VR applications, and VRECC is
no exception. We look forward to further expanding the counseling knowledgebase and
adopting more sophisticated NLP language modeling techniques to improve therapist-like
dialogs for handling different psychologically induced scenarios. In addition, we will con-
tinue the research efforts of improving a realistic VR environment and present an authentic
psychotherapy experience for users. Most importantly, we will increase the effectiveness
of adopting VRECC as a supporting tool for the increasing need for student counseling
practices on campus. Furthermore, in the plan for a comprehensive VRECC development,
the advanced modules and their seamless integration of the VR empathy-centric chatbot,
virtual group counselling, and the psychological online survey will be the continuing
research focus. The intelligent and integrated system will serve as a virtual assistant to
the therapists who will lead the group therapies and perform counseling virtually (online),
eliminating constraints such as location, scheduling, and privacy issues. The conversations
and underlying emotions of group therapy participants during the session can be simul-

Processes 2022, 10, 930
17 of 19
taneously input into the supporting empathy chatbot to support the therapist with better
counseling dialogs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.J.C.T. and C.V.T.; methodology, A.J.C.T., A.P.C.L., C.V.T.
and K.Y.K.H.; software, A.P.C.L. and K.L.K.T.; validation, C.V.T. and K.Y.K.H.; formal analysis,
A.P.C.L., K.Y.K.H. and A.J.C.T.; investigation, A.P.C.L. and K.L.K.T.; resources, A.J.C.T.; data curation,
A.P.C.L. and K.L.K.T.; writing—original draft preparation, A.J.C.T. and A.P.C.L.; writing—review
and editing, C.V.T. and K.Y.K.H.; visualization, A.P.C.L. and K.L.K.T.; supervision, A.J.C.T.; project
administration, A.J.C.T.; funding acquisition, A.J.C.T. and C.V.T. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology grant (MOST-110-
2221-E-007-113-MY3) and the National Tsing Hua University multi-disciplinary research grant.
Institutional Review Board Statement: This clinical experiment design was thoroughly reviewed
and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of National Tsing Hua University. The approval
number is 11009HE102.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Cohen, M. Student Guide to Surviving Stress and Anxiety in College & Beyond. Available online: https://www.learnpsychology.
org/student-stress-anxiety-guide/ (accessed on 10 May 2021).
2.
Ye, Y.X.; Dai, Y.J.; Xie, B.T.; Jian, D.K. Survey of Life Changes and Mood during the COVID-19 Epidemic. Available online:
http://www.etmh.org/CustomPage/HtmlEditorPage.aspx?MId=1346&ML=3 (accessed on 20 May 2021).
3.
Lin, A.P.; Trappey, C.V.; Luan, C.-C.; Trappey, A.J.; Tu, K.L. A Test Platform for Managing School Stress Using a Virtual Reality
Group Chatbot Counseling System. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 9071. [CrossRef]
4.
APA. Different Approaches to Psychotherapy. Available online: https://www.apa.org/topics/psychotherapy/approaches
(accessed on 8 November 2021).
5.
Summers, R.F.; Barber, J.P. Psychodynamic Therapy: A Guide to Evidence-Based Practice; Guilford Press: New York, NY, USA, 2010.
6.
Wolpe, J. The Practice of Behavior Therapy; Pergamon Press: Oxford, UK, 1990.
7.
Beck, A.T.; Weishaar, M. Cognitive therapy. In Comprehensive Handbook of Cognitive Therapy; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
1989; pp. 21–36.
8.
Raskin, N.J.; Rogers, C.R. Person-Centered Therapy; American Psychological Association: Washington, DC, USA, 2005.
9.
Craske, M.G.; Meuret, A.E.; Ritz, T.; Treanor, M.; Dour, H.J. Treatment for anhedonia: A neuroscience driven approach. Depress.
Anxiety 2016, 33, 927–938. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Byrd, D.R.; McKinney, K.J. Individual, Interpersonal, and Institutional Level Factors Associated With the Mental Health of
College Students. J. Am. Coll. Health 2012, 60, 185–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Diener, E.; Emmons, R.A.; Larsen, R.J.; Grifﬁn, S. The satisfaction with life scale. J. Personal. Assess. 1985, 49, 71–75. [CrossRef]
12.
Feldt, R.C. Development of a brief measure of college stress: The college student stress scale. Psychol. Rep. 2008, 102, 855–860.
[CrossRef]
13.
Weinstein, L.; Laverghetta, A. College student stress and satisfaction with life. Coll. Stud. J. 2009, 43, 1161–1162.
14.
Karyotaki, E.; Cuijpers, P.; Albor, Y.; Alonso, J.; Auerbach, R.P.; Bantjes, J.; Bruffaerts, R.; Ebert, D.D.; Hasking, P.; Kiekens, G.
Sources of stress and their associations with mental disorders among college students: Results of the world health organization
world mental health surveys international college student initiative. Front. Psychol. 2020, 11, 1759. [CrossRef]
15.
Tonacci, A.; Dellabate, A.; Dieni, A.; Bachi, L.; Sansone, F.; Conte, R.; Billeci, L. Can Machine Learning Predict Stress Reduction
Based on Wearable Sensors’ Data Following Relaxation at Workplace? A Pilot Study. Processes 2020, 8, 448. [CrossRef]
16.
Ratanasiripong, P.; Sverduk, K.; Prince, J.; Hayashino, D. Biofeedback and counseling for stress and anxiety among college
students. J. Coll. Stud. Dev. 2012, 53, 742–749. [CrossRef]
17.
Wyner, D.R. Pilot study of a university counseling center stress management program employing mindfulness and compassion-
based relaxation training with biofeedback. Biofeedback 2015, 43, 121–128. [CrossRef]
18.
Milligan, C.K. Yoga for stress management program as a complementary alternative counseling resource in a university counseling
center. J. Coll. Couns. 2006, 9, 181–187. [CrossRef]
19.
Lee, D.; Olson, E.A.; Locke, B.; Michelson, S.T.; Odes, E. The effects of college counseling services on academic performance and
retention. J. Coll. Stud. Dev. 2009, 50, 305–319. [CrossRef]
20.
Wilson, S.B.; Mason, T.W.; Ewing, M.J. Evaluating the impact of receiving university-based counseling services on student
retention. J. Couns. Psychol. 1997, 44, 316. [CrossRef]

Processes 2022, 10, 930
18 of 19
21.
Persky, S. Employing immersive virtual environments for innovative experiments in health care communication. Patient Educ.
Couns. 2011, 82, 313–317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Zhang, Q.; Karunanithi, M.; Kang, C. Immersive Augmented Reality (I Am Real)—Remote Clinical Consultation. In Proceedings
of the 2019 IEEE EMBS International Conference on Biomedical & Health Informatics (BHI), Chicago, IL, USA, 19–22 May
2019; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
23.
Trappey, A.; Trappey, C.V.; Chang, C.-M.; Tsai, M.-C.; Kuo, R.R.; Lin, A.P. Virtual reality exposure therapy for driving phobia
disorder (2): System reﬁnement and veriﬁcation. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 347. [CrossRef]
24.
Czech, O.; Wrzeciono, A.; Rutkowska, A.; Guzik, A.; Kiper, P.; Rutkowski, S. Virtual Reality Interventions for Needle-Related
Procedural Pain, Fear and Anxiety—A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10, 3248. [CrossRef]
25.
Piech, J.; Czernicki, K. Virtual Reality Rehabilitation and Exergames—Physical and Psychological Impact on Fall Prevention
among the Elderly—A Literature Review. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 4098. [CrossRef]
26.
Darcy, A.; Daniels, J.; Salinger, D.; Wicks, P.; Robinson, A. Evidence of Human-Level Bonds Established With a Digital Conversa-
tional Agent: Cross-sectional, Retrospective Observational Study. JMIR Form. Res. 2021, 5, e27868. [CrossRef]
27.
Fitzpatrick, K.K.; Darcy, A.; Vierhile, M. Delivering Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Young Adults With Symptoms of Depression
and Anxiety Using a Fully Automated Conversational Agent (Woebot): A Randomized Controlled Trial. JMIR Ment. Health 2017,
4, e19. [CrossRef]
28.
Minjeong, K. A Study of Chatbot Personality based on the Purposes of Chatbot. J. Korea Contents Assoc. 2018, 18, 319–329.
29.
Yin, J.; Chen, Z.; Zhou, K.; Yu, C. A Deep Learning Based Chatbot for Campus Psychological Therapy. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1910.06707.
30.
Tsaramirsis, G.; Buhari, S.M.; Al-Shammari, K.O.; Ghazi, S.; Nazmudeen, M.S.; Tsaramirsis, K. Towards simulation of the
classroom learning experience: Virtual reality approach. In Proceedings of the 2016 3rd International Conference on Computing
for Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), New Delhi, India, 16–18 March 2016; pp. 1343–1346.
31.
Stanica, I.; Dascalu, M.; Bodea, C.N.; Moldoveanu, A.D.B. VR Job Interview Simulator: Where Virtual Reality Meets Artiﬁcial
Intelligence for Education. In Proceedings of the 2018 Zooming Innovation in Consumer Technologies Conference (ZINC), Novi
Sad, Serbia, 30–31 May 2018; pp. 9–12.
32.
Department of Health, The Government of the Hong Kong Administrative Region. Psychosocial Health. Available online:
https://www.studenthealth.gov.hk/tc_chi/health/health_ph/health_ph_stress.html (accessed on 21 April 2022).
33.
Schneiderman, N.; Ironson, G.; Siegel, S.D. Stress and health: Psychological, behavioral, and biological determinants. Annu. Rev.
Clin. Psychol. 2005, 1, 607–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Scott, S.B.; Graham-Engeland, J.E.; Engeland, C.G.; Smyth, J.M.; Almeida, D.M.; Katz, M.J.; Lipton, R.B.; Mogle, J.A.; Munoz, E.;
Ram, N.; et al. The Effects of Stress on Cognitive Aging, Physiology and Emotion (ESCAPE) Project. BMC Psychiatry 2015, 15, 146.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Marks, H. Stress Symptoms. Available online: https://www.webmd.com/balance/stress-management/stress-symptoms-effects_
of-stress-on-the-body (accessed on 21 April 2022).
36.
Fan, H.-C. Explanation of Fan’s Stress Scale. Wu-Nan Book Inc. (Publisher): Taipei, Taiwan. Available online: http://ocw.lib.ntnu.
edu.tw/course/view.php?id=276 (accessed on 21 April 2022).
37.
Friedman, W.J. Types of Stress and Their Symptoms. Available online: https://www.mentalhelp.net/blogs/types-of-stress-and-
their-symptoms/ (accessed on 21 April 2022).
38.
QuestionPro. 18 Student Stress Survey Questions For Questionnaire + Template. Available online: https://www.questionpro.
com/survey-templates/student-stress/ (accessed on 13 April 2021).
39.
Corey, G. Theories and Practice of Counseling & Psychotherapy, 10th ed.; Brooks/Cole: Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 2020.
40.
Ho, P.C.-C.; Lin, Y.-H. Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy; Wu-Nan Book Inc. (Publisher): Tappei, Taiwan, 2013.
41.
Cloud Computing Services. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/ (accessed on 19 April 2022).
42.
Automatic Speech Recognition. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/speech-to-text (accessed on 19 April 2022).
43.
Lifelike Speech Synthesis. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/text-to-speech (accessed on 19 April 2022).
44.
RASA. Available online: https://rasa.com/ (accessed on 19 April 2022).
45.
Industrial-Strength Natural Language Processing IN PYTHON. Available online: https://spacy.io/ (accessed on 19 April 2022).
46.
CounselChat. Available online: https://counselchat.com/ (accessed on 28 November 2021).
47.
Bertagnolli, N. Counsel Chat: Bootstrapping High-Quality Therapy Data. Available online: https://towardsdatascience.com/
counsel-chat-bootstrapping-high-quality-therapy-data-971b419f33da (accessed on 8 August 2021).
48.
NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon. Available online: https://saifmohammad.com/WebPages/NRC-Emotion-Lexicon.htm
(accessed on 8 August 2021).
49.
Khodarahimi, S.; Rasti, A.; Khajehie, M.; Sattar, R. Students’ Mental Health: Personal and University Determinants. Online
Submiss. 2009, 6, 31–38.
50.
Pekrun, R.; Goetz, T.; Perry, R.P. Achievement Emotions Questionnaire (AEQ). User’s Manual; Unpublished Manuscript; University of
Munich: Munich, Germany, 2005.
51.
Russell, J.A. A circumplex model of affect. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 1980, 39, 1161. [CrossRef]
52.
Liu, Z.; Xu, A.; Guo, Y.; Mahmud, J.; Liu, H.; Akkiraju, R. Seemo: A Computational Approach to See Emotions. In Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada, 21–27 April 2018; pp. 1–12.
[CrossRef]

Processes 2022, 10, 930
19 of 19
53.
Iacobucci, D.; Posavac, S.S.; Kardes, F.R.; Schneider, M.J.; Popovich, D.L. The median split: Robust, reﬁned, and revived. J.
Consum. Psychol. 2015, 25, 690–704. [CrossRef]
54.
Chen, P.-H. Effectiveness of Counseling Skill Training and Relationships Amon Level of Counseling Skill, Helpee’s Self-
engagement and Counseling Outcome. Bull. Educ. Psychol. 1991, 24, 117–143.
55.
Orlinsky, D.E.; Howard, K.J. Process and outcome in psychotherapy. In Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change; John Wiley
& Sons, Inc: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1986.
56.
Barlow, D. Anxiety and Its Disorders: The Nature and Treatment of Anxiety and Panic, 2nd ed.; Guilford Press: New York, NY,
USA, 2002.
57.
Lorenz, T.K. Predictors and impact of psychotherapy side effects in young adults. Couns. Psychother. Res. 2021, 21, 237–243.
[CrossRef]
58.
Iacovelli, A.M.; Johnson, C. Disclosure through face-to-face and instant messaging modalities: Psychological and physiological
effects. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 2012, 31, 225–250. [CrossRef]
59.
Kim, H.C.; Cha, M.C.; Ji, Y.G. The Impact of an Agent’s Voice in Psychological Counseling: Session Evaluation and Counselor
Rating. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 2893. [CrossRef]
60.
Spek, V.; Nyklíˇcek, I.; Cuijpers, P.; Pop, V. Predictors of outcome of group and internet-based cognitive behavior therapy. J. Affect.
Disord. 2008, 105, 137–145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

