Volume 5, Number 1, 2016
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/g4h.2015.0033


### g


## Feasibility and Efficacy of an mHealth Game for Managing Anxiety: ‘‘Flowy’’ Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial and Design Evaluation


Quynh Pham, MSc,[1,2] Yasmin Khatib, PhD,[1] Stephen Stansfeld, MD, PhD,[1]

Simon Fox,[2] and Tobias Green, LLB [2]

Abstract

#### Objective: Meeting the complex needs of patients with chronic common mental health disorders (CMHDs) may be the greatest challenge facing organized medical practice. On the basis of a well-established and proven theoretical foundation for controlled respiration as a behavioral intervention for CMHDs, as well as preliminary evidence that gamification can improve health outcomes through increasing patient engagement, this ran- domized controlled pilot study evaluated the feasibility and clinical efficacy of a mobile health game called ‘‘Flowy’’ (www.flowygame.com) that digitally delivered breathing retraining exercises for anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation symptom management. Materials and Methods: We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group randomized controlled trial focusing on feasibility, clinical efficacy, and design proof of concept. In the intervention condition (n = 31), participants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the control condition (n = 32), participants were placed on a waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to ‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using psychological self-report questionnaires were made at 2 and 4 weeks post-baseline. Results: At trial conclusion, participants found ‘‘Flowy’’ acceptable as an anxiety management intervention. ‘‘Flowy’’ engaged participants sufficiently to endorse proactive gameplay. Intent-to-treat analysis revealed a reduction in anxiety, panic, and self-report hyperventilation scores in both trial arms, with the intervention arm experiencing greater quality of life. Participants perceived ‘‘Flowy’’ as a fun and useful intervention, proac- tively used ‘‘Flowy’’ as part of their care, and would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to family and friends. Conclusions: Our results suggest that a digital delivery of breathing retraining exercises through a mobile health game can manage anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation symptoms associated with CMHDs.


Introduction

Background
ommon mental health disorders (CMHDs) account
for a quarter of the global burden of disease, defined as
# C
premature death combined with years lived with disability.[1]

They include depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic
disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress
disorder, and social anxiety disorder[2] and are classified as a
chronic disease by the World Health Organization alongside
asthma, cancer, and diabetes.[3] Worldwide, 272 million people


suffer from anxiety disorders alone.[3] The Mental Health
Foundation reports one in five Britons feel anxious a lot or
all the time; of these, over 6 million will experience panic
attacks, and of this group, 1.7 million will suffer from panic
disorder.[4]

Meeting the complex needs of patients with chronic CMHDs
may be the greatest challenge facing organized medical practice. Despite recent global commitments to addressing mental
disorders,[5] national and international responses have been
slow, inadequate, and fragmented. This has resulted in exorbitant costs to the healthcare system; 15 percent of all United


1Centre for Psychiatry, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, United Kingdom.
2Playlab London, London, United Kingdom.
This study was registered with a clinical trials registry under trial identifier number ISRCTN78356215.


-----

Kingdom National Health Service (NHS) expenditure on
chronic disease is linked to poor mental health and well-being,
totalling nearly £10 billion in England each year.[6] CMHDs
disrupt existing acute healthcare structures built to be reactive
to disease—responding only when the patient is sick—but not
proactive and focused on keeping the patient healthy.
Characterized by a long duration and slow progression,
anxiety disorders are an extreme manifestation of an otherwise functional and appropriate human response to situational stressors. For those with the most severe forms, their
lives can become completely dominated and debilitated by
their condition. The epidemiology of anxiety disorders notably postulates respiratory abnormalities as both a cyclic
cause and effect for panic attacks.[7–12] As a result controlled
respiratory interventions by which a patient exerts voluntary
control over his or her own breathing are hypothesized to
alleviate anxiety symptoms. Breathing retraining methodologies have been successfully validated in numerous outcome
studies for effecting anxiogenic health outcomes.[12–17] They
are endorsed by the NHS and have been integrated into the
national Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
(IAPT) program, where patients are encouraged to practice
controlled breathing for 2–3 minutes, three to four times
daily, to cope with panic and anxiety.[18]

Despite their effectiveness and proven ability to optimize
anxiety symptom management, current methods of breathing retraining delivery are limited in both availability and
access, making them difficult to integrate into anxiety selfmanagement regimens in their current form. Breathing
retraining exercises are primarily taught in services, which
is problematic given that nearly 85 percent of people with
mental disorders are not receiving treatment.[19] Moreover,
although regulated breathing techniques are easy to learn,
they are also easy to perform incorrectly. Mitigating the risk
of people seeking misleading psychoeducation on breathing
retraining to manage their condition, as well as respecting
that intensive self-management is challenging for everyone
with anxiety, is critical when planning novel delivery
channels.
A need therefore exists for using integrative healthcare
models and designing proactive and feasible interventions
for CMHDs with patient-level integration at all stages of
research and design, from conceptualization to delivery. The
patient-centered model of care is grounded in the belief that
people are more than their disorders.[20] Patients should be
viewed as individuals with unique experiences, needs, and
aspirations and seen in the context of their daily lives, as part
of a family and a community. By focusing on people rather
than their disease and designing holistic interventions that
allow them to actively engage in and self-manage their
condition, patients are placed at the center of the healthcare
system where they belong.

Mobile health innovation

Advances in technology and particularly mobile digital
information and communication technology have enabled a
rapid proliferation of mobile health (mHealth) applications
(apps), many targeted at health. The developers of these include commercial enterprises, third-sector organizations, and
NHS Trusts and staff, as well as patients themselves, with the
majority of apps being sold via commercial marketplaces. As


of January 2013, 75 percent of the United Kingdom population own a smartphone, with one in five having downloaded at least one mHealth app[21]; it is projected that by
2018 there will be 3.4 billion smartphone users, of whom 50
percent will have downloaded at least one mHealth app.[22]

With this level of ubiquitous penetration, mHealth apps are
well positioned to improve access and treatment adherence
to psychological and behavioral interventions by enabling
services to be delivered more flexibly and tailored to individual patient needs. They offer the potential to transform
mental health delivery through widening access to information and offering sustained adherence support through realtime symptom monitoring.
The NHS Confederation’s Mental Health Network recognizes that mHealth apps represent real opportunities to engage
and empower patients with mental health problems, but also
cautions that they must have a strong evidence base. The Mental
Health Network recommends that patients be actively involved
throughout the development process to ensure the trust of the
wider public.[23] Additionally, policy makers, practitioners, and
providers of mental health services must also be active partners
in the development, evaluation, and implementation of new
technology to capitalize on opportunities offered by mHealth
apps to not just improve efficiency, but also to transform the
very nature of mental healthcare.
Employing a user-centered design process—an evidencebased iterative approach endorsed by the WHO and informed
by a thorough understanding of a specific end-user group—in
creating mHealth apps demonstrates a responsible and appropriate prioritization toward patient-centered care.[24] Usercentered design has been used in the design and development
of apps for diabetes, heart disease, and asthma to endorse
sustained behavioral change and improved self-care.[25] Interventions that are developed or redesigned using this patientcentered ideology can achieve greater health outcomes and
deliver measurable and significant health benefits.[26]

Games for mHealth

A subset of mHealth apps being leveraged to improve selfmanagement behaviors is mHealth games. They employ gamification, defined as the implementation of the most common
and enjoyable mechanics of videogames in non–videogame
contexts.[27] Common gamification mechanics include badges,
leaderboards, points, levels, challenges, and quests.[28] Recent
research has endorsed mHealth games as positive mechanisms
for health behavior change due to their ability to engage and
motivate players toward effective disease management.[29]

Numerous mHealth games have been clinically evaluated
and proven to effectively manage chronic diseases such as
diabetes,[26,30] cancer,[31–33] cystic fibrosis,[34–36] and asthma.[37–39]

They generated positive health outcomes, with all studies
achieving statistically significant results, and were readily
adopted by their target patient group. Current games range
from exergames to increase both knowledge and motivation of
exercise behavior,[40–43] role-playing games that foster greater
understanding of sensitive topics like mental health,[44–47]

race,[48] and sexuality,[49–52] and virtual rehabilitation games to
help patients during recovery.[53–57] It is clear that games are an
appropriate and effective medium for addressing numerous
health conditions that might otherwise be ill-addressed
through conventional care.


-----

By 2015, 50 percent of industries will gamify their innovation processes, although 80 percent of gamified applications
are expected to fail because of a lack of research around
suitable game design, as well as poor rationale or design of
gamification mechanics.[28] The academic and clinical staff responsible for the majority of mHealth games currently on the
market are not game designers and consequently develop
products that miss the most essential mechanism of engagement in games—the fun.[58] The solution seems to then be that
mHealth games should be responsibly designed and developed
by a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, researchers, and
game designers, as well as clinically evaluated to confirm
how much more effective they are in changing behavioral and
health outcomes than conventional approaches. mHealth
games are capable of teaching new forms of thought and behavior in an enjoyable way. This learning potential has been
left largely untapped in the mental health arena, and addressing
this gap may lead to a novel validated approach in mental
health intervention and self-management.

mHealth evaluation

As the field of mHealth advances and more players enter
the arena of digital intervention development for CMHDs,
concerns have arisen over the number of apps available for
download that have not been adequately tested for efficacy.
In the current app marketplace, new health apps are often
accompanied by substantial hype and promise but are not
supported by evidence.[59–61] Several studies have highlighted
apps that could compromise patient safety and are potentially
dangerous.[62–65] To mitigate against this, both clinical and
risk evaluation must be done to ensure that novel health
technologies fulfill basic qualifications: they are evidencebased, provide measurable value to the user, and are riskadversive and user-centered in design and development.[66]

Precedence exists for safe and effective apps for CMHDs,
but they are scarce and make up less than 1 percent of
commercially available apps.[67]

While it is tempting to shift the blame for this discrepancy
onto the app developers themselves and cite a lack of responsibility and best practice on their behalf, an equally feasible explanation is that few evaluation methodologies for
mHealth interventions exist. The traditional approach to behavioral intervention evaluation is through a randomized
controlled trial (RCT), the gold standard for assessing the
effect of an intervention post-development.[68] Current evaluation methodologies for behavioral interventions typically
involve development, pilot testing, evaluation in at least two
RCTs, and implementation studies.[69,70] However, this process
can take up to 17 years from initial research to full implementation, making it fundamentally incompatible with the
rapid pace of mHealth; the technology being evaluated may
well be obsolete before the trial is completed.[71–73] Traditional
evaluation processes are therefore incongruent with the fundamental principles of continuously evolving mHealth applications, which rely on iterative cycles of development to
identify design weaknesses and inefficiencies. Time spans of
traditional trials also see publications citing effects of technology that has long since been surpassed and therefore often
provide limited value to helping inform clinical decisions.
In acknowledgement of the shortcomings stemming from
traditional evaluation processes as well as advances in mo

bile devices that now incorporate sensors and can collect and
store both physiological and self-report health data, new
mHealth evaluation methodologies must be conceived and
adopted to achieve the potential for ‘‘real-time research’’ and
render conventional research designs more efficient.[74–77]

The potential for mobile devices to collect research data
under a safe, secure framework has largely remained untapped. Rigorous research is needed to examine both the
potential and challenges of using mobile technologies to
improve health outcomes, as well as to establish the reliability and validity of the mHealth evaluation methodology
used to generate these critical data. The results from this
pilot study will therefore lead to further research supporting innovative evaluation methodologies for mHealth interventions.

Study aims

On the basis of a well-established and proven theoretical
foundation for controlled respiration as a behavioral intervention for CMHDs and preliminary evidence that gamification can improve health outcomes through increasing
patient engagement, we developed an mHealth game called
‘‘Flowy.’’ ‘‘Flowy’’ is the first mHealth app to operationalize
breathing retraining exercises for gameplay. We designed
‘‘Flowy’’ to bridge intervention accessibility gaps, reduce the
economic burden of chronic mental illness, endorse personalized patient-centered care, and engage users to understand
and manage their own condition in a fun and meaningful way.
This randomized controlled pilot study evaluated the acceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an mHealth game that digitally
delivers breathing retraining exercises for anxiety, panic, and
hyperventilation symptom management. We engaged service
users with CMHDs, their families, and their care providers in
the design, development, and pilot evaluation of ‘‘Flowy.’’
We designed this study to establish clinical efficacy in reducing symptom severity alongside improving quality of life.
Furthermore, we assessed both user engagement and usability as key study metrics. We hypothesized that ‘‘Flowy’’
would be an acceptable, clinically effective, engaging, and
useful anxiety management intervention.

Objectives

This study had two main assessment objectives: (1) feasibility of a breathing retraining game called ‘‘Flowy’’ as an
anxiety management intervention and (2) clinical efficacy of
‘‘Flowy’’ to reduce anxiety symptomatology.
The long-term objective of this feasibility and efficacy
pilot study was to trial concepts and methods needed to inform a subsequent full-scale clinical evaluation, which will
assess whether ‘‘Flowy’’ can objectively reduce clinical
symptoms in a vulnerable clinical population. We also trialed
our study design to assess whether it was an appropriate
evaluation methodology for mHealth interventions, which
will inform the continued development of evaluation
frameworks in the field of mHealth.

Primary hypotheses

We hypothesized that we would achieve participant acceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety intervention. This was
assessed by the following criteria: (1) the number of people


-----

who responded to the recruitment call to trial an app that
managed their anxiety and completed the study eligibility
screener; (2) the response rate for participants in the trial
throughout the 4-week assessment period; (3) the number of
participants in the intervention condition proactively using
‘‘Flowy’’ at least once for over 1 minute of play during the 4week assessment, as assessed by log data; and (4) the number
of participants in the intervention condition who engaged in
sustained usage of ‘‘Flowy,’’ as assessed by log data.

Secondary hypotheses

Our secondary hypotheses were that participants in the
intervention group would experience reductions in anxiety,
panic, and hyperventilation, and increase in quality of life at
Week 4 assessment compared with baseline (P < 0.05). This
was defined as a decrease in score on the Generalized
Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7), Panic Disorder Severity
Scale-Self Report (PDSS-SR), Nijmegan, and Quality of Life
Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form
(QLES-Q-SF) psychological self-report questionnaires. We
hypothesized that in comparison with the control condition,
participants in the intervention group would experience
greater reductions in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic
attack symptoms, as well as increased quality of life at the
Week 4 assessment. This was defined as a greater decrease in
score on the GAD-7, PDSS-SR, Nijmegan, and QLES-Q-SF
self-report psychological questionnaires. Finally, we hypothesized that participants in the intervention group would
perceive ‘‘Flowy’’ as a useful intervention, defined by a
mean rating of q3 (‘‘neither agree nor disagree’’) on a 1–5point Likert scale usability questionnaire following study
completion. Further detailed information on these outcome
measures can be found in Materials and Methods.

Materials and Methods

Overview

The study methodology was reviewed according to the
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)
standards for clinical trials in eHealth[78] and reported according to the CONSORT-eHealth (version 1.6.1) checklist.[79] The study methodology was further reviewed and
advised by a research design advisor at the National Institute
of Health Research Design Services.

Trial design

We designed an unblinded, Web-based, parallel-group
RCT focusing on feasibility, clinical efficacy, and design
proof of concept. This was an exploratory study with an
iterative design to assess and improve study methodology,
game design, and usability. Initial contact with potential
participants was made online; trial candidates (n = 510) selfgenerated a login username and password and completed an
eligibility screener that required participants to meet inclusion criteria as well as show moderate signs of anxiety, defined as a score of q16 on the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3
(ASI-3), q8 on the Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS), and q6 on the GAD-7. Eligible participants (n = 63) subsequently received a follow-up e-mail to
digitally sign the study information sheet and consent form.
They then completed the online baseline assessment and


were randomized to one of two study conditions following
assessment. In the intervention condition (n = 31), participants received free access to ‘‘Flowy’’ for 4 weeks. In the
control condition (n = 32), participants were placed on a
waitlist for 4 weeks before being offered free access to
‘‘Flowy.’’ Online measurements using self-report questionnaires were made at 2 and 4 weeks post-baseline. Participants
in both conditions had unrestricted access to professional
help. Figure 1 shows the study CONSORT flowchart.

Clinical measures and data collection

Table 1 provides an overview of all clinical measures used
alongside their data collection schedule. Table 2 describes all
measures with their number of items, minimum–maximum
scores, clinical cutoff scores, and psychometric reliability/
construct validity (Cronbach’s alpha). Participants were asked
to provide information on their age, gender, education, employment, ethnicity, and religion/spirituality at baseline assessment (Table 3). Study measures were obtained using six
clinical self-report questionnaires. Anxiety symptoms were
assessed using three questionnaires: the GAD-7 item scale,[80]

the OASIS,[81] and the ASI-3 item scale.[82] Panic symptoms
were assessed using the PDSS-SR.[83] Hyperventilation symptoms were assessed using the Nijmegen Questionnaire.[84]

Quality of life, enjoyment, and satisfaction were assessed
using the QLES-Q-SF.[85] Participant views on using information technology for health were assessed using the
eHealth Literacy Scale (eHEALS).[86] Participant perception of
‘‘Flowy’’ was measured with a 21-question usability questionnaire alongside open-ended qualitative feedback and user
stories around their experience using ‘‘Flowy’’ (Table 4).

Outcomes

The primary study outcome was the acceptability of
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention. This was
assessed by the following:

1. The number of people who responded to the recruitment call to trial an app that managed their anxiety and
completed the study eligibility screener
2. Trial adherence throughout the 4-week assessment period as measured by completion of weekly assessments
3. The number of participants in the intervention condition proactively using ‘‘Flowy,’’ defined internally as at
least once for over 1 minute of play during the 4-week
assessment
4. The number of participants in the intervention condition who engaged in sustained usage of ‘‘Flowy,’’
defined internally as at least 5 minutes of uninterrupted
play and based on NHS IAPT guidelines for suggested
durations of controlled breathing exercises.[18]

Secondary outcomes included the following:

1. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation
symptoms and improvement in quality of life reported
by participants in the intervention group compared
with the control group from baseline to Week 4
2. A reduction in anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation
symptoms and improvement in quality of life reported
by participants in the intervention group from baseline
to Week 4


-----

FIG. 1. CONSORT study flow diagram. *Last observation carried forward for full data analysis.

Table 1. Overview of Clinical Instruments Used and Data Collection Schedule

Variable Questionnaire Eligibility screener Baseline Week 2 Week 4

Electronic health literacy eHEALS X — — —
Anxiety ASI-3 X X X X
GAD-7 X X X X
OASIS X X X X
Hyperventilation Nijmegan — X X X
Panic attacks PDSS-SR — X X X
Quality of life Q-LES-Q-SF — X X X

ASI-3, Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3; eHEALS, eHealth Literacy Scale; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; OASIS, Overall
Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity Scale-Self Report; Q-LES-Q-SF, Quality of Life Enjoyment
and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form.


-----

Table 2. Description of Psychometric Measures Evaluating Primary and Secondary Outcomes

Measure Type Description Alpha


eHealth Literacy Scale Self-report A measure of electronic health resource literacy, defined as
(eHEALS) a consumer’s combined knowledge, comfort, and perceived skills at finding, evaluating, and applying electronic health information to health problems. On this
eight-item scale, responses are rated on a scale from 1 to
5, with higher scores indicating greater eHealth literacy.

Generalized Anxiety Self-report A brief seven-item anxiety scale to assess symptom severity
Disorder Scale and identify probable cases of generalized anxiety
(GAD-7) disorder in clinical practice and research. Responses are

rated on a scale from 0 to 3, with a total score of q6
representing moderate anxiety, q11 moderately severe
anxiety, and q15 severe anxiety.

Overall Anxiety Severity Self-report A measure of the severity and impairment associated with
and Impairment Scale anxiety, as assessed by a brief, continuous five-item scale
(OASIS) that can be used across anxiety disorders, with multiple

anxiety disorders, and with subthreshold anxiety symptoms. Responses are rated on a scale from 0 to 4, and
individual items are added for a total severity score. A
cutoff score of q8 is used to determine an anxiety
diagnosis.

Anxiety Sensitivity Self-report An 18-item self-report multidimensional measure of the
Index-3 (ASI-3) three domains of anxiety sensitivity (physical, social, and
cognitive). Respondents indicate their agreement with
each item, from ‘‘very little’’ (0) to ‘‘very much’’ (4),
with total scores ranging from 0 to 72. A cutoff score of
q16 was used to establish moderate anxiety.

Nijmegan Questionnaire Self-report A 16-item measure of hyperventilation and dysfunctional
breathlessness, suitable as a screening tool for early
detection and also as an aid in diagnosis and therapy
planning. Responses are rated on a scale from 0 to 4, with
a total score of q23 out of 64 suggesting a positive
diagnosis of hyperventilation.

Panic Disorder Severity Self-report A questionnaire developed for assessing the severity and
Scale(PDSS-SR) detecting possible symptoms of panic disorder, measured
using seven items, each rated on a 5-point scale ranging
from 0 to 4. The overall assessment is made by a total
score ranging from 0 to 28, and a score of q9 suggests
the need for a formal diagnostic assessment.

Quality of Life Enjoy- Self-report A self-report questionnaire with 14 items evaluating overall
ment and Satisfaction life enjoyment and satisfaction with physical health,
Questionnaire (QLES- mood, work, social and family relationships, daily
Q-SF) functioning, and overall well-being. Responses are scored

on a 5-item scale with possible scores ranging from 14 to
70, where high scores indicate better enjoyment and
satisfaction with life.


0.93

0.91

0.89

0.93

0.92

0.91

0.86


3. Participant perception of ‘‘Flowy’’ as a useful intervention
4. Assessing outcome measure scores in pilot study participants to establish parameters of measurable change
in anxiety, hyperventilation, and panic attack symptoms for a subsequent full-powered, full-scale clinical
evaluation
5. Study design evaluation to inform sample size calculation and methodology of a subsequent full-powered,
full-scale clinical evaluation.

Participant recruitment

Participants were recruited online through extensive media
coverage, including a BBC profile, social media press,
newsletters, blog posts, Google AdSense, and a Call for


Participants landing page. Local businesses were contacted
for permission to display recruitment posters on their premises. University campuses were targeted for recruitment. The
primary study advertisement included a sample of questions
from the eligibility screener to optimize targeting appropriate
participants who experienced anxiety. The advertisement
emphasized the need to visit the eligibility screener Web site
to determine eligibility. It also included a link to the main
‘‘Flowy’’ Web site, which contained complete information
on the intervention, clinical explanation of breathing retraining exercises, and illustrations of the game mechanism
(Supplementary Fig. S1; Supplementary Data are available
online at www.liebertonline.com/g4h).
Participants interested in determining their eligibility accessed the eligibility screener Web site (Supplementary Fig.
S2) and self-generated a login username with their e-mail


-----

Characteristic


Table 3. Baseline Participant Demographic Characteristics

Participants [n (%)]

Intervention (n = 31) Control (n = 32) Total population (n = 63) P


Age (years) 0.69
18–24 7 (22.6) 10 (31.3) 17 (27.0)
25–34 17 (54.8) 15 (46.9) 32 (50.8)
35–44 4 (12.9) 6 (18.8) 10 (15.9)
45–54 1 (3.2) 1 (3.1) 2 (3.2)
55–64 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
65 and older 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
Gender 0.27
Male 18 (58.1) 13 (40.6) 31 (49.2)
Female 13 (41.9) 18 (56.3) 31 (49.2)
Other 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Country of residence 0.27
Argentina 3 (9.7) 0 (0) 3 (4.8)
Brazil 2 (6.5) 0 (0) 2 (3.2)
Canada 3 (9.7) 5 (15.6) 8 (12.7)
Cyprus 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Germany 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Israel 1 (3.2) 0 (0) 1 (1.6)
Italy 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
Malaysia 0 (0) 1 (3.1) 1 (1.6)
United Kingdom 12 (38.7) 10 (31.3) 22 (34.9)
United States 10 (32.3) 13 (40.6) 23 (36.5)
Education 0.82
High school diploma 7 (22.6) 10 (31.3) 17 (27.0)
Bachelor degree 14 (45.2) 11 (34.4) 25 (39.7)
Master degree 6 (19.4) 6 (18.8) 12 (19.0)
Professional degree 1 (3.2) 3 (9.4) 4 (6.3)
Doctorate degree 1 (3.2) 1 (3.1) 2 (3.2)
Not applicable 2 (6.5) 1 (3.1) 3 (4.8)
Employment status 0.41
Employed 25 (80.6) 23 (71.9) 48 (76.2)
Unemployed 6 (19.4) 9 (28.1) 15 (23.8)
Ethnicity
Asian 3 (10.0) 3 (10.0) 6 (9.5) 0.73
White 22 (73.3) 23 (76.7) 45 (71.4)
European 3 (10.0) 1 (3.3) 4 (6.3)
Hispanic 2 (6.7) 2 (6.7) 4 (6.3)
Mixed 0 (0) 1 (3.3) 1 (1.6)
Missing 1 (3.3) 2 (6.7) 3 (4.8)
Religion/spirituality 0.37
Yes 11 (35.5) 8 (25.0) 19 (30.2)
No 20 (64.5) 24 (75.0) 44 (69.8)
Mobile platform 0.91
iOS 14 (45.2) 17 (54.8) 28 (44.4)
Android 14 (43.8) 18 (56.3) 35 (55.6)
Mobile gameplay history 0.35
Yes 21 (67.7) 25 (78.1) 46 (73.0)
No 10 (32.3) 7 (21.9) 17 (27.0)


address and a unique password. Following completion of the
screener, their data were exported to a password-protected
Excel[�] (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) database. The e-mail
provided was checked for multiple registrations, and participants with missing data were excluded. Participants were
notified of their study eligibility by e-mail and directed to the
online study information sheet and consent form. Those not
eligible for the study were thanked for their time and given
the opportunity to sign up and receive a code to download


‘‘Flowy’’ in January 2015. Participants were not compensated for taking part in the study but were allowed to
download ‘‘Flowy’’ and keep the game following study
completion. Minors were not asked to participate in research.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria

Study candidates from the general population were eligible for the study if they met the following criteria: (1) males


-----

Table 4. Usability Questions to Assess Participation
Perception of ‘‘Flowy’’

Number Question Score

1 ‘‘Flowy’’ is useful. 4.17 (0.38)
2 ‘‘Flowy’’ makes me more produc- 3.22 (0.55)
tive.

3 ‘‘Flowy’’ gives me more control 3.56 (0.62)
over the activities in my life.

4 ‘‘Flowy’’ makes the things I want to 3.06 (0.87)
accomplish easier to get done.

5 ‘‘Flowy’’ saves me time when I use 2.94 (0.64)
it.

6 ‘‘Flowy’’ meets my needs. 3.39 (0.98)
7 ‘‘Flowy’’ does everything I would 3.22 (0.94)
expect it to do.

8 ‘‘Flowy’’ is easy to use. 4.17 (1.15)
9 ‘‘Flowy’’ is simple to use. 4.39 (0.85)
10 Both occasional and regular users 3.94 (1.11)
would like ‘‘Flowy.’’

11 I can use ‘‘Flowy’’ successfully 3.89 (0.96)
every time.

12 I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ quickly. 4.44 (1.04)
13 I learned to use ‘‘Flowy’’ easily. 4.61 (0.61)
14 I easily remember how to use 4.67 (0.49)
‘‘Flowy.’’

15 I quickly became skillful with 3.83 (1.25)
‘‘Flowy.’’

16 I am satisfied with ‘‘Flowy.’’ 3.94 (0.80)
17 I would recommend ‘‘Flowy’’ to a 4.17 (0.99)
friend.

18 ‘‘Flowy’’ is fun to use. 3.89 (0.68)
19 ‘‘Flowy’’ works the way I want it to 3.28 (0.90)
work.

20 I feel I need to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ 3.06 (0.87)
21 ‘‘Flowy’’ is wonderful. 3.94 (0.80)

Data are mean (standard deviation) values.

and females at least 18 years of age; (2) screen GAD-7 score
of q6; (3) screen OASIS score of q8; (4) screen ASI-3
score of q16; (5) comorbid disorders including major depression, dysthymia, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social
anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, simple phobia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and somatization disorder were accepted as long as moderate symptoms of
anxiety were observed (these broad inclusion criteria maximized generalizability of findings); (6) concurrent use of
antidepressants, anxiolytics, hypnotics, and herbal products
with psychoactive substances was acceptable provided there
was no change in medication type and dose after randomization; (7) provision of written informed consent; and (8)
able to comply with the study protocol (e.g., able to download ‘‘Flowy’’ onto a mobile device, able to complete
assessments).
Study candidates were ineligible if they met any of the
following criteria: (1) lack of mobile device or incompatible
operating system (Android� [Google, Mountaine View,
CA] and iOS [Apple, Cupertino, CA] compatibility required); (2) lack of access to Internet; (3) any coexisting
medical conditions that could have altered the clinical presentation of hyperventilation such as chronic severe asthma
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; (4) lifetime history of bipolar disorder or psychosis; (5) presence of any


Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
edition (DSM-IV) Axis I disorder, excluding those listed in
the inclusion criteria, that were likely to have interfered with
the patient’s ability to participate in the study, as judged by
the investigator; (6) presence of any DSM-IV Axis II disorder that were likely to have interfered with the patient’s
ability to participate in the study, as judged by the investigator; or (7) participants who were acutely suicidal to the
degree that precautions against suicide were needed, or a
history of suicide attempt in the past 5 years.

Sample size

Given that the primary study outcome was the acceptability of ‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention,
to be assessed by recruitment and response rates, power
calculations were not calculated a priori. The results from
this pilot study will be used to inform the required sample
size for a full clinical evaluation. There was no limit on the
number of eligible participants during the 4-week recruitment period, and recruitment strategies were exhausted to
include as many participants as possible.

Randomization and allocation

Randomization and allocation were done at the individual
level using a computerized randomization list to protect
against bias. Candidates who met inclusion criteria were
randomly allocated to the intervention group (‘‘Flowy’’) or
to the control (waitlist) group after signing the information
sheet and consent form. Participants were equally allocated
1:1 to intervention and control conditions for optimal analysis and maximized statistical power. Both investigator and
participants were unblinded to allocation.

Conception

‘‘Flowy’’ (www.flowygame.com) was initially conceived
as a digital delivery of breathing retraining. ‘‘Flowy’’ was
designed by start-up venture Playlab London with a team of
game developers and animators. Playlab’s founder had lived
experience of panic and anxiety disorders. The process of
recovery helped him to develop insight into chronic mental
health conditions and inspired him to investigate how condition symptoms might be ameliorated.
In January 2013 Playlab began conceptual work, informally testing paper and code prototypes of a simple breathcontrolled game experience. Early research and development
included periodic formative meetings to review each stage,
correct problems, and make decisions for the following
stages in an iterative process. Qualitative data were collected
from various stakeholder groups and thematically analyzed:
mental health practitioners and clinicians provided data on
feasibility, people supporting those with lived experience of
panic and anxiety disorders provided data on desirability and
value, and people with lived experience of panic and anxiety
disorders provided data on current behaviors concerning
panic, anxiety, panic attacks, and technology.

User-centered design

A series of test media was constructed and shown to
people with lived experience of panic and anxiety disorders
to assess desirable esthetics, themes, and mechanics and their


-----

FIG. 2. Screenshots of ‘‘Flowy’’ minigames. (Color graphics available at www.liebertonline.com/g4h)


effect on the user with particular regard to feelings of anxiety, trustworthiness, and ‘‘medical’’ framing. Following
from this initial research, prototypes were developed, and
several rounds of usability tests were performed with a
varied group of participants to evaluate functionality, interface, and robustness. Throughout the project, expert advisors
contributed to thinking on game design, usability, user experience design, clinical accuracy, and efficacy. ‘‘Flowy’’
was designed to endorse empowerment and motivation in
managing anxiety by potentially making this process fun.
The design team therefore aimed for ‘‘Flowy’’ to be visually
appealing, easy to navigate, and intuitive to use and to ultimately provide a meaningful user experience. They followed
the user-centered design process of development and engaged in usability testing throughout the project lifecycle.
This user-centered design process is endorsed by the World
Health Organization, which advises user evaluation at every
step of mHealth consumer application development to ensure
sustained user engagement for effective outcomes.[24] From
this user-centered design process, the design team obtained
objective feedback that was crucial to producing sustained
behavioral changes, as well as key to end-user adoption.

Intervention

‘‘Flowy’’ is a mHealth game that engages users in a series
of minigames where they use breathing retraining exercises
and perform diaphragmatic breathing to alleviate anxiety.
Diaphragmatic breathing is the deepest of all breaths, with
the most air inhaled. During diaphragmatic breathing, the
lowest levels of the lungs are inflated; the lower third of the
lungs contains the greatest amount of blood when standing
vertically, resulting in more oxygenated blood per breathing


cycle. The minigames in ‘‘Flowy’’ range in theme, from
sailing a boat down a river to flying balloons into the sky
(Fig. 2 gives a screenshot of various minigames). Users touch
the screen with their finger as they inhale and remove their
finger from the screen as they exhale to control the gaming
mechanics. A breathing indicator visually represents a full
breath; users see a circle expanding as they inhale and contracting as they exhale. This indicator provides a visual
guideline of a breathing retraining exercise and also simplifies the cognitive assessment of what constitutes a full
diaphragmatic breath. The goal of each minigame is to correctly follow the breathing indicator while advancing in the
game narrative; users progress through levels and achieve
goals by breathing correctly and staying calm. ‘‘Flowy’’ also
includes an in-game interactive tutorial on how to properly
perform diaphragmatic breathing as guided by both an NHS
IAPT protocol[18] and evidence-based research protocols from
literature.[12,87] An overview of the game characteristics can
be found in Table 5. Usage guidelines were not enforced to
allow for assessment of naturalistic usage patterns determined by the patient.

Control

Participants in the control group were placed on a waitlist
for 4 weeks. To prevent high attrition rates, participants received a weekly newsletter with curated content on breathing
retraining exercises, ‘‘Flowy’’ game development, mindfulness meditation, and similar content relevant to ‘‘Flowy.’’
Additionally, they received reminder e-mails through online
marketing tool MailChimp to complete study assessments.
After 4 weeks, participants received a free code to download
‘‘Flowy.’’


-----

Table 5. Characteristics of a Videogame for Health (‘‘Flowy’’)

Characteristic Details

Health topic(s) Anxiety disorders, panic attacks
Target age group(s) All ages
Other targeted group characteristics Well-being, mindfulness, meditation
Short description of game idea ‘‘Flowy’’ is a collection of minigames that digitally deliver
breathing retraining exercises.
Target player(s) (check one): - Individual, Dyad, Small group
, MMOG, Other: _______________________

Guiding knowledge or behavior change theory(ies), models, Capability-Motivation-Opportunity Behavior Model
or conceptual framework(s) Mechanics-Dynamics-Esthetics Framework
Self-Determination Theory
Intended health behavior changes Reduced hyperventilation
Increased activation
Increased self-management
Increased knowledge and education
Knowledge element(s) to be learned Breathing retraining
Behavior change procedure(s) (taken from Michie (From the BCT Taxonomy version 1)
inventory) or therapeutic procedure(s) used 2.2 Feedback on behavior
2.7 Feedback on outcome(s) of behavior
4.1 Instruction on how to perform the behavior
6.1 Demonstration of the behavior
8.1 Behavioral practice and rehearsal
8.2 Behavior substitution
8.3 Habit formation
8.4 Habit reversal
Clinical or parental support needed? (Please specify) No
Data shared with parent or clinician, Yes - No
Type of game (check all that apply):, Active, Action, Adventure
, Role-playing, Simulation, Strategy
, Sports - Casual - Educational
, Other: _______________________
Story (if any)
Synopsis (including story arc) (1) Blow bubbles from a straw
(2) Sail a boat down a river
(3) Fly balloons into the sky
How the story relates to targeted behavior change Minigame narratives revolve around air and flow to
encourage calm breathing.
Game components
Player’s game goal/objective(s) Player progresses through levels and achieves goals by
staying calm and breathing correctly.
Rules Follow the breathing indicator: touch the screen to inhale,
release to exhale.
Game mechanic(s) Reward feedback
Goals
Narrative
Procedures to generalize or transfer what’s learned in the NA
game to outside the game

Virtual environment
Setting (describe) See Figure 2 for screenshots of the minigames.
Avatar
Characteristics NA
Abilities NA
Game platform(s) needed to play the game: (check all that - Smartphone - Tablet, Kinect
apply):, Xbox, Wii, PlayStation
, Computer, Handheld device
, Other: _____________
Sensors used No
Estimated play time Approximately 10 minutes per play session

BCT, Behavior Change Taxonomy; NA, not applicable.


-----

Statistical analyses

Statistical analyses were conducted using IBM (Armonk,
NY) SPSS Statistics version 22. All participants who were
randomized were included in data analysis in accordance
with the intention-to-treat-principle. Chi-squared tests were
used for discrete variables to compare control and intervention groups to determine whether they differed at baseline
on demographic characteristics. Effect sizes were calculated
based on means and odds ratios (Cohen’s d[88]).
Primary analysis on engagement, defined as proactive and
sustained usage, used frequency and duration measures
from gameplay logs to assess outcomes. Secondary analysis
on clinical efficacy included a repeated-measures 2 · 2
analysis of variance (ANOVA) for four clinical outcome
variables: (1) anxiety, (2) panic, (3) self-report hyperventilation, and (4) quality of life, with time (baseline versus
Week 4) as a within-subjects factor and condition (intervention versus control) as a between-subjects measure.
Results were confirmed with a gain score ANOVA with
condition as the between-subjects factor alongside an
analysis of covariance using pretreatment scores as the
covariate. The effect of time on treatment was evaluated
using repeated-measures ANOVA at three time points
(baseline, Week 2, and Week 4). P levels were corrected for
non-sphericity using the Greenhouse–Geisser epsilon when
necessary. We tested for linear trends because we hypothesized a decrease in GAD, PDSS, and Nijmegan scores and
an increase in QLES-Q-SF scores across treatment weeks.
Significance levels for linear trends across all measures
were Bonferroni-corrected. Statistical significance was
considered at P < 0.05 unless otherwise specified. All test
results reported are two-tailed.

Ethical approval

Institutional board approval for the study protocol was obtained from the Queen Mary University of London Research
Ethics Committee with reference number QMREC2014/20.
The study protocol, interventions, participant information, and
informed consent procedure were approved and found to be in
accordance with all applicable regulations. All participants
received and digitally signed a study information sheet and
consent form. All participants were given the opportunity to
download and keep ‘‘Flowy’’ on their mobile devices following study completion.

Results

Demographics

Demographic characteristics of the control and intervention groups did not differ significantly at baseline (Table 3).
Participants were predominantly young adults (18–34 years
old; 51 percent) from developed, English-speaking countries
(Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States; 84
percent), highly educated (68 percent university-educated or
above), employed (76 percent), and white (71 percent). As
part of the eligibility pre-screening, candidates completed
the eHEALS questionnaire, which assessed their electronic
health literacy. The final study population had high electronic health literacy (mean = 3.58, standard deviation

[SD] = 0.22).


Intervention acceptability

In total, 510 candidates were screened for study eligibility
from April 2014 to June 2014 (Fig. 1). One hundred eightyfive participants met preliminary eligibility criteria. Of these,
106 did not meet pre-study requirements (baseline assessment, registering a mobile device, providing consent). Sixteen participants were subsequently excluded from the study
because of hardware compatibility issues, leaving a final
study population of 63. At study completion, 67 percent of
participants remained engaged and completed terminal study
assessments; 75 percent of control and 58 percent of intervention group participants completed all study assessments.
In total, 63 participants were randomly allocated to either
the control (n = 32) or intervention (n = 31) group of the study
(Fig. 1). Both groups experienced attrition during the 4-week
study period (45 percent of intervention participants and 25
percent of control participants), with the majority of attrition
occurring after Week 2 study assessments (42 percent of
intervention participants and 16 percent of control participants). There was a significant association between mobile
platform and attrition, with more participants leaving the
study if they had downloaded ‘‘Flowy’’ on an iOS platform
(64.3 percent) compared with an Android platform (23.5
percent) [v[2](1) = 5.28, P = 0.022]. Participants did not differ
on any other baseline characteristics.
Log data were recovered from all intervention group participants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ (26/31, 84 percent). Eightyfour percent of intervention group participants proactively
played ‘‘Flowy’’ at least once for a minimum of 1 minute
during the study. The number of participants who played
‘‘Flowy’’ per week peaked at baseline (20/31, 65 percent) and
was lowest at Week 4 (8/31, 26 percent) (Fig. 3, top). Log data
measured a mean weekly sessional play duration of 10 minutes during the 4-week study period, increasing weekly and
peaking at 15 minutes in Week 4 (Fig. 3, middle) and a mean
weekly total play duration of 20 minutes (Fig. 3, bottom).

Clinical efficacy

Mean scores and SDs for primary and secondary outcome
measures for the intent-to-treat sample appear in Table 6.
There were no group differences for any of the baseline
measures. A group-effects multivariate ANOVA showed no
significant difference for psychopathology measures (anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation) based on treatment condition (F3, 59 = 2.059, P = 0.115).
At the study conclusion, participants in both groups reported improved scores on anxiety, panic, hyperventilation,
and quality of life psychological self-report questionnaires.
Univariate gain score and 2 · 2 treatment by condition
ANOVAs showed an increase in quality of life (Dmean =
4.570; F1, 61 = 4.845, P = 0.034) and a reduction in anxiety
(Dmean = 0.911; F1, 61 = 1.049, P = 0.310), panic (Dmean =
0.108; F1, 61 [=][ 0.012,][ P][ =][ 0.914), and hyperventilation]
(Dmean = 0.523; F1, 61 = 0.055, P = 0.816) scores (Fig. 4) in
the intervention group playing ‘‘Flowy’’ compared with the
waitlist control group from baseline to Week 4. In particular,
the intervention group hyperventilation scores decreased
meaningfully. A score of q23 out of 64 on the Nijmegan
questionnaire suggests a positive clinical diagnosis of hyperventilation; intervention group participants went from a
mean score above the threshold score of 23 to below it and


-----

FIG. 3. From baseline to Week 4, (top panel) number of intervention group participants who played ‘‘Flowy’’ weekly,
(middle panel) mean weekly play session duration, and (bottom panel) mean weekly total play duration.

Table 6. Group Scores of Intervention and Control Group Psychometric Questionnaires
Pre- And Post-Evaluation and Significance of Gain Score Analysis of Variance, 2 · 2 Analysis
of Variance, and Analysis of Covariance Group Effects Analyses

Intervention Control


Outcome


Pre Post Pre Post Analysis df F g[2] P


Anxiety (GAD-7) GS 1 1.049 0.017 0.310
Mean (SD) 11.55 (5.05) 9.39 (5.21) 10.66 (4.63) 9.53 (4.79) 2 · 2 1 1.049 0.017 0.310
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.638 0.011 0.427
Panic (PDSS-SR) GS 1 0.012 0.000 0.914
Mean (SD) 16.90 (5.24) 15.35 (5.76) 15.78 (5.37) 14.13 (6.57) 2 · 2 1 0.012 0.000 0.914
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.045 0.001 0.832
Hyperventilation (Nijmegan) GS 1 0.055 0.001 0.816
Mean (SD) 24.45 (9.79) 21.74 (11.27) 26.91 (11.01) 24.72 (12.75) 2 · 2 1 0.055 0.001 0.816
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 0.204 0.003 0.653
Quality of Life (Q-LES-Q-SF) GS 1 4.845 0.108 0.034
Mean (SD) 32.11 (7.32) 35.89 (7.71) 32.71 (6.98) 31.92 (9.17) 2 · 2 1 4.845 0.108 0.034
n 31 32 31 32 ANCOVA 1 4.698 0.108 0.036

ANCOVA, analysis of covariance; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; GS, gain score; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity
Scale-Self Report; Q-LES-Q-SF, Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form; SD, standard deviation.


-----

FIG. 4. Quality of Life, Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire Short Form scores for the intervention (solid circle,
solid line) and control (open circle, dashed line) groups at study assessment time points (baseline, Week 2, and Week 4).


outside the threshold zone (baseline mean, 24.45; to Week 4
mean, 21.74). A repeated-measures ANOVA evaluating time
as a main effect on treatment showed a decrease in panic and
hyperventilation (P = 0.011 and 0.016, respectively) and an
increase in quality of life (P = 0.005) scores in intervention
participants from baseline to Week 4 (Table 7). Effect size
differences between intervention and control groups posttreatment were small (d < 0.3) for anxiety, panic, and hyperventilation measures and moderate (d = 0.393) for quality
of life measures.

Usefulness and usability

One hundred percent of participants in the intervention
group found ‘‘Flowy’’ to be a useful intervention (Fig. 5 and


Table 4). They also all remembered how to use ‘‘Flowy’’ after
initial play, confirming that ‘‘Flowy’’ can be learned and used
regularly with ease. Eighty-nine percent would recommend
‘‘Flowy’’ to family and friends. Participants rated the usability
of ‘‘Flowy’’ highly, with 92 percent saying ‘‘Flowy’’ was easy
and simple to use. Eighty-three percent of participants found
‘‘Flowy’’ fun to use. They did not strongly identify ‘‘Flowy’’
as making them more productive, making the things they want
to accomplish easier to get done, or saving them time when
they use it. In addressing the concern that ‘‘Flowy’’ could be
used as a safety behavior and avoid the cognitive root of their
panic attacks, 72 percent of participants did not identify with
feeling like they needed to have ‘‘Flowy.’’ Qualitative feedback from participants endorsed the concept of a novel breathcontrolled game for managing anxiety and panic attacks:


Outcome


Table 7. Intervention Group Psychometric Questionnaire Scores at All Evaluations
and Significance of Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance Time Effect Analysis

Intervention

Baseline Week 2 Week 4 df F g[2] P


Anxiety (GAD-7)
Mean (SD) 11.55 (5.05) 9.81 (4.60) 9.39 (5.21) 2 0.531 0.018 0.591
n 31 32 31
Panic (PDSS-SR)
Mean (SD) 16.90 (5.24) 15.42 (5.42) 15.35 (5.78) 2 4.858 0.139 0.011
n 31 32 31
Hyperventilation (Nijmegan)
Mean (SD) 24.45 (9.79) 22.45 (10.61) 21.74 (11.27) 2 4.405 0.128 0.016
n 31 32 31
Quality of life (Q-LES-Q-SF)
Mean (SD) 32.11 (7.32) 35.67 (5.08) 35.89 (7.71) 2 6.266 0.269 0.005
n 31 19 18

GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale; PDSS-SR, Panic Disorder Severity Scale-Self Report; Q-LES-Q-SF, Quality of Life
Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form; SD, standard deviation.


-----

FIG. 5. Frequency of intervention group participants who ‘‘agreed’’ (4 of 5) or ‘‘strongly agreed’’ (5 of 5) with positive
usage statements on a usability questionnaire.


I just wanted to stress how important I think the application
(and moreover the approach) could be in helping people like
myself deal with anxiety. For me—it’s changed my life
completely—and I know this is a story you must hear over
and over again.
I think it’s such an amazing idea and there is nothing else like
this around. I feel like panic attacks are swept under the rug
too much and it feels amazing that someone is finally addressing it. Once the app is ready, I will be promoting it to
everyone I know who has anxiety!!!
The game has helped me on more than one occasion to prevent a big panic attack.
Since first using ‘‘Flowy’’ I have been feeling a lot better. I do
still use the app, and I am a lot happier having this game with
me, it sometimes feels like a secret weapon!

Discussion

With an initial aim of creating an mHealth game for
anxiety management that could digitally deliver health outcomes in a fun and engaging way, ‘‘Flowy’’ was consequently conceived and piloted to measure usefulness,
desirability, and clinical impact. Preliminary results confirm
a demand exists for such an intervention, with a large population perceiving the concept of a breathing regulation
game as both viable and desirable. Participants accepted
‘‘Flowy’’ as an anxiety management intervention, engaged
sufficiently with ‘‘Flowy’’ to proactively reach for it when
needed, and showed interest in practicing breathing retraining in a gaming context.
The results from this feasibility and efficacy randomized
controlled pilot trial suggest that an mHealth application
operationalizing breathing retraining exercises for behaviorally targeted gaming can be an engaging and acceptable
intervention for anxiety disorders. However, we were unable
to demonstrate clinical efficacy—our trial results indicate
that ‘‘Flowy’’ did not produce significant decreases in anxiety, panic, and self-report hyperventilation scores. We hypothesize various explanations for this, the first being that
realistically, a short, lightweight, self-directed game-based


app is unlikely to change established clinical psychopathology within a 4-week time frame. Second, in aiming for an
early evaluation of ‘‘Flowy’’ to inform future design and
development decisions, we may have trialed an immature
version of ‘‘Flowy’’ that was not robust enough as a game to
increase breathing retraining adherence and consequently
have clinical impact. Third, our decision to mitigate against
high attrition rates in the control group by sending out
weekly psychoeducational newsletters may have turned our
waitlist control into an active control; this may explain the
lack of an interaction effect for our three clinical outcome
measures. Fourth, our final sample size of 63 was not sufficiently powered to detect small effect sizes and prevented an
accurate elucidation of how ‘‘Flowy’’ affected clinical
symptomology. Although we obtained all study measures
remotely through both app log data and an in-house online
assessment platform, thereby relieving participants of having
to attend traditional face-to-face measurement visits, we did
not take advantage of this methodology to increase scalability and recruit a large sample size capable of detecting
small effect sizes for our clinical measures.
Finally, our decision to use an RCT design as an evaluation framework for ‘‘Flowy’’ was potentially inappropriate
to establish true clinical impact. We encountered many of the
methodological barriers highlighted by researchers[89] that
hindered our ability to accurately measure the clinical impact
of ‘‘Flowy’’ on the studied sample. Our intervention group
experienced high attrition, which we suspected was due to
hardware compatibility issues and software errors affecting
gameplay; this would have made it difficult for participants
to initially engage with ‘‘Flowy’’ and may have discouraged
them from playing further. However, we were unable to
verify this hypothesis because of a methodological requirement to freeze development during the trial in order to
maintain internal validity. We identified issues with suboptimal frequency and duration of play, which may have been
alleviated through adjustments to the intensity of gameplay,
breathing indicator, or gamification techniques, but there was
no scope in our study design for a more critical analysis of


-----

the process to determine where problems existed and where
improvements could be made to make the game efficacious.
This methodological intolerance for responding in real time
to the usage behaviors exhibited in-trial by participants is
problematic given the continuously evolving nature of both
digital interventions and their users, and also regrettable given the ease and flexibility of change inherent to digital interventions that allows them to be rapidly iterated. Our future
research will build on the methodological limitations identified from this study and explore alternative framework for
evaluating mHealth interventions.
Evaluating quality of life and usability was integral to
the study design due to a strong focus on having ‘‘Flowy’’ be
applicable as a management application and not just a clinical intervention. Broad intervention applicability and
availability were at the forefront of game design prioritization, which meant quality of life improvement would ascertain this design decision. We observed a statistically
significant improvement in quality of life scores for participants randomly assigned to the intervention group, alongside
positive usability feedback; this is noteworthy given the 4week duration of the trial and shows that ‘‘Flowy’’ can effect
positive change in a short period of time. ‘‘Flowy’’ may have
promoted increased awareness of panic attack triggers,
which potentially contributed to greater self-monitoring and
reframing of the panic attack experience and consequently
improved overall quality of life.
The self-determination theory of Deci and Ryan[90] predicts
increased player engagement with games fosters a sense of
autonomy, competence, and social relatedness.[91] The positive improvements in quality of life from our study are
consistent with this: when given a game that facilitated the
process of managing their condition, our participants felt
motivated to take better care of themselves and consequently
felt happier and healthier. Our findings align with previous
studies that highlight self-efficacy as being particularly
sensitive to game-based intervention[92–95]; the observed high
levels of non-enforced usage demonstrate promising validation for this method of intervention delivery.
Gamified breathing retraining may have special value to
individuals with other chronic conditions involving impaired
perceptions of their own breathing. Similar effects and value
could apply for treating asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cystic fibrosis, and other chronic lung diseases.
Additional research is required to evaluate the scope of behavioral processes that are amenable to change through this
intervention platform.
Limitations to this pilot study must be acknowledged.
First, using self-report screening and not formal diagnostic
instruments to confirm existing anxiety symptomology
means that without a formal diagnosis, no claims about
prevention of anxiety or mental disorders can be made.
Non-uniform severity of symptoms at trial entry may have
reduced statistical power but likely improved the generalizability of study findings. Several of the outcome questionnaires used in this study have not yet been validated for
online use, which may change their psychometric properties.
The open-recruitment strategy used in this study was chosen
to optimize recruitment, but the cost of such a strategy is
that the attracted population may not be representative of
the actual clinical population. Analysis was done on an
‘‘intention-to-treat’’ basis, which is more common in RCTs.


However, for future studies analysis should be undertaken on
a ‘‘per protocol’’ basis; study attrition and loss to follow-up
were not correlated with lack of improvement but rather with
practical and logistic issues associated with hardware and
software failure. Suboptimal adherence to the intervention
resulted in high attrition rates in the intervention group; to
mitigate against this, future research will not enforce usage
but will provide participants with the recommended frequency and usage parameters. Finally, generalizability of the
findings may be limited because of the requirement of a
smartphone to join the study. This may have economically
biased the study findings and may not reflect patient access to
similar technology on a global level.
In summary, the feasibility and efficacy demonstrated in
this pilot trial provided preliminary empirical support for an
mHealth game called ‘‘Flowy’’ in managing symptomology
for a chronically ill population suffering from anxiety, panic,
and hyperventilation. Although more research is required to
demonstrate the clinical efficacy of ‘‘Flowy’’ in promoting
significant symptom amelioration, this study represents an
important first step toward highlighting the potential use of
‘‘Flowy’’ in hospitals and homes for anxiety management. It
is hoped that ‘‘Flowy’’ may one day constitute one component of a broader integrative approach to health care that
holistically combines physiological and behavioral interventions to aid patients in the prevention, detection, treatment, and recovery from CMHDs.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Erica Simon for reviewing this
manuscript. We wish to acknowledge the contribution of the
team that developed ‘‘Flowy’’: Adam Hodgson, Anders
Furevik, Khi-Jon Chua, Jean-Baptise Krohn, and Meg
Jayanth. We extend our gratitude to the 63 people who
participated in the trial and took a leap of faith in allowing
‘‘Flowy’’ into their lives.

Author Disclosure Statement

This research was a collaboration between industry partner Playlab London and academic partner Wolfson Institute
for Preventive Medicine. Q.P. is the current Lead Researcher
for Playlab London and at the time of the trial an MSc
candidate at the Wolfson Institute. She conceived, designed,
and implemented this study alongside support from her
academic department and Playlab London. S.F. and T.G.
co-founded Playlab London and conceived, designed, and
developed ‘‘Flowy.’’

References

1. Mathers C, Fat DM, Boerma JT; World Health Organization. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2008.
2. Pilling S, Whittington C, Taylor C, Kendrick T. Identification and care pathways for common mental health disorders: Summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 2011; 342:d2868.
3. World Health Organization. Integrating the Response to
Mental Health Disorders and Other Chronic Diseases in
Health Care Systems. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2014.
4. Skapinakis P, Lewis G, Davies S, et al. Panic disorder and
subthresholdpanicinthe UK generalpopulation:Epidemiology,


-----

comorbidity and functional limitation. Eur Psychiatry 2011;
26:354–362.
5. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Financing
Global Health 2010: Development Assistance and Country
Spending in Economic Uncertainty. Seattle, WA: Institute
for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2010.
6. Department of Health. No Health Without Mental Health: A
Cross-Government Mental Health Outcomes Strategy for
People of All Ages. Supporting Document—The Economic
Case for Improving Efficiency and Quality in Mental
Health. London: Department of Health; 2011.
7. Beamish PM, Granello PF, Granello DH, et al. Outcome
studies in the treatment of panic disorder: A review. J
Counsel Dev 1996; 74:460–467.
8. Clark DM. A cognitive approach to panic. Behav Res Ther
1986; 24:461–470.
9. Ley R. The efficacy of breathing retraining and the centrality of hyperventilation in panic disorder: A reinterpretation of experimental findings. Behav Res Ther 1991;
29:301–304.
10. Ley R. Pulmonary function and dyspnea/suffocation theory
of panic. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 1998; 29:1–11.
11. Lum LC. Hyperventilation and anxiety state. J R Soc Med
1981; 74:1–4.
12. Meuret AE, Wilhelm FH, Roth WT. Respiratory feedback for
treating panic disorder. J Clin Psychol 2004; 60:197–207.
13. Mueser KT, Lu W, Rosenberg SD, Wolfe R. The trauma of
psychosis: Posttraumatic stress disorder and recent onset
psychosis. Schizophr Res 2010; 116:217–227.
14. Rapee RM, Ancis JR, Barlow DH. Emotional reactions to
physiological sensations: Panic disorder patients and nonclinical Ss. Behav Res Ther 1988; 26:265–269.
15. Rapee RM, Brown TA, Antony MM, Barlow DH. Response
to hyperventilation and inhalation of 5.5% carbon dioxideenriched air across the DSM-III-R anxiety disorders.
J Abnorm Psychol 1992; 101:538–552.
16. Kim S, Wollburg E, Roth WT. Opposing breathing therapies for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial of
lowering vs raising end-tidal PCO2. J Clin Psychiatry 2012;
73:931–939.
17. Sanchez-Meca J, Rosa-Alcazar AI, Marin-Martinez F,
Gomez-Conesa A. Psychological treatment of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clin
Psychol Rev 2010; 30:37–50.
18. Young C, Hunte A, Newell J, Valian P. Coping with panic.
In: Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation
Trust, ed. Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
2011, Vol. 4. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridgeshire
and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; 2011: 27–28.
19. Saxena S, Setoya Y. World Health Organization’s comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2020. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2014; 68:585–586.
20. Saha S, Beach MC, Cooper LA. Patient centeredness,
cultural competence and healthcare quality. J Natl Med
Assoc 2008; 100:1275–1285.
21. Fox S, Duggan M. Mobile Health 2012. Pew Internet &
American Life Project. 2012. www.pewinternet.org/2012/
11/08/mobile-health-2012/ (accessed July 29, 2015).
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Mobile Medical Applications. 2014. www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/
./UCM263366.pdf (accessed July 29, 2015).
23. Cotton R, Irwin J, Wilkins A, Young C. The Future’s Digital: Mental Health and Technology. London: NHS Confederation Mental Health Network; 2014.


24. World Health Organization. mHealth: New Horizons for
Health Through Mobile Technologies. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2011.
25. McCurdie T, Taneva S, Casselman M, et al. mHealth
consumer apps: The case for user-centered design. Biomed
Instrum Technol 2012;(Suppl):49–56.
26. Cafazzo JA, Casselman M, Hamming N, et al. Design of
an mHealth app for the self-management of adolescent
type 1 diabetes: A pilot study. J Med Internet Res 2012;
14:e70.
27. Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke L. From game
design elements to gamefulness: defining ‘‘gamification.’’
In: Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future Media Environments.
Tampere, Finland: ACM Press; 2011.
28. Zichermann G, Cunningham C. Gamification by Design:
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc.; 2011.
29. Heron KE, Smyth JM. Ecological momentary interventions: Incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial
and health behaviour treatments. Br J Health Psychol 2010;
15:1–39.
30. Brown SJ, Lieberman DA, Germeny BA, et al. Educational
video game for juvenile diabetes: Results of a controlled
trial. Med Inform (Lond) 1997; 22:77–89.
31. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video
game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and
young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics
2008; 122:e305–e317.
32. Kato PM, Beale IL. Factors affecting acceptability to young
cancer patients of a psychoeducational video game about
cancer. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2006; 23:269–275.
33. Stinson JN, Jibb LA, Nguyen C, et al. Development and
testing of a multidimensional iPhone pain assessment application for adolescents with cancer. J Med Internet Res
2013; 15:e51.
34. Bingham PM, Bates JH, Thompson-Figueroa J, Lahiri T. A
breath biofeedback computer game for children with cystic
fibrosis. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2010; 49:337–342.
35. Bingham PM, Lahiri T, Ashikaga T. Pilot trial of spirometer games for airway clearance practice in cystic fibrosis.
Respir Care 2012; 57:1278–1284.
36. Davis MA, Quittner AL, Stack CM, Yang MC. Controlled
evaluation of the STARBRIGHT CD-ROM program for
children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis. J Pediatr
Psychol 2004; 29:259–267.
37. Asthma Advisory Committee Meeting. Asthma SelfManagement Application Project. In: University of Western
Ontario Centre for Global e-Health Innovation, Queen’s
University. The Lung Association. 2014. www.on.lung.ca/
document.doc?id=2109 (accessed July 29, 2015).
38. Krishna S, Francisco BD, Balas EA, et al. Internet-enabled
interactive multimedia asthma education program: A randomized trial. Pediatrics 2003; 111:503–510.
39. Developing Breathe: A Self-Management Web App for
Asthma. Ottawa: Centre for Global eHealth Innovation,
University Health Network; 2013.
40. Garde A, Umedaly A, Abulnaga SM, et al. Assessment of a
mobile game (‘‘MobileKids Monster Manor’’) to promote
physical activity among children. Games Health J 2015;
4:149–158.
41. Lin J-H. ‘‘Just Dance’’: The effects of exergame feedback
and controller use on physical activity and psychological
outcomes. Games Health J 2015; 4:183–189.


-----

42. Moller CA, Majewski S, Standish M, et al. Active fantasy
sports: Rationale and feasibility of leveraging online fantasy sports to promote physical activity. JMIR Serious
Games 2014; 2:e13.
43. Sato K, Kuroki K, Saiki S, Nagatomi R. Improving walking, muscle strength, and balance in the elderly with an
exergame using Kinect: A randomized controlled trial.
Games Health J 2015; 4:161–167.
44. Fish MT, Russoniello CV, O’Brien K. The efficacy of
prescribed casual videogame play in reducing symptoms of
anxiety: A randomized controlled study. Games Health J
2014; 3:291–295.
45. Leutwyler H, Hubbard EM, Dowling GA. Adherence to a
videogame-based physical activity program for older
adults with schizophrenia. Games Health J 2014; 3:227–
233.
46. Roepke AM, Jaffee SR, Riffle OM, et al. Randomized
controlled trial of SuperBetter, a smartphone-based/
Internet-based self-help tool to reduce depressive symptoms. Games Health J 2015; 4:235–246.
47. Shepherd M, Fleming T, Lucassen M, et al. The design and
relevance of a computerized gamified depression therapy
program for indigenous M�aori adolescents. JMIR Serious
Games 2015; 3:e1.
48. Gutierrez B, Kaatz A, Chu S, et al. ‘‘Fair Play’’: A videogame designed to address implicit race bias through
active perspective taking. Games Health J 2014; 3:371–
378.
49. Chu SKW, Kwan ACM, Reynolds R, et al. Promoting sex
education among teenagers through an interactive game:
Reasons for success and implications. Games Health J
2015; 4:168–174.
50. D’Cruz J, Santa Maria D, Dube S, et al. Promoting parent–
child sexual health dialogue with an intergenerational
game: Parent and youth perspectives. Games Health J 2015;
4:113–122.
51. Driesmans K, Vandenbosch L, Eggermont S. Playing a
videogame with a sexualized female character increases
adolescents’ rape myth acceptance and tolerance toward
sexual harassment. Games Health J 2014; 4:91–94.
52. Jozkowski KN, Ekbia HR. ‘‘Campus Craft’’: A game for
sexual assault prevention in universities. Games Health J
2014; 4:95–106.
53. Gorini A, Marzorati C, Casiraghi M, et al. A
neurofeedback-based intervention to reduce post-operative
pain in lung cancer patients: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res Protoc 2015; 4:e52.
54. Kottink AIR, Prange GB, Krabben T, et al. Gaming and
conventional exercises for improvement of arm function
after stroke: A randomized controlled pilot study. Games
Health J 2014; 3:184–191.
55. Lozano-Quilis J-A, Gil-Go´mez H, Gil-Go´mez J-A, et al.
Virtual rehabilitation for multiple sclerosis using a Kinectbased system: Randomized controlled trial. JMIR Serious
Games 2014; 2:e12.
56. Proffitt R, Sevick M, Chang C-Y, Lange B. User-centered
design of a controller-free game for hand rehabilitation.
Games Health J 2015; 4:259–264.
57. Szturm T, Reimer KM, Hochman J. Home-based computer
gaming in vestibular rehabilitation of gaze and balance
impairment. Games Health J 2015; 4:211–220.
58. Granic I, Lobel A, Engels RCME. The Benefits of Playing
Video Games. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Radboud University Nijmegen; 2013.


59. Buijink AW, Visser BJ, Marshall L. Medical apps for
smartphones: Lack of evidence undermines quality and
safety. Evid Based Med 2013; 18:90–92.
60. Haffey F, Brady RR, Maxwell S. A comparison of the reliability of smartphone apps for opioid conversion. Drug
Saf 2013; 36:111–117.
61. Misra S, Lewis TL, Aungst TD. Medical application use
and the need for further research and assessment for clinical
practice: Creation and integration of standards for best
practice to alleviate poor application design. JAMA Dermatol 2013; 149:661–662.
62. Wolf JA, Moreau JF, Akilov O, et al. Diagnostic inaccuracy
of smartphone applications for melanoma detection. JAMA
Dermatol 2013; 149:422–426.
63. McCartney M. How do we know whether medical apps
work? BMJ 2013; 346:f1811.
64. Rosser BA, Eccleston C. Smartphone applications for pain
management. J Telemed Telecare 2011; 17:308–312.
65. Ferrero NA, Morrell DS, Burkhart CN. Skin scan: A
demonstration of the need for FDA regulation of medical
apps on iPhone. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013; 68:515–516.
66. Lewis LT, Wyatt CJ. mHealth and mobile medical apps: A
framework to assess risk and promote safer use. J Med
Internet Res 2014; 16:e210.
67. Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, et al. Smartphones for
smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic
review. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e247.
68. Piantadosi S. Clinical Trials: A Methodologic Perspective.
New York: Wiley; 2005.
69. Chambless DL, Hollon SD. Defining empirically supported
therapies. J Consult Clin Psychol 1998; 66:7–18.
70. Rounsaville BJ, Carroll KM, Onken LS. A stage model of
behavioral therapies research: getting started and moving
on from stage I. Clin Psychol Sci Pract 2001; 8:133–142.
71. Balas EA, Boren SA. Managing clinical knowledge for
healthcare improvements. In: van Bemmel JH, McCray AT,
eds. Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2000. Stuttgart:
Schattauer; 2000: 65–70.
72. Brown CH, Kellam SG, Kaupert S, et al. Partnerships for
the design, conduct, and analysis of effectiveness, and
implementation research: Experiences of the Prevention
Science and Methodology Group. Adm Policy Ment Health
2012; 39:301–316.
73. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don’t we
see more translation of health promotion research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition.
Am J Public Health 2003; 93:1261–1267.
74. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The Multiphase
Optimization Strategy (MOST) and the Sequential Multiple
Assignment Randomized Trial (SMART): New methods
for more potent eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med
2007; 32(5 Suppl):S112–S118.
75. Mohr CD, Schueller MS, Riley TW, et al. Trials of intervention principles: Evaluation methods for evolving behavioral intervention technologies. J Med Internet Res
2015; 17:e166.
76. Mohr DC, Cheung K, Schueller SM, et al. Continuous
evaluation of evolving behavioral intervention technologies. Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:517–523.
77. Wyatt J. Assessing and improving evidence based health
informatics research. Stud Health Technol Inform 2010;
151:435–445.
78. Eysenbach G; CONSORT-EHEALTH Group. CONSORTEHEALTH: Improving and standardizing evaluation


-----

reports of Web-based and mobile health interventions. J
Med Internet Res 2011; 13:e126.
79. Eysenbach G. CONSORT-EHEALTH: Implementation of
a checklist for authors and editors to improve reporting of
web-based and mobile randomized controlled trials. Stud
Health Technol Inform 2013; 192:657–661.
80. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief
measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: The
GAD-7. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1092–1097.
81. Norman SB, Cissell SH, Means-Christensen AJ, Stein MB.
Development and validation of an Overall Anxiety Severity
and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Depress Anxiety 2006;
23:245–249.
82. Taylor S, Zvolensky MJ, Cox BJ, et al. Robust dimensions
of anxiety sensitivity: Development and initial validation of
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3. Psychol Assess 2007;
19:176–188.
83. Shear MK, Rucci P, Williams J, et al. Reliability and validity of the Panic Disorder Severity Scale: Replication and
extension. J Psychiatr Res 2001; 35:293–296.
84. van Dixhoorn J, Duivenvoorden HJ. Efficacy of Nijmegen
Questionnaire in recognition of the hyperventilation syndrome. J Psychosom Res 1985; 29:199–206.
85. Endicott J, Nee J, Harrison W, Blumenthal R. Quality of
Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire: A new
measure. Psychopharmacol Bull 1993; 29:321–326.
86. Norman CD, Skinner HA. eHEALS: The eHealth Literacy
Scale. J Med Internet Res 2006; 8:e27.
87. Everly GS, Lating JM. A Clinical Guide to the Treatment of
the Human Stress Response, 3rd ed. New York: Springer;
2013.
88. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.


89. Kumar S, Nilsen WJ, Abernethy A, et al. Mobile health
technology evaluation: The mHealth Evidence Workshop.
Am J Prev Med 2013; 45:228–236.
90. Deci EL, Ryan RM. Intrinsic Motivation and SelfDetermination in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum;
1985.
91. Przybylski AK, Deci EL, Rigby CS, Ryan RM.
Competence-impeding electronic games and players’ aggressive feelings, thoughts, and behaviors. J Pers Soc
Psychol 2014; 106:441–457.
92. Chao YY, Scherer YK, Wu YW, et al. The feasibility of an
intervention combining self-efficacy theory and Wii Fit
exergames in assisted living residents: A pilot study. Geriatr Nurs 2013; 34:377–382.
93. Kato PM, Cole SW, Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH. A video
game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and
young adults with cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics
2008; 122:e305–317.
94. Lyons EJ, Hatkevich C. Prevalence of behavior changing
strategies in fitness video games: Theory-based content
analysis. J Med Internet Res 2013; 15:e81.
95. Schneider KL, Ferrara J, Lance B, et al. Acceptability of an
online health videogame to improve diet and physical activity in elementary school students: ‘‘Fitter Critters.’’
Games Health J 2012; 1:262–268.

Address correspondence to:
Quynh Pham, MSc
Playlab London
71B St John Street
London, United Kingdom, EC1M 4NJ

E-mail: quynh@playlablondon.co.uk


-----

