ORIGINAL ARTICLES
Early Family Environment, Current Adversity,
the Serotonin Transporter Promoter Polymorphism,
and Depressive Symptomatology
Shelley E. Taylor, Baldwin M. Way, William T. Welch , Clayton J. Hilmert, Barbara J. Lehman,
and Naomi I. Eisenberger
Background: Mixed evidence has suggested that homozygous carriers of the short allele (s/s) of the serotonin transporter gene-linked
polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) may be at increased risk for depression, if they have also been exposed to early or current
adversity/stress. We address this debate by examining the relation of a stressful early family environment, recent adversity/stress, and
the 5-HTTLPR to depressive symptomatology in a normal sample.
Methods: A nonclinical sample of 118 young adult men and women completed assessments of early family environment, recent
stressful events, psychosocial resources, and psychological distress, including depressive symptomatology. The 5-HTTLPR was genotyped
using a standard protocol with DNA extracted from oral fluid.
Results: A stressful early family environment was significantly related to depressive symptomatology. In addition, gene-by-
environment (GE) interactions were observed between the 5-HTTLPR and both early family environment and current adversity/stress.
Individuals homozygous for the short allele had greater depressive symptomatology if they had experienced early or recent adversity
but significantly less depressive symptomatology if they reported a supportive early environment or recent positive experiences,
compared with participants with the s/l or l/l genotype.
Conclusions: Early or current environment, in conjunction with the serotonin transporter polymorphism, predicts depressive
symptomatology.
Key Words: Serotonin transporter, depression, stress, early family
environment, 5-HTTLPR, gene/environment interaction
R
ecent investigations have found conflicting evidence con-
cerning the relationship between a polymorphism in the
promoter of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) and
risk for depression. This polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) consists of a
20–23 base pair sequence that is repeated either 14 (short) or 16
(long) times, with the presence of the short (s) allele putatively
conferring greater risk for depression, particularly for people
who have experienced stress recently or early in life. Caspi et al
(2003) found that childhood maltreatment predicted adult diag-
nosed depression among individuals carrying at least one copy
of the s allele. They also found that people with one or more s
alleles who were exposed to adult stressful life events were more
likely to develop depression than those homozygous for the long
allele. Partial to full replications of this pattern have been
reported by Eley et al (2004), Grabe et al (2005), Kaufman et al
(2004), Kendler et al (2005), and Wilhelm et al (2006). However,
Surtees et al (2005) reported that adversity in childhood and
adulthood was associated with major depressive disorder, de-
fined by DSM-IV diagnostic criteria, but these relations did not
interact with the 5-HTTLPR genotype. Gillespie et al (2005) also
reported no replication of the pattern identified by Caspi et al
(2003).
We report on research designed to replicate the gene-by-
environment (GE) interactions between the 5-HTTLPR and the
stressful early family environment and between the 5-HTTLPR
and current stress/adversity on depressive symptomatology, as
assessed by the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck et al
1961), in a nonclinical sample of young adult men and women
participating in a study of stress processes. In addition, we
assessed whether depressive symptomatology is modulated by
psychosocial resources, including personal mastery, disposi-
tional optimism, self-esteem, and social support. Previous inves-
tigations have found such resources to buffer people against
psychological distress (Taylor et al 2003).
Methods and Materials
Participants
After obtaining approval from the Institutional Review Board
from the University of California, Los Angeles, members of the
UCLA campus community responded to an advertisement offer-
ing $60 for participation. Prospective participants with the fol-
lowing conditions were excluded: serious physical or mental
health problems; current treatment from a mental health profes-
sional; diagnosis of PTSD; and current use of mental health-
related medication (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors).
A sample of 118 participants (51 men and 67 women)
participated. All were affiliated with UCLA as either employees,
students, or both. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 29 years,
with a median age of 20.6 years.
Participants reported to a computer laboratory where they
completed informed consent forms and individual difference
measures of psychosocial resources and psychological distress.
Psychosocial resource measures included the Life Orientation
Test, a measure of dispositional optimism (LOT; Scheier and
Carver 1985), the Rosenberg Self-Esteem scale (Rosenberg 1965),
the Pearlin Mastery Scale (Pearlin and Schooler 1978), and
measures of social support (Schuster et al 1990). Measures of
psychological distress included the BDI (Beck et al 1961), the
trait anxiety scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
(STAI; Spielberger et al 1970), and the neuroticism scale of the
Big Five International Personality Scale (Goldberg 1999).
From the Department of Psychology (SET, BMW, WTW, CJH, BJL) and the
DepartmentofPsychiatryandBiobehavioralSciences(NIE),Universityof
California, Los Angeles, California.
Address reprint requests to Dr. Shelley E. Taylor, Department of Psychology,
University of California, 1282A Franz Hall, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los
Angeles, CA 90095; E-mail: taylors@psych.ucla.edu.
Received January 4, 2006; revised April 24, 2006; accepted April 25, 2006.
BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671–676
0006-3223/06/$32.00
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.04.019 
© 2006 Society of Biological Psychiatry

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was obtained using the Orasure
oral specimen collection device (Orasure Technologies Inc.,
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania). Samples were immediately placed on
ice in a cooler and transferred within the next few minutes to a
freezer. The samples were stored at –20°C for 12–18 months
before being extracted using the Puregene DNA purification kit
(Gentra Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota).
Assessment of Early Family Environment and Current Stress
Early life stress was assessed via the Risky Families question-
naire. This questionnaire (Taylor et al 2004) was adapted from an
instrument originally developed by Felitti et al (1998) to assess
the relation of family stress to mental and physical health
outcomes in adulthood. In previous research, we validated this
questionnaire against clinical interviews conducted and coded
by trained clinical interviewers; the dual assessments (question-
naire and interview) demonstrated high agreement and reliability
(Taylor et al 2004).1 The scale has been reliably tied to adverse
mental and physical health outcomes, including diagnosed de-
pression and depressive symptomatology (Felitti et al 1998;
Lehman et al 2005; Taylor et al 2004).
Participants rated aspects of their early family environment on
4-point scales ranging from 1 (rarely or none of the time) to 4
(most or all of the time), with items including whether the
individual felt loved and cared for; was insulted, put down,
sworn at, or made to feel threatened; was shown physical
affection; was pushed, grabbed, shoved, or slapped; was verbally
abused; was physically abused; observed quarreling or shouting
between parents; observed violence or aggression between
family members; lived with a substance abuser; lived in a
well-organized, well-managed household; and whether family
members knew what the child was doing. Positively worded
items were reverse-coded. Cronbach’s alpha was .86. Average
scores ranged from 1.00 to 3.54, with higher values representing
a riskier family environment.
To assess current adversity/stress, participants were asked to
list up to 10 major life events that had occurred in the past
6 months and rate their impact on a 7-point scale with labeled
endpoints ranging from –3 “very negative” to 3 “very positive.”
A total score was calculated for each subject across all events by
summing the participant’s ratings. Average total scores ranged
from –21 to 13, with lower values representing more negative
events.
Genotyping
The 5-HTTLPR was identified using a protocol modified from
Lesch et al (1996). Briefly, the forward primer was 5=-GGC GTT
GCC GCT CTG AAT GC-3= (labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein
fluorophore), and the reverse primer was 5=-GAG GGA CTG
AGC TGG ACA ACC AC-3=, which yielded 484-bp (short) and
527-bp (long) fragments. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was
performed in a total volume of 25 L, containing 100 ng of DNA;
160 nM of each primer; 1 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.3); 5 mM KCl;
1.5 mM MgCl2; 2% DMSO (v/v); 2.5 U Amplitaq Gold DNA
polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California); 200 M
of dATP, dCTP, and dTTP; 100 M of dGTP; and 7-deaza-2=-
dGTP. Cycling conditions consisted of 1) an initial 5 min
denaturation at 94°C; (2) 8 cycles with denaturation for 30 sec at
94°C, varied annealing temperatures consisting of 30 sec at 66°C
(2 cycles), then 65°C (3 cycles), then 64°C (3 cycles), followed by
hybridization for 1 min at 72°C; (3) 35 cycles with an annealing
temperature of 63°C and the same denaturation and hybridiza-
tion parameters; and (4) a final extension for 20 min at 72°C. The
PCR products were electrophoresed on an ABI 3700 DNA
analyzer (Applied Biosystems) with a Mapmaker size standard
(Bioventures, Murfreesboro, Tennessee). Data collection and
analysis used GeneScan and Genotyper software (Applied Bio-
systems).
Results
Participants were divided according to genotype (s/s 27%, s/l
48%, l/l 25%), which conformed to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.
An analysis of variance with genotype group (s/s, s/l, and l/l) and
risky families (split at median of 2.00) as the two independent
variables was conducted on depressive symptomatology, as
assessed by the BDI. Results revealed no main effect for geno-
type but a significant main effect for risky families, such that
participants from a risky family environment had higher levels of
depressive symptomatology, F(1, 110)  4.07, p  .046, repli-
cating findings from our previous investigations.
In addition, there was a significant interaction between 5-
HTTLPR and early family environment, F(2, 110)  4.99, p 
.008. As Figure 1 shows, s/s participants were at greater risk for
depressive symptomatology if they came from an early adverse
environment and at reduced risk for depressive symptomatology
if they came from an early supportive environment (t(31) 
2.932, p  .006), relative to participants with the s/l (t(54) 
1.131, p  .263) and l/l variants (t(25)  1.128, p  .270); that is,
family environment did not significantly moderate risk for de-
pressive symptomatology among s/l or l/l individuals. In addi-
1The clinical interviews revealed that exposure to family conflict, espe-
cially fighting between parents, was a common family stressor. This
stressor did not appear in the original Felitti et al (1998) question-
naire, and so items addressing this dimension of family life were
added to the assessment.
Figure 1. Relationship of risky family environment and 5-HTTLPR genotype
to depressive symptomatology.
672 BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671–676
S.E. Taylor et al
www.sobp.org/journal

tion, individual comparison tests within the supportive family
environment groups revealed that the apparent protective effect
of the s/s genotype is significant (comparing s/s versus combined
s/l and l/l groups within supportive families t(60)  2.049), p 
.045). Comparisons of the harsh family environment groups
revealed a marginally significant difference between the s/s
genotype and the combined s/l and l/l groups (t(66)  1.696,
p  .095). We repeated the analyses with scores on the Spiel-
berger et al (1970) state-trait anxiety measure as the dependent
variable; there were no main effects for risky families or geno-
type and no interaction (all ps  .10). No psychological resource
measures showed this distinctive interaction either, and no
psychosocial resources significantly moderated the interaction.
An analysis of variance with genotype (s/s, s/l, l/l) and recent
adversity/stress (split at median of –1.00) as the two independent
variables was conducted on the BDI scores. Results revealed no
main effect of stress or genotype. However, there was a signifi-
cant interaction that mirrors the results for early family environ-
ment, F (2, 107)  8.88, p  0.024;2 specifically, as Figure 2
shows, participants with the s/s genotype were at greater risk for
depressive symptomatology if they had experienced more neg-
ative events during the previous 6 months and at lesser risk for
depressive symptomatology if they had experienced more posi-
tive events (t(29)  2.596, p  .015), relative to those with the s/l
(t(54)  .603, p  .549) or the l/l variant (t(24)  .670, p  .509)
genotype (see Figure 2). In addition, individual comparison tests
revealed that the apparent protective effect of the s/s genotype in
low stress environments is significant (comparing s/s versus
combined s/l and l/l variants in low stress condition t [68] 
2.179, p  .033). Comparisons of the high-stress environment
groups revealed a marginally significant difference between the
s/s genotype and the combined s/l and l/l groups (t [48]  1.745,
p  .087). Recent adversity/stress was not significantly correlated
with early risky family environment (r  0.23, p  .22), indicating
that these two sets of analyses are largely independent of each
other. We repeated these analyses with the Spielberger et al
(1970) anxiety measure as the dependent variable, and there
were no significant effects (all ps  .10).
We examined whether there were differences in these pat-
terns as a function of gender and ethnicity. Men and women both
showed this interactive pattern, although the effects are signifi-
cant only for women because of the reduced sample sizes. Two
large ethnic subgroups comprised approximately two thirds of
the sample, specifically Asian-Americans (n  45) and European-
Americans (n  40). There were no significant differences
between these two groups on risky family scores, current stress,
or depressive symptomatology. However, there were significant
ethnic differences in allelic variation of the serotonin transporter
gene, such that Asian-Americans were overrepresented in the s/s
category and European-Americans were overrepresented in the
l/l category, X2(2)  13.163, p  0.005. To ensure that the GE
interaction between 5-HTTLPR and early family environment was
not explained by ethnicity, we compared the depressive symp-
tomatology of Asian versus Non-Asian s/s participants from risky
(Asian  10.10; Non-Asian  8.88) versus non-risky (Asian 
3.88; Non-Asian  2.40) early environments. As these means
suggest, the difference in depressive symptoms as a function of
risky family background was present for both ethnic groups at
approximately the same magnitude and did not differ between
the two groups (p  0.958). To ensure that the GE interaction
between 5-HTTLPR and current stress was not explained by
ethnicity, we compared the depressive symptomatology of Asian
versus Non-Asian s/s participants with high (Asian  10.50;
Non-Asian  8.00) versus low (Asian  3.88; Non-Asian  3.80)
current stress scores. As these means indicate, the difference in
depressive symptoms as a function of current stress was present
for both Asians and Non-Asians at approximately the same
magnitude and did not differ between the two groups (p  .662).
Discussion
This investigation identified a significant GE interaction
between a stressful early family environment and the 5-HTTLPR
on depressive symptomatology. A similar significant interaction
was found between current adversity and the 5-HTTLPR on
depressive symptomatology. The specific form of these GE
interactions indicates that the s/s genotype of the 5-HTTLPR
appears to be protective against depressive symptomatology in a
supportive early or current environment but enhances the risk for
depressive symptomatology in a high-stress early or current
environment. The pattern was distinctive to depression, as
opposed to other forms of psychological distress. Specifically,
anxiety as assessed by the Spielberger et al (1970) anxiety
measure did not show these same interactions. The fact that the
s/s genotype is implicated in depression but not anxiety or other
assessments of psychological distress is consistent with Kendler
et al’s (2005) findings. In addition, the interactions were not
significantly modulated by psychosocial resources, including
optimism, self-esteem, personal mastery, or social support. An
early stressful environment by itself predicted depressive symp-
tomatology, consistent with previous investigations (Lehman
2Degrees of freedom very slightly due to missing data; three participants
reported no major life events during the previous 6 months.
Figure 2. Relationship of current stress and 5-HTTLPR genotype to depres-
sive symptomatology.
S.E. Taylor et al
BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671–676 673
www.sobp.org/journal

et al 2005; Taylor et al 2004). Neither current adversity/stress nor
5-HTTLPR genotype alone predicted depressive symptomatol-
ogy. Overall, these patterns are notable not only for demonstrat-
ing a true crossover interaction between adversity and the
5-HTTLPR genotype, but also because they occurred in families
in which the degree of adversity was fairly mild, consisting of
some conflict, moderate household chaos, and/or cold, unaffec-
tionate and distant behaviors. No instance of physical or sexual
abuse was identified, for example.
Inconsistencies among previous efforts to demonstrate GE
interactions between an early or current stressful environment
and the 5-HTTLPR on risk for depression or depressive symp-
tomatology may be attributable to several factors. First, the
interaction appears to implicate only those with the s/s and not
the s/l genotype. Thus, studies in which s/s and s/l participants
are grouped together could reduce or obscure the interaction.
Second, studies that use a dependent variable with a restricted
range (such as diagnosed depression), rather than a more
continuous variable (such as depressive symptomatology),
would identify only the fact that the s/s genotype in conjunction
with stress enhances risk for depression; depending on the
specific statistical techniques used, it would not necessarily
identify the protective effects of the s/s genotype in the context
of a supportive or low-stress environment. Essentially, then, the
statistical test on a dependent variable with a restricted range
would test only half of the interaction. Moreover, if the sample is
a normal sample that includes lots of supportive families, then
the baserate for s/s variant individuals with diagnosed depres-
sion would include two contributing factors that could poten-
tially offset each other; that is, the number of cases demonstrating
the protective effect of the s/s variant in a low-stress environment
could offset the number of cases, demonstrating the enhanced
risk of diagnosed depression among s/s variant participants in
high-stress environments.
A third factor contributing to irregular results relating stress
and 5-HTTLPR genotype to depression or depressive symptom-
atology concerns whether the predictor variables have a re-
stricted or continuous range. The protective effects of the s/s
genotype are most evident in people who report a supportive
early environment or recently experienced positive life events. If
only predictors associated with risk are included (i.e., only
stressors in early childhood or adulthood and not beneficial
experiences), then the strength of the interaction will be under-
estimated.
Fourth, in the current study, the assessment of early family
environment was based on a standardized measure that has been
found in previous studies to predict both depressive symptom-
atology and diagnosed depression (Felitti et al 1998; Lehman et al
2005; Taylor et al 2004). Moreover, it assesses a chronically
stressful early environment, which may be more likely to reveal
a GE interaction than exposure to discrete stressful events, a
measure that has been used in some previous studies (e.g., Caspi
et al 2003; Surtees et al 2006).
An additional factor that may have accounted for the signifi-
cant results of this investigation was the relative youthfulness of
the sample. Previous investigations (Surtees et al 2006; Gillespie
et al 2005) have speculated that gene-environment interactions
may be more evident in younger than in older samples. More-
over, because our young adult participants had lived at home
with their families until relatively recently, the assessment of
early family environment may also have been more reliable,
relative to reconstructions made by older adults.
A few prior investigations present graphic data suggestive of
the same cross-over interaction we report, but they do not
comment on the protective effects of the s/s in low-stress
environments (e.g., Eley et al 2004; Wilhelm et al 2006). These
articles, along with the statistically significant protective effect in
the current study, suggest that this crossover interaction is
reliable. The protective effects of the s/s genotype in the context
of a supportive family environment and the reversal in the
context of an adverse early family environment also mirror
findings from animal research. For example, Suomi (1999) re-
ported that temperamentally impulsive rhesus monkeys raised in
the tumultuous environment of the peer group show adverse
psychosocial outcomes, including poor social skills, labile emo-
tionality, and low position in the dominance hierarchy, whereas
those raised by their mothers achieve greater than average
psychosocial outcomes, often rising to the top of the dominance
hierarchy. The crossover GE interaction reported here may
reflect similar dynamics.
This crossover interaction has potentially important impli-
cations for the study of the 5-HTTLPR gene because it suggests
that the s/s genotype is not a risk factor for depression so
much as it reflects a sensitivity to environmental influence; in
benign environments, that sensitivity assumes a protective
form, and in harsh environments, it confers risk for depres-
sion. As the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism lies within the upstream
regulatory region of the serotonin transporter gene, it may be
poised to modulate transporter expression in response to
environmental factors. For example, in vitro, cells (B-lympho-
blastoid) homozygous for the short allele have a greater
increase in transporter expression in response to glucocorti-
coid exposure than cells homozygous for the long allele (Glatz
et al 2003).
These findings may have implications for the search for other
“disease” genes or “psychopathology” genes as well, in that a
narrow search for a risk factor may obscure the broader behav-
ioral implications of a genetic variant. This point also under-
scores the fact that, without considering the full range of
predictor and outcome variables, the multiple forms and mean-
ing of phenotypes associated with a particular genotype may be
obscured (c.f., Manuck et al 2004).
A complicating factor in the interpretation of these results is
the ethnic difference in allelic distribution in the serotonin
transporter genotype (Gelernter et al 1997). Although the pattern
of increased depressive symptomatology in a stressful early or
current environment and lower levels of depressive symptom-
atology in supportive or less stressful environments held for both
Asians and Non-Asians with the s/s genotype, it is not entirely
clear what ethnicity may contribute to the dynamics of these
processes, and so these differences warrant additional investiga-
tion. The ethnic differences in the distribution of the serotonin
transporter polymorphism do raise an intriguing question as to
whether cultural conventions may develop to modulate genetic
variations such as these. Asian cultures have been referred to as
interdependent, characterized by viewing the individual as part
of encompassing social relationships and subject to the thoughts,
feelings, and actions of others in the social group (Markus and
Kitayama 1991). This characterization is in contrast to the inde-
pendent self, more common among European-Americans, which
is characterized as a more distinctive independent functioning
unit. It is conceivable that this robust cultural difference may
have developed at least in part to modulate potential genetic risk
conferred by s/s, given its high frequency in Asian populations,
by ensuring a strong family and social environment (see Laland
674 BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671– 676 
S.E. Taylor et al
www.sobp.org/journal

1993, for a discussion of gene-culture co-evolution). Currently,
these are merely intriguing speculations.
Limitations
A first potential limitation consists of the fact that we mea-
sured depressive symptomatology and not diagnosed depres-
sion. Thus, the clinical significance of the findings is unclear. As
noted, however, without examining depressive symptomatology
as a continuous variable, it would have been difficult to see the
particular form of the crossover interaction identified here,
involving the protective effects of the s/s genotype in the context
of a supportive family environment and a low-stress current
environment.
A related concern is that the sample is a nonclinical one.
However, as noted, we suggest that there may be certain
advantages to exploring GE interactions in nonclinical samples
with measures that cover the full range of the outcome variable
in question. Specifically, identifying factors that contribute to risk
for clinical disorders in normal samples may enable clinical
researchers to more precisely pinpoint what additional cofactors
are implicated in diagnosed pathology, including other genetic
polymorphisms, intensely stressful life experiences, or other risk
factors.
The GE interaction for early family environment reported
here was found in a nonclinical sample in which the “riskiness”
of the early environments of participants was relatively modest.
There was, for example, no evidence of extreme physical or
sexual abuse. No participant with a diagnosed major mental
disorder or a PTSD diagnosis was included in the study. The
findings, thus, suggest that even moderate family conflict and
distress may be tied to an enhanced risk for depressive symp-
tomatology.
Assessment of family environment involves reconstruction by
these young adult participants and thus may engage certain
biases. Most problematic is the potential for a negative emotional
overlay to influence the reconstruction of early environment as
well as reports of depressive symptomatology. Such a reporting
bias could conceivably affect the main effect of early family
environment on depressive symptomatology, although it could
not account for the GE interaction. Several other factors also
suggest that a reporting bias does not account for risky family
assessments. The instrument on which the risky family assess-
ment is based has demonstrated a dose-response relationship to
a broad array of diagnosed mental and physical health outcomes
(depression, cancer, CHD) (Felitti et al 1998), and a response bias
is highly unlikely to yield such effects. Moreover, in previous
investigations, we have formally evaluated statistical models that
give psychosocial functioning causal priority to see whether it
explains the reconstruction of childhood events (Taylor et al
2004; Lehman et al 2005). In all cases, this alternative model is a
weak fit to the data.
Finally, the small sample size is a limitation that may have
obscured weak effects, such as a main effect of current stress or
genotype on depressive symptomatology, for example. Replica-
tion with a larger sample is highly desirable.
Conclusions
A stressful early family environment contributes directly and
in interaction with the serotonin transporter polymorphism to
depressive symptomatology. Specifically, the s/s genotype is
associated with greater depressive symptomatology in offspring
from stressful early family environments and with lower depres-
sive symptomatology among offspring from supportive families.
The same GE interaction was found for the effects of current
stress and the 5-HTTLPR on depressive symptomatology as well.
The pattern was distinctive to depression, as opposed to other
measures of psychosocial distress (e.g., anxiety), and it was not
significantly affected by psychosocial resources normally found
to be protective against psychological distress. We conclude that
explorations of genetic contributions to clinical disorders will be
facilitated by examining the full range of the predictor and
outcome variables in question, if crossover GE interactions are
to be detected. (Bennett et al., 2002; Champoux et al., 2002;
Eysenck and Eysenck, 1975; Kendler et al., 1998).
This work was supported by an NIMH institutional training
grant fellowship MH15750 (to BMW) in Biobehavioral Issues in
Physical and Mental Health as part of the UCLA Health Psychol-
ogy Program and by NIMH Grant MH56880, by NSF Grant
BCS-0338631, and a grant from the Center for Psychoneuroim-
munology at the University of California, Los Angeles.
We thank the UCLA Genotyping Center, Dr. Jeanette Papp,
and Uma Dandekar for their assistance in carrying out this
research.
CJH is now with the Department of Psychology, North Dakota
State University. BJL is now affiliated with the Department of
Psychology, Western Washington University.
Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J (1961): An inventory for
measuring depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 4:561–571.
Caspi A, Sugden K, Mofﬁtt TE, Taylor A, Craig IW, Harrington H, et al (2003):
Inﬂuence of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in
the 5-HTT gene. Science 301:386–389.
Eley T, Sugden K, Corsico A, Gregory A, Sham P, McGufﬁn P, et al (2004):
Gene-environment interaction analysis of serotonin system markers
with adolescent depression. Mol Psychiatry 9:908–915.
Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Apitz AM, Edwards V, et al
(1998): Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to
manyoftheleadingcausesofdeathinadults.AmJPrevMed14:245–258.
Gelernter J, Kranzler H, Cubells JF (1997): Serotonin transporter protein
(SLC6A4) allele and haplotype frequencies and linkage disequilibria in
African- and European-American and Japanese populations and in alco-
hol-dependent subjects. Hum Genet 101:243–246.
Gillespie N, Whiteﬁeld J, Williams B, Heath A, Martin N (2005): The relation-
ship between stressful life events, the serotonin (5-HTTLPR) genotype
and major depression. Psychol Med 35:101–111.
Glatz K, Mossner R, Heils A, Lesch KP (2003): Glucocorticoid-regulated hu-
man serotonin transporter (5-HTT) expression is modulated by the
5-HTT gene-promotor-linked polymorphic region. Neurochemistry 86:
1072–1078.
Goldberg L (1999): A broad-bandwidth, public-domain, personality inven-
tory measuring the lower-level facets of several ﬁve-factor models. Per-
sonality Psychol Europe 7:7–28.
Grabe H, Lange M, Wolff B, Volzke H, Lucht M, Freyberger H, et al (2005):
Mental and physical distress is modulated by a polymorphism in the
5-HT transporter gene interacting with social stressors and chronic dis-
ease burden. Mol Psychiatry 10:220–234.
KaufmanJ,YangB-Z,Douglas-PalumberiH,HoushyarS,LipschitzB,KrystalJ,
Gelernter J (2004): Social supports and serotonin transporter gene mod-
erate depression in maltreated children. Proc Natl Acad Sci 101:17316–
17321.
KendlerK,KuhnJ,VittumJ,PrescottC,RileyB(2005):Theinteractionofstressful
life events and a serotonin transporter polymorphism in the prediction of
episodes of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62: 529–535.
Laland K (1993): The mathematical modeling of human culture and its
implications for psychology and the human sciences. Br J Psychol 84:
145–169.
Lehman BJ, Taylor SE, Kiefe CI, Seeman TE (2005): Relation of childhood
socioeconomic status and family environment to adult metabolic func-
tioning in the CARDIA study. Psychosom Med 67:846–854.
S.E. Taylor et al
BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671–676 675
www.sobp.org/journal

Lesch KP, Bengel D, Heils A, Sabol SZ, Greenberg BD, Petri S, et al (1996):
Association of anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in the seroto-
nin transporter gene regulatory region. Science 274:1527–1531.
Manuck SB, Flory JD, Ferrell RE, Muldoon MF (2004): Socio-economic status
covaries with central nervous system serotonergic responsivity as a
function of allelic variation in the serotonin transporter gene-linked
polymorphic region. Psychoneuroendocrinology 29:651–668.
Markus HR, Kitayama S (1991): Culture and the self: Implications for cogni-
tion, emotion, and motivation. Psychol Rev 98:224–253.
Pearlin LI, Schooler C (1978): The structure of coping. Health Soc Behav
19:2–21.
Rosenberg M (1965): Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Scheier MF, Carver CS (1985): Optimism, coping, and health: assessment and
implicationsofgeneralizedoutcomeexpectancies.HealthPsych4:219–247.
Schuster TL, Kessler RC, Aseltine RH (1990): Supportive interactions, negative
interactions and depressed mood. Am J Community Psychol 18:423–438.
Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene RD (1970): Manual for the State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Suomi SJ (1999): Attachment in rhesus monkeys. In: Cassidy J, Shaver P,
editors. Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applica-
tions. New York: Guilford Press.
Surtees PG, Wainwright NW, Willis-Owen SA, Luben R, Day NE, Flint J (2006):
Social adversity, the serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) polymorphism
and major depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry 59:224–229.
TaylorSE,LernerJ,ShermanDK,SageR,McDowellN(2003):Areself-enhanc-
ing cognitions associated with healthy or unhealthy biological proﬁles?
J Pers Soc Psychol 85:605–615.
Taylor SE, Lerner JS, Sage RM, Lehman BJ, Seeman TE (2004): Early en-
vironment, emotions, responses to stress, and health. J Pers 72:1365–
1393.
Wilhelm K, Mitchell P, Niven H, Finch A, Wedgwood L, Schimone A, Blair I,
et al (2006): Life events, ﬁrst depression onset and the serotonin trans-
porter gene. Br J Psychiatry 188:210–215.
676 BIOL PSYCHIATRY 2006;60:671–676
S.E. Taylor et al
www.sobp.org/journal

