American Journal of Epidemiology 
Copyright O 2000 by The Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health 
All rights reserved 
vol.151. No. 5 
Printed In USA. 



To study possible triggering of first events of acute myocardial infarction by heavy physical exertion, the 
authors conducted a case-crossover analysis (1993-1994) within a population-based case-referent study in 
Stockholm County, Sweden (the Stockholm Heart Epidemiology Program). Interviews were carried out with 699 
myocardial infarction patients after onset of the disease. These cases represented 47 percent of all cases in the 
study base, and 70 percent of all nonfatal cases. The relative risk from vigorous exertion was 6.1 (95% 
confidence interval: 4.2, 9.0). The rate difference was 1.5 per million person-hours, and the attributable 
proportion was 5.7 percent. The risk was modified by physical fitness, with an increased risk being seen among 
sedentary subjects as in earlier studies, but the data also suggested a U-shaped association. In addition, the 
trigger effect was modified by socioeconomic status. Premonitory symptoms were common, and this implies 
risks of reverse causation bias and misclassification of case exposure information that require methodological 
consideration. Different techniques (the use of the usual-frequency type of control information, a pair-matched 
analysis, and a standard case-referent analysis) were applied to overcome the threat of misclassification of 
control exposure information. A case-crossover analysis in a random sample of healthy subjects resulted in a 
relative risk close to unity, as expected. Am J Epidemiol 20O0;~\51:459-67. 

The first two studies to apply the new case- 
crossover design (1) to analyses of whether heavy 
physical exertion triggers the onset of acute myocar- 
dial infarction both obtained results that supported the 
hypothesis (2, 3). In the US study (2), the relative risk 
of myocardial infarction within 1 hour after heavy 
exertion was 5.9 (95 percent confidence interval (CI): 
4.6, 7.7), and in the German study (3) it was 2.1 (95 
percent CI: 1.6, 3.1). In both studies, the effect was 
modified by frequency of regular physical exercise, 
with sedentary persons being at the highest risk. 
We recently carried out a third independent case- 
crossover study on exertion and myocardial infarction. 
Our main objective was to examine the case-crossover 
method and to look for sources of bias and other weak- 
nesses that could refute the earlier findings. Because 
this study was nested within a population-based case- 
referent study, comparisons with standard epidemio- 
logic techniques were possible. To test the new design 
further, we carried out a case-crossover analysis using 
information from a random sample of the population. 
If the case-crossover design is valid, healthy subjects 
should not have an excess risk of being sampled in a 
moment of exposure to physical exertion. Our second 
objective was to analyze how the trigger effect is mod- 
ified by physical fitness. Information on regular exer- 
cise was available from the questionnaire used in the 
case-referent study. Therefore, we did not have to rely 
solely on usual trigger frequency as the indicator of 
physical fitness, as was the case in the earlier studies. 














The Swedish Onset Study is part of the Stockholm 
Heart Epidemiology Program (SHEEP), a population- 
based case-referent study of causes of myocardial 
infarction. Cases, defined as persons with first events 
of myocardial infarction, were recruited from all 10 
emergency hospitals in the region through a special 
organization and from continuous screening of death 


certificates by Statistics Sweden. A small number of 
missed cases were identified later through the comput- 
erized hospital discharge register and were then 
included. All cases of hospitalized myocardial infarc- 
tion were diagnosed according to standardized criteria 
using information on symptoms, electrocardiograms, 
and enzyme levels. The study base included all 
Swedish citizens aged 45-70 years who had not had a 
myocardial infarction previously and were living in 
Stockholm County. Cases were included at the time of 
disease incidence. At the same time, one referent sub- 
ject per case was randomly selected from the study 
base after stratification for age, sex, and hospital catch- 
ment area. 
The cases in the Onset portion of the SHEEP Study 
were identified between April 1993 and December 
1994 in the coronary care units of the departments of 
internal medicine at nine of the 10 regional hospitals. 
Because all of these hospitals have geographically 
defined catchment areas, the Swedish Onset Study was 
still population-based. The total number of fatal and 
nonfatal cases in these areas during the study period 
was 1,489; 699 patients were interviewed. After exclu- 
sion of patients with unreliable information on time of 
onset or with a high percentage of absent or clearly 
inaccurate answers, 660 cases remained (figure 1). 
Female referents were recruited throughout the entire 
study period, but the recruitment of male referents 
ended in January 1994. All referents of patients inter- 
viewed were asked to participate in a telephone inter- 
view on trigger exposures; 367 of the 383 referents 
who were eligible agreed (96 percent). Characteristics 
of the study populations are shown in table 1. 

Cases were interviewed during their hospital stay or 
shortly afterwards. The median interval between the 
onset of myocardial infarction and the interview was 
15 days. The interviews were carried out by 28 nurses 
who had received preparatory training during at least 
three evening classes. Meetings for discussion of 
methodological problems were held regularly during 
the study period. The interviewers were not informed 
about our assumptions on the length of induction peri- 
ods, and they were asked to pay equal attention to each 
of the 26 1-hour intervals before disease onset. The 
median duration of the interview was 90 minutes. The 
telephone interviews with referents took approxi- 
mately 15 minutes and were conducted by specially 
trained administrative staff. 
In the case interview, detailed information was first 
obtained on all episodes of pain (clock time, type, 
duration, etc.), other symptoms, and circumstances 
during the 4 days before the myocardial infarction to 
determine the precise time of disease onset. The inter- 
viewers were also instructed to distinguish between 
premonitory symptoms of disease onset and symptoms 
of ordinary angina pectoris. Then, for various hypo- 
thetical triggers, there were questions on the time of 
the last exposure before myocardial infarction, the 
usual frequency and duration of trigger occurrences 
during the previous year, and the intensity and timing 
of trigger events during the 26 hours before the onset 
of myocardial infarction. We used the questionnaire 
from the US study (2), with slight modifications. The 
degree of physical exertion was quantified on a scale 



U. 
I 
Low quality 


I 
/ 
\ 
y~\ 
V. ^J No consent 
v—' 


D. Cases 
used in 
the matched 
case-referent 
analysis 



FIGURE 1. Distribution of cases in a study of triggering of myocardial infarction (Ml) by physical exertion, Stockholm Heart Epidemiology 
Program (SHEEP), 1993-1994. Characteristics of the subjects in the squares are given in table 1. (*These data include 223 subjects who rep- 
resent an estimate of the number of male fatal cases in 1994. This category was not identified in the SHEEP Study.) 


TABLE 1. Characteristics (%) of the study populations In 
physical exertion, Stockholm County, Sweden, 1993-1994 



A 
(n= 1,268) 
B 
= 399) 

C 
(/7 = 261) 
D 
[n = 336) 
E 
(n = 369) 

Demographic factors 
Age 45-60 yearst 
Male sex 

Manual worker 
Nonmanual worker, low grade 
Nonmanual worker, high and middle 


Smoking status 
Never smoker 
Ex-smoker 
Current smoker 
Medical history 
Hypertension 
Obesity 
Diabetes mellitus 
43 
68 
31 
19 
40 
10 
19 
20 
61 
38 
36 
24 
49 
78 
30 
18 
42 
11 
22 
26 
52 
35 
37 
25 
50 
75 
27 
15 
46 
12 
23 
26 
51 
36 
40 
28 
48 
56 
32 
17 
42 
8 
24 
24 
52 
35 
38 
26 
49 
57 
28 
23 
42 
7 
42 
31 
27 
29 
28 
11 
* The letters A-D refer to study populations depicted in figure 1: A, all cases; B, all interviewed cases with high 
quality information who did not report premonitory symptoms; C, all interviewed cases wtth high quality informa- 
tion who reported premonitory symptoms; D, all cases of the pairs in the case-referent study; E, all interviewed 
referents who were used in the referent case-crossover study. 

of 1-8 metabolic equivalents (METs). One MET is 
defined as the amount of energy expended per minute 
by a subject sitting quietly; it is equivalent to 3.5 ml of 
oxygen uptake per kilogram of body weight per minute 
by a 70-kg adult. The MET scale was presented to the 
study subject along with several examples of typical 
activities on each level. This list of activities has been 
published elsewhere (2,4). The subject was then asked 
questions about the latest exposure, usual frequency of 
exposure, etc., by level, starting with the highest level. 
Heavy exertion was defined as a peak exertion level of 
at least 6 METs, and was described as vigorous exer- 
tion leading to panting and overheating. 
The referents were questioned about episodes of 
exertion before a certain point in time. This fictitious 
time of myocardial infarction was the same as that of 
the corresponding case with regard to time of day and 
day of the week, but not month or season. The most 
recent time before the referent interview that matched 
these criteria was chosen. Questions on physical exer- 
tion were not posed level by level. Instead, the inter- 
viewer established the 6-MET limit with information 
on physiologic responses and examples of typical 
activities. Information on the latest exposure, usual 
frequency of exposure, and exposure during the 26- 
hour interval preceding disease onset was then 
obtained. 

Comprehensive information on common cardiovas- 
cular disease risk factors was available from the 
postal questionnaire of the SHEEP Study. The 
response rate was 91 percent among cases already 
interviewed in the Onset portion of the study. 
Physical fitness was determined from answers to the 
question, "How much did you exercise earlier?", 
which was repeated for each 10-year period of adult 
life. Possible answers were "very little exercise," 
"sporadic walks," "occasional exercise," and "regular 
exercise (at least once a week)." Socioeconomic sta- 
tus was determined from occupational job titles in the 
questionnaire database. Smoking status, hypertension 
(systolic pressure ^170 mmHg or diastolic pressure 
>95 mmHg), obesity (body mass index >27), and reg- 
ular medication use were determined from question- 
naire information and from measurements made at the 
SHEEP health examination. 

Four analytic strategies were applied: 1) a case- 
crossover analysis (analysis I) carried out among the 
cases using the usual-frequency type of referent infor- 
mation (the usual-frequency study); 2) a case- 
crossover analysis (analysis II) carried out among the 
cases using the pair-matched type of referent infor- 

mation (the pair-matched study); 3) a matched case- 
referent study (analysis HI) with referents sampled 
from the population; and 4) a case-crossover analysis 
(analysis IV) carried out among the referents using 
the usual-frequency type of referent information (the 
referent study). 
In the usual-frequency (analysis I) and referent 
(analysis IV) studies, the estimates of relative risk 
were calculated from the ratio of the observed expo- 
sure odds to the expected exposure odds. The observed 
exposure odds (either 1 or 0) were based on the 
observed frequency of heavy physical exertion during 
the hazard period before onset. The expected exposure 
odds were based on the subjects' usual annual fre- 
quency of heavy exertion. These trigger exposures 
were assumed to be discrete events, and their effect 
periods were assumed not to overlap. The probability 
(p) of sampling an exposed hazard period of a given 
duration (H) from the previous year's person-time was 
then calculated from the formula p - n(D + H)IT, 
where n = annual frequency of exertion, D = average 
duration of exertion each time, and T = total time— 
that is, the full year expressed in the same units as D 
and H (see Maclure (1), appendix). For example, if H 
is close to 0, then ongoing trigger exposure at the onset 
of myocardial infarction is required for the case to be 
exposed, and the expected exposure odds are then 
based on only the sum of trigger-exposed person-time 
in the previous year. The relative risk refers to the risk 
of having a myocardial infarction during a period of 
heavy exertion as compared with the risk during peri- 
ods of lighter exertion or no exertion. 
An estimate of the length of the maximum hazard 
period is the maximum recovery time—the time dur- 
ing which the risk is still increased after the end of a 
brief episode of heavy exertion. To determine the 
length of this interval, we calculated relative risks after 
determining whether or not cases had been exposed 
during each consecutive 15-minute or 1-hour period 
before the onset of myocardial infarction. Control for 
subsequent exposure was done by restriction. The 
maximum time examined was 4 hours before myocar- 
dial infarction. The estimates of each case's probabil- 
ity of exposure during the interval were based on 
annual frequency of trigger exposure and total hazard 
periods of either 15 or 60 minutes. 
In the pair-matched study (analysis II), the hazard 
period 1 hour before onset was compared with the 
actual level of exertion in the comparable hour 1 full 
day earlier—that is, the period from 25 hours before 
onset to 24 hours before onset. In the case-referent 
study (analysis EQ), the referents were considered 
exposed or unexposed according to their physical 
exertion during the 1 hour before their fictitious time 
of onset. In the referent study (analysis IV), the refer- 
ent's exposure status 1 hour before the fictitious onset 
was regarded as "case" information and answers to 
questions on usual frequency supplied the "control" 
information. 
The onset of disease was defined as the time of 
appearance of a typical pain that was timed with other 
diagnostic criteria. Each case was then classified as 
exposed or unexposed ("concurrent" and "nonconcur- 
rent" with exposure are alternative expressions (1)) 
during a hazard period before the onset of disease. 

In the usual-frequency (analysis I), pair-matched 
(analysis II), and referent (analysis IV) studies, case 
and referent data were matched individually. Methods 
for analyzing stratified data were applied, with the 
individual patient used as the stratifying variable (1, 
5). In the usual-frequency (analysis I) and referent 
(analysis IV) studies, standard Mantel-Haenszel meth- 
ods for follow-up studies with sparse data in each stra- 
tum were used (1, 6). The pair-matched (analysis H) 
and case-referent (analysis IH) studies were analyzed 
as matched case-referent studies with the use of condi- 
tional logistic regression (1, 5). Modification of the 
relative risk by various factors was assessed by com- 
paring relative risks in subgroups defined by different 
levels of the potential effect modifier. Subgroups were 
compared using the x2 test for homogeneity (5). All 
calculations were carried out with SAS (version 6.11; 
SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina) and Excel 7.0. 

When using all available cases and a hazard period 
of 1 hour as Mittleman et al. (2) did, we found that 42 
patients (6.4 percent) had been engaged in heavy phys- 
ical exertion during the hour before the onset of 
myocardial infarction. The relative risks of 3.3 in our 
study (table 2) and 5.9 in the US study (2) are directly 
comparable. However, these effect estimates depend 
on the choice of hazard period, as well as potential bias 
in the group of patients that had premonitory symp- 
toms before disease onset. 
A large group of patients (40 percent) reported hav- 
ing symptoms before the onset of diagnostic pain that 
they and the interviewer afterwards thought might 
have been a part of the disease process. In 79 percent 
of these subjects, the premonitory symptoms contained 
at least one episode of chest pain. Table 3 shows that 
the relative risk in the group reporting premonitory 
symptoms was close to unity. The relative risk for 
those without premonitory symptoms was 6.1. It was 
not possible to carry out corresponding pair-matched 


TABLE 2. Relative risk of myocardlal infarction within 1 hour after exposure to physical exertion, 
Stockholm County, Sweden, 1993-1994 
Study 
design 
Case-crossover (usual frequency) 
Case-crossovert (pair-matched) 
Case-referent$ (matched) 
No. 
of 
subjects 
660 
660 
336 x 2 
No. of 
exposed 
cases 
42* 
42 
22 
Relative 
risk 
3.3 
4.2 
4.7§ 
95% 
confidence 
Interval 
2.4, 4.5 
2.0, 8.7 
0.9, 23.6 
* In 32 patients (76 percent), exertion was ongoing when the symptoms of disease began. 
t There were 38 patients who reported heavy exertion only during the 1-hour hazard period, as compared with 
nine who reported heavy exertion only during the control period (24 hours earlier). Four subjects reported heavy 
exertion during both time periods. 




(analysis II) and case-referent (analysis III) analyses in 
this group, because there was too little information. 
The relative risk among persons with ongoing expo- 
sure was 6.1 (table 3). Table 4 shows that during the 
first 15 minutes after exposure, there was a much 
lower but still increased relative risk of 1.9 (95 percent 
CI: 0.5, 7.1). In each of the next two quarters of an 
hour, the risk was almost identical, with confidence 
intervals of similar range. There was no increase in 
risk beyond 45 minutes after the end of exertion. When 
the full hour after trigger exposure was considered, the 
relative risk was 1.8 (95 percent CI: 0.8, 3.9) and the 
confidence interval included 1. Our conclusion is that 
the risk is increased during heavy exertion and that a 
slightly increased risk during the first 45 minutes after- 
wards is suggested but not verified. 
The trigger effect was modified by social status, and 
the risk was smaller in higher socioeconomic status 
groups (table 5). The self-employed group comprised 
mainly self-employed manual workers and some 
small-scale entrepreneurs. There was also effect mod- 
ification due to physical fitness. The risk was clearly 
increased among sedentary subjects. When usual trig- 
ger frequency was used as an indicator of fitness, there 
was a dose-response relationship, with the most fit per- 
sons having the lowest risk, similar to what has been 
reported previously. However, this finding was not 
reproduced when fitness was determined from a direct 
question on exercise habits. Instead, a U-shaped rela- 
tion was suggested. No significant effect modification 
was found from age, sex, smoking status, hyperten- 
sion, diabetes, obesity, or regular use of beta blockers. 
Effect modification from aspirin could not be tested, 
since only a few patients (7 percent) had been using it 
regularly before their first myocardial infarction. 
In the referent study (analysis IV), the fictitious time 
of myocardial infarction was random for the referents, 
although it followed the pattern of the true cases. It 
was not influenced by the referent's level of physical 
exertion. The comparison between the observed odds 
of concurrent exposure and the expected odds based on 
usual frequency should therefore have resulted in an 
odds ratio close to 1. There was no information on 
usual average duration of exposure to heavy exertion 
from the referents. Instead, we tested different assump- 
tions when calculating exposed person-time in the pre- 
vious year. When assuming a duration of 1 hour, which 
is close to the median duration reported by the cases, 
and no carry-over effect, the relative risk is 1.2 (95 per- 
cent CI: 0.5, 2.9). Assuming longer durations and haz- 
ard periods lowers the relative risk. Assuming a total 
average duration (hazard period included) of only 30 
minutes leads to a relative risk estimate of 2.6 (95 per- 
cent CI: 1.1,6.1). 
TABLE 3. Relative risk of myocardlal Infarction from exposure to physical exertion as a potential trigger among patients without 
and with premonitory symptoms, with two relevant choices of recovery time, Stockholm County, Sweden, 1993-1994 
Length of 
recovery 
time 
(minutes) 
0t 
545 
Patients without premonitory symptoms 
(n = 399) 
Patients with premonitory symptoms 
(n = 261) 
All patients 
(n = 660) 

27 
33 
Relative 
risk 
6.1 
5.3 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
4.2, 9.0 
3.6, 7.6 

Relative 
risk 
1.5 
1.3 
95% 
confidence 
Interval 
0.7, 3.4 
0.7, 2.7 

32 
40 
Relative 
risk 
4.1 
3.4 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
2.9, 5.8 
2.5, 4.7 
* No. = number of concurrent/exposed cases. 
t Only patients with ongoing physical exertion (£6 metabolic equivalents) at disease onset were regarded as exposed cases. 

TABLE 4. Relative risk of myocardlal Infarction from exposure to physical exertion as a potential trigger during recovery 
periods of different lengths, among patients without premonitory symptoms and among all patients, Stockholm County, Sweden, 
1993-1994 


No. 
of 
cases* 
No. 
exposed)" 
Relative 
risk 
95% 
confidence 
Interval 
No. 
of 
cases* 
No. 
exposed! 
Relative 
risk 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
0.7, 4.7 
0.2, 3.5 
0.3, 3.5 
0.3, 3.6 
0.3, 3.5 

0.8, 2.7 
0.2, 1.3 
0.3, 1.8 
1.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
1.0 

1.5 
0.5 
0.8 

628 
624 
622 
620 
618 
616 
616 
616 
628 
618 
615 
610 
1.9 
1.9 
2.0 


1.8 
0.6 
1.2 
0.5, 7.1 
0.5, 7.4 
0.5, 7.3 


0.8, 3.9 
0.2, 2.3 
0.5, 3.1 
372 
370 
368 
366 
366 
365 
365 
365 
372 
366 
364 
360 



* Number of cases in the analysis. 
t Number of concurrent/exposed cases. 

In this study, we found a sixfold increase in risk of a 
first myocardial infarction shortly after the beginning 
of exposure to physical exertion that leads to panting 
and overheating. As in the two earlier case-crossover 
studies (2, 3), this risk seems to be modified by physi- 
cal fitness, although the relation might not be linear as 
in earlier reports if more valid indicators were used. 
The results suggest the possibility of a U-shaped rela- 
tion. However, there are also problems with misclassi- 


**r\ tv\-t 
<U.UU 1 




100.7 
6.9 
3.7 
3.3 
54.7 
4.6 
2.3 
12.1 
10.5 
5.8 
4.8 
25.8 
52.7, 192.4 
2.5, 18.5 
0.9, 14.9 
1.9,6.2 
13.7, 218.4 
1.7, 12.5 
0.9, 6.0 
6.8,21.4 
5.3, 20.5 
1.3,25.4 
2.5, 9.1 
10.3, 64.8 




10 
2 
10 
5 
No. 
exposed 
Relative 
risk 
95% 
confidence 
Interval 
P 
value 



<1 
1-2 
>2-A 
>4 

Very little 
Sporadic walks 
Occasional exercise 
Regular exercise 

Manual worker 
Nonmanual worker, low grade 
Nonmanual worker, high and middle 


No. 
of 
cases 

284 
49 
22 
44 
42 
135 
63 
102 
103 
63 
146 
38 
TABLE 5. Relative risk of onset of myocardlal Infarction during exposure to heavy physical exertion, 
according to patients' characteristics, Stockholm County, Sweden, 1993-1994 
* Based on usual frequency of trigger exposure reported in the case-crossover interview. 
t Based on answers to a question on average level of exercise during preceding years in the questionnaire of 
the case-referent study. Information was for missing 14 percent of the patients. The overall relative risk in this 
subset of the patients (n = 342) was 6.8 (95% confidence interval: 4.5, 10.2). 
fication of usual trigger frequency—problems that are 
probably common to all studies undertaken so far. 
It is important to restrict the analysis to the subset of 
cases who do not report any premonitory symptoms, 
for two reasons. First, there may be a reverse causation 
bias in that premonitory symptoms make a subject less 
eager than usual to engage in physical exertion. 
Second, it is possible that a premonitory symptom sig- 
nals an important biologic event such as plaque rupture 
or the beginning of thrombosis. If exertion has its 
influence at this step in the causal process, the choice 
of diagnostic pain as the time of onset leads to mis- 
classification of case exposure in these subjects. The 
empirical evidence 
these arguments. 
supports 
Nevertheless, we analyzed both groups, and although 
we have focused on the results from the restricted 
group, the conclusions would not be different if all 
cases were considered. In future studies, the triggers of 
strictly identified and defined premonitory symptoms 
should be analyzed, since this may reveal further 
details regarding the causal mechanisms. According to 
our interviews, symptoms and signs often appear 
before the diagnostic chest pain and are usually not 
paid attention to in clinical practice. 
Mittleman et al. (2) reported an induction period of 
1 hour or less and used a hazard period of 1 hour. The 
choice of hazard period should be guided by the recov- 
ery time, i.e., how long the trigger effect carries over 
into unexposed person-time. Mittleman et al. (2) never 
reported separate effect estimates for persons with 
ongoing trigger exposure and those without it but still 
exposed within 1 hour before myocardial infarction 
onset. Our findings suggest a rather rapid decrease in 
risk after termination of trigger exposure. Accordingly, 
shorter hazard periods should be preferred if there is 
information in such detail as to support their use. 
The Swedish Onset Study was population-based by 
design and ambition. Although we had questionnaire 
information on common risk factors from 78 percent 
of all identified cases in the SHEEP Study, we man- 
aged to interview only 47 percent of the case patients 
(70 percent of the nonfatal cases). Because of the self- 
matching procedure, there was no control subject 
selection bias, and since there did not seem to be much 
effect modification from most standard risk factors, 
the results should be generalizable to the total popula- 
tion, not only to some identifiable high risk groups. 
There is still the possibility of case selection, with sur- 
vival bias being the most obvious. However, because 
heavy exertion often takes place outdoors in areas 
where the chances of instant detection and rapid trans- 
port are comparatively smaller and the risk of sudden 
death is therefore increased, any survival bias in the 
study should have conferred a risk estimate that was 


too low. There are no reasons to believe that recruit- 
ment and participation of nonfatal cases should depend 
on recent trigger exposure. Case selection that is 
dependent on usual frequency of trigger exposure only 
concerns exposure opportunity (7), and it does not lead 
to bias. In analogy to distinctions made concerning 
sources of confounding, this phenomenon could also 
be called between-individual control-time selection 
bias. 
Another control-time selection problem has not been 
discussed before but must be considered a possible 
source of bias, and we suggest that it be called within- 
individual control-time selection bias. A special case 
exists where a subject is experiencing a steady upward 
(or downward) trend in trigger frequency. If usual fre- 
quency is reported as the average frequency over a 
longer period, it does not reflect the probability of 
exposure at the time of disease onset, and the relative 
risk will be biased towards infinity (or zero). This was 
mentioned by Greenland (8) in his discussion of the 
case-time-control design (9); he called it "selection 
confounding." However, within-individual control- 
selection bias may also arise from cyclic patterns in 
trigger exposure, such as circadian, workday-versus- 
weekend, or seasonal variations. For example, if there 
are seasonal differences in trigger frequency, it would 
be preferable to have usual-frequency data relevant to 
the season of the time of onset. If this information is 
not available, having to rely on a yearly average 
implies a bias in each case's contribution to the com- 
mon effect estimate. However, a peculiar feature of 
case-crossover analysis is that all of these individually 
biased contributions cancel out as long as there is not 
an unequal selection (in relation to the true incidence 
rates) of cases from the different phases of the trigger 
variation. The instruction given to the case patients 
was that the usual-frequency information should apply 
to the last full year. Because the data collection started 
in April and ended in December VA years later, we 
had artificially created a seasonal variation in inci- 
dence, with fewer cases in the first 4 months of the 
year. There was also a higher relative risk if the analy- 
sis was confined to cases included during these 4 
months. This may have been due to a higher true fre- 
quency of usual trigger activities in this period that 
was not reflected in the reported annual average, but 
we had no information on the true frequency. To esti- 
mate the magnitude of this potential within-individual 
control-selection bias, we repeated the main analysis 
of the study using only subjects from 1 full year. 
However, the relative risk changed only from 6.1 to 
6.2. 
The self-matching in the case-crossover design elim- 
inates confounding due to risk factors with long induc- 

tion periods, and since concurrent exposure to other 
potential triggers among cases exposed to heavy exer- 
tion was extremely rare, within-individual confounding 
was also not a problem. Both the incidence of myocar- 
dial infarction and the occurrence of heavy exertion 
have circadian variations, and therefore there may have 
been confounding by time of day (4). Control for this 
type of confounding is inherent in the pair-matched 
analysis (analysis H), and the similarity in relative risks 
between different analytic strategies is reassuring. In an 
attempt to control for this in the usual-frequency study 
(analysis I), we restricted the analysis to cases with 
onsets between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and to usual 
frequencies based only on trigger events occurring 
within those time limits. The relative risk increased only 
slightly from 6.1 (see table 3) to 6.5 (95 percent CI: 4.3, 
10.0). We further tried to stratify by smaller segments of 
the time of day, but this failed because the quality of the 
data was too low. In the German study (3), a restriction 
was made in the base time for the usual frequency but 
not for the incidence of cases, and this should lead to a 
lowered relative risk. In the case-referent analysis, the 
investigators did not adjust for trigger frequency, which 
would have the same influence, and therefore it is prob- 
able that the relative risk of 2.1 reported underestimates 
the true relative risk. 
Misclassification of case status, time of disease 
onset, and case exposure information was discussed 
above. However, the real challenge to the case- 
crossover design is the threat of misclassification of 
referent exposure information, especially the usual- 
frequency type (10). The reader should appreciate the 
difficulties involved in integrating various forms of 
activity with the same intensities in terms of breathing 
and body heating into two single measures of "usual 
frequency" and "usual duration during the past year." 
The best argument against any serious misclassifica- 
tion is that the usual-frequency, pair-matched, and 
common case-referent analyses resulted in effect esti- 
mates of approximately the same magnitude. To this 
we can add that a case-crossover analysis conducted 
among referents resulted in a relative risk close to 
unity, as it should have. 
A problem with the questionnaire is that it does not 
ask for affirmation of very low usual frequencies, 
making it impossible to distinguish between this cat- 
egory and persons with missing answers. This is prob- 
ably the major reason behind the extremely high rela- 
tive risk in the low usual-frequency category (table 
5). Cross-tabulation of usual trigger frequency and 
exercise habits further supports 
this suspicion. 
Approximately 40 percent of persons having a usual 
trigger frequency of zero in the past year are found 
among those who exercised occasionally or regularly. 
We also had some problems with missing answers 
regarding usual duration, and in those relatively few 
instances where there was information on usual fre- 
quency but not on usual duration we gave the subject 
a duration approximately the same as the median 
duration among persons who supplied this informa- 
tion. To test the influence of the missing information, 
we also repeated the analysis keeping only the sub- 
jects with full information, then deliberately also 
excluding the low-usual-frequency, high-risk sub- 
jects. As a result, the relative risk changed from 6.1 to 
4.7 (95 percent CI: 2.8, 8.0). We also tested various 
assumptions about usual duration among persons with 
missing information, but this had only minor effects. 
We think that the usual frequency of trigger exposure 
is underestimated by many subjects, which implies 
dependent misclassification, but this does not invali- 
date the findings. To lower the relative risk of 6.1 to 
unity, the subjects should have reported an average 
usual trigger frequency of 11 times per week instead 
of twice weekly, and this amount of underreporting is 
unlikely. 
Because incidence rates per hour were available 
from the SHEEP Study, we were able to estimate risk 
differences. The absolute risk of myocardial infarction 
per hour was low. In the age group 45-70 years, there 
were 0.46 new cases per million person-hours among 
males and 0.15 per million among females (table 6). 
Although the relative risk implies a sixfold increase in 
risk, the absolute risk per hour increased only from 0.3 
TABLE 6. Relative risk, rate difference, and attributable 
proportion for heavy physical exertion as a trigger of 
myocardial Infarction, Stockholm County, Sweden, 1993-1994 
Incidence 
rate* (per 
million 
person- 
hours) 
Relative 
rtskt 
Rate 
difference}: 
Attributable 
proportlon§ 





Male 
Female 

45-60 
61-70 
0.48 
0.15 
0.18 
0.57 
6.3 
5.1 
7.2 
4.1 
2.4 
0.6 
1.1 
1.8 

6.5 
2.8 
9.3 
2.2 




t Estimated as (RR - 1) x IR. 
§ Estimated using the proportion of exposed cases and the 
relative risks in the Onset portion of the SHEEP Study. Available 
data did not permit a separation of earlier cases from excess cases 
(11). 

per million to 1.8 per million; that is, the risk differ- 
ence was 1.5 per million person-hours (table 6). We 
conclude that triggering from heavy physical exertion 
accounts for 5.7 percent of the myocardiai infarctions 
in this age group. 





tection against triggering by regular exertion. Determinants of 
Myocardiai Infarction Onset Study Investigators. N Engl J 
Medl993;329:1677-83. 
3. Willich SN, Lewis M, L5wel H, et al. Physical exertion as a 
trigger of acute myocardial infarction. Triggers and Mech- 
anisms of Myocardiai Infarction Study Group. N Engl J Med 
1993,329:1684-90. 
4. Mittleman MA, Maclure M, Robins JM. Control sampling 
strategies for case-crossover studies: an assessment of relative 
efficiency. Am J Epidemiol 1995;142:91-8. 


6. Greenland S, Robins JM. Estimation of a common effect pa- 
rameter from sparse follow-up data. Biometrics 1985;41: 
55-68. 


8. Greenland S. Confounding and exposure trends in case- 
crossover and case-time-control designs. Epidemiology 
1996;7:231-9. 


1. Maclure M. The case-crossover design: a method for studying 
transient effects on the risk of acute events. Am J Epidemiol 
1991;133:144-53. 
2. Mittleman MA, Maclure M, Toiler GH, et al. Triggering of 
acute myocardiai infarction by heavy physical exertion: pro- 


11. Greenland S, Robins JM. Conceptual problems in the defini- 
tion and interpretation of attributable fractions. Am J 
Epidemiol 1988; 128:1185-97. 

