
Out of Hospital Sudden Cardiac Death Among 
Physically Active and Inactive Married 
Persons Younger than 65 Years in Slovenia 

Homepage: 
www.kup.at/jcbc 
Online Data Base Search 
 for Authors and Keywords 

Journal of Clinical and 
Basic Cardiology 

Indexed in 
Chemical Abstracts 
EMBASE/Excerpta Medica 



Out of Hospital Sudden Cardiac Death Among 
Physically Active and Inactive Married Persons 
Younger than 65 Years in Slovenia 

Methods: A sedentary life style has been shown to increase the risk of coronary artery disease, a precursor of sudden cardiac 
death, while regular physical activity prevents atherosclerosis. In an out of hospital cardiac death study in Slovenia, case crosso- 
ver design was used to investigate physical activity as a potential trigger of sudden cardiac death in connection with certain life 
style, biological and social risk factors. 
Results: In the study, 206 sudden cardiac deaths were selected: 166 men and 40 women with median age at death 57.8 and 59.0 
years, respectively. The relative risk of dying during or within one hour after terminating physical activity of at least 6 metabolic 
equivalents was 3.0 in comparison to time without activity. The relative risk of people who performed 1.5 hours or more 
physical activity per week was 2.55 (95 % confidence limits: 1.69–3.84), opposed to 49.90 (confidence limits: 18.73–132.96) for 
persons who performed less activity. According to the observed characteristics the risk of dying for inactive sudden cardiac 
victims was 17.13 to 25.89 (95 % confidence limits: 11.28–44.60) times higher in comparison to physically active persons. 
Persons who drank more than 4 international units of alcohol per day, positive family history, ischaemic heart disease and a heart 
rate of more than 90 beats/minute had the highest risk. 




cause of death in the Western world, and among them 
sudden cardiac death (SCD) is a significant public health 
problem. Approximately 12 % of all natural deaths occur sud- 
denly, and 88 % of them are of cardiac origin [1–3]. 
The risk factors associated with SCD are the same as those 
with coronary artery disease (CAD) [4]. Among them, sed- 
entary life style has consistently been shown to increase the 
risk of CAD [5], while on the other hand regular physical 
activity plays a role in both primary and secondary prevention 
of atherosclerotic vascular processes. Exercise increases car- 
diovascular functional capacity and through affecting auto- 
nomic nervous system, by increasing vagal activity [6], 
decreases myocardial oxygen demands [7–9]. At the same 
time heavy physical exertion sometimes immediately pre- 
cedes and indeed appears to trigger the onset of acute myo- 
cardial infarction [5, 10]. 
In the section “Out of Hospital SCD research among per- 
sons younger than 65 years in Slovenia”, we tried to deter- 
mine the risk of dying during or within an hour after termi- 
nating physical activity of 6 metabolic equivalents (MET) or 
more among physically active and inactive persons. In both 
groups we also looked at the risk of triggering SCD according 
to various characteristics of the deceased. 

Study Design 
Case crossover study design [11] was used to assess the effect 
of 6 or more MET physical activity – measured according to 
the Physical Activity Rating Scale [12] – on triggering SCD. 
A one-hour hazard period immediately before the onset of 
SCD was compared to the total hazard period in the last year 
of life computed on the basis of the usual frequency approach 
[11, 13]. Cases were deceased subjects who died due to sud- 
den cardiac death during or within an hour after terminating 
defined physical activity, and controls were persons who also 
died due to SCD, but during a time of less or no physical 
activity. 
Study Population 
The study population was selected on the basis of underlying 
cause of death from the Death Register of Slovenia. Cases 
were residents of the Republic Slovenia in the year 2000 and 
in the first months of 2001 who died out of hospital due to 
cardiac disease, and were between 20 and 65 years old at the 
moment of death. 
Data were obtained through two questionnaires. The first 
was sent to family members and the second to the attending 
physician of the deceased. Only married persons were 
included in the study because risk behaviour, usual annual 
frequency data and also the profile of risk behaviour in the 
last 24 hours of the deceased’s life were needed. We further 
divided cases into SCD victims and expected deaths. SCD 
was defined as an instantaneous death or a death within an 
hour after the onset of cardiac symptoms. When family mem- 
bers were not able to or did not decide whether their relative 
had died according to the definition of suddenly or not, we 
also considered the death as sudden when the deceased per- 
son could perform physical activity of at least 3 MET on the 
very last day of his/her life or if SCD was written on any part 
of the death certificate. We supposed that an individual who 
could perform very light exertion such as personal care or 
strolling in the park was not expected to die on the same day. 
This last criterion was also used for persons who died during 
night sleeping. 
Received: July 29th, 2002; accepted: November 21st, 2002. 
From the 1Division of Mortality Statistics, Institute of Public Health of the Republic Slovenia, and the 2Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Clinical Centre of Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
Correspondence to: Joz∨∨∨∨∨ ica Šelb Šemerl, Msc, MD, Division of Mortality Statistics, Institute of Public Health of the Republic Slovenia, Trubarjeva 
cesta 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia; e-mail: Jozica.Selb@ivz-rs.si. 




Cases were those SCD victims who had died during or 
within an hour after termination of at least 6 MET physical 
activity, in comparison to controls who also had died of sud- 
den cardiac death but not during heavy physical activity or 
within an hour after its termination. Physically active were 
those SCD victims who performed physical activity of 6 
MET or more at least 1.5 hours a week (78 hours per year), as 
opposed to inactive ones who performed less physical activity 
of equivalent degree. All subjects were also divided into four 
classes according to frequency of physical activity performed 
per week. 
Chronic stress was defined as retirement or dismissal from 
employment in the last year of life or serious disease or death 
of a close family member in the same time period [14]. On 
the basis of alcoholic beverages usually consumed per day or 
per week, the quantity of alcohol consumption measured in 
international units (IU) was divided into four classes, as can 
be seen in Table 1. 
If immediate relatives died, or survived myocardial infarc- 
tion or died from SCD before the age of 70, the deceased had 
a positive family history. Suspected CAD was defined as un- 
clear signs of ischaemia on the electrocardiogram (ECG), but 
when clear signs of ischaemia on the ECG or medically certi- 
fied coronary disease were found, CAD was defined as con- 
firmed. 
As a criterion for medicine currently taken which could 
influence the triggering of SCD, we chose those drugs which 
spouses reported that the deceased had been taking them in 
the last month of their life and not those just prescribed by a 
medical doctor. 
Questionnaire 
In the period from one to three months after death, data were 
collected by mailing the questionnaire to spouses of the 
deceased and to the attending physician. 
Closed type questions were used with detailed instruc- 
tions for filling in the questionnaire. Before each question 
dealing with coffee drinking, cigarette smoking, physical 
activity or alcohol consumption in the last 24 hours of 
deceased life, and for this purpose requiring the filling in of a 
time line, a similar event was chosen from everyday life, and 
written down as an example. 
Table 1. Physically active persons; relative risk of onset of sudden cardiac death during 
or within an hour after terminating physical activity of 6 MET, according to characteristics 
of SCD victims; (95 % CI) 

Number of 
SCD victims 
(127) 
Number of deaths 
during or within 
one hour after 
physical activity 
(23) 
Relative risk 
(95% CI) 
Demographic determinants 
 Male 
 Female 
Life style characteristics 
 0–1 IU alcohol/week 
 2–6 IU alcohol/week 
 1–3 IU alcohol/day 
 ≥ 4 IU alcohol/day 
 Body mass index > 25 
 Stress yes 
 Stress no 
111 
16 
19 
21 
41 
29 
102 
52 
73 
Ischaemic heart disease and family history 
 Family history positive 
 Family history negative 
 Suspected or confirmed 
 IHD by clinical signs 
 IHD confirmed by post 
 mortem 
40 
71 



Circulatory and biochemical parameters 
 Heart beat/minute > 89 
 Systolic blood pressure 
 > 139 mmHg 
 Diastolic pressure 
 > 95 mm Hg 
 Cholesterol 
 > 5 mmol/l 
 Triglycerides 
 > 1.8 mmol/l 




Drugs 
 No acetylsalicylic acid or 
 other anticoagulant drugs 
 No beta receptor blocking 
 agents or amiodarone 
 No ACE inhibiting drugs 
 No hypolipaemic drugs 

41 
88 
98 
20 
3 
4 
3 
5 
8 
19 
11 
11 
8 
10 








9 
16 
19 
2.43 (1.57–3.77) 
3.85 (1.24–11.94) 
7.09 (2.66–18.89) 
1.89 (0.61–5.86) 
1.49 (0.62–3.58) 
3.46 (1.73–6.92) 
2.70 (1.72–4.23) 
3.00 (1.66–5.42) 
2.08 (1.15–3.76) 
3.69 (1.85–7.38) 
1.70 (0.91–3.16) 








3.65 (1.85–6.84) 
2.45 (1.50–4.00) 
2.43 (1.55–3.81) 
Data on premonitory signs or symptoms 
of death, life style, physical activity, medical 
and family history, eventual medication and 
stressful events were collected from the 
spouses. The frequency and duration of 
physical activity (from night sleeping to 
extreme exertion) [5] in the last year before 
death were also collected. A detailed 
description of the level of physical activity 
in the last 24 hours before death, in two 
hour intervals, was required to be indicated 
on the time line. Interviewed spouses did 
not know the exact topic being researched 
(SCD); they only knew that cardiovascular 
diseases were the subject of the study. 
In case we did not receive a response 
within the three week period, another re- 
quest for participation was mailed to the 
same address. If the response did not follow 
despite the second request, the case was 
considered to be non-respondent. The 
attending physician was asked for data on 
the haemodynamic and biochemical para- 
meters of the deceased and some health 
issues. Before data were entered into the 
data base, the questionnaires were checked 
by the study coordinator and coded by 
professional coders. The protocol of the 
research was approved by the Ethics Com- 
mittee at the Ministry of Health of the 
Republic Slovenia, and all interviewed per- 
sons received a letter in which their rights 
concerning data protection and non-par- 
ticipation in the research were stated. 
Statistical Analysis 
The risk of SCD due to heavy physical 
activity during physical activity and in the 
one-hour hazard period immediately before 
death was calculated. To estimate the rela- 
tive risk, the ratio of the observed fre- 
quency of deaths during the hazard period 
to the expected frequency from the infor- 
mation on the control period was used. 
The amount of person time spent in heavy 
physical activity (hazardous person time) 
was estimated by usual annual frequency 



and duration of physical activity. Unexposed person time was 
calculated by subtracting the hazard period in hours from the 
number of hours in a year. The ratio of observed non-ex- 
posed hours to expected exposed hours was calculated with 
confidence intervals (CI) [11]. The calculated ratio reflects 
the risk of becoming an SCD victim during a period of heavy 
physical activity or within one hour after terminating it in 
comparison to the risk during lighter or no activity. 
Relative risk was calculated only for those variables which 
at least three or more deceased persons had while performing 
heavy physical activity. The data were processed on personal 
computer using the SPSS.10 for Windows and Excel 97 sta- 
tistical packages. 

276 responses out of 376 mailed questionnaires were received 
from widowed spouses, giving a 73.4 % response rate. Among 
the 276 responses, 238 SCD were evidenced; 193 men and 45 
women with median age at death of 57.5 years (50.8 and 62.2 
in 5 % and 75 %) in male and 58.4 years (53.8 and 61.0) in 
female. Among the 238 SCD evidenced we received 206 
responses on the degree of physical activity performed in the 
last year of the deceased’s life, ie hours per day and the frequency 
of physical activity per week. The same number of responses, 
ie 86.6 % were obtained for the number of hours before death 
when deceased was physically active 6 or more MET. 
The highest physical activity level that SCD victims were 
able to perform within the last 24 hours of their life was dis- 
tributed over a range from sitting and carrying out normal 
easy tasks to extreme exertion such as exhaustive work or 
high-activity sports (Figure 1). 
Our analysis was limited by a small number of inactive 
persons who died during or within an hour after terminating 
physical activity. Among them the risk of dying during vigor- 
ous physical activity was from 17.13 to 25.89 (95 % CI: 
11.28–44.6) times higher in comparison to those who were 
physically active. At the highest risk were persons who did 
not use prescribed acetylsalicylic acid or other anticoagulant 
drugs or hypolipaemic drugs 26.89 (CI: 16.21–44.60) and at 
the lowest were those with a body mass index (BMI) of more 
than 25 kg/m2 (Table 3). 
Figure 1. Highest level of physical exertion (Physical Activity Rating 
Scale) performed by sudden cardiac death victims on the day of death 
by gender (1: sitting or lying awake; 2: sitting performing easy tasks; 
3: very light; 4: light exertion with normal breathing; 5: moderate exer- 
tion with deep breathing; 6: vigorous exertion with panting, overheating; 
7: heavy exertion with gasping, much sweating; 8: extreme or peak 
exertion) 
We found a three-times higher relative 
risk of dying during or within an hour after 
terminating physical activity in comparison 
to time with no exertion when we looked 
at all SCD victims together. For physically 
active SCD victims relative risk was about 
18 % lower than that of the entire SCD 
victims population, but for inactive persons 
it was about 17-times higher (Table 2). 
The majority of characteristic-specific 
relative risks in physically active persons lay 
within the 95 % confidence limits of the cal- 
culated total relative risk. Everyday physical 
activity approached the lower confidence 
limit and close to the upper one were female 
gender, drinking more than 4 IU of alcohol 
per day, positive family history and cardiac 
or antihypertensive therapy without beta 
receptor blocking agents or amiodarone. 
At the highest risk of dying during 
physical activity, looking only at weekly 
hours of physical activity, were people who 
performed less than everyday physical 
activity, persons who did not drink alcohol 
or drank only one unit per week, those 
with heart frequency more than 90 beats 
per minute and persons whose post mortem 
examination confirmed CAD. The relative 
risk of triggering SCD during physical 
activity increased as the level of physical 
activity decreased. A U-shaped curve was 
observed between the risk of dying during 
physical activity and amount of alcohol 
drunk per day. High chronic stress elevated 
the risk of dying during physical activity by 
44 % (Table 1). 
Table 2. Relative risk of onset of sudden cardiac death (SCD) during or within an hour after 
terminating physical activity of 6 MET, all SCD victims, physically active and inactive persons 

Number of 
SCD victims 
Number of deaths 
during or within 
one hour after 
physical activity 
Relative risk 
(95% CI) 
206 
All 
Physically active (> 78 hrs/year) 127 
79 
Physically inactive 
Physically active 
 7 times/week 
 3–4 times/week 
 1–2 times/week 
 Less than once/week 
64 
38 
40 
73 
27 
23 
4 
13 
7 
3 
4 
3.00 (2.06–4.37) 
2.55 (1.69–3.84) 
49.90 (18.73–132.96) 
1.70 (0.99–6.70) 
5.62 (2.68–11.79) 
6.93 (2.24–21.49) 
51.44 (19.31–137.06) 
Table 3. Physically inactive persons. Relative risk of onset of sudden cardiac death during 
or within one hour after terminating physical activity of 6 MET, according to characteristics 
of SCD victims 

Number of 
SCD victims 
(79) 
Number of deaths 
during or within one 
hour after physical 
 activity (4) 
Relative risk 
(95% CI) 
55 
48 
Socio-economic and demographic determinants 
 Male 
 Stress no 
Life style characteristics 
 Body mass index > 25 
Ischaemic heart disease and family history 
 Ischaemic heart disease as 
 an underlying cause of death 
Drugs 
 No acetylsalicylic acid or 
 other anticoagulant drugs 
 No hypolipaemic drugs 
44 
67 


3 
3 


3 
4 
49.06 (15.82–152.12) 
46.29 (14.93–143.53) 


65.62 (21.16–203.46) 
62.91 (23.61–197.62) 




SCD is a special life situation [15] and close family members 
of SCD victims get over it in very different ways. According 
to our experience, some of them are willing to talk about the 
terms and circumstances surrounding this stressful event but 
others are not. Such a major shock had occurred that some 
could not concentrate their thoughts and were able to recall 
particular details of the day of the death of their loved one 
only a few months later, but others could explain every par- 
ticular detail at any time. After consultation with a doctor 
working at a hospice and another one researching mourning 
due to suicides, we decided to collect data from one to three 
months after sudden death. 
The (in our opinion) good (73.4 %) response rate was the 
consequence of strong emotions and tensions of the wid- 
owed spouses. Possible questions of guilt due to potential 
missing or overlooking of important signs or symptoms of 
disease ending with sudden death could also have played a 
part. We did not insist on 100 % responses to every particu- 
lar question because the respondents might not know, not 
remember or not want to respond to some questions which 
contained unpleasant content for them. Non-participation 
was due to personal reasons, connected with negative 
emotions to the research, not knowing the answers to numer- 
ous questions or simply no response after the second request. 
In our country people are not used to participating in 
research as interviews, especially not in medical epidemiol- 
ogy research. 
We classified data on the amount of regular physical activ- 
ity performed into two categories. Those deceased who per- 
formed at least 78 hours of 6 MET physical activity per year 
were assigned to the first one, those who performed less to 
the second. We decided to make such broad categories in 
order to minimise misclassification concerning frequency 
and duration of deceased physical activity, due to proxy 
respondents. Physical activity in terms of sports activity or 
free time engagement is becoming popular as a way of life 
which can protect health, slow down the course of some ill- 
nesses and will help after injury or disease [7]. At the same 
time physical activity was described as a triggering factor for 
acute myocardial infarction or SCD [5, 8, 9, 16, 17]. Paterson 
assigned triggering SCD during extreme physical activity to 
abnormal regulation of electrolyte and cardiac sympatho- 
vagal balance which could increase the incidence of arrhyth- 
mia, especially in connection with underlying ischaemia [18]. 
According to our results SCD victims had a 3-times higher 
relative risk of dying during or within an hour after terminat- 
ing physical activity than in periods without activity, and suf- 
ficiently physically active persons had a 19.6 times lower rela- 
tive risk of dying due to SCD during physical activity than 
those who were not sufficiently active. 
In their study on the effect of physical activity on the inci- 
dence of SCD, Bartels et al. [19] found the relative risk dur- 
ing highly strenuous physical activity compared to inactivity 
to be 150 in the sedentary group as opposed to 4.0 in the most 
active group. Our results showed lower risk in contrast to 
Bartels. Possible explanation could be different grade of 
physical activity performed in two groups. Inactive persons in 
our research performed either no or a few hours of recom- 
mended physical activity; we did not include only the seden- 
tary group as Bartels did. Our results are in accordance with 
the Seattle study where a relative risk of 56 was found during 
vigorous activity of married men with a low level of habitual 
physical activity in comparison to 5 for men with a high level 
of habitual activity [20]. We confirmed the thesis that physi- 
cal activity could trigger SCD. An increasing level of habitual 
physical activity was associated with a progressively lower 
relative risk of SCD, a type of dose response, the same obser- 
vation as Mittleman found for triggering acute myocardial 
infarction [5]. The difference in the number of physically 
active subjects in the categories less or more than 78 hours 
per year opposed to frequency per week comes from the 
smaller number of answers assigned to specify hours of 
physical activity performed per week which we needed to cal- 
culate the product hours per year than frequency per week. 
Being female appeared to be riskier for becoming a victim 
of SCD during intensive physical activity in spite of the same 
level of recommended health protective physical activity per- 
formed annually. There are some morphological and func- 
tional adaptations in the anatomy and physiology of the female 
body which could play a special role not only in pregnancy 
and childbearing but also in CAD onset in women. Women’s 
cardiovascular system is designed to adapt to the extraordi- 
nary demands of pregnancy and childbirth by modifying 
diastolic cardiac reserve more than systolic [21]. Because of 
the above mentioned adaptations, there is a question as to 
what extent the female heart is able to compensate, by means 
of sympathetic stimulation [22], for the acute extra demands 
that physical activity no doubt places on it. In the ATRAMI 
study [6] it was found that depressed baroreceptor stimula- 
tion (BRS) and heart rate variability (HRV) were associated 
with female sex. This finding supported the thesis that low 
BRS contributes to high risk of cardiac mortality after myo- 
cardial infarction. Obesity [23], diabetes [19], tobacco use 
and alcoholism [24] are known as risk factors, a higher level 
of which are more predictive for sudden cardiac death in 
females than in males. 
Different extrinsic stimuli may cause similar physiological 
changes that subsequently lead to acute pathologic events 
[10]. Depression has been found to be associated with 
elevated sympathetic tone and decreased vagal tone [10, 25]. 
This may partly explain the higher relative risk of SCD 
among those who had experienced prolonged stress in the 
last year of their life such as illness or death of a close family 
member or retirement or dismissal from their job. 
Heavy drinking increases the risk of SCD [26] with fatal 
arrhythmia as the most likely mechanism. Subclinical heart 
muscle injury and hyperadrenergic state, electrolyte abnor- 
malities, impaired vagal heart rate control, repolarisation 
abnormalities with prolonged QT interval and worsening of 
myocardial ischaemia or sleep apnoea may also contribute 
[27]. We did not observe linear dose response in the risk of 
SCD for physical activity and amount of alcohol consumed 
per day, but a U-shaped curve linked the relative risk of sud- 
den cardiac death during physical activity and increasing 
amount of alcohol consumed per day. A similar U-shaped 
curve was described for alcohol consumption and SCD risk 
by Albert [28]. We tried to explain the seemingly paradoxical 
situation that people who did not drink alcohol or drank it 
rarely had a higher relative risk of dying during physical 
activity than those persons who drank four or more units of 
alcohol per day. In addition to not drinking alcohol as a con- 
sequence of various illnesses, underreporting of alcohol con- 
sumption due to abstention or misclassification by respond- 
ents into occasional, regular, ex or never drinkers could play a 
part. 
Taking beta receptor blocking drugs or amiodarone 
appeared to be some kind of protection against sudden car- 
diac death during physical activity. We found that persons 
who were not taking these drugs and at the same time per- 
formed sufficient regular physical activity had the highest 
risk of dying during physical activity than physically active 
persons who were taking these drugs. We ascribed this to the 
fact that 91 % of SCD victims had had at least one of the 
major risk factors for coronary artery disease or CAD had 



already been present with them. The antiarrhythmic proper- 
ties of beta receptor blocking agents possibly reduce the 
occurrence of severe arrhythmia in some patients with diu- 
retic induced electrolyte depletion and may prevent adrena- 
line mediated intracellular loss of potassium during cardiac 
ischaemia [29]. Because of the low number of patients in our 
analysis who had been prescribed beta blocking agents, we 
did not separate different indications for beta blocking 
agents. We could not determine whether not taking beta 
blocking agents in the case of hypertensive heart or other 
heart disease increased the risk of dying during physical 
activity. 
Our results, whereupon persons who drink more than 
4 IU of alcohol per day, had a positive family history, persons 
with ischaemic heart disease confirmed by post mortem 
examination and persons with a heart rate of more than 
90 beats per minute had the highest risk of dying during 
physical activity are similar to the most important risk factors 
for sudden cardiac death described in the Paris study [4]. 
We calculated the relative risk of dying during physical activ- 
ity according to the characteristics of the deceased one by 
one, and we did not examine the interrelations between dif- 
ferent characteristics. 
Among the SCD victims there were far fewer inactive 
people who died during hard physical activity then active 
ones, so we could calculate a relative risk among active as 
opposed to inactive persons only for a small number of vari- 
ables. We are continuing our research in order to strengthen 
our present results and to find other interdependencies 
between the researched variables. 

This research was funded by the Slovenian Ministry of Sci- 
ence and Research, the Ministry of Health and the Institute 
of Public Health of the Republic of Slovenia. 
References: 
1. Margot J, Elosua R, Gil M. Epidemiology of sudden cardiac death in Spain. Rev 

2. Madsen JK. Ischemic heart disease and prodromes of sudden cardiac death. 
Is it possible to identify high risk groups for sudden cardiac death? Br Heart J 
1985; 1: 27–32. 




5. Mittleman MA, Maclure M, Tofler GH, Sherwood JB, Goldberg RJ, Muller JE. 
Triggering of acute myocardial infarction by heavy physical exertion. Protection 
against triggering by regular exertion. Determinants of Myocardial Infarction 
Onset Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 1993; 23: 1677–83. 


7. Fras Z. Life style in prevention of coronary artery disease. In: International sym- 
posium on cardiovascular diseases. Proceedings of the 29th memorial meeting 
devoted to Prof. Dr. Janez Pleènik. Ljubljana 1998; Institute of Hystology, Medi- 
cal Faculty University of Ljubljana. 


9. Rosengren A, Wilhelmsen L. Physical activity protects against coronary death and 
deaths from all causes in middle-aged men. Evidence from a 20-year follow-up of 
the primary prevention study in Goteborg. Ann Epidemiol 1997; 7: 69–75. 
10. Willich SN, Lewis M, Arntz HR, Lowel H, Schubert F, Stern R, Schroder R. 
Stress factors in acute myocardial infarct: the role of physical exertion and unusual 
life events. Z Kardiol 1994; 83: 423–30. 


12. Sallis JF, Haskell WL, Wood PD, Fortmann SP, Rogers T, Blair SN, Paffenberger 
RS Jr. Physical activity assesment methodology in the Five-City Project. Am J 
Epidemiol 1985; 121: 91–106. 
13. Mittleman M, Maclure M, Robins JM. Control sampling strategies for case- 
crossover studies: an assessment of relative efficiency. Am J Epidemiol 1995; 142: 
91–9. 




16. Rodriguez BL, Curb JD, Burchfiel CM, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Masaki K, 
Chiu D. Physical activity and 23-year incidence of coronary heart disease morbid- 
ity and mortality among middle-aged men. The Honolulu Heart Program. Cir- 
culation 1994; 6: 2540–4. 




19. Bartels R. Effect of physical activity on incidence of sudden cardiac death. Study 
of the Berlin-Reinickendorf and Berlin-Spandau population. Med Klin 1997; 6: 
319–25. 






23. Aronow WS, Herzig AH, Etienne F, D Alba R, Ronquillo J. 41 month follow–up 
of risk factors correlated with new coronary events in 708 elderly patients. 
Am Geriatr Soc, 1999; 6: 501–6. 


25. Kop WJ. Acute and chronic psychological risk factors for coronary syndromes: 
moderating effects of coronary artery disease severity. J Psychosom Res 1997; 2: 
167–81. 




28. Albert CM, Manson JE, Cook NR, Ajani UA, Gaziano JM, Hennekens CH. 
Moderate alcohol consumption and the risk of sudden cardiac death among US 
male physicians. Circulation 1999; 9: 944–50. 
29. Hoes AW, Grobbe De, Lubsen J. Sudden cardiac death in patients with hyperten- 
sion. An association with diuretics and beta-blockers? Drug Saf 1997; 4: 233–41. 
